From phone charging to fart-proof pants, 2015 is the year of problem-fixing bottoms.

Mugsy Jeans, a startup men’s fashion brand, has launched a line of jeans that give men extra space in the crotch area. The jeans, which come in four shades and run from waist sizes 29 to 38, cost $149 each.

Leo Tropeano, the brand's founder, started the company after moving to New York City and realizing how important style was. He wanted to find a pair of jeans that made it appear as if he had a decent physique but wasn’t ill-fitting like most of his wardrobe.

Every pair he owned “made [his] crotch feel like it was in a Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson chokehold" — so he decided to fix the problem himself by creating a line of his own jeans.

He began to share the idea and prototype with friends and quickly realized that a lot of men were having similar problems.

"When you move you know they’re going to push back and crunch your balls, but then they don’t,” he explains to Mashable. “They all wanted better fitting jeans without having to sacrifice comfort. Most of these guys gave up on finding better jeans, they just continue to wear the same jeans brands they’ve always worn, simply because that’s what they’re used to.”

After a successful Kickstarter campaign earning double its funding goal, two years perfecting the fit and going through samples and consulting with denim experts, the Mugsy team was able to move forward with production.

The jeans are made from a lightweight denim with stretch to allow for mobility and extra give in the crotch. The company has only been open for business for a few weeks but has already sold half of its inventory.

Mugsy Jeans has received positive feedback, usually focusing on the comfort and self-esteem boost that the jeans provided, Tropeano said.

In true Mashable fashion, we had members of our team test the jeans. Brian Koerber, one of our Watercooler reporters, assumed that because of a bigger fit in the crotch area, the pants would be baggy as well. He was wrong — the pants maintained a skinnier leg while also offering more room.

This was his take:

I have been forcing myself into slim and skinny jeans since before men could actually buy skinny jeans — that's right, I've worn women's jeans — so I'm all too familiar with the struggles of small pants. The waste size was accurate, but I felt like they sat a little higher than other jeans that I have. The pants were also quite long, which is to be expected in a pant that doesn't offer a length. The denim felt pretty raw, but not too rough that I didn't want to wear them which for me is nice. I want a pair of jeans that will mold to me, not ones that are already broken in. A good pair of jeans is an investment. My only big problem is that half of the stitching on the hem of the cuff on one leg came out after my second day wearing them, which was very surprising. However the jeans were really long so I would assume that most people would want to get these fitted anyways. Overall, these jeans are nice and although they're not the cheapest thing out there, they did deliver on everything they said they would.

Another Watercooler reporter, Max Knoblauch, didn't believe that men had a space issues in the first place — but did notice how comfortable the pair was.

Inseam aside, right off the bat they are super long and also way too baggy in the calf area. I run the line between two sizes depending on the brand but these definitely are made larger, so I think they are too big for me. They are comfortable to wear and I would definitely wear them on a day where I had to move a lot and wanted to stay warm, as they allow for a lot of stretching, but I probably wouldn't wear them on a day where I wanted to dress up or go out or anything. I like that the items in my pockets don't like, bulge out or anything and I also like the cuff when you fold them. It looks cool and that's rare, okay? Their main thing is about like, a comfortable inseam right? Yeah it's fine. I don't think this is a pervasive problem for men's pants — though I usually buy like regular or slim cut as opposed to skinny. Long story short — they are a bit boxy and unshaped and I don't like that they just kind of hang loosely around my legs."

The brand is currently developing another line with light colors and a set of watches as they plan on expanding into select stores.

“Generally, though, we just want to take all the pain out of men’s fashion," Tropeano said. "Look good, be comfortable. That’s our motto, we want to apply it to all men’s clothing.”|||

From phone charging to fart-proof pants, 2015 is the year of problem-fixing bottoms.