While I’m not that close to the whole Twitter situation and although I’m a moderately heavy user (@Kellblog), I don’t study their financials or other statistics.  That said, as a user, I feel a certain malaise around the service and I think it’s definitely in need of some new energy.

What I don’t get it is apparently soon-to-be-made permanent appointment of Jack Dorsey to CEO while simultaneously serving as CEO of Square.  Dorsey is undoubtedly an amazing guy, that’s not the question.

The question is simple:  is CEO a part-time job?  And the answer is equally simple:  no.

I can say this having worked for many CEOs over my 30 year career (e.g., at Business Objects for nearly a decade) and having been a CEO for about a decade as well between MarkLogic and Host Analytics.  No way, no how, no matter how amazing the person, CEO is not a part-time job.

Now the great part about Silicon Valley is that there are, indeed, a lot of amazing people out there.  There is no logical reason why Twitter cannot find someone amazing — who doesn’t already have a full-time job — to run the company.  So please add me to the “I don’t get it” list.

What I’m making is a general statement.  My logic is only compounded by the situation:

So if I’m going to argue that if it’s impossible in general, then it’s kind of impossible-squared when one company is IPO mode and the other is in turnaround mode.

Is it totally unprecedented? No, per this story, but I nevertheless think it’s a bad idea, as two folks who’ve done it seem to agree.

Though rare, it’s not unheard of for a person to run two large companies. That’s what Steve Jobs did with Apple and Pixar, though he described it as “the worst time in [his] life.” Elon Musk, CEO of Tesla and SpaceX, put it more mildly: “It is quite difficult to be CEO at two companies.”|||

While I'm not that close to the whole Twitter situation and although I'm a moderately heavy user (@Kellblog), I don't study their financials or other statistics.  That said, as a user, I feel a certain malaise around the service and I think it's definitely in need of some new energy. What I don't get it is apparently…