The Comedy Writing System E-Book is Here! Have great ideas, but don’t know how to make them funny? Have writer’s block and can’t seem to get through it? Now you can attend one of Jerry Corley’s Killer weekend comedy writing workshops wherever you are! Hi Everyone! I’ve been working my butt off to put together this e-book. Finally, after months of trying to make sure I put everything in the book that I cover in a weekend seminar, plus a couple of cool bonuses, it’s ready!! This comedy writing system is powerful. I give you multiple ways to write comedy from scratch on virtually any subject! Whether you are new to comedy writing or have been performing for a while, I guarantee–that’s right, GUARANTEE–that you will benefit from the tools I give you in this comedy writing system. If you’re tired of not hitting the bulls-eye with your jokes and bits, if the material you’ve been coming up with doesn’t quite “pop,” or feels like it needs something else, this is the writing system for you! If you’ve been reading my blog or keeping up with the advice I’ve been giving for free, that’s just been scratching the surface. FOR THE COMEDIAN, WRITER OR PRESENTER: Inside this book I give you multiple ways to approach writing jokes on any subject. How to take your failures, weaknesses, frustrations, pet-peeves and turn them into triggered laughs. How to NEVER get foiled by ‘writer’s block’ ever again! I will show you the best ways to get the highly-coveted applause break. How to utilize a multi-pronged process for creating your comedy and knowing why it will be funny! I am so confident that you will find this comedy writing system powerful, that I am offering you a 30-day money-back guarantee! But enough of the “sales pitchy” crap. If you want to finally feel empowered and confident about your comedy writing and never doubt your ability again, stop procrastinating and get my comedy writing system today! Get Jerry Corley’s “Breaking Comedy’s D.N.A. – Comedy Writing System

 It’s not a bunch of fluff… it’s 192 pages of solid comedy-writing content! The 8 Major Laugh Triggers – (Covered in one of my seminars valued at $199.00) The 12 Major Comedy Structures – (I was recently offered $2500 for the exclusive rights) Bonus #1 “The Listing Technique Explained” – (The most powerful joke-writing tool in comedy today!) Bonus #2 “Top 10 Ways To Write A Joke” – (My secret to writing up to 120 jokes per day!) Bonus #3 “Joke Writing 1-2-3” (Go from nothing to material in 3 EASY steps) Bonus #4 “10 Sure-Fire Ways to Beat Writer’s Block – (A Fail-safe. Techniques I use to never have writer’s block, EVER!) Most of the book is the exact same information I pour out in my powerful weekend comedy writing seminars, plus several bonuses. The value of the book is certainly equal to one of the weekend courses; usually priced at $249.00–unless you’re lucky enough to get the special deal in L.A. at $79.00.

 I am offering this comedy writing system at the promotional discount for a limited time. Originally priced at $127, then $97 …and now it’s only $67.00 for a limited time! Get the INSTANTLY DOWNLOADABLE book, (in Adobe PDF format), and shave your learning curve by YEARS and change your entire outlook on comedy writing! 

 We use PayPal for easier, more secure payments. You can use your credit card even if you don’t have a PayPal account! We use PayPal for easier, more secure payments. You can use your credit card even if you don’t have a PayPal account! Watch our quick Video tutorial Once you click “add to cart,” you will be taken to a PayPal page to make your purchase. You can purchase through PayPal even if you don’t have a PayPal card (see video tutorial below). Once the payment is processed you will be taken outside of my site to e-junkie to download your purchase. E-junkie, (the online storage portal for e-products), will provide you with a link for immediate download of your product. Your credit card will show the purchase is from CLICKBANK*COM. This E-book comes with a full 60-day money-back guarantee! If you’re not satisfied, for any reason, please send me an email for a complete refund! Stop thinking comedy writing is so overwhelming and start Writing More Jokes than you thought possible! Click ADD TO CART NOW!|||

