Perhaps the most evident and oft-cited reason for staying in school is that the classes you take leave you with tangible skills. While this may be true, it misses the point — the most valuable courses don’t prescribe what to learn, but how to learn.

I often hear the adage from other students that liberal arts education is useless. They harp on their belief that a technical degree is more valuable than a non-technical degree, as if it conveyed personal or intellectual superiority:

This mentality is unabashedly narrow-minded and anti-intellectual. Every single field of study has intellectual worth, whether you appreciate it or not. Scholars have increased both the breadth and depth of human understanding in subjects they find compelling. Monumental discoveries often come from places where practical application is not immediately apparent. This is the point of academia.

Every discipline, by its very nature, has a different way of learning. Each gives you new ways to conceptualize entities and their interactions with each other. Alternative mental models are no more wrong or right, they’re just different, and perhaps incompatible. The analytical tools you gain through the study of a field are of far greater use than any degree.

You might argue that it’s possible to expand your knowledge of different disciplines outside of college. And you’d be right! You definitely can.

But you won’t. You won’t because it’s hard. You won’t because you don’t know where to begin. You won’t because at first glance, any field unrelated to your current fascination will appear boring. You won’t because it’s difficult finding time to explore topics unrelated to your job or startup.

School forces you outside your comfort zone. You may dislike a field of study, but it’s important that you study things you dislike for some amount of time to be a well-rounded person. Consider that many important innovations began at the intersection of multiple fields. In fact, all of the most valuable courses I’ve taken are unrelated to computer science.

Good students teach themselves. I’ll be frank: I rarely go to classes. Some would call me an autodidact — a self-learner — but I don’t believe there is such a thing. I’m always learning from someone else, whether it be a lecturer, the writer of a textbook, or the collective authors of a Wikipedia article. Each is simply a different medium, and everyone has their own set of preferences.

It would be dishonest of me to not address why I despise (and continue to despise!) specific courses: bad classes with bad curriculum taught by bad teachers are a waste of your time. The reasoning above is in the ideal case, when your courses inspire you to learn more rather than overload you with grunt work. Optimize for engaging classes with professors who will push you outside your intellectual comfort zone. Avoid bad classes at all costs.

Many of college’s most important lessons cannot be learned from books. School is a catalyst for experiences that teach you your physical, emotional, and mental limits. When combined with academics, an undergraduate program offers you the greatest variety of opportunities to acquire new skills, both from your fellow students and from faculty. There will never be another time — not even at a startup — when you will be surrounded by such a concentration of peers encouraging and enabling you to learn more.|||

I wasn’t required to leave college for good, I just had to take a single semester off. But I knew myself. I wouldn’t be able to go back to the grind of classes after 8 months without them, regardless…