A bustling metropolis peacefully shared by cultures from all parts of the world, Dubai’s diversity expresses itself in a myriad of ways, be it, in the culinary landscape, fashion, music, retail and real estate. From beach-facing pads and Arabian-styled villas to Spanish-themed communities and neighbourhoods inspired by the quintessential Beverly Hills lifestyle, the city has it all.

If you are looking for an apartment for rent in Dubai, consider a short stay rental. Find terrific, great value short stay in Dubai on our site. Our range of exclusive short stay deals enable you to enjoy the best of what the emirate has to offer. Take in the sights and sounds of the city as you stroll through iconic landmarks, take a ferry out to the Creek and stumble upon numerouspromenades, beaches, markets and events that fill the streets. Get ready to be blown away by the shopaholic paradise and tourist dream that Dubai is known for.

As the UAE’s leading property agency, we offer the largest selection of short stay in Dubai for any occasion and every budget. Find the perfect short stay property and apartment for rent in Dubai and create unforgettable experiences and memories. The beautiful short stay listings on our site feature generous living spaces, privacy and amenities than hotels, often for way less cost than a standard apartment for rent in Dubai or hotel room.They are also furnished and serviced and come equipped with electronic appliances and essential household items, right down to towels, linens and crockery. They are also impeccably maintained with regular checks conducted by our staff.

Find your home away from home and take advantage of the added space, freedom and comfort of an apartment for rent in Dubai for a fraction of the price. We are a trusted community marketplace for people to list, discover and book unique short stay pads, be it, online or from a mobile phone or tablet. Whether you have got your eye on an apartment for rent in Dubai for a day, a villa for a week or an Emirates Hills mansion for a month, our range of short stay properties in Dubai often accommodate more guests than a hotel room and enable you to enjoy personal space in the heart of the city.

If you are after a Dubai break on a budget, then don’t expect to stay in Downtown Dubai. Downtown is known for its shopping, nightlife, fine dining haunts and entertainment options, but this also means that it is a premium location for visitors. Dubai Marina is a great economical alternative with its host of trendy hangouts and great waterfront location that is perfect for finding those spots that you can rave about and for taking those envy-inducing and postcard-perfect snaps. Check out our range of recommended short stay properties here.|||

A bustling metropolis peacefully shared by cultures from all parts of the world, Dubai’s diversity expresses itself in a myriad of ways, be it, in the culinary landscape, fashion, music, retail and real estate.