WSO Investment Banking Resume Template for College Students Released to the Public! Big Announcement: WSO Resume Template is Out in the Wild!: Mod Note (Andy): If you're looking for our resume for experienced IB professionals or a private equity resume template, click here.. For those of you looking to make sure your CV format is clean and make sure that your...

Ask Natalie from Accepted about Business School Admissions WSO is excited to have the experts from Accepted on board to answer applicant questions in the business school forum. Here are messages from Natalie and Jen who will be checking this thread every few days: Natalie I'm here to answer any questions you have regarding Business School...

How have you helped your parents after you entered finance and are making $$$? My dad and mom, who are poor, but sacrificed a lot for me (working 2 jobs, working on weekends, etc.), I'm sending them off to a nice long vacation, all paid by me. What have you guys done for your parents, just out of curiosity? Also paid off all of their debt they had (under 5k). Seems...

Hey WSO Community - we're super excited to (finally) announce the launch of the Wall Street Oasis Podcast!!! The Wall Street Oasis podcast offers the same trusted content you love from the site with even deeper access to the most interesting people in the world of finance. Talking with...

The Divorce Fund: Speculating on Your Misery I have spoken candidly in the past and will gladly do so again, about my misadventures in the world of marriage. It's a world many foolish men enter, but few ever leave financially unscathed. Today, we look at yet another nail in the coffin of this once noble and righteous institution. ...

List of all US Real Estate Developers and REITs I'm beginning my MRED in the Fall, and am starting to wind up my networking efforts. I figured a CapIQ screen of every developer in the nation sorted by State/City would probably be a good start. I hope that anyone else in a similar situation finds this useful. Let me know if you have...

When I did my military service, we performed an exercise whereby we stayed up for 36 hours without food and then marched our way to the shooting range. The resulting spread of bullets on the target where equivalent to that of someone being significantly intoxicated. I think many of us can...

How does one best fit pregnancy into a PE career As a woman eyeing a career in PE, how could one best plan pregnancy to minimise damage to one's career progression. Time it with MBA? Wait till Director or even Partner? I doubt there are many mothers on here who can speak from experience, but I value the application of anyone's mind.

I love the stories of interns crashing and burning, drinking too much, or doing something stupid as much as anyone else, but are there any tales from the opposite end of the spectrum?

Why they aren't more women in X field I'm about sick of all the damn women (and virgins) complaining about how there aren't enough women in INSERT_CAREER_FIELD_HERE. This argument is made about minorities as well, which is similarly irritating. I'm writing this article to (brutally) highlight the things that women do...|||

Mod Note (Andy): Make sure to see the comment below by user @DickFuld" This letter was cited in the DealBook here: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/02/business/dealbook/reflections-on-stress-and-long-hours-on-wall-street.html?ref=dealbook - Unfortunately the letter was removed so I'm quoting it below Long read but definitely worth the time. [quote]"A Son Never Dies By Sunil Gupta The End April 18th 2015 San Francisco International Airport[/quote] - "A Son Never Dies" by Sunil Gupta - Moving Letter from a Father of an Ibanking Analyst