Crypton is a framework for creating zero-knowledge applications with JavaScript.

Zero-Knowledge applications offer meaningful privacy assurance to end users because the servers running the application cannot read the data created and stored by the application.

To learn more, check out the Crypton website.

"The suggested way of installing Redis is compiling it from sources as Redis has no dependencies other than a working GCC compiler and libc. Installing it using the package manager of your Linux distribution is somewhat discouraged as usually the available version is not the latest." - Redis documentation

Configuring and setting up redis to run is an environment specific problem and left as an exercise for the user. You may now be able to just simply do

PostgreSQL supports a variety of Linux versions. One of these install commands may work for you:

These installation instructions were run on a system running OS X (version 10.11) and all dependencies were installed using the latest software versions available from Homebrew at the time this was written (10/2015). These instructions assume you have and already installed.

After installation follow the instructions to copy the plist file and setup Redis to launch at boot time.

After installation follow the instructions to copy the plist file and launch PostgreSQL at boot time.

is installed as part of the install. This command will create a new user called that has superuser role permissions and can create roles.

See the nvm website for detailed installation instructions. Crypton currently expects Node.js version to be installed which is the most current LTS release.

Important : If you are using enable the use of the correct Node.js version after you enter the directory by typing which will reference the file which is already present in the root of the repository. This will setup the correct version of and .

You need to do this every time you into the dir in every terminal shell you open.

You need to configure your environment specific config files for crypton to use the postgres database user that has superuser permissions. Edit the following files:

In those files you need to change the and keys as appropriate for your environment. The user you configure must have postgres superuser permissions.

The default is username with an empty password.

NOTE: If you are on Ubuntu Linux please note that you must have a username and password set for a postgres superuser and you need to ensure you can connect to the DB with . You need to be able to do this without using to first shell out to the user that is created by the default installation scripts on Ubuntu. This page might be of interest.

If the output is OK then continue.

will place a file in the directory, this is the JavaScript file you'll use in your client applications.

The command creates a DB user, database, and the appropriate DB schema in PostgreSQL based on your .

You may first want to edit to specify which (or all) of Chrome, Firefox, and Safari to test. When you run it will launch all of the selected browsers and run the tests in each.

The default server configurations can be found in .

The default server configurations can be found in .

The full set of commands can be seen with

Verify the server is running with or a browser. You may need to use mode which skips self-signed TLS certificate checks. Crypton ships with a self-signed certificate for testing purposes only. You will definitely want to use your own real TLS certificates!

Open your browser to the URL https://localhost:1025/ and register a new account via the form. Since the server uses a self-signed certificate by default you may need to instruct your browser to accept and trust this only certificate. You can find the instructions for Safari here.

Once you are registered and logged in, open the JS console in your browser. See the original version of these instructions here. The following is just a quick smoke-test that things are working as expected. You should continue to the Crypton docs for more info and examples.

Add values to this Item. This will save the item immediately, no callback required.|||

crypton - :lock: A framework for creating zero-knowledge mobile & desktop applications