This is a solid path for those of you who want to complete a Computer Science course on your own time, for free, with courses from the best universities in the World.

In the future, more categories and/or courses will be added to this list or a more advanced/specialized list.

Initially, we will also give preference to MOOC (Massive Open Online Course) type of courses because those courses were created with our style of learning in mind.

Your registration for this graduation course will be effectuated after you create your profile in our students profile issue.

Comment in that issue in order to officially enrolling in our course, and make your public commitment!

Use the following model to create your profile:

IMPORTANT: add your profile once and after you finish each course you can return in that issue and update your comment.

ps: In the Completed Courses section, you should link the repository that contains the files that you created in the respective course.

By making a public commitment, we have much more chances to succeed in our graduation, know better our fellows and share the things that we have done.

For those reasons we are using this strategy.

This guide was developed to be consumed in a linear approach. What does this mean? That you should complete one course at a time.

The courses are already in the order that you should complete them. Just start in the Introduction section and after finishing the first course, start the next one.

If the course isn't open, do it anyway with the resources from the previous class.

Yes! The intention is to conclude all the courses listed here!

It may take longer to complete all of the classes compared to a regular CS course, but I can guarantee you that your reward will be proportional to your motivation/dedication!

You should create a repository on GitHub to put all of the files that you created for each course.

You can create one repository per course, or just one repository that will contain all of the files for each course. The first option is our preferred approach.

We love cooperative work! But is quite difficult to manage a large base of students with specific projects. Use our channels to communicate with other fellows to combine and create new projects.

My friend, here is the best part of liberty! You can use any language that you want to complete the courses.

The important thing for each course is to internalize the core concepts and to be able to use them with whatever tool (programming language) that you wish.

Watch this repository for futures improvements and general information.

The only things that you need to know are how to use Git and GitHub. Here are some resources to learn about them:

ps: You don't need to do all of the courses. Just pick one and learn the basics because you will learn more on the go!

You can open an issue and give us your suggestions as to how we can improve this guide, or what we can do to improve the learning experience.

You can also fork this project and fix any mistakes that you have found.

Let's do it together! =)

Join us in our group!

You can also interact through GitHub issues.|||

computer-science-and-engineering - :mortar_board: Path to a free self-taught graduation in Computer Science