Japan Display Inc. ("JDI") has announced the development of the world's first 17.3-inch high resolution (7,680(W) x RGB x 4,320(H) pixels), fast response (frame rate 120Hz) liquid crystal display (LCD) module, the same size as the standard monitor commonly used for the video image production.

The LCD module, based on low temperature poly-silicon (LTPS) technology with true 8K pixels (RGB stripe arrangement), realizes high definition (510ppi) images, and the 120Hz frame rate enables smooth playback of moving image. By providing wide viewing angle, high contrast and little color shift, the advantages of IPS technology enable reproduction of life-like 8K image with a sense of depth in image quality.

This next-generation 8K technology suits not only products*2 for video image production, but also medical monitors and gaming PC monitors which require, high resolution and depth in image quality, and many more.

This display will be exhibited in the NHK/JEITA booth on October 7 - 10, 2015 during CEATEC JAPAN 2015 held at Makuhari Messe, Japan, in collaboration with NHK.

*1 Based on JDI's investigation as of September 2015

 *2 According to the roadmap for 4K/8K Television & Broadcasting of Japan's Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, it is expected that commercial 4K broadcasting over CS, CATV and IPTV to start in 2015. Experimental 4K/8K broadcasting over BS is anticipated in 2016, with commercial 4K/8K broadcasting over BS aiming to be active no later than 2018.

The information contained in this press release is accurate as of the date of issuance and is subject to change without notice. Information in this press release, other than statements of historical fact, constitutes forward-looking statements, which are based on available information, operating plans and projections about future events and trends. Forward-looking statements inherently involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those predicted in such forward-looking statements.|||

Japan Display Inc. Website