Take on any video-editing test with Corel Pinnacle Studio 18 Ultimate Keygen, our most comprehensive version. Powered by a novel native 64-bit architecture, Ultimate allows you to make wonderful movies with support for 4K Ultra HD video.

You acquire all the features of Corel Pinnacle Studio 18 Patch and more, plus NewBlue bonus effects, iZotope Music & Speech Cleaner, Blu-ray authoring, extra Scorefitter soundtracks, and support for XAVC S for 4k and HD. Strengthen your videos with 2,000+ transitions, effects and templates, add the perfect soundtrack, and easily share online, on disc and on devices.

Drag and drop features to make a movie mechanically or utilize the Storyboard mode to plan. More skilled editors can use the timeline for precision editing.

Best content from your screen and contain the footage in movies with Live Screen Capture. Even add voiceover while you capture!

Choose from over 2,000 2D and 3D effects to surprise and delight your audience in Corel Pinnacle Studio 18 Keygen.

Syndicate an infinite number of video and audio track for multi-layer editing, and make custom-fit soundtracks with Scorefitter.

Take your videos to the next level with over 700 presets and more than 55 plugins including:

If you’re shooting video in 4K Ultra HD, Pinnacle’s got you enclosed with 4K Ultra HD Video support which contains novel XAVC S support and 4K smart encrypting.

iZotope Music and Speech Cleaner simply erases annoying noise from your audio and video files. Experience increased audio clarity and improved sound!

Post your movies online with one-click sharing to Facebook, YouTube and Vimeo. Make DVDs and Blu-ray discs, and export your movies to popular setups to play them on game consoles and mobile devices.

Acquire a 6-week, all-access pass to StudioBacklot.tv, featuring brand-new Pinnacle Studio 18 content, loads of other training and a royalty-free stock library.

Corel Pinnacle Studio 18 Ultimate Keygen + Patch Full Version Free Download from the link given below:|||

Corel Pinnacle Studio 18 Ultimate Keygen is a video-editing tool. Corel Pinnacle Studio 18 Ultimate Keygen allows to make wonderful movies with 4K HD Video.