Hello there! Here we are again with this amazing bunch of resources for your web and graphic design projects. Come and have a scuba dive around this ocean of unique fonts, delicious icons, cool mockups and wireframes, print and web templates, powerful development and designing tools, and stacks more.

Go ahead and dive in!

A set of 15 outline icons that represent touch screen gestures such as two-finger tap, double tap, tap and hold, pinch in, pinch out, slide up, or down among others.

A set of 44 thin, outlined icons for Sketch regarding weather conditions such as storm, rainy, sunny, cloudy, windy, and more for both daytime and nighttime.

A set of more than 6,000 icons in flat style that represent all sorts of food like dairy products, fruits, vegetables, spices, prepared foods, drinks, beverages and more. They all come in AI format and PNG previews from 24 to 512 pixels.

Smokey is a brush set that features quite realistic looking effects that would very nicely suit handwritten-like fonts with a cool liberal style.

A set of 25 minimal logo templates by Hasibur Rahman that come in a clean line style. These logos each come in an individual PSD file and 4 AI files.

A set of 6 Apple Watch wireframes crafted in the Sketch format that feature both outline and color-filled screens for music player, messages, and the analog clock.

An amazing set of photorealistic mockups for a book and business cards, perfect for company branding. These mockups come in the PSD format, and were released by AlienValley. They are free for personal use.

A set of 75 mockups in line style representing 20 desktop, mobile, and wearable devices such as: iMac, iPhone, Galaxy, Nexus, Lumia and Samsung Gear S, and many others. There is a total of 75 elements counting the multiple perspectives of the devices that come in AI format.

A trifold brochure template that comes in PSD, AI, and INDD formats that has a tourism theme, but is suitable for multiple business purposes. It features a full-size background with black text and round-framed images, as well as out-filled icons giving it a fresh, yet professional look.

Liquid is a web template UI kit crafted in PSD that comes in several screen-size-based variations, as well as single cards for a video player, article posts, search bars, and more.

A UI Kit crafted for iPhone devices that is mainly focused on fashion. It comes with several screens in a clean, minimal style for eCommerce featuring female clothing products.

A clean and minimal web UI kit that is focused on eCommerce elements such as product cards, and stylish carousel headers. It comes in a single PSD file.

An eCommerce UI Kit crafted for iOS that features a Material style, and comes with several pre-built screens such as login, shopping cart, and product description.

New Industry is a typeface that combines straight lines with constant curves and trimmed corners, which give it a very technical look and feel. It features uppercase, numerals, and some special characters.

Jekyll Hyde is a pair of typefaces that are inspired by a novel from the year 1886, each of them similar in style to the other, but different in their own way.

Royals is a bold typeface that features straight edges. It comes in 4 different styles, regular, regular italic, rush, and rush italic for uppercase, numeral characters, and regular glyphs.

Bemount is a bold typeface that features a look and feel of marker handwriting. It features both Russian and Latin alphabets in uppercase, as well as numerals and special characters.

Banthers is a font crafted by Agga Swist’blnk that features a chalky, handwritten style with bone-like ends. It features uppercase characters, along with some special characters with long ends and adorns.

Octavia is a landing page PSD template that features a very clean and minimal style and feel, and outline icons.

DIFF is a PSD web template that has a unique style, featuring crossed off titles and several straight lines randomly placed along the page.

Cosmetico is an eCommerce PSD theme that features a very clean design that aims to attract the customer with the organization and ease of navigating through it.

Bergen is a free minimal design PSD template for eCommerce sites that features a screen-size header with a menu on the side and several sorts of full-width containers.

Matrix is a PSD template for a one-page layout that features a clean and minimal design. It comes with a big header, outline icons, full-width tiles grid, product pricing tables, and more.

Gazette is a multipurpose blogging WordPress theme that features a minimal design and a full-width tile grid that showcases the main topics of the magazine.

Lens is a WordPress theme suitable for photographers that features a nice parallax background, a 4-column footer widget area, a showcase, and more.

A curated bundle of 47 WordPress magazine themes that come with different styles and layouts. You’ll be able to one-click download most of them, as well as share or suggest more themes to add to this cool bundle.

ActiveBox is an HTML one-page template that can be used for multiple purposes. It features a clean and minimalistic design, and the PSD source file is included.

Identity is an HTML template that simply consists of a centered minimal ID card with a full-screen background that features a circle framed photo, name, title and social outline buttons.

Truva is a Kirby CMS-adapted blogging theme that includes a material color palette, allowing you to personalize your theme with up to 288 combinations. It also comes with Disqus comment system and a few other components.

An HTML theme for a Bootstrap-based dashboard that features a nice flat design with smooth effects. This theme has several elements such as icons, table list, maps, and notifications, among others.

A collection of 10 stunning hover effects developed in Sass, including animations, transformations, parallax, and some others. You’ll find effects regarding SciFi, cities, roads, landscapes, and more.

A code snippet in CSS that allows you to create, through parallax effects, simulated surface perspective as you scroll along the page, getting almost a straight angle perspective when the surface reaches the top of the page.

A full-screen carousel-like exposition that basically features a screen-size grid of tiles that expand open to the size of the screen, and back to their place.

A left-side navigation bar that allows you smoothly and quickly scroll along the vertical page layout. There’s also a bouncing effect on the text every time you reach a section of the page.

A parallax effect applied to whole pages by sliding new screens in and out, developed for touch-capable screens.

A curated list of useful jQuery plugins and resources such as tutorials, books, blogs and plugins for animations, forms, tables, time and date, validation, and many more. This list was curated and released by GitHub’s user Peter Kokot.

Lattice is an open source project that runs containerized workloads on clusters which consist of a number of cells, or virtual machines that run containers, and a brain that monitors the cells. It features built-in HTTP load-balancing, a cluster scheduler, log aggregation with log streaming, and health management.

Web Field Manual is a curated list of resources for designing experiences and interfaces on the web. This collection expands constantly with web designer-fed knowledge and inspiration.

Jaws is a server-less application framework that uses AWS services to redefine how to build massively scalable apps.

Sphido is a lightweight flat-file CMS for PHP that requires PHP v5.4, and that features the usage of Markdown, HTML, PHTML, and/or or Latte.

SimpleStore is a clean and responsive boilerplate for eCommerce web interfaces that counts on the feature of being fully client-side and lightweight, with calculations of tax rates, built-in shipping methods, multi-currency support, and much more.

A collection of invaluable gems for rails gathered together by GitHub user hothero. You’ll find gems for active records, users, APIs, plugins, emailing, debugging, code styling, error logging, and many more topics

Hoodie is open source software that helps you building web and iOS applications. Simply develop your frontend code, then plug it into its frontend-friendly API, and your app is ready.

Chocolat.js is a jQuery plugin that enables you to display and modify images responsively as you hover over or click on elements you set.

LayoutGrid is a static responsive grid developed in CSS and Javascript featuring drag-n-drop handling to reorder each screen size on both desktop and mobile.

Enquire.js is a pure JavaScript library that allows you to harness CSS media queries in JavaScript by providing you with tools to create advanced responsive sites.

Random Color Generator is a JavaScript Library that provides you with randomly categorized color palettes.

Recess is a simple code quality tool for CSS built on top of Less that was developed at Twitter to support internal style guides. It can be integrated directly into your build system as a compiler, to keep your source looking clean and super manageable.

Gmail.js is a JavaScript API for Gmail that features plenty of methods to work with Gmail and Chrome extensions.

A CSS Grid that’s perfectly suitable for card listing designs such as tiles, videos, or article listings. It is media-query-less but still adjusts the number of columns depending on the available width or set values.

CSSfmt is a tool built on top of PostCSS that automatically formats CSS and SCSS source code such as Vanilla CSS, SCSS syntax, and nested selectors syntaxes like LESS and Stylus.

Boron is a JavaScript library that allows you to create several modal or dialog animations based on React.js. Some of the animations you’ll find are drop, fade in, and outline slide.|||

Hello there! Here we are again with this amazing bunch of resources for your web and graphic design projects. Come and have a scuba dive around this ocean of