Hello, welcome to Losing Weight With Pat. Diets are a big part of losing weight. That’s why I will try and help you find the right diet for you.

If you are like me, you have tried a lot of different diet techniques, but none seems to work. When I was growing up I never really had a problem with my weight. But when I reached in my middle 30’s, that is when I started noticing my weight gain.

I’ve tried an assortment of diet programs, but none seems to help. That’s why I will try and show you things that can work and I’ll also show you things that I have experienced or tried that do not work.  Over the years, I have learned to take better care of myself. I started eating right, more vegetables and less of all that garbage that my body use to crave.

There are a lot of temptations out there to go to a fast food restaurant and indulge in a good burger. That’s because there are so many fast food restaurants out there, more than 50,000 and still building on. Every corner you look down is some kind of fast-food restaurant, and they are still building more as I write this.  Sometimes you just have to stop and think about what you are consuming. That is why I would like to help you with that temptation.

The temptation is the number 1 killer in the world. The kind of the world we live in, it is hard to keep yourself under control. You have to discipline yourself, take control of your body and the things you put into your body.

I would like to help you to get on a good diet plan. Ones that work. I’m in the same boat you are in, I’ve tried it all. But there are things that do work, I’m here to help you find a diet that works for you.

Going on a diet don’t mean that you don’t eat. You could still eat what you want and lose weight. I’ll be explaining all that in my posts.

If you have any questions or would like to leave a comment, please feel free to. I really Would like to hear from you.

If you need me to help you with finding a good solid diet please just ask.

Again thank you for coming to see me here at Losing Weight With Pat.|||

Diets and temptation. How to stay a way form harmful food. How to create a good diet plan that works. So come see what I can doing for.