It manipulated the pollution levels of its cars. It deliberately designed “defeat” software to fool regulators and, more importantly, customers into thinking it was hitting targets it was nowhere close to. And who knows, as the scandal unfolds, there may well be even worse revelations about the scale of corporate wrongdoing at the German car giant Volkswagen . It is now engulfed in a scandal from which the company may never recover.

But, hey, guess what? Perhaps none of that really matters. Because it turns out that VW was also a global leader in “corporate social responsibility”. Its annual report was packed full of lovingly described projects it backed and charities it supported. It was a “thought leader” on dozens of different weighty issues, and a “change agent” for improving society. Globally, it was ranked as the 11th best company in the world for its corporate social responsibility work.

The social responsibility of companies is very simple – to make good products, to honour their contracts and to pay their staff and suppliers on time. Everything else is just a smokescreen.

What that surely tells us is that CSR has become a racket – and a dangerous one. It allows companies to parade their virtue, and look good, while internal standards are allowed to slip. In fact, the social responsibility of companies is very simple – to make good products, to honour their contracts and to pay their staff and suppliers on time. Everything else is just a smokescreen.

It remains to be seen what happens to VW, and whether it can recover from the emissions scandal. The early signs are hardly promising. It took several days for the chief executive to be removed, and even then he was replaced by an insider – there was little sign the company had worked out it needed a clean sweep of its management. In the wake of that, there has been plenty of discussion about whether it signals the death of Germany Inc, or indeed the death of diesel. We will see. One thing it should certainly signal the death of, however, is the corporate social responsibility movement.

Volkswagen was as progressive, inclusive and caring as any multi-national is meant to be these days. The Reputation Institute recently ranked the company as the 11th best in the world for its CSR work (Google, BMW and Disney were the top three, by the way – just in case you want to start selling the shares). Last year it collected the “Gold Medal Award for Sustainable Development” from the non-profit World Environment Center, which praised it for its “understanding of sustainability as a strategic goal and its exemplary implementation”. It won the 2014 policy award for Corporate Social Responsibility for its strategic partnership with the Nature and Biodiversity Conservation Union. Only last week, and rather embarrassingly after the revelations emerged, the Dow Jones Sustainability Index picked it as the overall global winner in the auto industry for its commitment to the environment.

There is hardly a worthy project the company did not have time – and of course some euros – for. Its sustainability report runs to 156 pages. Apparently it had a “corporate culture which” allowed “the Volkswagen Group to integrate traditional entrepreneurial business values with a modern understanding of responsibility and sustainability”. In China, it was working to promote safer cycling. In Poland, it was working to promote work-life balance for mothers. In the Czech Republic, its Skoda unit was working with local arts centres. In Germany, it was helping to protect traditional moorland. At its Bentley plant in Crewe it was encouraging staff to come to work by bike or foot (possibly because it doesn’t pay them enough to drive a Bentley). Whatever country you looked at, VW was doing something to protect the environment, promote diversity or bring about world peace.

That is pretty much compulsory for multi-nationals these days. According to a recent report from the consulting firm EPG, British and American companies in the Fortune 500 are now spending $15bn a year on CSR work. Another survey put the total spend at $19bn (which is more, to take just one example, than the £12bn the UK spends annually on policing). Whatever the actual number, it is going to be a very big one. No one has managed to calculate the total number of people employed in the industry, or their average salary, but it will be a huge number, and the pay will no doubt be generous. A whole industry of consultants has grown up around it, while hundreds of charities and third-sector organisations have sprung up specifically to pitch for generous grants from big companies.

Of course, no one would pretend that none of it does any good. It is hard to burn your way through $20bn without getting something for all that money, even for a corporate responsibility official. The trouble is, it has become a smokescreen. After all, VW is far from alone. BP made a big play of its green credentials before the Deepwater Horizon disaster (remember all those wind turbines that sprouted up on filling stations). The energy company Enron won a host of CSR awards before it went bankrupt in 2001 amid an accounting scandal. Just about every company caught up in a scandal turns out to have a CSR department spending millions. It would be easy to dismiss that as harmless do-gooding. But there is more to it than that. It is, in reality, a way of allowing companies to make a very public display of how virtuous they are, and that allows them to stop giving serious thought to what their actual purpose is.

The social responsibility of a private company is actually very straightforward. It is to make a decent product, which does what it says it will, and isn’t dangerous in any unexpected way. It is to charge a fair price. It is to honour its contracts. And it is to pay its staff and suppliers on time – and, within reason, to pay its taxes promptly as well. If it can do all of those things, and do them well, it is already making a hugely responsible contribution to society.

Companies could simply take that $19bn spent on CSR and pay it out in higher salaries and dividends – and then let shareholders and staff give money to charity if they want to.

CSR departments are providing moral cover for companies that allow their own internal standards to get worse and worse. It has become a racket, and a damaging one – and the sooner it is closed down, the quicker companies such as VW can get on with cleaning up their behaviour where it actually matters.|||

The Volkswagen scandal has shown us that CSR allows companies to parade their 
  virtue, and look good, while internal standards are allowed to slip