Shows teenagers how to plan and attend a party, suggesting games to play and songs to sing ("Jimmy Crack Corn").

Shows how to plan a party. Illustrates the skills which enable the guests to have fun together.

 Ken Smith sez: This film creates a world so innocent that it's embarrassing. Jean, Nora and Eileen are high school girls who want to throw a "coming out" party to introduce college boy "Steve" to the rest of the gang. But whoa, let's not be impulsive, the narrator cautions, for "a successful party needs planning and skill." Accordingly, every detail of the get-together is mapped out beforehand, from the refreshments (hot chocolate and sandwiches) to the "well-chosen games" (a hat-making contest and Charades). "Everyone's out to have fun and to help OTHERS have fun," the narrator emphasizes. This need to do everything collectively, to allow no room for individual interests, to "help keep the party fun for all," is shown when Nora attempts pull Steve aside for some conversation. Nuh-uh! Who knows where that behavior would lead! Jean drags the two rebels back into the group, and the gang soon has a grand time singing Jimmy Crack Corn around the piano. The narrator offers one last nugget of wisdom -- "Part of a good party is knowing when to go home" -- and the kids do just that.

 The disapproval of anything impulsive or individual in this film shows a really warped sense of "democracy," and more closely resembles socialism, if you think about it. According to Ted Peshak, "This whole part of the north Chicago area has changed because of that film."

 

 PARTIES PLANNING INVITATIONS TEENAGERS REFRESHMENTS FOOD ENTERTAINMENT GAMES HOSTESSES GUESTS

 <BR>

Reviewer: Elrond - - October 7, 2005 

 Subject: huh? I always get a kick out of these 40s/50s 'social guidance' films, usually for how cheesy and outdated they are. This one really hits home though... I'm a 19 year old college student, I'm not much of a partier but I'm not stupid, enough to know that there's something wrong with the image presented by this film. I know times were simpiler back then, and the booze, drugs, and sex associated with today's parties probally wouldn't have been present to the degree they are today, but this party reminded me of a children's birthday party: organized and regemented games, everyone stays with the group, sing-a-long (and don't even get me started on Jimmy Crack Corn), etc.... These kids are probably 16-19, not 5. I don't think teens were so different in the 1950s.

 I have a staunch feeling this film may be more trying to reinforce a utopian view of socieity, rather than teach party planning skills (same goes for many of the other Instructional Film.)

Reviewer: Spuzz - - September 7, 2005 

 Subject: What a difference 40 years makes. Jean phones her friends with the most amazing news. Her brother and his roommate from college are coming to town for a vixit! Jean and her friends think this calls for a celebration of the highest magnitude, so they put together a humdinger of a party. They plan it.. Invitations! Refreshments! (because, as Jean enthuses, Ƕwe have to feed the MEN! And Jean also ends this conversation with this, ǶWell, we want something to eat and something to drink.. Refreshments!Ƕ). and Entertainment is also discussed, ǶWe want to show Steve a good time, but we donǶt know what he really likes!Ƕ one of the girls says, pawing her teddy bear. The girls all decide to play mixer games! Soon, the party is underway! They have hat designing contests, guessing games, rhythym games and charades! Now, again, these are COLLEGE students weǶre talking about here, not 6 year old kids. Soon the whole thing gets out of control when the narrator states that one of the guests has some spontaneous unplanned fun, and plays ǶJimmy Crack CornǶ on the piano! Oh! The kids of today! Such rebelness!!! (runs from room)

 

 

 (Oh right this is a MUST SEE on this site!!)

Reviewer: Karma Hawk - - April 5, 2005 

 Subject: Cornet films: Opressing teen partys since 1950's This film was made to teach kids how too plan a party, however something that makes this film odd is the fact that the Cornet people really didn't know thier audience or made horible directorial decisions, it doesn't take long to see that this film describes how to plan a good "kids" party but not so much a good "teen" party. "Teen" partys usually don't involve party games, and arn't so opressive (At one point we're taught that we should make sure that guests stay with the group no matter what) Odd directorial decission makes this highly recomended.

Reviewer: depthfunction - - April 3, 2005 

 Subject: Oh. My. Gawd. BWAHAHAHAHAHA!!!

 

 I've watched a lot of goofy movies in this archive, but this one takes the cake. Please - somebody tell me that this isn't really what teen parties were like back in 1950, because that was the lamest thing I've EVER seen. But I guess this was before rock'n'roll - that explains a LOT.

 

 And the "Jimmy Crack Corn" sing-along? SO very wrong on SO many levels.

 

 I give it 5 stars because it had me ROFLMAO!

Reviewer: RedAliCat - - June 27, 2004 

 Subject: How To Land A Man! This really should have been titled, "How To Land A Man: Perfection Is The Only Way." The "preparations" that the "girls" go through are down right businesslike--"Now, what is our purpose?" and "I'll go to the library and research party games." Heavens to betsy if something went wrong; Steve would HATE you then! The bit about keeping people from pairing off to talk seemed rather totalitarian. It seems like the only time you would get to know people personally is chatting with them exclusively for a few minutes. Though they probably were meant at face value, most of the phrases used in today's thought process give the movie a whole new meaning. Calling it a gay party, males were men and females were girls, saying they were "out to have fun," the witch gnawing at a suspended apple, and the much-repeated "show Steve a good time" makes for a good laugh. One wonders if some involved were aware of how it sounds. For a film so focused on a "good time," I really wonder if kids back then would have been satisfied with singing Jimmy Crack Corn.

Reviewer: Marysz - - March 28, 2004 

 Subject: Having Fun and Helping Others Have Fun Another oppressive teen etiquette film, this time on how to give a party. JeanǶǶǶǶs brother is bringing a friend, Steve, home from college and she decides to give a party to welcome him to their ǶǶǶǶgang.ǶǶǶǶ Jean, Eileen and Nora (who is seen in at least three other Coronet films, ǶǶǶǶHow Do You Know ItǶǶǶǶs Love,ǶǶǶǶ ǶǶǶǶWriting Better Social LettersǶǶǶǶ and ǶǶǶǶHow to say No: Moral MaturityǶǶǶǶ) get together and draw up a ǶǶǶǶto doǶǶǶǶ list that consists of guests, invitations, refreshments and entertainment. The actual party is simple and innocent by todayǶǶǶǶs standards. The boys wear coats and ties and the guests play party games in a simply furnished bungalow living room. The usual overbearing narrator tells us that the job of a party is to ǶǶǶǶhave fun and help others have fun.ǶǶǶǶ America must have been a rowdy, ill-mannered place in the late forties and early fiftiesǶǶǶǶotherwise why would so many of these heavy-handed films about manners been made? After a hat-making contest, a round of ǶǶǶǶrhythmǶǶǶǶ and a game of charades, itǶǶǶǶs time for refreshments, courtesy of Mom (Dad is nowhere to be seen; maybe heǶǶǶǶs out bowling). Mom must have seen ǶǶǶǶHow To Set a Buffet Table,ǶǶǶǶ another etiquette film in the Archives, on how to serve food that the guests can serve themselves and ǶǶǶǶhelp the others, too.ǶǶǶǶ Watching these old films, IǶǶǶǶm always struck by how much smaller food portions were. When the refreshments are finished, itǶǶǶǶs time for the guests to go home. But not before an impromptu sing-a-long of ǶǶǶǶJimmy Crack Corn.ǶǶǶǶ Maybe this prefigures the folk-singing craze that took off later in the decade. - March 28, 2004Having Fun and Helping Others Have Fun

Reviewer: dynayellow - - September 2, 2003 

 Subject: When planning your party, failure is not an option! You think you've seen Squaresville teens before? Well, mister, sit down and watch this little flick, with a group of young people so squeaky-clean they make Ivory soap look like an oil slick.

 

 Unbelievably camp as three hot-to-trot girls plan a party for a boy from college. Directions from the cheery faced yet utterly dominant narrator tell you to make sure that you participate in the Hive Mind at parties. At one point, two people step to the side to talk to each other--a fatal mistake! Herd them back into the Group because it's time for a hat party! 

 

 And what kind of swingin' party doesn't end with a stirring rendition of Jimmy Crack Corn (complete with a faux-minstrel-show baritone singing about his "Massah?"). So amazingly innocent you just won't believe it.|||

Shows teenagers how to plan and attend a party, suggesting games to play and songs to sing (Jimmy Crack Corn).