In the late 19th century, as the horseless carriage was just around the corner, observers were skeptical of the possibility, practicality, and safety of such a design. Some of the questions being asked showed that people thought of it not as the thing it would become, the car, but as a novel version of the horse-driven carriage.

The same thing is happening now, over 100 years later, with what’s being dubbed the driverless car. Most of the mainstream media attention so far has been focused on incremental or cosmetic ways in which these cars are different from what’s currently on the road, and fears related to these differences: what if a car driven by software kills someone? How will it make decisions about who to kill? What if these cars are hacked? Oh look, these cars might have more shiny windows!

These are important issues that will need to be addressed before widespread use is possible, but they hide the more interesting changes that these cars will bring.

It means highways, long distance commutes, spread out families, suburban sprawl, trucks, far away holidays, and more. The social and environmental changes brought about by the introduction of the car went far beyond the initial fears and speculations.

As I will aim to describe here, it means less parking hassle, a smoother ride, new business models for taxis, fewer road deaths, improved accountability, fewer car owners, specialised car designs, and many more things which we haven’t realised yet.

One person whose writing seems more forward-looking than most of the mainstream media’s short-sighted pieces is software architect and entrepreneur Brad Templeton. As a previous member of Google’s self-driving car team, he has done a lot of research in this space. On his robocars page he shares many of his predictions on what driverless cars will mean for society. Here is an introduction to some of the more interesting ones.

Cities currently need to allocate some of their land to parking spaces. In addition, at certain times a significant proportion of urban traffic is made up of cars looking for parking spaces. Self-driving cars ameliorate both of these by

Current cars have good suspension, but not the best possible. Self-driven cars won’t need to be able to ‘feel’ the road in the way that humans like to, and so suspension can be optimised further. These cars will also have more precise control over acceleration, unlimited patience, and will likely be able to optimise for comfort over speed in scenarios where this is relevant.

The taxi industry is already being disrupted by companies like Uber and Lyft, and it is moving towards a model which almost looks like it was designed for self-driving cars. The next step here will be app-based ‘summoning’ of self-driving cars, wherever you might be in a city.

Uber could buy a fleet of self-driving cars for themselves, but it would be more in line with its current model to allow individuals or other companies to put their cars to ‘work’ for the Uber app when they’re not using them themselves. People might even buy cars especially to have them work for Uber, in the same way that some people now buy apartments to rent out on Airbnb.

Car crashes kill over 1 million people per year globally. Self-driving cars don’t drink, text, fall asleep, or turn around while driving. They have faster response times, and are more aware of their own limitations. Because of the incentives created by increased accountability (as detailed below) and the highly negative impact of the fear following any accidents, there is enormous pressure on manufacturers to make sure that their accident rates are far lower than current human accident rates —Templeton’s estimate is that these cars will need to demonstrate an accident rate 10–50 times better than human drivers before they will even be allowed on the road unsupervised.

A common concern about self-driving cars is about assigning blame. If a car crashes and kills someone, who will be at fault? Self-driving cars will actually make this process easier, for the following reasons:

As autonomous cars become ubiquitous, car sharing will become more viable. Current schemes such as zipcar are a good start but having to walk around to find a zipcar is an inconvenience. When app-based car summoning (Uber or otherwise) becomes available it will likely be cheaper, more convenient, and safer for a lot of people based in cities or big towns to use a such a service rather than own their own car.

What happens when you remove the need for a steering wheel, dashboard, windscreen, pedals, and windows? Just like early cars gradually moved away from the carriage design, these new cars will probably evolve slowly into something that looks very different from current car designs. These are some designs we might see:

These new cars won’t mean that people-driven cars will disappear (though they might be banned from driving on public roads, as Tesla’s Elon Musk has suggested). People still ride horses for fun. Driving for leisure will probably remain popular, but these autonomous cars will take over where driving is just a means to an end.

If you found the content of this post interesting, please recommend or share so others will read it too. I’d highly recommend checking out Brad Templeton’s Robocars site and blog if you’d like to take a more in-depth look at this subject.|||

In the late 19th century, as the horseless carriage was just around the corner, observers were skeptical of the possibility, practicality, and safety of such a design. Some of the questions being…