Do you ever face this dilemma?

You want to learn so many things, however you don’t have the adequate time to learn all of them. You want to learn Japanese, learn Salsa Dancing, learn to paint, play the violin and drive a motorcycle – all at the same time.

Do you find yourself in this situation?

You have decided to learn something, and you know it is important for you to learn it, but you just can’t get yourself to do it. You find it boring – infact the whole learning experience is like a chore.

I personally face both these dilemmas – I have too many things to learn. And also not having enough motivation to learn that subject.

Yesterday, I had to choose between learning Microsoft SharePoint 2013 on Udemy versus Inbound Marketing on Hubspot.

Guess what happened? Nothing happened. I spent most of my time contemplating and did not end up choosing any.

So, How do you pick & choose what to learn?

Well – It is very simple. The Rule #1 in Rapid Skill Acquisition is to choose a lovable project.

I learnt this when reading The First 20 Hours by Josh Kaufman.

Great book by the way. I strongly recommend you read it. It will change your perspective on learning and skill-acquisition.

One of my favourite quotes from the book:

“The best thing that can happen to a human being is to find a problem, to fall in love with that problem, and to live trying to solve that problem, unless another problem even lovable appears”

I think this is the secret sauce to a happy and productive life. Just pick the skill that is the most enjoyable for you right now. In other words, choose an enjoyable project.

If you want to learn something quickly – then make sure it is a lovable problem or subject. The more excited you are about learning that skill, the more quickly you will acquire it.

For example, as a Wannabe Blogger – I know it is important for me to learn some key Internet Marketing techniques such as Developing Landing Pages, A/B Testing,etc.

These are not mandatory skills, but important for me – to convert more of my visitors into repeat customers.

However, I don’t necessarily enjoy that part. I purchased a 3 hour course on Creating Effective Landing Pages. But I could not get myself through the course. It felt like a chore. So I stopped learning how to make Landing Pages.

The skill I enjoy the most is writing.

It is exciting – it gets my juices flowing. I look forward to my weekends where I can get my unlimited refills of Starbucks coffee, and I can use that time to start posting articles.

Hence, I spend most of my time on writing. It is a skill that I can improve heuristically – by trial-and-error & the more I write the better I become.

The challenge is fun. And I get enjoyment from it regardless of how pretty my website will look like.

The same applies to any skill acquisition. It is important to choose wisely. More importantly choose a lovable project. Regarding the other skills you want to learn, put them on your bucket-list – and tackle them when the right time comes. It is important to focus on one thing at a time.

Feel free to share this article if you found the information resourceful!!|||

If you want to learn something quickly - then make sure it is a lovable problem or subject. The more excited you are about learning that skill, the more quickly you will acquire it.