Twitter… What Are You Thinking?

The big announcement surprised some, angered others, and led many to conclude that the little bird isn’t bringing in enough cash.

The news: Twitter share counts will no longer appear alongside Tweet buttons AND third-party direct access to tweet share stats will be curtailed.

Update: Our team worked hard and were able to bring back Twitter share counts in version 1.4.1 of Social Warfare! Purchase your copy today!

Off the cuff, that may not sound like an earthshaking development – but the potential ramifications are huge. It could even signal the beginning of the end for social media metrics as we know them or it may signal a giant step towards a paywall-anchored internet.

Let’s take a look at what we know, what we can surmise, and what this change could mean to your business.

Or could it be that Twitter – a social media mainstay – is leading us towards better ways to assess social effectiveness?

It would be easy to run wild with speculation. Rather than do that, though, the Social Warfare team asked a bevy of online influencers for help understanding the situation.

If you care about the future of the internet – and especially if you do business online – don’t leave without reading, bookmarking, and sharing this article.

The impact Twitter’s decision (and its unavoidable consequences) will have on you and your business depends on how you function online.

Here are a few of the most likely situations and outcomes:

The Social Warfare team realized Twitter’s announcement foreshadowed the coming of something considerably more significant than a Tweet button design change.

After pondering the situation, we sent out a heads-up announcement to our subscribers – then we polled online influencers to see what insight they could bring to the discussion.

Our query focused on three things:

Following is a synopsis of the responses we’ve received thus far. We’ll also consider the (unofficial) logic provided by a Twitter insider.

Afterwards, we’ll put those same three questions to YOU.

Speculations about motive ranged widely. Some were unique. Most pointed to an end game related to the primary motivation behind most business decisions – how to make more money.

Responses fell into these six fairly well-defined categories:

You may recall that it was about two years ago that Twitter, Inc. became a publicly traded company. Share value moved from a $69 USD high in January of 2014 to a current close of $25.76 – and has been sinking steadily since last spring.

That scenario adds real credence to the “desperate attempt to earn more money” theory. And while we can’t provide an OFFICIAL explanation for the move, here’s what we were told by a source inside Twitter:

Remember: This is just the beginning of the discussion. Your input is valuable. We want to know what you think.

To get the discussion started, though, here’s how the responses we’ve received to date pan out.

All told, the general consensus was that the initial jolt won’t last more than a few months. Just as the SEO world found ways to deal with grossly diminished reporting of search data for analytics, the social media community will develop workarounds to meet the challenge.

We may need to pass through a period of ‘flying blind,’ but the online world is resilient, creative, and determined.

Give yourself some applause. You deserve it.

Said my buddy – and copywriter extraordinaire – Demian Farnworth, “Either the backlash will be so big Twitter retracts or someone else comes up with a better way to demonstrate social proof. I actually prefer the latter option.”

And that brings us to our final query…

This is a tough, tough question. It’s tempting to get out the crystal ball and predict either mayhem or social media nirvana.

And it’s tempting to play the middle of the road and say much without saying anything really. Some of the probabilities seem self-evident and/or unavoidable, and our panel covered the bases well.

Time will give us a better picture of how things will pan out.

Some believe Twitter’s move will make a “huge impact” on the social media world.  Some see no reason to panic and are content to wait and see.

Some think we would be wise to get proactive – FAST.

The range of responses stacked up like this:

If you get quiet and listen closely. If you sniff the social wind a bit and let the news sink in… you’ll realize something is up.

Something is different.

As a third-party provider of a WordPress social media plugin, Social Warfare is definitely concerned. Our team is working hard to keep Social Warfare reasonably priced and optimally effective.

Twitter’s recommendation (Gnip.com) is cost-prohibitive. Fees aren’t posted on the Gnip site, but developers will need to pony up thousands of dollars each month just to get on board.

By the way (surprise, surprise), Gnip was recently acquired by Twitter.

It is possible to access share counts via the Twitter REST API. This approach, however, requires individual permissions and is considerably more complex and cumbersome than the current, relatively simple, JSON endpoint access.

More likely, Twitter’s move will stir up launches of providers who pay the Gnip fees – then resell the data to others.

Let’s look at the writing on the wall, though: IF Twitter’s desire is to put access to their data behind a paywall – and Gnip is the chosen wall – chances are good we’ll never, ever see easy (read that “low-cost or free”) access to tweet counts again.

The mom and pop buffet we’ve grown accustomed to online may be rapidly moving towards an RSVP. You may soon need to pay handsomely for services once easily affordable.

The giants have claimed their spots, they’ve set up shop, and they are ready to start claiming bigger pieces of the financial potential of internet marketing.

How does that idea set with you?

Have you become so internet-dependent that you have no choice but to pay whatever it takes to operate online?

Will the politicians protect you from online extortion?

Can a grassroots movement persuade the big wheels to back off and tread easily?

It’s your turn to talk. Comments are open.

We’re indebted to our panel members. Even though our call for responses went out without warning – and we needed feedback quickly – they took time to answer. We learn from them daily, and you can too. Click on the names to find out more about the contributors and their work.

“I commend anyone for testing. But I don’t believe in a social media utopian society where everyone is equal.” “This is one way to break me of my love affair for vanity metrics.” “It simply doesn’t make sense to me on any level… DISLIKE isn’t a strong enough word for how I feel about it.” “I feel this is yet another sad tale of Twitter turning their backs on the developers that helped it become great. Of all the social stats to remove access to, Twitter shares should be one of the last.” “It seems like a natural play for monetization… which will make Wall Street happy.” “[Share counts are] the main metric we use to measure how much traction our content is getting.”  “Is there a good technical reason for this or is it more ‘We’re Twitter. We can screw developers anytime we want’ B.S.?”

We’d really love to hear from you and get your perspective on Twitter’s decision to kill tweet counts. You can sound off in the comments below or let us know how you feel on the social network of your choice. You know what to do!

P.S. If you’re not a fan of Twitter’s decision and want your tweet counts to remain, use the hashtag #SaveOurShareCounts and join the other folks petitioning against this change.|||

