Type in the driving directions. Tap "enter." The code flies across the cosmos toward Mars. Minutes later, the signal arrives at the rover standing alert on the planet's surface. The plucky bot decodes the instructions to drive a meter or two that-a-way, in the direction of an interesting-looking rock. Agreeably, it rolls. And then the robot sits just there, as if thinking "now what?" as it waits for the next signal from home base.

This is no way to drive.

Slow going is a Martian way of life. Having invested years and billions of dollars to send a fragile rolling robot to another world, NASA isn't suddenly going to start doing donuts or drag-racing a dust storm. The rover is on its own—if something goes wrong, there's nary a mechanic in sight. And then there's the time lag: It takes 5 to 20 minutes to send directions one-way from Earth, depending upon the current distance to Mars. So NASA drives like a grandma. This spring, the Opportunity rover completed a the first Martian marathon. It took more than 11 years to drive those 26.2 miles.

Imagine an awesome future Mars car. It prowls instead of puttering, exploring vast swaths of the Red Planet. It's much more capable than any rover we've ever sent. And whether or not it's carrying humans, the Martian dream car probably drives itself.

On a basic level Mars rovers already have some limited autonomy, says NASA's Matt Heverly, who has guided both Curiosity and Opportunity. Curiosity can take a basic set of instructions and execute them on its own. But there are important reasons why we're still a long way from a badass Google car that bombs around Mars, cruising carefree as it explores the rocks, craters, and dunes.

Curiosity is actually on its own more than you might think. The reason is twofold. One is the time lag in sending the signals. It's a hell of lot less annoying to send a bunch of instructions at once than to drive with a minutes-long gap between call and response. The second reason is the way that Earth and Mars days are not quite in sync. The Martian day is 40 minutes longer than ours, meaning that to keep in sync with the rover's 9 to 5, NASA's people have to shift their daily schedules forward 40 minutes every day.

For the sake of employee sanity, Heverly and colleagues quit that after the first three months of Curiosity's mission. Now, they send it a list of instructions twice a day, and let the rover work its way through them while its human minders sleep or eat lunch. Here's how it works:

Curiosity sees the surface of Mars as if it's a scene from an Atari game. Even so, the rover has a pretty amazing ability to analyze the world around it—not by scanning the lines on a highway, but by understanding the unpredictable Martian terrain. When NASA can see all the rocks out in front of a rover, it can easily plot a course around them. But, Heverly says, the time comes when you've got to go over a hill and you don't know what's on the other side. So they trust the rover, essentially telling it: Go ahead, but keep yourself safe.

Heverly says Curiosity can take pictures at regular intervals of the ground in front of it and to its sides, building a 3D terrain mesh. The rover can then look at the map it has made, he says. "It can say, 'If I drove here, would there be a rock underneath my wheels and if so, how tall is that rock and is that safe for me?'"|||

One of the guys who drivers Mars roves explains how to get them to drive themselves.