On Oct. 6, the winner of the $60,000 Hilary Weston Writers’ Trust Prize for Nonfiction will be announced in Toronto. In anticipation of this award, the National Post presents excerpts from all five nominated books this week. Today: Rosemary Sullivan’s Stalin’s Daughter.

At 7:00 p.m. on the evening of March 6, 1967, a taxi drew up to the open gates of the American Embassy on Shantipath Avenue in New Delhi. Watched carefully by the Indian police guard, it proceeded slowly up the circular drive. The passenger in the back seat looked out at the large circular reflecting pool, serene in the fading light. A few ducks and geese still floated among the jets of water rising from its surface. The embassy’s exterior walls were constructed of pierced concrete blocks, which gave the building a light, airy look. The woman noted how different this was from the stolid institutional Soviet Embassy she had just left. So this was America.

Svetlana Alliluyeva climbed the wide steps and stared at the American eagle embedded in the glass doors. All the important decisions of her life had been taken precipitately. Once she crossed this threshold, she knew that her old life would be irrevocably lost to her. She had no doubt that the wrath of the Kremlin would soon fall on her head. She felt defiant. She felt terrified. She’d made the most important decision of her life; she’d escaped, but into what she had no idea. She did not hesitate. Clutching her small suitcase in one hand, she rang the bell.

Danny Wall, the marine guard on desk duty, opened the door. He looked down at the small woman standing before him. She was middle-aged, neatly dressed, non-descript. He was about to tell her the embassy was closed when she handed him her passport. He blanched. He locked the door behind her and led her to a small adjacent room. He then phoned Robert Rayle, the second secretary of the embassy, who was in charge of walk-ins — defectors. Rayle had been out, but when he returned the call minutes later, Wall gave him the secret code indicating the embassy had a Soviet defector, the last thing Rayle was expecting on a quiet Monday evening in the Indian capital.

When Rayle arrived at the Embassy at 7:25, he was pointed to a room where a woman sat talking with Consul George Huey. She turned to Rayle as he entered and almost the first thing she said was: “Well, you probably won’t believe this, but I’m Stalin’s daughter.”

Rayle looked again at the demure, attractive woman with copper hair and pale blue eyes who stared back at him. She did not fit his image of Stalin’s daughter, though what that image was, he could not have said. She handed him her Soviet passport. At a quick glance, he saw the name: Citizeness Svetlana Iosifovna Alliluyeva. He went through the possibilities. She could be a Soviet plant; she could be a counter-agent; she could be crazy. But Iosifovna was the patronymic, meaning “daughter of Joseph.” George Huey asked, nonplussed: “So you say your father was Stalin? The Stalin?”

As the officer in charge of walk-ins from the Soviet bloc, Rayle was responsible for confirming her authenticity. After a brief interview, he excused himself and went to the embassy communications centre, where he cabled headquarters in Washington, demanding all files on Svetlana Iosifovna Alliluyeva. The answer came back one hour later: “No traces.” Headquarters knew nothing at all about her — there were no CIA files, no FBI files, no State Department files. The U.S. government didn’t even know Stalin had a daughter.

While he waited for a response from Washington, Rayle interrogated Svetlana. How had she come to be in India? She claimed that she had left the U.S.S.R. on Dec. 19 on a ceremonial mission. The Soviet government had given her special permission to travel to India to scatter the ashes of her “husband,” Brajesh Singh, on the river Ganges in his small village of Kalakankar, Uttar Pradesh — as Hindu tradition dictated. She added bitterly that because Singh was a foreigner, Alexei Kosygin, Chairman of the Council of Ministers, had personally refused her request to marry him, but after Singh’s death, she was permitted to carry his ashes to India. In the three months she’d spent here, she’d fallen in love with the country and wanted to stay on. Her request was denied. “The Kremlin considers me state property,” she said with disgust. She told Rayle that, under Soviet pressure, the Indian government had refused to extend her visa. She was fed up with being treated like a “national relic.” She looked firmly at Rayle and said that she had come to the American Embassy to ask the U.S. government for political asylum.

So far, Rayle could only conclude that this utterly calm woman believed what she was saying. He immediately understood the political implications. If she really was Stalin’s daughter, she was Soviet royalty. Her defection would be a deep psychological blow to the Soviet government, and it would make every effort to get her back. The American Embassy would find itself in the midst of a political maelstrom.

Rayle remained suspicious. He asked her why her name wasn’t Stalina or Djugashvili, her father’s surname. She explained that in 1957 she had changed her name from Stalina to Alliluyeva, the maiden name of her mother, Nadezhda, as was the right of every Soviet citizen.

He then asked where she had been staying. “At the Soviet Embassy guesthouse,” she replied. How had she managed to slip away without being noticed? he asked. “They are having a huge reception for a visiting Soviet military delegation and the rest of them are celebrating International Women’s Day,” she replied. He asked her how much time she had before her absence at the guesthouse would be noticed. She might have about four hours, she explained, since everyone would be drunk.

Then she passed Rayle a battered sheaf of papers. It was a Russian manuscript titled: Twenty Letters to a Friend and bearing her name as author. She said that it was a personal memoir about growing up inside the Kremlin. This was astonishing: Stalin’s daughter had written a book. What might it reveal about her father? Rayle asked if he could make a copy of it and she agreed.

Following his advice as to the wording, she wrote out a formal request for political asylum in the United States and signed the document. When Rayle warned her that, at this point, he could not definitely promise her asylum, Svetlana demonstrated her political shrewdness. She replied that, if the United States could not or would not help her, she did not believe that any other country represented in India would be willing to do so. She was determined not to return to the U.S.S.R., and her only alternative would be to tell her story “fully and frankly” to the press in the hope that she could rally public support in India and the United States. The refusal to protect Stalin’s daughter would not play well back home. Svetlana understood how political manipulation worked. She’d had a lifetime of lessons….

The U.S. Ambassador, Chester Bowles, was ill in bed that night, so Rayle walked the 10 minutes to his home in the company of the CIA station chief. Ambassador Bowles would later admit that he had not wanted to meet Svetlana personally on the chance that she was simply a nutcase … As they discussed the crisis, the men realized there was not going to be enough time to determine Svetlana’s bona fides in New Delhi before the Soviets discovered she was missing. Bowles believed that the Soviet Union had so much leverage on the government of India, which it was supplying with military equipment, that if it found out Svetlana was at the U.S. Embassy, Indian forces would demand her expulsion. The embassy would have to get her out of India.

At 9:40 p.m. a second flash cable was sent to headquarters in Washington with a more detailed report, stating that Svetlana had four hours before the Soviet Embassy noted her absence. The message concluded: “Unless advised to the contrary we will try to get Svetlana on Qantas Flight 751 to Rome leaving Delhi at 1945Zulu (1:15 am local time).” Eleven minutes later Washington acknowledged receipt of the cable.

The deciding factor was that Svetlana had her Soviet passport in her possession. This was unprecedented. The passports of Soviet citizens traveling abroad were always confiscated and returned to them only as they boarded their flights home. That afternoon the Soviet Ambassador to India, I. A. Benediktov, had held a farewell luncheon for Svetlana. It was a grim affair. He was furious with her because she’d delayed her departure from India long past the one-month authorized by her Russian visa, and Moscow was now demanding her return. She was compromising his career. She would be getting on that flight back to Moscow on March 8.

“Well, if I must leave,” she’d said, “where’s my passport?” Benediktov had snarled to his aide: “Give it to her.” Here Svetlana showed she truly was Stalin’s daughter. When she demanded something, she was not to be refused. Benediktov had made a huge mistake that he would pay for later. For the Soviets, Svetlana was the most important defector ever to escape from the U.S.S.R.

Sitting in his sickbed, Chester Bowles made a decision. With her Indian papers in order and her Russian passport, Svetlana could openly and legally leave India. He ordered a U.S. B-2 tourist visa stamped in her passport. It would have to be renewed after six months. He asked Bob Rayle if he would take her out of India. Rayle agreed. The men returned to the Embassy. It was 11:15 p.m.

Svetlana easily passed through Indian customs and immigration and, in five minutes, with a valid Indian exit visa and her U.S. visitor’s visa, joined Rayle in the international departure lounge. When Rayle asked her if she was nervous, she replied, “Not at all,” and grinned. Her reaction was in character. Svetlana was at heart a gambler. Throughout her life she would make a monumental decision entirely on impulse, and then ride the consequences with an almost giddy abandon. She always said her favourite story by Dostoyevsky was “The Gambler.”

Though outwardly cool, Rayle himself was deeply anxious. He was convinced that, as soon as they discovered her missing, the Soviets would definitely insist that she be handed over. If she were discovered at the airport, Indian police would arrest her, and there would be nothing he could do. He felt the consequences for her would be grave. Execution would have been the old Stalinist style, but her father had been dead 14 years. The Kremlin would not risk a public trial of Svetlana, but she might disappear into the dark reaches of some psychiatric institution. At the least, she knew that, were she apprehended, she would never be allowed out of the Soviet Union again.

The Qantas flight to Rome landed punctually, but Rayle’s relief soon turned to dread as he heard the announcement that the flight would be delayed. The plane had developed mechanical difficulties. The two sat in the departure lounge waiting as minutes turned to hours. Finally, at 2:45 a.m. the Qantas flight for Rome was airborne at last.

As they were in mid-air, a cable about the defector arrived at the American Embassy in New Delhi. In Washington Donald Jameson, who served as CIA liaison officer to the State Department, had informed Deputy Under Secretary of State Foy Kohler of the situation. Kohler’s reaction was stunning — he exploded: “Tell them to throw that woman out of the Embassy. Don’t give her any help at all.” Kohler had recently served as American Ambassador to U.S.S.R. and believed that he had personally initiated a thaw in relations with the Soviets. He didn’t want the defection of Stalin’s daughter, especially coinciding with the 50th anniversary of the Russian Revolution, muddying the waters. When the Embassy staff read the flash cable, they replied: “You’re too late. They’ve gone. They’re on their way to Rome.”

The staff failed to check the status of the Qantas flight. Had they discovered Svetlana and Rayle were sitting for almost two hours in the airport lounge and could have been recalled, Svetlana would have been driven back to the Embassy and “kicked out.” The whole course of her life would have gone very differently. But Svetlana’s life always seemed to dangle on a thread, and chance or fate sent her one way rather than another. She would come to call herself a gypsy. Stalin’s daughter, always living in the shadow of her father’s name, would never find a safe place to land.

Excerpt from Stalin’s Daughter by Rosemary Sullivan © 2015. Published by HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. All rights reserved.|||

Rosemary Sullivan on the night a middle-aged woman walked into the American Embassy in India and declared that she was Soviet royalty ... and wanted to defect