A woman who dreamed of being blind arranged to have drain cleaner poured in her eyes to fulfil her wishes.

Jewel Shuping, 30, from North Carolina has Body Integrity Identity Disorder (BIID), a condition in which able-bodied people believe they are meant to be disabled.

Her desire to lose her sight was so strong that she decided to blind herself - by having a sympathetic psychologist pour drain cleaner into her eyes.

Telling her shocking story, Ms Shuping said her fascination with blindness began early in childhood.

'My mother would find me walking in the halls at night, when I was three or four years old,' she said.

'By the time I was six I remember that thinking about being blind made me feel comfortable.'

As a child, she would spend hours staring at the sun, watching sunspots and solar storms after her mother told her it would damage her eyes.

When she was a teenager she started wearing thick black sunglasses and got her first white cane aged 18 before becoming fully fluent in braille by the age of 20.

'I was 'blind-simming', which is pretending to be blind, but the idea kept coming up in my head and by the time I was 21 it was a non-stop alarm that was going off,' she said.

Determined to turn her dream into a reality, Ms Shuping found a psychologist willing to help her become blind and took the necessary steps in 2006.

They first put in numbing eyedrops - which Ms Shuping picked up during a special visit to Canada - followed by a couple of drops of drain cleaner in each eye.

It is not known if the unidentified psychologist is facing prosecution for their actions.

'My eyes were screaming and I had some drain cleaner going down my cheek burning my skin.

'But all I could think was 'I am going blind, it is going to be okay.'

Medics at a hospital tried to save her vision, against her wishes, but they were permanently damaged.

But it took about six months for the damage to fully take effect.

Ms Shuping said her delight went to disappointment when she opened her eyes and realised she could still see.

'When I woke up the following day I was joyful, until I turned on to my back and opened my eyes - I was so enraged when I saw the TV screen.'

However, over time her eyesight diminished to nothing.

Her left eye suffered a 'corneal meltdown' - collapsing in on itself and requiring the eye to be removed - while her right eye had glaucoma and cataracts, and a webbing of scars.

Ms Shuping's family have disowned her after learning it wasn't an accident.

However, she has been supported by her former fiancé Mike, 50, who is registered legally blind - although in his case due to naturally occurring early-onset macular degeneration.

Ms Shuping, who is studying for a degree in education, said she has no regrets and that she dreams of helping other blind people live an independent life.

'I really feel this is the way I was supposed to be born, that I should have been blind from birth.

'When there's nobody around you who feels the same way, you start to think that you're crazy. But I don't think I'm crazy, I just have a disorder.'

Ms Shuping is now sharing her story to help raise public awareness of BIID and to encourage people with the condition to seek professional help.

She said: 'Don't go blind the way I did. I know there is a need but perhaps someday there will be treatment for it.

'People with BIID get trains to run over their legs, freeze dry their legs, or fall off cliffs to try to paralyse themselves.

'It's very very dangerous. And they need professional help.'

Dr Michael First, professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia University in New York, who did not treat Ms Shuping, said cures for the condition were rare.

The expert, who coined the term BIID, said: 'Any major disability can be a focus of BIID, from amputation to paraplegia and blindness.

'These people are aware that this feeling of theirs is unusual - they know it is coming from within them. They can't explain it.

'But because of this level of awareness we don't consider this to be something that we would consider evidence of psychosis.

'In the world of psychiatry cures are rare, very often it's about asking how you make someone's life fulfilling despite their condition.

'Now the problem of course if you have a particular individual who wanted amputation or who wants to be blind - how do you know once you have done it that they are going to be satisfied?'

And while Ms Shuping is happier than ever living as a blind woman, she says she can see why people who were born with a disability or who acquired one involuntarily might find it hard to comprehend her actions.

'I do understand why some people would be angry about a person giving themselves a disability,' she said.

'They think it's a ploy to get social security, or a waste of advocacy that would be better focused on people with an involuntary disability. But I feel that the way I became disabled doesn't really matter.

'If someone were to say that its fundamentally selfish to blind myself, I would say that it's selfish to refuse treatment to somebody with a disorder.

'This is not a choice, it's a need based on a disorder of the brain.'|||

Jewel Shuping, from North Carolina, had thoughts of being blind from a young age. She suffers from Body Integrity Identity Disorder, where able-bodied people believe they are meant to be disabled.