For years, has stressed that it has "earth's biggest selection" of consumer products whether that's with flat screen televisions or brands of dish soap. On Thursday however, the Seattle-based online retailer announced that its collection of goods, particularly in the consumer electronics category, would be getting a little smaller.

By the end of the month, the company will stop selling video-streaming devices from and , which compete with Amazon's own gadgets. New listings for Apple TVs and Google Chromecasts are also no longer allowed.

"Over the last three years, Prime Video has become an important part of Prime," read a statement from an Amazon spokesperson, referring to the company's expedited shipping and media membership service. "It’s important that the streaming media players we sell interact well with Prime Video in order to avoid customer confusion."

Declared to be the "Everything Store" by one influential book on the company, Amazon and its ban on these particular devices comes as a bit of a surprise given its focus on customer choice and happiness. As CEO and founder Jeff Bezos wrote in a recent letter to shareholders, his company is about "customer obsession rather than competitor focus."

This move, however, stresses the latter. Apple, Google and Amazon have fought mightily in the media-streaming device business, with the Seattle company essentially selling their Fire TVs and Fire TV Sticks at break-even to attract more users Prime. The company does not disclose how many paying Prime members it has (analyst estimates range from 30 million to 80 million), though Bezos and other executives have made it clear that those members are more loyal customers and outspend non-Prime shoppers.

While some would liken the decision to Apple's refusal to sell a competitor's goods in its brick-and-mortar stores, Carolina Milanesi, chief of research at Kantar Worldpanel, said there is a significant distinction. Apple is a hardware company that makes money on the sale of its devices, she said, while Amazon's is an e-commerce company where shoppers expect to find everything.

"At the end of the day, Amazon is not going to convince me to use their services by not allowing me to buy a Chromecast on their site," she said. "They have to differentiate themselves somehow on their services or their hardware."

Milanesi also suggested it was misleading for Amazon to portray the discontinuation of the Chromecast sales on the fact that that the devices do not allow for Prime Video capability. Through a software development kit, Google's device allows for compatibility of all mobile and web developer apps, according to its website. In other words, Amazon could develop a version of its Prime Video app for Google Chromecast if the company chose to. A spokesperson for Google declined to comment.

Competition in the streaming device market has intensified. Just this week, Google unveiled a new version of Chromecast and a new type of device called Chromecast Audio intended to stream music to speakers. The company said it had sold 20 million Chromecast devices to date, making it the top streaming device in the market in terms of total unit sales.

For Amazon, the decision to sacrifice customer selection should be viewed as a rare dilemma, in which Bezos prioritized one of his company's branded devices above a key Amazon tenet. With the popularity of Fire TV (the company called it the best selling video-streaming device in the month of July), Bezos chose to create a moat around his own interests, choking off a huge retail channel for the other tech giants and pushing shoppers toward Amazon's gadget--or at least another with Prime Video functionality. Amazon noted in its statement that it will continue to sell Roku's media-streaming player as well as Xbox and Sony's Playstation, calling them "excellent choices."

Choice in this case is relative as it seems the "Everything Store" may actually be the "Not-Quite-Everything Store."

Follow Ryan on Twitter at @RMac18 or email him at rmac@forbes.com.|||

Amazon chose to discontinue the sale of Apple TVs and Google Chromecasts, but is that best for the customer?