Existing social media such as Facebook and Twitter, are about the consumption of content, it has already replaced books, TV and newspapers to name a few.

The web started as “access to information”, then slowly people started using it as a “space of interaction” adding a more human aspect to it. The Web 3.0 will be a seamless integration between the “real world” and the “information world” in my opinion.

Contextual computing was enabled through the fusion of hardware and software.

Mobile is not the future, it’s the present, it's just the start.

The main advantages we should look into are these:

You can have your email hosted in your local server at home, that is connected with high bandwidth to the internet, and it backups frequently, in different other “local servers” or “mobile devices”.

You can make money out of your devices by “renting” encrypted backup space to other devices. Either through the new currency (either bitcoin or any cryptocurrency) that you can trade as well for backing up other people’s data.

You can make your resources “searchable” then they can be indexed by the current real stuff (things) search engines that I call “stuff engines”. So people can search you, search your content, and stuff around them. By turning on your own content or stuff as searchable then other “stuff engines” can crawl them.

Unlike old-fashioned search engines, when stuff is searchable, it creates its own indexes. The more trustworthy you are, your points of trustworthiness get shared through the internet, so no need to page rank you. So search can be done as in real life, quick lookup no need of huge indexing engines and complex parsing.

I think this ever long debate will be solved when wireless bandwidth increases exponentially (and prices drop), and clock speed of small processors will match that growth.

Dedicated Hardware will just be for “Sensors” (e.g. food data, presence data, motion, etc.) and for Actuators or advanced Display (e.g. Google Glass, Oculus Rift). While the core where the magic happens should be a General Purpose Hardware, with a common OS/Platform.

At a certain point in the future everybody will be a developer, it will be a literacy thing, “writing instructions that automate actions”, everything will have an API.

The future of internet has to be decentralized and is going to be decentralized (But not like the bittorrents).

As human beings, we never lived fully decentralized, even as tribes we used to trade with another tribe, and inside a Tribe they were leaders, judges, and authorities “who we trust”.

But, like DNS servers, and Certificate Authorities, the future of Internet will become gradually decentralized, we may end up having “hiearchies of trust” and “trust authorities”. To whom we can assign trust or revoke the trust anytime we want.

For “Stuff Engines” they can index data locally for each city, district, community, as controlled by the owner’s of that community. It will be voted and agreed upon.

The web will be decentralized from ISPs, the manufacturing will decentralize, artisanal products will be as cheap and accessible and scalable through the power of the web, and food will be healthier and more accessible.

It will bring us together in REAL rather than splitting us apart, hegemonies will split, and the grassroots economy will take the lead.

The thinking will also shift, startups like General Assembly will be widespread. Old Schools and Universities will vanish because they are simply ineffective to society, they were designed for an industrial era.

Not only teaching will be on demand, but the courses will be very pragmatic, more in depth.

With startups like Udacity and Coursera. The role of “content access” will no longer be a problem. Courses will not be about telling you what something is, while the class time should be for discussion, debates, deep problem solving and learning from each other.

Henceforth, we don’t really need universities for this. We can use coffee shops and neighboorhood meetups. The knowledge power will get out of the hands of universities.

Research labs will be replaced soon by hackerspaces and maker spaces, and hackerspaces will evolve into nano tech hackerspace, medical research space etc.

The old funding and grants will no more be the main center of attention, useful research and innovation will be crowd funded, and even useless research will be dropped out.

The thing that is missing from today’s learning is the “doing aspect”, in the future we will be having more hackathons, in field immersions, internships inside the class, etc.

In the future, literacy will not be the ability to read. The fact that you read a book is just consumption. Students will start massively writing books, explaining courses and content to each others. Through writing, we synthesize our knowledge and pass it to another person to increase our understanding. Peer to Peer teaching will be a necessity for success, and it will create the virality that will replace the existing educational hegemonies.

With Web 3.0 people will be using the web to make their reality better, and spend more time on reality. Schools and Universities will dilute, and Agora spaces will replace the old classrooms.

People will gather to discuss ideas and build new things (hacks) rather than discovering the content, so the interaction would be more fruitful and more efficient rather than the old school system.

Professors will become like Jedi Masters only needed to make you level up, rather than to give you knowledge.

Writing software will be like using a calculator, even software will be democratized in an amazing way, now it's already starting with the RESTful web.

Software will become so powerful, that will democratize everything, enhance everything, and automate the boring stuff.|||

