Napz's integrated lights make it possible for lucid dreams to be accessible for everyone

The biohacking device Napz, as designed by Octavio A. Martinez García, can stimulate lucid dreaming, a state where sleepers are aware that they are dreaming and can control many elements of what happens during the dream.

When the user puts the mask on, integrated lights engage and shine through the eyelids. They focus on Rapid Eye Movement (REM), which indicate which level of sleep somebody has arrived at and how actively they might be dreaming. The lights from Napz follow the RPM and trigger the eyes to see lights which triggers the ability to interact intentionally with a dream.

Dream control is a method that can help people suffering from insomnia, severe nightmares, PTSD and similar sleep disorders. Lucid dreaming has been a therapeutic technique for over a century, a skill achieved through practice. Napz and similar devices allow patients to access lucid dreaming more quickly. Instant access to controlled dreams has recreational applications, but lucid dream wearables are most interesting to people in treatment and recovery fields.

If wearables wasn’t the breakout technology of 2014, it’s certainly poised for the title in 2015. Napz demonstrates the continuing maturation of the trend by showing what’s possible when combining wearables with another breaking trend: biohacking. The biohacking movement centers around using exploits of the human body’s reaction to stimuli to produce better effectiveness, health, energy, happiness…or sleep.

As a concept, biohacking has been around for Millenia (meditation is a form of biohacking, as is lifting weights). But its recent combination with the makers’ movement and adoption of a futuristic-sounding name has begun spawning devices like Napz.

Napz was showcased at Digital Futures UKMX labs weekend—put  on by V&A with the help of the British Council and partners like Centro de Cultura Digital—where Mexico City and the small town of Dundee had an event exchange of inventions. The event went on for 48 hours as part of the London Design Festival 2015 last June.

Photos (in order of appearance): Creative Economy |Centro de Cultura Digital | Centro de Cultura Digital | Jonathan May|||

Napz's integrated lights make it possible for you to control your dreams, and for lucid dreaming to be accessible for everyone.