Over the last few months I have been working on an exciting project. Basically I’ve been moving organisations on premise data centre into a third party data centre.

The project is the typical moving a bunch of racks, ensuring there is an appropriate fabric and making sure everything comes back up and we don’t miss a beat. It requires a good understanding of the environment and how everything pieces together but more importantly planning. We have a good project manager for that and I am there to give advice.

Initially I was a little skeptical about doing this project, because I had never done this before. I’ve built data centres with colleagues but I’ve never relocated one into a third parties facility.

In this project I did not learn very much about technology, I would say I learnt more about people. While I already knew most of this stuff, the project allowed me to practice my craft and see if it works beyond the walls (and fences) of the University of Wollongong (UOW) and the Australian Nuclear Science Technology Organisation (ANSTO). For the most part, the recipe works and I figured I’d share the most important traits that helped this particular project execute smoothly.

Conversations are important but more importantly having constructive collegial conversations, which lead to a decision and outcomes, is essential.

Coming into an organisation new, I had to earn people’s trust and respect so I invested a bit of time getting to know folks. I thought this was great. I learnt what people liked e.g. Volkswagen, what they didn’t like e.g. Apple (only a minority), what they’ve done in the past etc. This was fun and brought new insights.

Once I had a sense, we’d simply talk. Whether it be at work, or late in the evening people, were really keen to get this project moving.

This did not mean we did not have some pointy conversations. We had many, but our mutual respect for the outcome and one another led to us being able to have open conversations where we would typically resolve matters.

I enjoyed working with the vendor on this project. There was absolute professionalism and care. This came through in the contractors they used to help with things like cabling.

What I particularly enjoyed was the can do approach which centered on us running and getting the outcome as quick as possible. While the vendor had a pre-existing relationship with the organisation, they didn’t with me and so a bit of time was dedicated to building this relationship.

I think sometimes we treat vendors with a bit of a distain and perhaps don’t have the confidence in them to execute, but reflecting on this a little more it comes down to how that relationship is developed and nurtured and it’s really a process of the entities gaining confidence and mutual respect for one another.

Never under estimate the importance of the trusted relationship with a vendor.

I love organisations that think big, it is really important but often a downfall for them is how they execute the thinking.

I’ve been in some organisations where the thinking is outstanding but the implementation of the initiative is lack luster because rather then incrementally change processes, people and technology, it’s done in one step. The totality of this, for example can be people do not line up.

I enjoyed this project because our approach was to do small activities, which yielded an outcome and in turn gave people more confidence to go onto the next step. They could see the final goal getting closer because of the small steps.

It takes a little longer (really not much), but everyone is united on the journey.

In this particular project we have a hard deadline, we have to be out of the current data centre by a specific date otherwise there will be big problems organizationally. Hard deadlines are probably the best way to create a sense of urgency.

That said in doing this project, we introduced our own sense of urgency and that was really what gets this done quickly to show we can do it. This intention has resulted in people doing the ‘magic’ that they do because they want to show it can be down quickly. People will amaze you and themselves.

People have ideas and more often then not they want to share them. What frustrates people in organisations is that the ideas go unheard.

I tell my classes in computing science that there is nothing such as a ridiculous question or idea. Our job is to flesh them out, together and sometimes they will be winners, others will be dead ends and that’s ok.

Working through this project, the open, transparent culture combined with our desire to ship quickly meant that people were inclined to give their views and more often then not in some shape or form they were incorporated, because they simply led to a better outcome.

People want to be heard, create a culture where people can be heard and are encouraged to express it.

I am a technologist; I have been one since day dot. That said I like to equally think of myself as a people person, a person who fosters debate and ideas.

The problem with technologists is sometimes they just can’t see beyond the technology, the bigger picture.

When I was at ANSTO I took the view that the technologists should do the technology and the business people should do the people and business prongs.

In this particular project we engineered it such that the technology people were heavily involved in the business activities specifically the communications, change management and planning – they were the centre of it and equally we took the view the business people should be more involved in the technology side of the house.

From my perspective it was fun, we all learnt something.

The bottom line is, it’s all about balance. If you get the balance right, things that seem daunting actually prove to be invaluable experiences where the outcome is greater then the sum of the parts.

I’ve always said Strategy, People, Process and Technology are the key ingredients to running an IT shop (or any for that matter). As it turns out in this project, it’s all about the people.|||

