A celebratory birthday trip to Amsterdam turned into the holiday from hell for three friends after an Airbnb booking led to them being scammed out of more than £500.

Lauren Dudley, 20, and Danielle Whiteman, 20, had decided to take their friend Amy Ridgeway to the Dutch city for her 21st birthday and booked an apartment for the three of them via the rental company.

But with days to go before their trip, the friends became concerned after the apartment 'owner' did not reply to their emails asking for the address.

They contacted Airbnb, only to find that their booking was fake, they had been the victims of fraud and had lost the £502 - and a £200 security deposit - they had paid via bank transfer to the person posing as the flat's owner.

Airbnb gave the friends a credit note covering the sum they had shelled out, and a list of alternative apartments in the city as Miss Dudley, Miss Whiteman and Miss Ridgeway started a frantic search for somewhere to stay.

They eventually found an alternative room for their stay on September 10, but when they arrived the new flat was above a noisy kebab house, and the bedding had not been changed prior to their stay.

And even after they arrived home, their ordeal was far from over as fraudsters then hacked Miss Dudley's Airbnb and email account, and started using her profile to advertise bogus listings on the accommodation website.

'It was my friend's birthday and I wanted to take her away for the weekend because it was her 21st,' Miss Dudley, from Barnham, West Sussex, told MailOnline.

'I was aware of Airbnb and as there were three of us we thought an apartment would be better for us than a hotel.

'We found an apartment we really liked the look of, spoke to the woman we thought was the owner, booked it and paid her the money.

'I didn't think much of it but a couple of days before we were due to go I asked her for the address and where we should meet her. But she wasn't replying.

'The day before the trip I still hadn't heard anything so I contacted Airbnb and said "I'm sure it's nothing, but I wanted to check I had the right place".

'They came back to me and said it was fraud.

'We were set to fly out the next morning, it was ridiculous and we had paid £502.'

Airbnb gave Miss Dudley a credit note and sent her a list of places that were available for the two night stay the friends had planned - but all of them cost more than the amount covered by the credit note.

They spent all night searching for accommodation, staying up until 1am on the morning they were due to fly before finding a room which would take them.

They had to pay an extra £60 for the new room, and hand over 100 euros when they arrived.

'We knew it was only going to be a room,' said Miss Dudley - who works as a photographer. 'In the pictures it looked very pretty.

'When we arrived there was a shared bathroom with a group of boys, which we hadn't been made aware of, who were in the room next door.

'We were upset but we were tired so we decided to have a nap and come at it fresh, when we found there were hairs in the bed and the sheets were filthy.'

Miss Dudley called Airbnb and explained the situation, and the owner sent a cleaner in to change the bed.

'He was very rude,' Miss Dudley said. 'He told us he had changed the bed, I said "you haven't" and I called the woman whose apartment it was.

'She said he hadn't cleaned as we had arrived early - but she hadn't told us that.'

Miss Dudley, Miss Whiteman and Miss Ridgeway decided to make the most of their trip and enjoy their visit to the city.

Miss Dudley reported the money taken after the original booking to her bank. She had agreed to send the money in a bank transfer after receiving an email from what appeared to be an official Airbnb affiliated account, but it was actually from the fraudster and had nothing to do with the website.

She also reported the fraud to police and ActionFraud.

A week later, Miss Dudley was stunned to start receiving emails and messages from Airbnb customers asking if they could rent her apartment in London.

'Airbnb then told me there had been a fraud on my account,' she said. 'Someone had hacked into my email address and then [got into] my Airbnb account - which had an image of my passport on it, my bank details, my home address.

'I was reading these emails coming in and seeing them vanish in front of me because the hacker was deleting them so I wouldn't realise what was going on.

'I phoned Airbnb and told them someone was using my account to carry out fraud, but all they told me to do was change my own email address and they would transfer that to my account.'

She said she wouldn't be using Airbnb again, and was unhappy that what was supposed to be a fun trip for Miss Ridgeway had turned sour.

'I just feel bad for Amy,' she said. 'The £200 for the security deposit was hers and me trying to take her away for her birthday resulted in her losing out.'

Miss Ridgeway, a student and part-time sales assistant, said she feared her own bank details would be hacked, as they were included on Miss Dudley's account.

'I don't want to say it ruined the holiday,' she said. 'But it definitely spoiled it.

'I worry that they have got my card details and could use them, so I've been checking my bank account constantly to make sure that no money has been taken.'

'This was supposed to be a 21st birthday present but I've lost the £200 which Airbnb wouldn't refund. Plus we had to pay money upfront when we arrived at the second apartment.

'I hadn't used Airbnb before, and I definitely wouldn't ever use them again.'

Miss Whiteman said she would also be reluctant to book a holiday stay with Airbnb, and said their experience had put a dampener on their trip.

'When we arrived in Amsterdam we'd had no sleep because we'd been up all night trying to find somewhere else to stay,' she said.

'If they'd given us money we could have gone to a hotel, but because we had a credit note we had to find somewhere on Airbnb.

'People I've spoken to about it said they should have given us a free holiday.

'It was very stressful, but I felt more sorry for Lauren. She had organised the trip and none of this was her fault.'

Airbnb advises both guests and property owners to only communicate via the app, and that messages sent this way remained secure. Users are also advised that they should only pay for their accomodation via Airbnb, and not outside the website.

A spokesman said that users should report anyone asking them to pay outside of the Airbnb site, and that the firm would never ask someone to pay via an email.

He said: 'Airbnb protects hosts and guests by handling all payment and communication through our secure platform.

'When you keep your payment and communication strictly on the Airbnb platform, payments are accurate and your account is secure. It’s one of the reasons that so many hosts and guests book through Airbnb.

'We proactively educate new customers on the importance of keeping their payments and communications strictly on the Airbnb platform, and our global Trust and Safety team works 24/7 to protect our community and prevent attempts at fraud.

'In the interest of providing excellent customer service we have been in close contact with the guest and are providing our full support. We advise our community to keep all payments and communication on the platform, where their money is secure.'

He added that it was extremely rare for hosts and guests to experience problems with properties rented through Airbnb.|||

Lauren Dudley, 20, and Danielle Whiteman, 20,  had decided to take their friend Amy Ridgeway to the Dutch city for her 21st birthday and booked an apartment  via the rental company.