Images are a universal language and the appearance of has provided a powerful tool for brands to communicate without geographical differentiation, their values and attributes. It even does more; It can increase your desire for identification, something that seems to work very well with the more younger audience.

The numbers of active users easily ratify the potential of this platform. In 2010, and with just a half-year of life, Instagram had already five million active worldwide users; The service rapidly gained popularity, with over 100 million active users as of April 2012 and over 300 million as of December 2014 with more than 70 million photographs shared a day.

Many of the young people who fled from Facebook with the digitization of their parents and even grandparents, coupled with the high number of smartphones, have been largely the cause of Instagram’s success. It is now the turn of Instagram to demonstrate its profitability with the challenge of offering increasingly more solutions for brands.

Instagram is always bragging about having an important and active community, but especially of a very young public, categorized as “millennials“. According to a report by Global Web Index, Instagram and Tumblr  are the two social platforms with the most youngest audience. 70 % of their users are between the ages of 16 and 34 years.

Instagram is also the king of engagement: According to a study by L2, Instagram is very superior in engagement compared to the rest of social media platforms. The study realized by L2inc.com states that Instagram’s followers interaction is between 15 times superior compared to Facebook. Not in vain, 93 % of the most well-known brands already had an account in this network by January, 2014.

The online mobile photo-sharing and 15 seconds micro video social network also counts with a good stall in the fields of sports, fashion, healthy nutrition and beauty among many others. This is reflected in the top 20 brands in Instagram chart which we collected from mx.macys.com:

Nike: Just Do It!

With more than 18.5 million followers and more than 47 million mentions, Nike is by excellence the brand that’s squeezing and clearly understands that Instagram is definitely a great digital tool for brands. It’s the king of the hashtags and followers.

Prada comes in second with 18.7 million mentions dropping to the tenth position in the number of followers.

In third place we see Adidas Originals but ironically we don’t see them no way near the top 20 in hashtag mentions.

Other brands include Vans Shoes, which beat out Louis Vuitton, Fendi, and Burberry with more than 14.5 million mentions coming in sixth.

But, what is it that Instagram lacks to consolidate itself as a solid platform for all brands? Instagram should at least maximize the return with all its users and start working on at least these 3 key tips:

Tools aimed to measure statistics: They should at least try to improve and consolidate their own tools and facilitate their use. Among those that exist in the Instagram galaxy we can highlight Iconosquare, where one can basically measure the total number of likes received, your most liked photos ever, your average number of likes and comments per photo, your follower growth charts and more advanced analytics.

Schedugram, is for social media managers who need an easier way to manage Instagram for their clients and brands.Schedugram features web uploading, scheduling,and supports multiple accounts.

In addition, there is the challenge to provide greater versatility to the platform and its integration with web sites and other social networks, in order to advance the branding to the conversion.

Advertising: At the moment it’s only available in the U.S, Canada, Australia and most recently in the United Kingdom. It’s a matter of time till it reaches the rest of Europe, as recently happened with .

More Analytics: We all know that analytics are vital for any brand to obtain the results of your marketing efforts. Instagram is working on the progressive roll out of new analysis tools.

In the meantime, whether you’re a big brand, social media manager or a small business posting engaging photos and videos to your feed will always help your account in the positive way.

If you want to share your thoughts on how Instagram has helped your business and how is it that you’re using it as a marketing tool, we would love for you to use the comments box.

You can also follow us on Twitter @socialmedia04|||

Images are a universal language and the appearance of Instagram has provided a powerful tool for brands to communicate