As we build Astronomer, a data collection platform, we’re sharing a weekly progress update for self-accountability, and we hope it’s also interesting to you.

Up until now, we’ve used “Active Apps” as our metric, and it served us well.

Now we’re shifting our focus from organic growth of a self-service product to an “enterprise” sales approach.

As a result of that shift, we’re adopting a new “one metric that matters”: Annual Recurring Revenue (“ARR”). We’ll still focus on 10% weekly growth, and will begin reporting on this metric next update.

We’ve spent a lot of time over the past weeks talking to companies of all sizes. These conversations range from teams of 4 just past their MVP stage to some of the largest companies in the world.

The quantity/quality of meetings we were able to set was surprising until we recognized a pattern in our notes: Every Head of Growth, Senior Director of Analytics, CIO across every single industry (education, healthcare, consumer goods, technology, finance) has ideas of how they would like to use their data.

The problem: they can’t move on these projects because of fragmented data. High-powered people were taking our meetings because they wanted to talk to someone, anyone who could help. And to vent their frustration.

Data silos affect much larger companies than we initially anticipated, but their recognition of the situation they’ve found themselves in (and the constrained capabilities they’re left with) was truly surprising and exciting.

Our opportunity is larger than just SaaS. Our opportunity is Enterprise.

Some people cautioned us against going after companies like them:

That was good to hear because it sets an upper bound: if they have their own labs and everything is built in house, let’s leave them alone.

Below that the enterprise market is wide open. No one has made significant headway in solving this problem for these companies. When we show a product that costs tens of thousands to people who normally deal in seven figure projects, they think we’re joking.

Bigger companies have more data, more at risk, and more reward for getting it right. A basic startup tenet is that we should make “painkillers not vitamins.” Larger companies have more pain, therefore are a better market for us.

Caterina Fake wrote this week about a coming plague that will kill the unicorns (private startups valued > $1B), and how it will have a trickle down effect to all startups. I don’t agree that a plague is absolutely imminent, but it’s healthy to behave as if it’s possible.

We’ve seen some really terrific, ambitious ideas take off at the commoditized SaaS level. But why do so many startups emulate this approach? Perhaps there are a number of reasons but there is a simple explanation at the heart of it:

Building for the masses = potential to be an industry icon.

Everyone wants to build a tool that millions of people will use; one that sets the industry standard and causes everyone fall in line. Github and Docker are great examples. Every developer wants to emulate the way these companies have changed our workflows but it’s not obvious that these companies also aggressively go after enterprise accounts. Their widespread influence is supported and sustained by enterprise sales.

I’ve been a developer for twenty years. Building dashboards has always been painful. Pulling the data together (and keeping it that way) is the most painful part. That’s the problem we’re solving. We help developers save time and feel confident that their data aggregation system will work long-term.

We’re going to market with three products:

Access to our secure, burstible AWS-based platform with simple, metered pricing. It translates unstructured data to a columnar schema, and ensures that your data arrives safely and securely. It will also report errors, and volumetric anomaly alerts, to help you catch bad data before it does damage.

Fixed-price access to the cloud platform, as well as access to our core team on any aspect of data integration, analytics — helping you move from concept to production quickly.

Private instance of our platform installed in an Amazon Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) that you control, ensuring maximum security for your valuable customer data. Includes deployment support, training, and ongoing monitoring.

Astronomer doesn’t provide visualization and dashboards; there are many great tools for that like Tableau, Periscope, Mode, Looker, and Leftronic.

Astronomer doesn’t provide a permanent data store — it sends your data to Amazon S3, Amazon Redshift, Keen IO, Google BigQuery, and legacy data warehouses — really anywhere.|||

As we build Astronomer, a data collection platform, we’re sharing a weekly progress update for self-accountability, and we hope it’s also interesting to you. Now we’re shifting our focus from organic…