Over the last 24-48 hours, we’ve noticed a number of our customer’s transactions modified and rebroadcast with a new transaction number. This attack is being applied to almost all transactions on the network and is not targeted at Coinkite or our users.

The modification that’s being made to the transactions is well understood and isn’t new: it is a simple numeric tweak to one number (S) in the ECDSA signature. It’s documented as part of BIP62 and is called the “low S” requirement. Coinkite always uses the lower S value, but these pranksters have been replacing that with the higher S value.

Transactions are being changed without any knowledge of the private keys involved. The change does not affect the source, destination, or amounts of the funds, so it isn’t obvious when it first happens.

While this attack is happening, you cannot trust bitcoin transaction numbers as much as you might be used to. Once you send a transaction, you need to understand that your transaction might actually get into a block under a different hash. Your recipient gets the funds the same, miner fees are the same, and most block explorers do not show enough detail to be able to tell the two transactions apart.

Technically, your original transaction could be considered a “double spend” and let’s hope no-one is foolish enough to confuse your intentions. There is nothing you can do to prevent these modifications. The modification happens after it is sent onto the public network.

We all need to be a little more careful about acting on zero-confirmation receives right now. In particular, it is not safe to build new transactions on top of the first transaction until it confirms, because there are in effect two versions of that transaction (yours and the high-S version) and you can’t predict which will be mined. This is a problem even for transactions between trusted parties and even between your own accounts.

As of today, all deposits into Coinkite accounts must receive one confirmation before we will use them in a new transaction. We have deployed new code that tracks these modified transactions, and when they get confirmed into blocks, we retroactively adjust our records and continue with the new transaction number in effect.

This pull request should help. (~~The solution would be BIP62 which is not ready yet. Once it is, we encourage all miners to enforce it as soon as possible.~~)

Since 2013, Coinkite has helped thousands of startups from all over the world safely and easily use Bitcoin. Now, it is easier and safer for your whole team to work with Bitcoin, including both developers and managers, because Coinkite has API access and an intuitive web interface.

Coinkite is the leading bitcoin platform, transacting over 400,000 BTC a month and helping you focus on building your app and adding value to your business—not building infrastructure. Coinkite’s Multi-Signature and HSM-based Bitcoin vaults deliver incredible advantages over other solutions and when automated, completely avoid human error in daily operations. Plus, Coinkite offers payment processing and other merchant tools to help you bootstrap faster.|||

