This post was written after raising £230,000 for Togethera, the private sharing app for your family and loved ones, on Crowdcube in the UK. It captures the lessons we learned and advice that was generously shared by Anthony Eskinazi and Doug Monro, founders of JustPark and Adzuna, which raised £3.5M and £2.2M respectively. You can see how we did along with insights on our round in the infographic at the end of this post.

Before we dive in, two important points on equity crowdfunding:

Keeping both of these in mind, let’s dive into the process.

If you answered ‘No’ to more than one of the above, you’re not ready for crowdfunding.

This is the most critical decision you’ll make. Set the amount too high and you run the risk of not making it. Too low and you don’t look credible. The figure you’ll end up with is an optimisation of two factors: the amount you need (top down) and an amount you can be almost certain to raise (bottom up).

Let’s start from the latter:

While you’re working on these, go over other pitches on the platform, request their business plans (everyone does it) and speak to a few entrepreneurs who have both succeeded and failed in a crowdfunding campaign.

This section deserves its own post, but here are the top tips:

Ask everyone who’s coming in the round to recommend others, get introductions to new angels and funds. Create as big a pipeline as you can and push for early commitments.

You need at least one person who’ll be almost exclusively focused on fundraising, but ideally you’ll need support from more members of the team to handle content creation, handling of incoming business plan requests, forum conversations and email campaigns.

Appoint your lawyer and get ready for the changes you’ll need to make to your articles and potentially your existing investment agreement.

Once your pitch is approved and video is done, you can activate your pitch, but keep it in private mode. You can now start receiving investment pledges, without opening up the round to the general public. This is when things start getting interesting.

Now you have to drive all the people who have previously told you they want to invest to do so urgently. Let them know in advance you’ll be enabling your pitch in private mode and give them a few days to get their investment in. This is where you make or break your campaign.

Have you reached 50% of your target? If yes, awesome — proceed to the next step! Otherwise, keep engaging with investors until you’ve reached that milestone.

Things get very exciting now!

You want to make as much noise as possible at this point. Activate your email and marketing campaigns, hit all the channels you’ve lined up and create buzz around your pitch. For the next 6 weeks this is your exclusive focus and you’ll pour all your energy into blasting through your target asap and get to overfunding. During this period:

Have you hit target? Fantastic! Well done — you are now in overfunding mode. Now things become a lot easier. You’ll start seeing people who you’d spoken to weeks ago, suddenly deciding to invest. Investors from the platform are starting to come in with much higher amounts and everything feels easier. It’s human nature. We’re all a lot more likely to back something that’s been validated by others and validation in this case is strongest when you’ve hit your target. This is not no time to relax though. This is where crowdfunding really proves its value as you raise from investors who you could not have reached otherwise. Keep executing the plan, creating buzz and getting in as much money in as possible. Don’t forget to take time off to celebrate with the team when your campaign ends.

This stage is similar to traditional fundraising. You cannot relax until all the documents have been signed; money is in the bank and forms submitted to Companies House. In this case though, you will hopefully have a much larger number of investors as advocates for your business. Make the most of it, by engaging them early and harness their enthusiasm for the business they just backed.

We did exceed our target by 15% and raised £230,000 from 180 amazing investors. In terms of timing, it took us four and a half months from first meeting with Crowdcube to ending our campaign and then weeks to get all the money in and close. You can see how our round came together and a bunch of insights on the infographic below.

Would I recommend Crowdfunding? Absolutely! It’s become a vital financing tool for any start-up; it’s unlocking huge amounts of capital and it lets you share the company’s success (and risk) with your closest supporters. However, it’s hard work just like traditional fundraising and it demands careful planning and execution. I hope that this post will help you navigate the process. If you have comments, questions or want to go through any of the above in more detail, leave a comment below or drop me an email (sokratis@togethera.com) or reach out on Twitter.|||

This post was written after raising £230,000 for Togethera, the private sharing app for your family and loved ones, on Crowdcube in the UK. It captures the lessons we learned and advice that was…