UK consumers purchasing digital goods such as software, apps, music, videos, games, and ebooks now enjoy new rights under the Consumer Rights Act 2015. The law clarifies rights concerning refunds, repairs or replacements of faulty goods, and it creates a new 30-day timeframe for consumers to reject a faulty item and obtain a refund. During the 30-day period, faulty goods can be returned for a full refund. After that time, retailers have one opportunity to repair or replace the faulty goods, at the consumer's choice. If the attempt to repair or replace the goods is unsuccessful, consumers can claim a refund, or ask for a price reduction if they decide to keep the item.

A page on the Business Companion website, funded by the UK government, but written by independent experts, provides useful explanations of some of the new rights provided to consumers by the Consumer Rights Act 2015. For example, digital content must be "of satisfactory quality, fit for a particular purpose, and as described." The site has the following to say about quality: "Most computer systems' software, games and apps have minor defects that are corrected over time with fixes or upgrades. Therefore a 'reasonable person' might expect the defects to be present and judge any items containing them to be of satisfactory quality."

The recent release of Batman Arkham Knight on PC was plagued with issues, causing publisher Warner Bros. to pull the game from sale and issue refunds. Had the publisher not offered refunds itself, it's likely that the new rules would have meant consumers could have demanded a refund, instead of waiting it out for a patch.

An interesting question is: what rights do consumers have when it comes to free digital content, which is pretty widespread these days? The Business Companion notes explain that if digital content is given away by the trader, then the consumer does not, in general, have statutory rights, but the trader may still be liable if the free digital content causes damage—for example, by deleting other files, or infecting a system with a virus. Moreover, if "free" digital content is supplied as part of a contract, then the new statutory rights may still be applicable. For example, if a computer comes with "free" anti-virus software that would normally require payment, then as far as the Consumer Rights Act 2015 is concerned, it was supplied as part of an overall contract that cost money, and so is covered by the Act.

An explanatory document from Citizens Advice gives another example of how the new Act works with free digital content. It considers the case of a free game where you can build up virtual currency of some kind through normal game-play. If a consumer then buys additional currency through an in-app purchase, but the extra currency does not appear in the game, the consumer now has new rights: "Under the Act, as the game is free, the provider does not have to provide a remedy for any faults in the game. However, once you paid a price for some content then, if you can show that that content is faulty (that is, does not meet the quality rights) the provider will be liable to provide a remedy. The provider is only liable for faults affecting the chargeable elements of the game."

Giving consumers clear legal rights for digital content is long overdue, and highly welcome. However, it will take a while for the full impact of the new law to be understood as cases come before judges tasked with interpreting the rules. As the business Companion website puts it: "This information is intended for guidance; only the courts can give an authoritative interpretation of the law." That applies equally to the above summary, which is not intended as any kind of legal advice.|||

Long overdue, includes situations where free digital content is involved.