For the 60 or so bootstrapping startups here at Oslo’s StartupLab, to hold the No.1 spot on top of hackernews is the holy grail of marketing, especially when you’re in the middle of an equity crowdfunding round like we are right now. 1000s of businesses around the world make the attempt every week and very few make it.

But what happens when you reach the top and hold it for a day? The short answer is “A LOT” :).

You can have a look at the post here.

With plenty of luck, of course, but we did have a plan. Our tagline was the shortest possible pitch, confidently pushing our main selling point, “easy”, and creating enough curiosity for click through. Because Someone.io is aimed at business customers, we posted at 09:23 CEST, just as the UK arrives at work and mainland Europe sits down to its desks. New York and the East Coast were still fast asleep, being 6 hours behind.

Just seconds after we posted, we started to see a lot of new visitors to the website. Here’s the flow of unique visitors to the website.

The previous two small spikes were a post in digi.no about our crowdfunding campaign and a mail out to several thousand users. HN news had a slightly larger impact…

Because Someone.io is a B2B task manager for teams, our key metric is how many companies we have signed up, rather than how many users. As you can see, yesterday was a terrific day7

These are the people who came to have a look and then signed up. Most are from Europe, followed by North America and Asia. (This image comes from intercom.io which was a great help yesterday and comes highly recommended:))

We hit 100 tweets mentioning the Hacker News post in the first two hours, at first they were mostly from Tech news twitter bots:

We set to work writing a few tweets of our own and saw way more interaction than usual:

As the comment section on the post blew up and we started seeing traction on our own tweets, things got more interesting

By the end of the day we had over 250 unique tweets talking about us, a 40% increase in followers including some big silicon valley folks and investors, plus plenty of praise from all over.

This image comes from data we collected during the day to see the flow of points and comments on the HN post.

The comment section was really fascinating and the HN community debated a lot of sides of our product and various strategies that startups in our position could use. It certainly wasn’t all sweetness and light but as we were replying we saw other users defending our position for us, which was heartening for us and I think a credit to the HN community. Especially the minimum of snark and a general attitude of supportiveness.

This is not to mention the customer service mails that were rolling in, potential investors contacting us and a stream of friendly faces here at StartupLab asking how we did it ;)

The two main questions we had were about our payment plan and what makes us different from Trello specifically. HN users themselves were jumping in to answer those which was great but I thought I’d take the opportunity to post our responses here:

All in all, a terrific day for our company. I hope this can give you some insight and some help for your own campaigns. This experience was a little nerve wracking but we were really encouraged by the response we had to the product and things are looking up for Someone.io.

If you have any questions, don’t hesitate to get in touch at dan@someone.io.

Thanks for reading and don’t forget to come and sign up at www.someone.io|||

For the 60 or so bootstrapping startups here at Oslo’s StartupLab, to hold the No.1 spot on top of hackernews is the holy grail of marketing, especially when you’re in the middle of an equity crowdfunding round like we are right now. 1000s of businesses around the world make the attempt every week and very few make…