Morphed lets you mimic pure rendering of a DOM node while still letting you use your favourite DOM manipulation library. Each time your callback is invoked it receives a fresh copy of the initial node, allowing you to make your changes from scratch each time. Behind the scenes, morphdom is used to perform the minimal set of DOM manipulations between the current state and the new state.

Morphed expects to be running in a Browserify, Webpack or similar environment.

jQuery is used here for demonstration purposes but it is not required by Morphed.

Working with DOM manipulation libraries can let state get out of hand very quickly. jQuery and friends make it simple to toggle a class here or add add a few nodes there, but before long it's impossible to separate out the business logic from the UI code. Some frameworks work around this issue by rendering the entire app to a virtual DOM and only updating the real DOM with the differences. This is great for many cases but sometimes you're working with a prerendered element (say, from a CMS) and just want to be able to tweak what's already there.

Morphed attempts to get the best of both worlds by passing a copy of the same initial node to your update function every time it is invoked. You can manipulate this element as required to get it to reflect your application's current state and Morphed will replace the old node with this up to date version. This means that you never need to try and "reverse" a DOM manipulation, you simply don't perform it in your update function. Using morphdom behind the scenes allows Morphed to swap out this new version of the node for the old version with the fewest manipulations possible.

The constructor supports the following arguments:

Invokes the callback with a copy of the initial DOM node and the current state. All manipulations performed on the node will be applied to the DOM using morphdom.

Morphed provides a simple state API to handle state tracking for you. It is modeled on the React Component State API and will cause an each time a state function is called. You can access the Morphed instance's current state with .

Merges the passed state with the current state. This will add any new keys and replace existing keys. Old keys will be kept. Calling this function will trigger an .

Replaces the current state with the passed state. Calling this function will trigger an .

Here is the same example as above using to track the count.

Using Morphed isn't without its pitfalls but many of them have simple workarounds.

Depending on the type of DOM manipulations you are making, some cached queries or event handlers may be pointing to nodes that are no longer rendered. The key here is to use event delegation to handle events. In jQuery, this can be achieved using and attaching the handler to the same node that is passed to Morphed, or one wrapping it. For example:

Some elements are stateful and will lose their current value if they are rerendered. The most obvious examples of this are form input controls. There are two things you can do here to work around this issue. The first is to add a listener to the input and store the value yourself. This is a common (in fact, required) pattern in React and allows you to simply update the element with the real value on each update callback. If you don't want to add a host of callbacks for your inputs, you can tell Morphed to ignore any manipulations made to a particular element by adding the attribute . Any changes made in the update callback to an element with this attribute will not be reflected in the real DOM. All modifications to this element will need to be performed outside of the Morphed update callback.

Due to the way morphdom works, jQuery animations will no longer work. Most of the time these animations can be replaced with CSS animations triggered by a class change. When you find yourself in a situation where this won't work and absoloutely must use a javascript animation, make sure you ignore the animated node with . Be aware, children of this node will be ignored too.

Pull Requests welcome. Please make sure tests pass with:|||

morphed - Mimic pure rendering with a cloned DOM node