One of the biggest forces to hit business in the past several years is big data. Leading players in every industry are mining vast amounts of data they amass from vendors and customers in search of new opportunities.

But how do companies with fewer resources make the best use of customer and vendor data? How can they use big data to get a competitive edge?

Three experts in the field— Michele Chambers, chief marketing officer of Continuum Analytics Inc., Hilary Mason, chief executive officer of Fast Forward Labs, and Jerry Wolfe, CEO of Vivanda Inc.—discussed big-data strategies for midmarket companies with Dennis K. Berman, financial editor of The Wall Street Journal. Edited excerpts follow.

MR. BERMAN: What is your bull-detector strategy when dealing with sellers of big-data analytics?

MR. WOLFE: If somebody’s trying to sell you a big-data project, kick them out. They should be talking to you about business challenges, business opportunities that might be available to you. Big data, and what you do with it, is a tool. It’s a means to the end.

MR. BERMAN: What’s the right scope for a project for a midmarket company to begin using analytics inside the organization?

MS. CHAMBERS: The first thing to do is to do a little bit of a data census and say, “What data do we have?” Then say, “What data should we have?” Fix the things that are missing and then say, “What assumptions am I making today that I can now validate with the data I have access to?”

If you’re a company focused on product innovation and you’re always driving new products, that’s where you start. You say, “Well, what could we do? How could we innovate faster? How could we capture new markets?” You have to understand what your business objective is.

And then look at the data to fit that objective, and figure out what are the types of solutions that you can drive with that.

Some of it is also figuring out how do you use new data. If you keep doing the same old thing the same old way, you’re going to get the same old results. If you want new results, you have to use new techniques, new data in order to infuse new kinds of decisions and businesses.

MR. BERMAN: Who should be in charge?

MR. WOLFE: It’s top down. For all the CEOs in the room, or C-level folks or VP-level folks, you can’t delegate this. You can’t say, “Go do a big-data project for me and tell me what you find.” It’s like delegating the strategy for your business. That’s what big data is about. It’s about figuring out how to operationalize your strategy.

MR. BERMAN: I would think most people don’t have the confidence, technically, to lead a project like that.

This is all extremely common-sense stuff. This is really just collecting a ton of information, counting something in it and maybe averaging it or normalizing it in some way and getting an answer out and maybe making a graph of that answer. And you might actually have the people already who are capable of doing the work.

MR. BERMAN: Some of the promise of big data or analytics is that it can reveal things to companies that they didn’t even know to ask. Jerry, do you create a structure? Or is it just a serendipitous thing?

MR. WOLFE: At least in my career, virtually nothing’s been serendipitous.

I think you have to start with a frame of reference of questions. I think the thing not to do is to go back to that notion of, “Oh, it’s a big-data initiative. Let’s gather together some analytically oriented people who are empathetic and see what they can come up with.”

You know what the challenges are facing your business. The trick is, pick one of them. Put a small team against it. Be actively involved with them, and start peeling the onion back.

MS. CHAMBERS: Entrepreneurs and midmarket companies are more bullish than big companies are. But you don’t know how you’re going to do it. So you figure out where the white space is. Where is the best opportunity?|||

Executives from Continuum Analytics, Fast Forward Labs and Vivanda, speaking at The Wall Street Journal’s Middle Market conference, discuss how companies with few resources should get started.