Social media is an essential part of today’s marketing plans. Two main questions for beginners in social marketing are: how do you get started with your social media marketing strategy? and how can you be sure that your efforts on social are effective? To achieve success, every step of  your social marketing promotion needs to be carefully planned. Keep notes and follow us.

You don’t have to be active on all of them. Choose the social networks that best fit your strategy and the goals you want to achieve. Pick the ones that matter to you and the ones that matter to your audience. When it comes to how much time you need to devote to a social network, at least at the beginning, a general advice is to spend at least an hour per day.

This one seems obvious enough to be neglected very often. Completed profile shows professionalism, so make sure you company profiles have it all. Cover photos, bio, contact and profile info complete and up-to-date. While posting, make your social presence personal and human that way you will get closer to your audience. Make your social page worth following by posting an interesting, industry relevant and popular content.

Social media is much more than just a publishing platform. It is built around engagement. Instead of the public passively waiting for information to come, today’s social media public is constantly creating and sharing information. If you are a beginner in your business that is the perfect place to connect with your potential audience, and you will do that by sharing with them an interesting content, or participating in an interesting discussion. The social media  offers the great opportunity to get your message out there, engage, inform, interact, and enable your audience to pass your message forward. That way you will get your first batch of number one fans and your potential customers.

Marketers often wonder about the ideal amount of post per day, when is the perfect time to post, and what type of content should they post. It depends on your industry, your target group, your resources, and the quality of your updates. Studies show that for Facebook it’s advisable to post 5-10 times a week, on Linkedin once per day, while on Twitter it’s advisable to post at least 5 times a day. As for the best times to post, on Facebook it’s recommendable to post  between 1 and 4 p.m. late into the week. On Saturday and Sunday is advisable to post at 12–1 p.m. For Thursday and Friday, it’s recommendable around  1–4 p.m, and on Wednesday at 3 p.m. The best posting time on Twitter is between 1–3pm on weekdays. When it comes to LinkedIn, it’s advisable to post around 7–8:30 am on Monday and Friday, and around 5–6pm on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. The best posting time on Instagram is 5–6pm on weekdays and at 8 pm on Mondays. Keep in mind visual  posts get more views, clicks, shares, and likes than any other type of post. Photos average a 35% boost in Retweets, and videos get a 28% boost.

Almost all of the social media platform of today offer built-in analytics, enabling marketers to keep track of the most popular  posts and updates and providing them with the identifying the number of people who have reached that content. Those stats can show you what works the most with your audience, and it can help you out with creating your future social media posting strategy.

Social media can be a very powerful tool for developing your business strategy if it’s taken seriously. Following  these few simple steps will give you a chance to create a social media marketing strategy that can generate desired results.|||

BridTV Blog