Google is now part of a larger empire, the Alphabet kingdom. Last week the corporate restructuring of Google in to several companies all under the umbrella of Alphabet and its emperor Larry Page became official.

The consequences will be fascinating. Instead of one Google apparatus with a lot of different arms, we can now watch individual companies like Nest, Calico, Google X and Google Life Sciences grow and innovate. The journey will be fascinating to chronicle from both business and innovation standpoints.

The Alphabet split makes a lot of sense in retrospect. But Google was never the obvious candidate to cleave its domain into several disparate regions. Now that it has, a blueprint for how other massive tech conglomerates can do the same becomes much more palatable to investors and the public.

The call for Microsoft to spin out its different business units as separate companies has been going for several years. Add to this the fact that Microsoft has also had a bit of an identity crisis in recent years, constantly redefining its core mission and purpose.

As currently situated, Microsoft is essentially, “a Windows company that does a bunch of other stuff.” CEO Satya Nadella likes to talk of Microsoft as a productivity company, the great platform of the people. With Windows 10, Microsoft’s operating system is definitely at the core of what the company does and how it should define its ethos. But Microsoft is also so much more.

For the sake of this exercise, we will call the new Microsoft parent company “Halo.” It fits in any variety of ways. Halo is the game that propelled Xbox to its glory. After Microsoft named its digital assistant Cortana from the artificial intelligence in that game, Halo makes a bit of nerdy sense. A halo is also an encompassing circle of light that surrounds a central object like the sun, the moon or an angel. As a verb, halo means to surround with or to be within that circle.

What would constitute Halo? Let’s break down the pieces.

The core of Halo would have to be Windows, just like Google is the core of Alphabet. The operating system is central to everything the current Microsoft wants to do and to be.

The function of Windows as a company would be to grow the operating system, its device profile, developer resources and app store. As such, any device manufacturing capabilities that Microsoft still has left from the Nokia acquisition would be part of Windows. Microsoft is set to announce a variety of new hardware at a press event on October 6th, including two new flagship Lumia smartphones and the Surface Pro 4. The design and manufacture of these devices would be the responsibility of the Windows.

A strong case can be made that Office should be part of the Windows segment of Halo. But that is not how Microsoft has been treating Office in the last couple of years. Office is now considered to be one of the three main pillars of Microsoft (next to Windows and Azure) and it has been getting its own set of business and technology features that can carry it as its own company within the Halo.

Office has all the requirements to be a standalone company: revenue (through Office 365), a large install base and brand name, a platform (with the new developer features for Office 2016) and cross-platform distribution. The last item is particular importance for Office as an individual entity. Microsoft began rolling out Office apps to iOS and Android a couple of years ago in what seemed like a stunning move at the time. But in 2015, software and apps can only flourish if they are everywhere and interconnected to every other device a person may use through the cloud.

Microsoft has recognized this and opened up Office distribution, all the while tying the Azure backend to everything the Office suite touches. In the Halo realm, Office would stand for the productivity and business intelligence suite of the empire.

If there was ever a Microsoft division ripe to be spun out as its own company, Xbox would be it. Xbox—and its unique Kinect technology—have always been something of a curiosity at Microsoft the Windows company. Why not take the whole division and just make it the games and entertainment hub of the new Halo?

Included in Xbox would be all of Microsoft’s game development properties, including Minecraft and everything in the surprisingly robust Microsoft Studios (where Halo the game was born when Microsoft acquired Bungie). The Xbox group would also be the primary entity in dealing with the film and television world as Xbox (and Playstation) has become not just a gaming platform, but the primary entertainment hub for the connected television. Xbox as a company could then work out some distribution deal to get that content back to the Windows Store, its sister company in the Halo framework.

The other obvious division ripe for a spinout in the current Microsoft is Bing. The Web has never quite been Microsoft’s strong suit—at least from a revenue point of view—and Bing is the best entrance into the market that the company owns. Like Office, Bing has a revenue model (search ads) and a platform for developers to build upon. The Cortana personal assistant would be part of the Bing’s purview, working with all the other sister companies to tie together to Windows, Office and Xbox, with Azure as the connective tissue.

The question for Halo would be if Bing could compete in a Google-dominated world without the backing of the larger Microsoft structure and resources. According to comScore, Bing has a 20.1% (and growing) market share of desktop search as of the first quarter of 2015 and still has some partnership with Apple for search results in mobile Safari on iOS. But mobile—where the search sector is growing—is a difficult battleground with Apple moving to build its own search capabilities and the mother of all search companies in Google owning an 80% share of the global mobile ecosystem with Android.

People have looked at Microsoft over the past 15 years or so and have proclaimed that innovation was dead in Redmond. This has never, ever been true.

Microsoft’s Research team is one of the leading sources of innovation in the entire technology industry. The Kinect—one of the most interesting technologies of the past 10 years—was born out of Microsoft R&D. Some of the great breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, machine learning, machine vision, speech recognition and cloud computing have come out of Microsoft.

Spinning out Microsoft Research as a separate company in the Halo would require some creative business practices. The equivalent division in Alphabet—Google X—is built fundamentally different than Microsoft Research. Research at Google and Google X (which are distinct entities) try to productize innovation almost as soon as it occurs. Hence we have seen Google Glass come to market as a hyped up prototype and self-driving cars tested on the roads a decade before it will be commercially practical.

Microsoft Research works on a much more classical corporate research structure under the “four quadrants” mode of innovation. Yes, it works on big projects and moon shots (see: Microsoft HoloLens, speech recognition and neural networks), but it also fuels sustaining and mission focused innovations at Microsoft. Whereas Google X will become something of a product and company incubator that feeds Alphabet, Microsoft Research as a standalone entity is harder to see as an individual unit.

In its current business model, Microsoft wants to be two things at once: a massive consumer brand and the go-to enterprise hardware and software platform. On the enterprise side, Microsoft’s Azure cloud platform is the background of the offering, followed by a variety of business intelligence and communication services (like Yammer, Skype etc.).

As its own company, Azure would compete directly with Amazon Web Services, Google App Engine (its cloud suite) and database and management companies like Oracle, Salesforce and IBM. The Azure product at Microsoft has more than enough ammo to enter this fight as an individual company within Halo and provide enough depth to innovate towards changing enterprise client needs.

Microsoft has long had an investment arm to make bets on startups and emerging companies. Microsoft famously invested in an early Facebook, a $240 million bet that worked out fairly well for all parties.

Under the Halo structure, Microsoft Ventures would continue its work in discovering and aiding startups. In this manner it would function as a vetting unit for deals, partnerships and acquisitions to the larger Halo enterprise.

Splitting up Microsoft under a corporate parent like Halo is not quite as simple as the Alphabet companies coming out of Google.

The Alphabet split at Google was almost necessary. Over the years Google had created or acquired so many disparate projects that had nothing to do with each that the corporate structure was a mess. What does Calico have to do Nest? One is focused on health and fitness, the other one with connecting the smart home.

To Nadella’s credit, many of Microsoft’s current properties now share capabilities and interests. Azure is the connective technology of Office and Windows. Office is the primary suite of applications that makes Windows useful. Xbox is reliant on Windows for its core operating system. Azure and the enterprise depend on Windows for a good portion of its client base. Bing would probably die a quick death if it wasn’t core to Internet Explorer and the Edge browser. So on and so forth.

As such, an Alphabet-like restructuring of Microsoft makes sense from a business standpoint but less so from a technology standpoint. Where do some of Microsoft’s outlier products like Skype end up? Are they new companies in Halo or rolled into the productivity suite of Office or just sold off entirely?

Microsoft could easily spin off some of its units as separate businesses (the way that eBay and PayPal are now individual companies). Xbox, Bing and Skype would be the prime candidates. But the Alphabet model has to be attractive to a Microsoft that has grown so large that it is difficult to encapsulate its mission and focus.|||

What if Microsoft were to restructure itself like Alphabet and Google? Here's what it could look like.