British Airways has provided a behind-the-scenes look at the assembly of its new state-of-the-art plane – ending the mystery for passengers who have always wanted to know how an aircraft is built.

In just four minutes, this stunning time-lapse footage reveals the massive amount of work that goes into assembling the Boeing 787-9 Dreamliner, which the Heathrow-based carrier is introducing to its fleet this month.

With a seating capacity for 216 passengers in four classes, the twin-engine plane will be used on routes between London and destinations such as Abu Dhabi, Delhi, Kuala Lumpur, Muscat and Austin, Texas.

British Airways’ first 787-9 Dreamliner was delivered last week after it was assembled by dozens of workers at a giant Boeing factory in Everett, Washington, north of Seattle.

Timelapse footage shows parts being delivered to the factory in giant 747 Dreamlifter cargo planes, including two Rolls-Royce Trent 1000 engines, before the plane is assembled using robotics and heavy machinery.

The video takes viewers inside the plane, where employees are shown installing everything from ceiling panels to lavatories.

Once the carrier’s livery is added, the plane’s parts, including its landing gear and wing flaps, are tested and it takes off on its first test flight.

British Airways’ 787-9 Dreamliner features a redesigned first class cabin, with just eight seats compared to the usual 14.

The 787-9 Dreamliner itself has an increased range of just under 10,000 miles, is 20ft longer and 4in taller than the 787-8 Dreamliner, and is quieter and 20 per cent more fuel efficient than similarly sized commercial jets.

Composite materials make up 50 per cent of the primary structure, including the fuselage and wings, and the windows are more than 30 per cent larger than other mid-sized planes.|||

British Airways has provided a behind-the-scenes look at its new state-of-the-art plane, which is being introduced on routes to Abu Dhabi, Austin and other destinations this month.