We’ve recently really taken a liking to building and deploying static sites using middleman. Middleman is a ruby gem that uses a tool chain familiar to rails developers, and simple enough to grasp for those less familiar with rails, and even ruby.

Before we dig into middleman, here’s a little wishlist of an ideal static site development tool:

Middleman enables a very familiar and productive workflow: a rich toolchain during development, but with the ability to compile the site down to static HTML and deploy to a simple webserver like Amazon S3.

Middleman comes with built-in support for livereload, but I prefer browsersync (Node.js), as it’s a bit more responsive to file changes due to it’s architecture. Using it with middleman is painless:

By default, launches a ruby dev server on port . Browsersync has a handy mode that sits in front of another server and proxies requests to it. When browsersync starts up, it’ll look for the first available port starting with 3000 and it’ll open a new chrome tab on instead of 4567.

Now, any changes you make will trigger an automatic page reload.

To make things a little easier, we like to stick these two commands in a Procfile and run our development environment using foreman.

Add it to your Gemfile:

Activate it in the middleman file:

Generate a new post with the middleman helper:

Read more about the middleman blogging extension here.

Middleman comes with a handy command which takes your existing site and compiles everything to static HTML. The build command writes your entire site to the directory, making it easy to ship to a deployment server.

Deploying the site to S3 is super simple thanks to the middleman-s3_sync extension. Add it to your Gemfile, and configure it in your config.rb file:

The S3 sync extension also supports loading your credentials from a file located in the project root directory. You should use this to keep your Amazon credentials out of source control.

There are two ways to ship your build directory to S3. You can enable the setting in your s3sync config, which will automatically deploy your site to your S3 bucket after running , or, you can run `middleman s3sync` manually.

Check out this page from AWS for more info on hosting a static site on S3.|||

Frothlogic is a Ruby on Rails and custom software development agency based in Los Angeles, CA.