We like to share the release announcement for Aspose.Slides for .NET 15.7.0. This is one of maintenance release whereby we have added some new features as well.

We have included the support for exporting presentation slides to Tiff by setting custom Pixel format. Please visit the documentation article Converting Presentation to TIFF with Custom Image Pixel Format for further reference. We have also included the support for exporting slides to Graphics. For more details, please visit the documentation article Converting Slides to Graphics Object for further reference.

The support for exporting to HTML and images have been improved for images, text and slides notes have been improved in this release and many incurring issues have been rectified in this regard. We have also resolved issues pertaining to loss of table and charts data upon cloning slides within presentations as well.

The presentation rendering support has been enhanced for exporting to HTML, PDF and images in this release as well for object like tables, AutoShapes, charts, text and SmartArt shapes. Many chart rendering issues including missing or improper chart axis, InvertIfNegative property colors, plot area and legends have been rectified. The issues of missing charts including issue of improper chart leader lines have also been rectified in this release. We have also addressed the rendering issues related to AutoShapes and tables as well in this release.

We have improved the support for presentations access and their saving that resulted in generation of corrupted presentations and raising presentation repair message when opened in PowerPoint. The presentation access and saving issues have been rectified for many presentation decks that earlier resulted in exceptions including , , , , and in previous releases during saving and exporting to Pdf.

We have made several enhancements to the new API. Refer to the article Public API and Backwards Incompatible Changes in Aspose.Slides for .NET 15.7.0 for further reference.

To see a complete list of fixes and to download Aspose.Slides for .NET 15.7.0, please visit the download page.|||

We like to share the release announcement for Aspose.Slides for .NET 15.7.0. This is one of maintenance release whereby we have added some new features as