In the US, each state sets its own expectations of what the public schools in that state should accomplish. These expectations take the form of education standards, which describe both the subjects that should be introduced at each grade level and what specific material the students should learn within them. Standardized tests in these states are typically based on these education standards as well.

Given their central role in education, getting these standards right is essential. Unfortunately, it's also incredibly challenging, and states haven't always been up to the task. In particular with the sciences, this challenge is compounded. A steady flow of legislators have attempted to insert their personal opinions into the educational process—opinions about things like the age of the Universe and the role of evolution in shaping life on Earth.

One response to these problems has been attempts to set national education standards, such as the Common Core initiative in language and math. Science is no exception. Two of the most significant US scientific organizations joined forces with a science teachers' organization to create the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), and the NGSS were made freely available to be adopted by states. A number have done so.

But there are some groups with an interest in science education have suggested that, in some ways, the NGSS aren't significantly better than the state standards they're replacing. And somehow, the new standards seem to have only intensified the political opposition. The pushback thus far has little to do with the real limitations of the NGSS and more to do with their scientific content.

Educational standards play an ostensibly simple role: they determine what students should know and when. So by eighth grade, for example, a student should be aware of the major features of plate tectonics.

The "ostensible" simplicity comes from the fact that understanding something like plate tectonics requires a whole chain of previous understandings. You need to know a bit of materials science and phase transitions (rocks can bend if they're warm, and melt entirely if they're hot). You'd need to know a bit of geography (where things like mountains and volcanoes are), what volcanoes are, and so on. The development of this knowledge has to be ordered and structured so that the material from one grade can be built upon to provide a more sophisticated understanding the next.

The complexities don't end there. There is some reasonable (and unresolved) debate about what the nature of any educational standards should be. Should they describe the bare minimum that everyone should come out of the educational system with? Or they could be more aspirational, describing what you'd like everyone to learn in an ideal world, accepting that you'll fail with many of the students. Even there, there's debate over what should set the aspirations, with life, work, and college needs all providing reasonable standards.

Getting all of that right to a greater or lesser degree is a huge challenge for any topic. But science as a topic poses a number of distinctive difficulties, because it's not a single item. Science is a specific approach to generating knowledge—even if the five-step process of doing science that we typically teach is wrong, it's still generally worth trying to get the scientific method across.

Actually applying the scientific method will vary based on the field; astronomy and biology have radically different experimental approaches, for example. And then there's all the knowledge generated through the use of the scientific method. Ideally, science standards will help students understand all three of these aspects. Figuring out how to do that is a serious challenge.

Given the magnitude of this challenge, it should be no surprise that many states weren't up to the task.

One of the biggest complaints about science education in the US is that it often focuses on rote memorization of facts without describing either the method that generated them or the theories that organize our understanding of them. In a lot of cases, that has been the product of previous science standards, which provided a list of things students should know and little more.

Read any critical evaluation of state standards, and you'll see that this was far from the only problem. In some rare cases, standards focused so much on the methods that they neglected to specify much about what we've found out using them. In other cases, topics were introduced in one year, ignored for several more, and then returned to with unrealistic expectations about what the students would have learned in between. In still other cases, the standards were simply too poorly written to make it clear what was expected at all.

"If you looked at California's old standards, it's a book," Josh Rosenau of the National Center for Science Education told Ars. "It's like 500 pages. It's this enormous document—it has this level of detail and amount of information specified that no teacher could plausibly cover."

This was only one of many problems identified by Michael Petrilli, president of an education group called the Fordham Institute. "We want to make sure that these standards do a good job covering the important areas of content, that they do it in a way that's usable by teachers, that's not filled with jargon," Petrilli told Ars. "None of that is a given. Over the years, states, in most cases, royally botched this." Problems Petrilli mentioned ranged from inaccurate information to superficial coverage, along with a sometimes stunning lack of clarity.

As a result, in one of Fordham's recent evaluations, the standards in 10 states were given an F. Another 16 got a D. This was pretty typical of earlier evaluations as well.

All of this was a problem even when elected officials didn't insert themselves into the process that generated and approved the standards. Unfortunately, legislators, elected school board members, and appointed educational officials have all attempted to inject their personal scientific objections into their state's curriculum standards. In prior years, this led the Fordham Institute to declare that states didn't even deserve to be graded.

Put simply, students in some states suffered due to the weak standards that were adopted there. And all students suffered from political bickering in Texas. Fights over education standards and textbook approvals in the lone star state were common, and its large student body meant that these fights influenced textbooks that end up used in other states.|||

The NGSS get criticized for not enough science; blocked for the science they have.