Switzerland-based EZYcount is a B2B web accounting system accessible anytime and anywhere with mobile devices. It’s dedicated for small companies, start-ups, and individuals. The Client’s goal is to provide the easiest accounting system for the best price. Interested how we helped?

Thanks to EZYcount, all entrepreneurs, CEOs, and managers can focus on things they are best at and spend as little time as necessary on those they don’t like (and statistically one of the latter is accounting). In fact, EZYcount makes accounting more approachable for them.

EZYcount is a successful Swiss startup on their growth path. They came to XSolve as they needed a professional Development Team to build a next generation of a product that will fuel their progress. Additionally, the Client wanted to assure the continuity of the development in their own Development Team.

Our Development Teams were responsible for building a professional web application that is scalable and built according to the professional rules of conduct. This cooperation expanded as well and our sister company, which is dedicated to UI Design, was responsible for the User Interface redesign.

Due to limited internal capabilities, the Client sought a qualified and reliable technology partner.

“We didn’t have the resources or the right knowledge, internally. We approached XSolve because they had the right people that could complement our team”, says Vivien Roduit, EZYcount CEO & Founder.

The Client looked for a development stack that will help them build an app fast and with enterprise-grade quality and security. They chose PHP/Symfony. XSolve, as the first SensioLabs partner in CEE, was soon on the shortlist. The Customer’s decision was affected by our approach: experienced teams composed of close-knit members who are able to quickly and professionally create valuable products which meet the Client’s expectations and business requirements.

It was very important for the Client that the company that is hired needs to be communicative and accountable with solid track record. Stable but dynamic, with professional certified developers, delivering a new version of software every two weeks and providing full product experience software and UI – XSolve seemed to be a good match and EZYcount decided to start working with us.

“I looked at many companies worldwide, and we chose XSolve because they were a good cultural fit, they had done good projects in the past, and we liked their approach. XSolve understood very quickly what we wanted, and they understood the challenges”, said Vivien Roduit.

We started with comprehensive two-day workshops with the Customer in our office. Understanding the vision of the product, business environment and goals, as well as the constraints was the first thing that our Development Teams learnt during the workshops. This is the way of enabling the productivity of our teams, since if they know that all, they are able to build a solution which fits the needs extremely well without spending much time on specifying them. One of the handy tools that helps is Product Canvas.

Later on we broke down needs by means of user story mapping, usually literally all walls are covered with post-it stickers. That led to producing the Product Backlog which was a foundation of Release and later Sprint Plannings. The Development Team released a new version of the software every two-week sprint. Basing on the working product, the Client was able to steer the development into the right direction through Development Phase.

An additional requirement of the Client was to have a continuity of development by their own Development Team. We decided that the best way of doing that is to invite at least one developer to our team. As a result, one of the Client’s developers spent a month in Poland working side by side with our team. We heard from them that he was extremely happy and found Poland his second home!

From UI Design to Frontend to Backend Development.

The Client got a solid web app which is a great foundation to expand and scale up their business. They are able to further develop it in-house or by any other developer because of using good practices of software engineering and open source technologies. Our Development Team enjoyed the project a lot and the great people that build the EZYcount company and we will miss Vincent (who already gained here his second Polish name “Wiesiek”).

“I would say their technical know-how and their practical experience was a huge differentiator. When working with them, we didn’t only save time, but they also built us a long-term solution. You don’t always get that when you work with contractors, and I feel like it’s even more uncommon with offshore providers”, concluded Vivien Roduit.

You can read the full Customer’s review at our Clutch profile.|||

Swiss EZYcount is a B2B web accounting system accessible anytime with mobile. It’s dedicated for smaller companies. SaaS solution development case story