

Out of hundreds of millions of Tweets a day, Moments surface the best of what’s happening on Twitter. Through Moments, millions of people can enjoy the power of Twitter — at the center of a protest, the front row at the Oscars, on the field at the World Cup, or from outer space. What you see on Twitter is what’s happening in the world.

What follows are the standards and guidelines for creating and selecting Moments that we as a Twitter curation team follow.

Moments is designed to help people find great content on Twitter. Our own curators do not act as reporters or creators of original content; instead, they organize and present compelling content that already exists on Twitter in a straightforward, easy-to-consume way.

These global guidelines are designed to articulate what goes into making the best experience possible for both consumers of content and those whose content is featured in Moments.

Moments is designed to highlight remarkable content on Twitter. They should appeal to a broad audience, and the content should be appropriate for all parts of the Twitter community.

Sometimes Moments will parallel what is relevant on the world stage or in the media; other times, they will be built on content unique to Twitter. We will select Moments based on what is happening on Twitter, or create Moments based on Twitter content featured across media outlets. When selecting Moments around controversial topics, we will choose topics that are big news in the mainstream press or are demonstrably large public conversations on Twitter.

We avoid creating Moments that may invade privacy, encourage illegal activities, exploit or harm minors, or make Twitter, Inc. a focus of the story.

We do not duplicate curated collections or sets of Tweets embedded on a single third-party website, or those retweeted from a single Twitter account.

Moments is about featuring content created by people on Twitter. We will always be faithful to individual voices when we include them in Moments and will not include Tweets in a way that misleads, substantially changes a Tweet’s original context, or includes content from protected accounts. We will avoid featuring content created by Twitter employees.

Moments are intended to feature compelling, original and diverse content. When selecting content to appear in a Moment, we consider the content of the Tweet, any media, and the avatar and username of the poster.

A Moment is a collection of Tweets that is, like Tweets themselves, a flexible way to tell creative stories, using a diverse range of voices, a wide range of media, and which unfolds to tell a full and compelling story. The best Moments include Tweets that come directly from the scene or a source, and reflect the perspective, timeliness or voice in order to capitalize on the unique content that Twitter enables.

Here are some considerations for creating Moments:

Our Moments curation team is not responsible for driving revenue, user growth, or managing Twitter’s partner relationships. We will feature Tweets in Moments and select Moments based on what best serves our audience, and not to benefit advertisers, partners, or Twitter’s business interests. The Moments Curation team will generally avoid creating Moments that cover our own industry, our company, or our competitors.

We allow individuals and partners to curate Moments, and may feature those Moments in the Moments tab. We review every Moment before featuring it, and will ensure that any Moment featured in the Moments tab or from a Moments account meets the overall curatorial standards outlined in this policy. We will also always clearly indicate who curated a Moment.|||

Twitter Moments: Guidelines and Principles
Out of hundreds of millions of Tweets a day, Moments surface the best of what’s happening on Twitter. Through Moments, millions of people can enjoy the power of Twitter — at the center of a protest, the front row at the Oscars, on the field at the World Cup, or from outer space. What you see on Twitter is what’s happening in the world.
What follows are the standards and guidelines for creating and selecting Moments that we as a Twitter curation team follow.