No. It's not funny, neither a movie story:

However, Linux.Wifatch not only removes malicious backdoor but also encourages users to update their weak passwords.

Once a device is infected, the Linux.Wifatch malware connects to a peer-to-peer network that is being used to distribute threat updates.

Linux.Wifatch's code does not deploy any payload for malicious activities, such as to carry out DDoS attacks, rather it detects and remediates the known families of malicious codes present on the compromised devices.

However, the malware does not appear to be used for malicious purposes yet, but researchers have found that the malware contains a number of backdoors that can be used by its developer to carry out malicious tasks remotely.

The researcher shared complete details of the malware in a two-part series on his blog with the same name - "Loot Myself: Malware Analysis and Botnet tracking."

In 2014, the researcher sensed unwanted activities in his home router and for which he could not find the location as well.

This curiosity made him explore more, and while digging deeper he decoded the roots of the malware- THE SOURCE CODE, written in Perl.

After going through the source code, the researcher points out that the code is not obfuscated; it just uses compression and minification of the source code.

Further, the researcher mentions about an unusual activity:



 Though the risk associated with Linux.Wifatch is low, the security researchers at Symantec are keeping an eye on its activities. They say with such a "Malware-for-Good," it apparently creates a 'Benefit of the Doubt' as the author's intentions are unknown.

 

 The case hasn't closed yet, as Symantec says, "It pays to be suspicious."

If you have also detected such activity on your home routers, you can get rid of the risk associated with it by:

Further, you can protect your Wireless network by following few measures, that assure your security, like:|||

Robin Hood-style Hacker Just Hacked 10,000 Routers with Linux.Wifatch mawlware to Make them More Secure