Facebook to launch free internet to large part of Africa via satellite-based sevice after announcing a partnership with a French satellite communication operators, Eutelsat. Facebook and Eutelsat will utilize a AMOS-6 satellite that is going to be launched into the orbit to provide web service in sub-sahara Africa.

I was on facebook early today when I stumbled on Mark Zuckerberg’s post where he made mention of a free internet to Africa via satellite

Mark share this via his facebook timeline some hours ago;

I’m excited to announce our first project to deliver internet from space. As part of our Internet.org efforts to connect the world, we’re partnering with Eutelsat to launch a satellite into orbit that will connect millions of people. Over the last year Facebook has been exploring ways to use aircraft and satellites to beam internet access down into communities from the sky. To connect people living in remote regions, traditional connectivity infrastructure is often difficult and inefficient, so we need to invent new technologies. As part of our collaboration with Eutelsat, a new satellite called AMOS-6 is going to provide internet coverage to large parts of Sub-Saharan Africa. The AMOS-6 satellite is under construction now and will launch in 2016 into a geostationary orbit that will cover large parts of West, East and Southern Africa. We’re going to work with local partners across these regions to help communities begin accessing internet services provided through satellite. This is just one of the innovations we’re working on to achieve our mission with Internet.org. Connectivity changes lives and communities. We’re going to keep working to connect the entire world — even if that means looking beyond our planet.

Along with these photos

Facebook’s mission is to connect the world, I also believe satellite will play an efficient measure in eradicating significant barriers that exist in connecting Africans.

Meanwhile Google also is working on a free internet service(Project Loon ballon program) to some area in Africa after recently expanded their low-cost Android one smartphone service to Africa.

According to Mark Zuckerberg, the satellite is still under construction and is going to be launch in 2016.

This is incredible, or what do you think about the facebook free internet for africa?|||

Facebook to launch free internet to large part of Africa via satellite-based sevice after announcing a partnership with a French satellite communication operators, Eutelsat. Facebook and Eutelsat will utilize a AMOS-6 satellite that is going to be launched into the orbit to provide web service in sub-sahara Africa.