Warning: Asepsis is no longer under active development and supported under OS X 10.11 (El Capitan) and later.

Asepsis prevents creation of .DS_Store files. It redirects their creation into a special folder.

Well, it is not really a problem for most Mac users because .DS_Store files are normally hidden in Finder.

But I'm a developer and I run Finder with TotalFinder and I have enabled display of hidden files. Also I run a lot of command-line tools via terminal. The problem is that sometimes .DS_Store files get into a way. I hate when my clean new folders get polluted by those small tiny files holding unimportant garbage. I hate when I zip a folder using some unix command and it includes .DS_Store files in the archive. I hate when I visit a network volume and that pollutes its content with those nasty files. To put it simply I don't want my geeky Windows friends to laugh at me because this makes me look incompetent.

That is why I decided to solve this for myself and I'm sharing my solution with other Mac geeks out there to help them protect their egos :-)

Apple implemented a private system framework which is responsible for creating and manipulating .DS_Store files. This framework is used mainly by Finder, but there are also other system apps which link against it and may use it (yes mdworker I'm looking at you!). DesktopServicesPriv uses standard libc calls to manipulate .DS_Store files.

At core Asepsis provides a dynamic library which gets loaded into every process linking against DesktopServicesPriv.framework. It interposes some libc calls used by DesktopServicesPriv to access .DS_Store files. Interposed functions detect paths talking about .DS_Store files and redirect them into a special prefix folder. This seems to be transparent to DesktopServicesPriv.

Additionally Asepsis implements a system-wide daemon whose purpose is to monitor system-wide folder renames (or deletes) and mirror those operations in the prefix folder. This is probably the best we can do. This way you don't lose your settings after renaming folders because rename is also executed on folder structure in the prefix directory.

After reboot .DS_Store files are no longer created when you open Finder and browse folders (in case .DS_Store files are not already present there).

Asepsis checks for update after every reboot using Sparkle framework. It also checks its consistencty at that point.

Just run provided uninstaller from the DMG archive or in Terminal execute:

Alternatively you may use uinstaller which comes with the DMG archive. It launches for you.

You may want to review the source code and install it by compiling it from sources. Please follow instructions in GitHub repository.

During the installation asepsisctl tool is symlinked into , so it should be visible from the command-line.

As you can guess there is a clear risk that during system update Apple reverts files to the originals. This should be no big deal. Asepsis checks for this at every reboot and reports it. Reinstalling asepsis should patch it back. In the worst case you will notice that you have .DS_Store files creeping back in the house.

Here is the script source: https://github.com/binaryage/asepsis/blob/master/ctl/cmd/diagnose.rb

Here is the script source: https://github.com/binaryage/asepsis/blob/master/ctl/cmd/install_wrapper.rb

Under Mavericks some users reported that system restart is required after successfully running . You should do that to be sure all processes link against patched DesktopServicesPriv.

Note: in step 3, the path might be different if you boot from external disk, for example

It this didn't work for you for some reason. You have a backup folder with original DesktopServicesPriv.framework version on your disk. Contact me at support@binaryage.com and I will give you special instructions.

Starting with macOS 10.11 (El Capitan), Asepsis cannot run on a normally configured machine due to System Integrity Protection.

System Integrity Protection (SIP) is a new security feature introduced by Apple. That's good, but unfortunately it prevents Asepsis from altering DesktopServicesPriv framework. This article will tell you how to configure your machine, so that you can use Asepsis. Before you do this, it is important to get informed about what System Integrity Protection is, and what it means to turn it off. Technical details are well covered in SIP review on Ars Technica. Apple also provided some information here.

Anyways, if you decide to modify the setting under El Capitan, you will be able to install and run Asepsis as before. Just to be clear...

I'm not encouraging you to turn System Integrity Protection off. Your machine may be less secure with it off. It is entirely your decision.

You must boot into the Recovery OS. You do this by restarting your machine, and holding until the Apple logo appears.

Then select Terminal from the Utilities menu. It looks like this:

In the window that opens, type and press return.

This turns off the part of SIP that Asepsis needs to run, and OS X complains that it is an unsupported configuration.

Now type and press return to restart your machine.

After restart create file in your home directory to allow installer to ignore system version checks:

Then you may install the latest version of Asepsis.

You can find some further information in our blog.|||

Asepsis is a system utility for prevention of .DS_Store files created by Finder and other applications