Lately I have been seeing a pattern. A pattern in how someone makes something really functional, it gets traction, a very loyal user base, then suddenly you start seeing a disturbing trend where the service starts adding features that seem out of place and pretty soon you have a service that no longer does what it used to do and you delete the app and move to another service, with a slightly cynical attitude thinking how long this one will last.

What I think happens is someone puts an idea in the head of the creator “hey! you can be the next Xillion $ Silicon valley company” and the creator gives into that tempting moment.

This precise moment is when I think a lot of the utility kind of services, the really great ones, start spiraling down into the hell hole of chasing the Xillion $ company dream. The product that was once focused and did one thing but did it really well which was the reason why the users loved it so much starts seeing the addition of features some of which are nice, but most make the user be like “what the hell is going on”, till it reaches a point where the very reason for which the user was using the app is either no longer there or is over-shadowed in terms of access/functionality by the other “features that will get to Xillion $” that people give up on it.

From the creator’s perspective I assume what happened is that once he started dreaming of the Xillion $ company he had ideas, absurd amount of them, which he felt the need to implement as well you can’t build a Unicorn on top of a service that does a simple thing well duh!!!! The newly arrived needs for these features makes him think “well I need more people and money”. And since the service had traction he is able to get funding. This is when he is in real trouble. Taking institutional money means now you are accountable to someone else and more often than not what they want is growth. Not organic growth but you know Hockey stick curve and other trending MBAish terms growth. You think adding more features that have “network effects” and what not will help. And the cycle continues.

It continues till your users are going “WTF is going on, this app that used to do X does not do it anymore”. And you are doomed.

Now this might seem like a rant but I have a couple of examples where I have seen a very similar trend multiple times and very similar counter examples too. And you can always point out and say “hey joker, how many things have you created” and the answer will be well crickets.

So for the examples of services that could not focus and went on to become so overly complicated in the rush for the Xillion $ vision that they no longer are best at doing what they used to do:

Don’t believe me, check this link out where their CEO himself says they need to bring back focus to the core values of the app from all the zing-bang they have been doing.

This service was great for one thing, pushing links/text/images from your laptop to your mobile devices and vice-versa. As of now I can’t even get push notifications on their app to work on iOS and what I hear from my Android pals is that they have similar usability issues. Instead of fixing these they are coming up with some fancy chat/social features. “Hey push bullet people, if your company name has the word push in it may be your push notifications should work at the very least”. It has become useless to the point that me and my friend are contemplating writing a dead simple service for ourselves.

Now for counter examples, the companies which focused on the core feature and made that experience so much better over time that with every improvement they do you think how did I ever live without this: 1) Pocket

If you have not heard of Pocket, they allow you to save web-articles/videos from anywhere on the interwebs and make it available on all your devices. They have an active user base of 20Million and even now their focus on the core product is so awesome that every update feels like a genuine improvement that you instantly fall in love with like the Recommendation section. Also they scaled to 20Million users with just 20 people. The linked article is worth a read on how they do it.

The way these apps have kept the focus on the core products even at their scale is amazing. I bet a user from early days of these services will still find themselves at home and not lost in features if they were suddenly given the latest update.

So all you hard working, awesome people building out stuff out there please focus, focus, focus,focus, focus, focus,focus, focus, focus,focus, focus, focus,focus, focus, focus,focus, focus, focus.

You might not build a Xillion $ company that way but may be you don’t need to. What we all need is something that works.|||

Lately I have been seeing a pattern. A pattern in how someone makes something really functional, it gets traction, a very loyal user base, then suddenly you start seeing a disturbing trend where the…