Friday, May 12, 2017 by Richard Harris



Everyone is having a great time this year at NVIDIA's GPU Technology Conference, so if you don't make it this year, there is always next year. The major topic this year that has stood out from the rest has to be Artificial Intelligence. As the cutting edge of AI technology gets closer to making better faster smarter mechanical beings, computer processing speeds too must... Everything you need to know about GPU Technology Conference Friday, May 12, 2017Everyone is having a great time this year at NVIDIA's GPU Technology Conference, so if you don't make it this year, there is always next year. The major topic this year that has stood out from the rest has to be Artificial Intelligence. As the cutting edge of AI technology gets closer to making better faster smarter mechanical beings, computer processing speeds too must...

Friday, May 12, 2017 by Richard Harris



Throughout the past 20 years, we've become well acquainted with the traditional text message. We've seen it evolve from a method of communicating with friends and family, to a way for consumers to interact with businesses in order to receive updates and relevant information. As 4 billion people worldwide use SMS, this traditional method of communication continues to evo... Explaining RCS and how it could kill the need for some apps Friday, May 12, 2017Throughout the past 20 years, we've become well acquainted with the traditional text message. We've seen it evolve from a method of communicating with friends and family, to a way for consumers to interact with businesses in order to receive updates and relevant information. As 4 billion people worldwide use SMS, this traditional method of communication continues to evo...

'I was going to show an ad here Thursday, May 11, 2017 by Christian Hargrave



Synthesio, a social media intelligence and social listening tool, has announced Synthesio Plus. This new update, a premium offering, will allow their customers to gain stronger qualitative and quantitative insights out of their social data through utilizing interaction analytics in all aspects of the platform."Everything that we build for our platform is designed to giv... Thursday, May 11, 2017Synthesio, a social media intelligence and social listening tool, has announced Synthesio Plus. This new update, a premium offering, will allow their customers to gain stronger qualitative and quantitative insights out of their social data through utilizing interaction analytics in all aspects of the platform."Everything that we build for our platform is designed to giv...

Thursday, May 11, 2017 by Richard Harris



Brainshark, Inc., delivering SaaS-based sales enablement and readiness solutions, has announced the launch of Brainshark Labs, its incubator for research and innovation, at Microsoft Build 2017, held May 10-12 in Seattle. They will share how they are integrating Microsoft's Cognitive Services and HoloLens mixed-reality simulation technology to transform how salespeople ... Thursday, May 11, 2017Brainshark, Inc., delivering SaaS-based sales enablement and readiness solutions, has announced the launch of Brainshark Labs, its incubator for research and innovation, at Microsoft Build 2017, held May 10-12 in Seattle. They will share how they are integrating Microsoft's Cognitive Services and HoloLens mixed-reality simulation technology to transform how salespeople ...

Thursday, May 11, 2017 by Christoph Schell



Understanding the opportunity for mobile printing in the workplace first requires rejecting the notion that the enterprise has abandoned much of its need for printing and paper records. Digital forms and workflows may be reducing the amount of paperwork, yet many organizations still rely on hard-copy contracts, government forms and reports to support business processes ... Demand for mobile print solutions are on the rise Thursday, May 11, 2017Understanding the opportunity for mobile printing in the workplace first requires rejecting the notion that the enterprise has abandoned much of its need for printing and paper records. Digital forms and workflows may be reducing the amount of paperwork, yet many organizations still rely on hard-copy contracts, government forms and reports to support business processes ...

Wednesday, May 10, 2017 by Richard Harris



As the digital transformation progresses onwards, the unfortunate side effects are becoming blatantly obvious in the news. It seems like every other day that some new big box company, political party, or individual has their information compromised. But even though only the few biggest companies get the real media attention, hundreds of millions of hacking attempts are ... The Netflix hack: A chat about securing your company Wednesday, May 10, 2017As the digital transformation progresses onwards, the unfortunate side effects are becoming blatantly obvious in the news. It seems like every other day that some new big box company, political party, or individual has their information compromised. But even though only the few biggest companies get the real media attention, hundreds of millions of hacking attempts are ...

Wednesday, May 10, 2017 by Christian Hargrave



To meet surging demand for expertise in the field of AI, NVIDIA announced that it plans to train 100,000 developers this year - a tenfold increase over 2016 - through the Deep Learning Institute.Analyst firm IDC estimates that 80 percent of all applications will have an AI component by 2020. The NVIDIA Deep Learning Institute provides developers, data scientists and res... Wednesday, May 10, 2017To meet surging demand for expertise in the field of AI, NVIDIA announced that it plans to train 100,000 developers this year - a tenfold increase over 2016 - through the Deep Learning Institute.Analyst firm IDC estimates that 80 percent of all applications will have an AI component by 2020. The NVIDIA Deep Learning Institute provides developers, data scientists and res...

Wednesday, May 10, 2017 by Michael Haynes



The app economy is larger than ever - mobile revenues grew 40 percent in 2016 with app developers grossing $37 billion, excluding any advertising revenue. Roughly half of that goes back in the ecosystem for User Acquisition (UA) - or paying for downloads.AppOnboard Inc, mobile app demo maker, has raised $4M from Troy Capital Partners, London Venture Partners (“LVP) and ... Wednesday, May 10, 2017The app economy is larger than ever - mobile revenues grew 40 percent in 2016 with app developers grossing $37 billion, excluding any advertising revenue. Roughly half of that goes back in the ecosystem for User Acquisition (UA) - or paying for downloads.AppOnboard Inc, mobile app demo maker, has raised $4M from Troy Capital Partners, London Venture Partners (“LVP) and ...

Wednesday, May 10, 2017 by Saar Yoskovitz



The backbone of many science fiction plots just a few short years ago - smart machines, homes and cities - are now all around us thanks to the Internet of Things (IoT). Fitbits track and analyze physical attributes from stairs climbed to quality of sleep. By simply saying “Alexa,” Amazon Echo can deliver you with today’s weather forecast or play your favorite music as y... Wednesday, May 10, 2017The backbone of many science fiction plots just a few short years ago - smart machines, homes and cities - are now all around us thanks to the Internet of Things (IoT). Fitbits track and analyze physical attributes from stairs climbed to quality of sleep. By simply saying “Alexa,” Amazon Echo can deliver you with today’s weather forecast or play your favorite music as y...

Tuesday, May 09, 2017 by Christian Hargrave



Editor's Note: Guest submission by Postman, an API tool developerKeyboard usability is usually high on the priority list for any dev tool. For most developers, it’s a more efficient input method, requiring minimum movement and effort compared to a mouse or any other pointing device. It also saves time, and for repetitive / well-frequented tasks, this can bring about a h... Tuesday, May 09, 2017Editor's Note: Guest submission by Postman, an API tool developerKeyboard usability is usually high on the priority list for any dev tool. For most developers, it’s a more efficient input method, requiring minimum movement and effort compared to a mouse or any other pointing device. It also saves time, and for repetitive / well-frequented tasks, this can bring about a h...

Tuesday, May 09, 2017 by Christian Hargrave



Organizations need to rethink traditional approaches to customer experience management according to a new study sponsored by Axway in partnership with industry analyst firm IDC. The study, The Role of Customer Experience Networks in Delivering Value-Based Digital Transformation, found that despite customer experience being the top digital initiative for organizations, 6... Customer experience is becoming critical and needs revamped Tuesday, May 09, 2017Organizations need to rethink traditional approaches to customer experience management according to a new study sponsored by Axway in partnership with industry analyst firm IDC. The study, The Role of Customer Experience Networks in Delivering Value-Based Digital Transformation, found that despite customer experience being the top digital initiative for organizations, 6...

Tuesday, May 09, 2017 by Michael Haynes



Zang, an Avaya company, announced that its ‘Call Mom’ service is now live and can be used by anyone in the world to send a message to Mom for Mother’s Day. With families spread out over the globe in different time zones - including members of the military deployed overseas - getting Mom live on the phone can be challenging. That’s why Zang launched the ‘Call Mom’ servic... Call Mom service helps you not to be a loser Tuesday, May 09, 2017Zang, an Avaya company, announced that its ‘Call Mom’ service is now live and can be used by anyone in the world to send a message to Mom for Mother’s Day. With families spread out over the globe in different time zones - including members of the military deployed overseas - getting Mom live on the phone can be challenging. That’s why Zang launched the ‘Call Mom’ servic...

Tuesday, May 09, 2017 by Richard Harris



FileMaker, Inc. announced the release of the FileMaker 16 Platform, the latest version of its custom app platform. Their platform includes everything needed to create, share, and run custom apps for business teams. This simplifies and accelerates the design and delivery of custom apps for mobile, cloud and on-premises deployments. The FileMaker 16 Platform packs powerfu... Tuesday, May 09, 2017FileMaker, Inc. announced the release of the FileMaker 16 Platform, the latest version of its custom app platform. Their platform includes everything needed to create, share, and run custom apps for business teams. This simplifies and accelerates the design and delivery of custom apps for mobile, cloud and on-premises deployments. The FileMaker 16 Platform packs powerfu...

Monday, May 08, 2017 by Jeff Williams



Why is application security such a pain? One of the hard problems with application security is that there are a zillion different ways that things can go wrong. Far more than any one person can be expert in. It's unfair to think that a software developer, who is already supposed to be expert in all the latest software languages, frameworks and best practices, should als... Improve mobile app security by turning it into code Monday, May 08, 2017Why is application security such a pain? One of the hard problems with application security is that there are a zillion different ways that things can go wrong. Far more than any one person can be expert in. It's unfair to think that a software developer, who is already supposed to be expert in all the latest software languages, frameworks and best practices, should als...

Sunday, May 07, 2017 by Richard Harris



Buzz, buzz, buzz - mobile software development marches forward and we've got loads of mobile development tips, advice, and helpful commentary for you in our latest issue. A special thanks goes out to all of the contributing editors, and the leaders who sat with us to give us some great insight on the topics inside.Check out what you’ll find inside the May 2017 issue of ... Tools and tips for app developers in the May 2017 issue Sunday, May 07, 2017Buzz, buzz, buzz - mobile software development marches forward and we've got loads of mobile development tips, advice, and helpful commentary for you in our latest issue. A special thanks goes out to all of the contributing editors, and the leaders who sat with us to give us some great insight on the topics inside.Check out what you’ll find inside the May 2017 issue of ...|||

Developer news for iOS, Android, Apps, Game Development, VR, SDKs, Mobile Marketing, and other topics relating to mobile software development.