Working for other people usually sucks, and it isn’t that it always has to suck, it’s just that most people and businesses aren’t that good at creating places that are rewarding to work. A few places might have it down like google or reddit, but the vast majority of companies you could work for will never compare to freedom and rewards you can experience when you work for yourself.

Unless the work you are doing is in alignment with what you want to be doing for the rest of your life, or unless you truly love what you are doing, every second you spend working at a job is taking away from the time that you could be spending doing something that you do love.

Many people shy away from entrepreneurship or contract/freelance work because these lines of work don’t produce a guaranteed income, but there really is no such thing as guaranteed income. Many people work at the same company loyally for years, and yet still get fired or laid off when times get tough. There is no such thing as a sure thing, so you might as well be doing what you love.

Most workplaces have requirements on what hours you have to work, where you have to work, when and how long you can take vacations, and even what days you have to work, and as long as you stay an employee it’s going to be that way. Don’t think moving into management is your way out either, because despite some increased perks and pay, salary employees also get even more responsibility and time requirements.

Maybe all you want is to go out and have a salad for lunch break, but if your employer forbids leaving the premises on your lunch break, then guess what? Packed lunch it is!

As long as you are working for the man, the man gets to dictate what and how you do your job, and they will most likely hold you accountable to maintain their standards and operating policies, even if you don’t agree with them.

Every employee position has a specific role that it was designed to fill, so when you step in and work for someone else, your sole task is to fill the role that they assign you, and while it can be nice to know exactly what you are supposed to do, it is also depressing to lose the ability to do what you want. As an employee you may find a way to improve things, but you also aren’t in charge to make those kind of changes, and that fact can be depressing.

When you work for someone else, you give up some of your freedom to advance and raise your status. While a good workplace will offer opportunities for raises and promotions, you are still limited in how far you can go.  For example: in the medical field you are often limited by licensure, so no matter how good you become at your job, you can’t advance unless you get more schooling, and likewise, many people who are terrible at their job can advance simply by going back to school.

When you work for someone else, you basically contract out your time and effort to that person.  It is kind of like agreed upon slavery for a set wage. And when you sell your time to company in exchange for income, you make yourself dependent upon that company for your survival, but to a business you are just another employee. No matter how good you are at your job, you are dispensable and can be let go.

When you work as an employee, you often spend a lot of time learning the way that the business leaders want you to do your job, and while it will teach you some basic skills that could carry over to similar jobs, it teaches you mostly things that are only relevant to the business that you work at. For example: there are many people who work their way up into management positions, get fired, and then are unable to get a similar job somewhere else simply because the experience at one type of job does not usually carry over to something in a different industry.

Many people work 40 years doing jobs they don’t like so that they can retire, and enjoy a few years of debt free living until their poor health puts them in a nursing home or kills them. If we assume that the purpose of life is to find a fulfill your purpose, then nothing is more wasteful than using your life to do things that take you away from your purpose.

When you work for someone else, it all goes back to that whole indentured servant scenario from earlier. You pledge x amount of time and effort in exchange for x amount of dollars. Do you know who loses out when you exchange your life for money?  You guessed it! You.

When you work for someone else, the money they pay you makes you a commodity and they can basically treat you as they please as long as you are dependent upon the income.



 You can always find jobs at great places to work, and some people are truly more happy working for someone else than they would be working for themselves, and if that’s the case for you, then I am truly happy for you.



This post is for the people who have strong dreams of their own, for the people who know there is something more for them in life, for the people who want to march to the beat of their own drums. If you are one of these people, then it is crazy to work for anyone but yourself unless you are using a job as a stepping stone to create your own dream life.

What do you think? Do you actually like your job or do you hate it too? Feel free to leave us a comment and let us know your own experience, maybe you can offer a new insight for our readers!|||

Do you like the person you work for, or do you like the job that you do each day? If not, you would probably be happier working for yourself