Applications are something that we can’t live without while using an iPhone or iPad. iOS devices that came out-of-the-box has some pre-installed applications in them already and one the most important stock application is the App Store. This gives you access to the marketplace full of free and premium applications and games available for all devices running on Apple operating system.

People enjoy downloading applications from the marketplace that Apple has to offer until one day restore or upgrade to another firmware version just to find out that their favorite apps are no longer there on the home screen anymore. While most users have no problem re-downloading them from the App Store, the real problem came in when the app wouldn’t open or appear on the Springboard, despite showing installed.

What to do when this happen? This post will show you a few fixes to get your disappearing apps back.

When you don’t see an application showing up on your iPhone or iPad home screen, chances are it has been deleted during some kind of processes such as restore or downgrade. This is a well-known problem for most users and the best way to fix it is to go on the App Store and download the application again.

Once the app is downloaded, you should see it on the device.

During the download process or the app barely started to download and your Wi-Fi connection stopped working for a long period of time. In some cases, the application might just delete itself and you will have to go on the App Store and install it again, referred to our point above.

The easiest way to find out whether or not your Wi-Fi is currently working is go on the Safari browser and tab on some random page or do a quick search on Google. If the page shows up then there is nothing wrong with your Wi-Fi.

We also recommend that users don’t use their mobile data (Wireless from the carrier) while downloading applications. Not only that it will waste more of your data but also slow down the process.

Sometimes your device just doesn’t work properly our of nowhere and force restart it can fix a lot of problems, including this one. If a simple restart doesn’t help, then perform a force restart.

What you want to do is…

That is how you reboot your iPhone or iPad.

Those of you who recently jailbroke your iPhone or iPad, especially on iOs 8.3 – 8.4, would run into an error where sometimes app icons will disappear randomly. There are two reasons why this happen:

We found out that you can follow the provided solutions above would help to fix this problem. If not, go on Cydia and update the tweak called UIKit Tools. From personal experience, when a new jailbreak tool dropped, hold off until an expert has something to say about packages compatibility and whether or not it’s stable enough to jailbreak. This way you could avoid running into too many issues at once.

This is the last thing I would want to go into because even though applications gone missing is a common error, a quick fix using several methods above would get it to work again. However, if nothing really helps you right now, then you may have to downgrade back to your previous firmware or whichever is still open.

This issue might happen on a newly released major software update or beta version and so you should downgrade back to a more stable firmware.

Unlike any other problems found on our iPhone and iPad, apps missing or randomly disappeared can be fixed easily and the steps needed to be taken is straightforward. The two causes for this issue is when you jailbreak your device using a new utility or restore your iPhone from iTunes. We hope that this post contain enough fixes to help you get through this problem. Shout it out in the comment section below and let us know if it works for you.|||

