Forget the numbers you see quoted on every slide deck at a conference because these are meaningless when you analyse just how fragmented this market seems to be. So I'm going to serve you up a new set of numbers.

And they're not going to give up their chance to define IOT if they can help it.

Cisco, Samsung, Honeywell, , and ARM are playing a calculated game of roulette behind the scenes, whilst appearing on stage with an air of firm commitment in front of potential clients.

There are 10 larger initiatives to define standards and frameworks for the Internet of Things globally; Allseen Alliance, Industrial Internet Consortium, Internet Of Things Consortium, IPSO Alliance, LoRa Alliance, Open Internet Consortium, Thread Group, Z-Wave Alliance, Zigbee Alliance, Alliance for the Internet of Things Innovation (AIOTI). There are some notable companies missing here,  (or GE Digital as the new spinoff is now known as) and .

To enable widespread adoption and help accelerate the development and evolution of an interoperable peer connectivity and communications framework based on AllJoyn for devices and applications in the Internet of Everything. - Allseen Alliance We are defining the specification, certification & branding to deliver reliable interoperability -- a connectivity framework that abstracts complexity - Open Internet Consortium It’s a mesh network designed to securely and reliably connect hundreds of products around the home – without blowing through battery life. - Thread

While there are differences between their focus; for example industrial IOT use cases and smart home interoperability, what's interesting to note is just how many camps these 6 vendors are playing footsie with. Cisco and Samsung are part of seven initiatives. IBM, Honeywell and Intel are aligned with five. Plus a quick look at their mission statements and many are far from realising true interoperability, for example Thread with a mesh based networking protocol.|||

50 billion connected devices. $19 trillion opportunity. All by 2020. Forget the numbers you see quoted on every slide deck at a conference because these are meaningless when you analyse just how fragmented this market seems to be. So I'm going to serve you up a new set of numbers. There are 10 [...]