The GPU (Graphics Prossessing Unit) is changing the face of large scale data mining by significantly speeding up the processing of data mining algorithms.  For example, using the K-Means clustering algorithm, the GPU-accelerated version was found to be 200x-400x faster than the popular benchmark program MimeBench running on a single core CPU, and 6x-12x faster than a highly optimised CPU-only version running on an 8 core CPU workstation.

These GPU-accelerated performance results also hold for large data sets.  For example in 2009 data set with 1 billion 2-dimensional data points and 1,000 clusters, the GPU-accelerated K-Means algorithm took 26 minutes (using a GTX 280 GPU with 240 cores) whilst the CPU-only version running on a single-core CPU workstation, using MimeBench, took close to 6 days (see research paper “Clustering Billions of Data Points using GPUs” by Ren Wu, and Bin Zhang, HP Laboratories).  Substantial additional speed-ups are expected were the tests conducted today on the latest Fermi GPUs with 480 cores and 1 TFLOPS performance.

Over the last two years hundreds of research papers have been published, all confirming the substantial improvement in data mining that the GPU delivers.   I will identify a further 7 data mining algorithms where substantial GPU acceleration  have been achieved in the hope that it will stimulate your interest to start using GPUs to accelerate your data mining projects:

The majority of the current GPU data mining research was conducted on workstations where a single CPU is connected, via PCI Express bus, to between 1 and 4 CUDA GPUs.  A typical use-case involved using only one GPU connected to one CPU. CUDA (an acronym for Compute Unified Device Architecture) is a parallel computing architecture developed by Nvidia.  A CUDA program comprises a main host program (written in an extended C/C++) that is executed on the CPU and which calls out to programs that will be loaded and executed on the GPU.   CUDA requires that each GPU is “managed” by a unique CPU thread.  So to use 4 GPUs with single CPU will require at least a 4-core CPU.

There are other types of GPUs (e.g. AMD-ATI) however the CUDA GPU is the market leader and we will only be referring to the Nvidia CUDA GPUs in this post.

Now you may be asking the following questions “What happens when you want to scale-up beyond a single workstation to a cluster of GPUs?” and “Can we use small GPU clusters for Big Data Analytics instead of the traditional large commodity clusters running Hadoop MapReduce?” Answers to these questions will be presented in a subsequent post.

If you have not yet started experimenting with GPU’s then here are 10 things to do to get started:

When looking at recently published GPU research papers here are at least three reasons why you can expect today  to achieve even better speed-ups :|||

