Best Protection. Best Performance. Easy To Use.

Bitdefender Total Security 2016 Crack builds on technology awarded PRODUCT OF THE YEAR and uses machine-learning to fight off cyber-threats without impacting your device’s performance. It automatically takes the best security decisions for you in securing your data, protecting online payments and safeguarding online privacy. Also includes a new firewall, redesigned parental controls, a one-click optimization tool and even helps recover or block your devices in case of loss or theft.

Bitdefender’s powerful technologies eliminate even the most dangerous e-threats today. Bitdefender Total Security 2016 Crack blocks everything from traditional viruses, worms, and Trojans to ransomware, zero-day exploits, rootkits, and spyware.

Behavioural detection technology that acts as an additional protective layer by constantly monitoring active programs and tagging suspicious activities.

Bitdefender Total Security 2016 Crack blocks all ransomware, even new or unknown, from encrypting and demanding ransom on your personal files. You can choose which areas you want to protect.

Bitdefender’s new firewall deals superior performance in pinpointing intrusions, effectively filtering incoming and outgoing traffic, even over a Wi-Fi network.

Make online transactions from a unique, dedicated browser that secures your accounts from fraud. Bitdefender Safepay™ can now also automatically fill credit card details in billing fields.

For e-threats, such as rootkits, that cannot be removed from within the Windows operating system, the computer is re-booted in Rescue mode for cleanup and restoration.

Sniffs and blocks websites that try to steal financial data such as passwords or credit card numbers by masquerading as a trustworthy entity.

Warns whenever you visit websites that pose potential fraud risks such as casino, porn, money loans and many others.

Learn if your Google, Yahoo and Bing search results are safe before you actually click a link. Bitdefender Total Security 2016 Crack also blocks access to infected links that you have already clicked.

Bitdefender Total Security 2016 Crack is always silently active in the background, blocking new malware and removing infections. Every week, we send you a summary.

Enables you to keep track of all of your security-related tasks, plus lets you quickly and easily drag-and-drop files for quick scanning for viruses — right from your desktop.

Remotely scan and fix security issues on all of your Bitdefender-protected devices from anywhere, using Bitdefender Central.

Immunizes any Flash Drive from viruses when they’re connected to your computer so you never worry again about USBs infecting you or your friends.

Bitdefender Total Security 2016 Crack blocks malicious links or e-threats you passed on from your friends on Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest or any other social network.

Bitdefender Total Security 2016 Crack stores your passwords, credit card data and other sensitive in a secure vault. It also autofills them when you brows and can recommend you secure passwords.

Blocks inappropriate content, restricts browsing, Facebook, online games and all other Internet activities between certain hours, and notifies you when you child attempts to bypass your rules. Also monitors restricted areas and informs you when your child is where he isn’t supposed to be, via an Android app.

Stops unwanted e-mail from reaching your Inbox, now fully based on Cloud technology.

Locks, wipes or even locates your laptop from any Internet-connected device you have at hand.|||

Bitdefender Total Security 2016 Crack and Keygen Full Free Download. Bitdefender Total Security 2016 Crack plus keygen haveing best Anti-Ransomware award.