Nylas Mail is an open-source mail client built on the modern web with Electron, React, and Flux. It is designed to be extensible, so it's easy to create new experiences and workflows around email. Want to learn more? Check out the full documentation.

You can download compiled versions of Nylas Mail for Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux (.deb) from https://nylas.com/download. You can also build and run Nylas Mail (Previously N1) on Fedora. On Arch Linux, you can install n1 or n1-git from the aur.

Plugins lie at the heart of Nylas Mail and give it its powerful features. Building your own plugins allows you to integrate the app with other tools, experiment with new workflows, and more. Follow the Getting Started guide to write your first plugin in five minutes. To create your own theme, go to our Theme Starter guide.

If you would like to run the N1 source and contribute, check out our contributing guide.

The Nylas Mail user interface is styled using CSS, which means it's easy to modify and extend. Nylas Mail comes stock with a few beautiful themes, and there are many more which have been built by community developers

Want to dive in more? Try creating your own theme!

We're working on building a plugin index that makes it super easy to add them to Nylas Mail. For now, check out the list below! (Feel free to submit a PR if you build a plugin and want it featured here.)

Great starting points for creating your own plugins!

Note these are not tested or officially supported by Nylas, but we still think they are really cool! If you find bugs with them, please open GitHub issues on their individual project pages, not the Nylas Mail (N1) repo page. Thanks!

When you install packages, they're moved to ~/.nylas-mail/packages, and Nylas Mail runs apm install on the command line to fetch dependencies listed in the package's package.json

You can configure Nylas Mail in a few ways—for instance, pointing it to your self-hosted instance of the sync engine or changing the interface zoom level. Learn more about how.

Have an idea for a package or a feature you'd love to see in Nylas Mail? Search for existing GitHub issues and join the conversation!|||

nylas-mail - :love_letter: An extensible desktop mail app built on the modern web.