

 

 We’re at Adobe MAX 2015 with some exciting news for UX Designers. We unveiled the progress we’ve made on a new design tool, code-named Project Comet, that combines wireframing, visual design, prototyping, and previewing all in one.  Built specifically for today’s UX design challenges, Comet is fast and fluid so it can scale with large and complex projects.

Over the years, we’ve learned a lot about what you need and have created tools so you can deliver your best design work. As technology has changed, so has the way that you approach your work.  Instead of one screen, you now have to think about multiple screens and how the experiences you’re creating relate to each other.

When we talked to you, we learned you needed:

Because design has changed, the tools for design have to change too. These insights inspired us to create Project Comet.

You can take advantage of vector drawing tools for rapid design and layout, make interactive prototypes, and preview them in real-time on a device. Because design and prototyping is in one tool, you won’t waste time or re-do any work when you want to make changes.

We built Comet as a native application using the latest rendering technology and hardware compositing techniques. As we continue to develop Comet, we’ll share how we’re crafting Comet for performance and what makes Comet a really fast and productive tool.

One of the benefits of being part of Creative Cloud is our ability to leverage Adobe’s CreativeSync technology. You’ll be able to take advantage of any existing Photoshop or Illustrator asset by bringing them directly into Comet, and move seamlessly between tools to undertake specific tasks like bitmap editing in Photoshop or complex vector editing in Illustrator.

This is just the start! We’re looking forward to talking with you and continuing to get feedback about Project Comet as we lead up to a preview release in early 2016.  Join the conversation at @AdobeUX and sign up to learn more.|||

We’re at Adobe MAX 2015 with some exciting news for UX Designers. We unveiled the progress we’ve made on a new design tool, code-named Project Comet, that combines wireframing, visual design, prototyping, and previewing all in one.