Rocket Lab’s test launch window for its private orbital complex begins May 21 Rocket Labs is targeting a big first in commercial spaceflight – the first launch of an orbital rocket from a ...

U.S. Government Fears a Monday Explosion of the Ransomware Plague It Helped Create As a second wave of the WannaCry Ransomware attack is infecting more systems in more countries, the White House has ...

Lucid’s unique approach to cars is about more than just electric drivetrains Lucid Motors is a startup focused electric cars, and the company revealed the design of its first car, the Lucid Air, at ...

Houston Comicpalooza is making waves in Texas this weekend, and Canada’s getting its cosplay on with the Toronto Comic ...

Companies, governments brace for a second round of cyberattacks in WannaCry’s wake As the world readies to open for business on Monday, companies and governments are bracing for a second round of ...

If We Live Another Billion Years, a Lot of Crazy Shit Is Going to Happen Let’s just throw this one in the science fiction category. Everyone knows humans aren’t even going to survive the ...

Developers of the MP3 Have Officially Killed It MP3, the digital audio coding format, changed the way we listen to music and drove the adoption of countless new devices ...

The UK National Cyber Security Center is warning the nation to be on guard for another wave of cyber attacks after ...

It’s been a long night at the Pier 36, also known as Basketball City. But this time, you couldn’t see hoops. ...

This robot helps kids with special needs to communicate At the TechCrunch Disrupt Hackathon in New York today, a team of sophomores from Rutgers University introduced a social ...

Cradle is an app that makes it easier for you to find and donate to charities Is your money burning a hole in your pocket, and you’d like to use some of it for good causes, but you don’t know ...

Confidant is an early alert system to help find missing people Technology such as Facebook’s Safety Check has massively helped with the challenge of identifying and ...

CityConnect shows you how climate change will impact your own home We’ve all seen the maps that show Florida being consumed by rising sea levels. But many of us still underestimate the ...

EEG hardware hack uses blink detection and predictive text for hands-free typing Hardware is hard at the best of times. But software developer Patrick Morris-Suzuki set himself the ambitious challenge ...

‘Elderly Alexa’ helps family care for their remote loved ones via voice Last night on Saturday Night Live, a spoof advertisement for an “Alexa Silver” poked gentle fun at how an Alexa ...|||

Looking for best blogs on tech? On this page you can see blog postings from top tech blogs, all in one place. This 
top tech blog aggregator is provided by DevNews.co