Hyperion Entertainment is very pleased to announce the imminent release of the long awaited adventure/strategy/RPG crossover game Gorky 17 originally by Metropolis Software House for AmigaOS! After changeful 12 years since its original announcement, the AmigaOS port of Gorky 17 became almost what was Duke Nukem Forever for the PC world. Yet, we made it in two years less ;)

In order to ensure the highest possible quality, Hyperion Entertainment commissioned Frank Menzel and Thomas Claus, who are well known for their original games for AmigaOS 4 under the Entwickler-X label, to stabilize, optimize, enhance and last not least to finalize the AmigaOS port of Gorky 17. The result of their work speaks for itself and shows their high level of professionalism, which allows us now to rightfully claim that the AmigaOS port of Gorky 17 represents the best version of Gorky 17 released on either platform ever!

: Gorky 17 is now released and available at your dealer. Read here what Amiga blogger Epsilon has to say about it.

Production is already in progress, all registered dealers got informed about the now available pre-orders and the official start of sales in calendar week 43, 2015. Get in touch with your preferred dealer to place your personal pre-order!

Neuss, Germany on October 10, 2015 in form of a strictly limited amount of early bird units sold separately for 34,95 Euro SRP as well as part of a special fair-super-bundle consisting of But there is more to it! In cooporation with Alinea Computer Hyperion Entertainment will celebrate 30 years of AmigaOS and the release of Gorky 17 by making Gorky 17's pre-release debut at the Amiga 30 years event inin form of a strictly limited amount of early bird units soldas well as part of a special fair-super-bundle consisting of

at a heavily discounted fair-price of 50,- Euro incl. VAT*) in contrary to the regular price of about 65,- Euro incl. VAT.

We all hope you enjoy this fantastic news as much as we do and will stop by at our booths in Neuss on October 10... cheers!|||

Hyperion Entertainment