Regular exercise may help reduce the number of suicide attempts by bullied teens, a new study shows.

The study — which was published last month in the Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry — found that bully victims who exercised four or more days each week were 23% less likely to have suicidal thoughts or attempts.

The data from over 13,000 adolescents from grades 9 through 12 was compiled by the National Youth Risk Behavior Survey — where researchers found that mood boosts from physical activity may improve mental health of teenagers.

"We were sure that exercise has positive effects and knew the role of exercise as a buffer to life stress," Dr. Jeremy Sibold, who led the team of researchers, told the Daily News.

But Sibold, of the University of Vermont, said he didn’t expect such a distinct link between the frequency of exercise and behavioral choice.

Overall, 30% of the students in the study reported feeling sad for two or more weeks and 22% admitted they had attempted suicide in the previous 12 months.

Bullied students were twice as likely to report suicidal thoughts or attempts.

Suicide is the third leading cause of death among adolescents — with about 4,400 deaths per year, the CDC reported.

More than 14% of high schoolers have considered suicide and nearly 7% have attempted it, according to the CDC.

Sibold said that because of the link between exercise and better mental health, more schools should devote time for physical activity.

"Statistics show that schools are taking time away from (physical activity) and recess, that's a red flag when we know that the mental and health benefits are profound,” Sibold told The News.

“We should be looking at exercise as a cost-effective way (to potentially shield people from the many harmful effects of bullying)...As a nation, we're getting progressively sedentary."|||

Bully victims who exercised four or more days each week were 23% less likely to have suicidal thoughts or attempts.