Some sexist tropes in The Martian

This isn’t a critique of the book, The Martian by Andy Weir. The book is excellent. I’m neither a physicist nor an astronaut, but if Neil deGrasse Tyson tweets praise, I assume a lot of the technical details are correct. Actually the book is so good, it also catches some of the cultural details of the STEM industry. Whether these were intentional by Weir or not, I don’t know.

This is a classroom exercise. Just as you’d read To Kill A Mockingbird and examine racial injustice — which isn’t necessarily a criticism of Harper Lee or her novel — I’d like to examine some sexist themes that are nicely illustrated in The Martian.

These are “tropes”, as I’ll call them, because we see them in STEM all the time. That’s why I can even call them tropes…they are so damned predictable.

These tropes exemplify small or even tiny everyday actions that subtly shape perceptions and behaviors, and with repetition and time, they form biases.

Trope 1: Men’s lists of accomplishments are their list of accomplishments. Women’s lists of accomplishments must include physical appearance.

Physical traits and appearances are mostly ignored in the novel, but here are some excerpts:

Because being beautiful obviously sits right up there with being high-ranking and universally respected at NASA.

Here’s a letter Watney writes for Johanssen in case he dies. Johanssen is the “hot chick” on the mission. He also tries to tell her how to dress and how to act. Perhaps Watney also wanted her to smile more.

I get that it’s your dying letter, Watney, and you can say whatever you want, but really?

Because arguing — the way real men argue — requires a level of testosterone that women don’t have.

I love that Annie fights back in this scene. But Teddy’s comment made me cringe.

Trope 3: Men care about accomplishing shit; women only care about attracting men.

It’s the worst when parents are perpetuating this shit. This was a quick, almost under-the-radar example, but its implications are significant.

Trope 4: Men discuss a woman in front of her like she’s not there.

Here, Mindy joins a meeting with Venkat and Mitch. They proceed to question her, insult her, defend her, and then apologize to her, in front of her, and mostly without her input. Indeed.

Wow if that’s not condescending, I don’t know what is. She found Watney. Poor Mindy, she really gets shit on during the entire novel.

If you read this book and these tropes flew by you, ask yourself why. I’d like to challenge you to recognize it. Think about what it does to people who face it all the time.

To all the young kids out there — I praise this book for being great, for making science fun, and for maybe playing a part in your desire to pursue STEM.

I believe that the work being done every day by the fine folks at NASA/JPL, SpaceX, etc. is the most important work we can be doing as a species.

But if you are also concerned by any of the above, please email or tweet me. I’m working to make it better, and I need your help.

Thanks to @rklau, @sippey, and @chrismpls.|||

This isn’t a critique of the book, The Martian by Andy Weir. The book is excellent. I’m neither a physicist nor an astronaut, but if Neil deGrasse Tyson tweets praise, I assume a lot of the technical…