We’ve had a strong presence in major awards competitions and industry accolades this year, including the Webby Awards, Creativity International Awards, and Clutch’s Top Mobile Developers Canada 2015. We’re excited to announce that we can add to that list, recently scoring three W3 Awards for our work on WE365!

In the 2015 competition, we won the Silver Award in three categories:

The W3 Awards honors creative excellence on the web, and recognizes the people behind award-winning sites, marketing programs, social content, mobile apps and online video. The W3 is judged by the Academy of Interactive and Visual Arts (AIVA), a group of top professionals from acclaimed firms including Agencynet, AvatarLabs, Big Spaceship, Brandweek, Code and Theory, Disney, HBO, Microsoft, Monster.com, MTV, Sesame Workshop, Victoria’s Secret, Wired, and Yahoo!. Please visit www.aiva.org for a full member list and additional information.

This year’s competition was tight, with over 5,000 entries submitted from all types of firms, from small agencies to Fortune 500s. Each entry was judged based on a standard of excellence as determined by AIVA and scored on a 100-point scale by the judges.

“We were amazed at the caliber and quality of work we received this year from the smallest agencies to the biggest firms worldwide. As the Web continues to expand in new and exciting ways, our winners continue to truly push the envelope of Internet creativity and web design.” said Linda Day, the director of the IAVA. “On behalf of the 600+ members of The Academy of Interactive and Visual Arts, we are honored to recognize our winners as they continue to set a high standard of excellence.”

The W³ Awards honors creative excellence on the web, and recognizes the people behind award-winning sites, marketing programs, social content, mobile site/apps and online video. In honoring the best of the Web, the W³ Awards is the first major web competition to be accessible to the biggest agencies, the smallest firms, and everyone in between. Small firms are as likely to win as Fortune 500 companies and international agencies. In its tenth year the W³ Awards received over 5,000 entries from Ad agencies, Public Relations Firms, Interactive Agencies, In-house creative professionals, Web Designers, Graphic Designers and Web Enthusiasts.|||

The W3 Awards honors creative excellence on the web and mobile. We're excited to announce that we've won 3 awards for our work on We365!