Video: Innocent Mother Beaten By Cops In Front Of Her Children For Reporting Cop’s Rude Behavior

% of readers think this story is Fact. Add your two cents.

Carlsbad, CA — A shocking video captured the brutal beating of a mother in front of her two children after she merely asked an officer a question.

Cindy Hahn and her children were on their way home when they stopped to use the restroom. During their stop, Hahn asked a Carlsbad police officer a question.

According to Hahn, the officer responded by telling her to mind her own business. Shocked that the officer would address her in such a manner, Hahn called the department to complain. Minutes later, the cop who she reported for being rude pulls her over.

The End Of ISIS Is Near! Russian Forces Are Terrifying ISIS So Much So That 3000 Terrorists Are Fleeing Syria Headed To Jordan

Gerald Celente: ‘It’s Cold War 2’… We’re Not Getting Much Information Other Than Propaganda.

For an alleged seat belt violation, the Carlsbad officer demands that she exit her vehicle. At this point, she is thrown to the ground while two more officers arrive as backup to help assault this dangerous mother of two.

Bystanders plead with the cops to stop their assault, but it is to no avail. One woman is thrown back as she attempts to physically stop the attack.

As the two officers pile on top of Hahn, one of them punches her in the face as he yells out the standard “stop resisting” line.

Hahn was then cuffed and booked on charges of resisting arrest and battery. Apparently the officers did not know that their attack was captured on video when they claimed that Hahn battered them.

After Hahn’s attorney had shown the DA the video of the attack, the charges were immediately dropped.

Hahn has since filed a lawsuit asking for a jury trial and unspecified damages.

“If this goes on with an unarmed mother of two, God forbid what happens when there is somebody who’s perceived to be a threat,” said Mark Geragos, Hahn’s attorney.

As of yet, none of the officers involved in beating this innocent mother have been disciplined.

According to the Daily mail these officers traumatized at least one of the innocent womans’ children badly, scaring them for life no doubt?!

When is something going to be done about this vicious out of control police state?

Hahn says her two young children aged 7 and 11 screamed from inside the car as they watched in horror their mother being severely beaten.

The cop had a bad chip on his shoulder to start things out.The Daily Mail writes:  Hahn, whose father is a retired police officer, says the incident was triggered after she asked an officer, who standing next to a car with its alarm blasting, what was going on.

‘He says, ‘Is this your car?’ And I said, ‘No, sir.’ And then he says ‘Then, mind your own f******* business,’ she said.

Shocked, Hahn told a man nearby what the officer has said and then started to record a video.

She said she reported the incident to police after the cop continued swearing at her, but then left the scene.

But a short while later, she alleges the same officer pulled her over and said it was due to a seatbelt violation.

She says that within moments, she was forced to the ground and claims things escalated further when back-up arrived.

The clip shows a third police officer keeping witnesses away from Hahn, who is eventually helped to her feet as the officer in a motorcycle helmet hikes down her dress.

According to court documents, Hahn suffered permanent memory loss and brain trauma.

What would these so called police officers and their likes do, when they actually come across someone who is just a little bit more of a threat? Unfortunately, a lot of us here already know the answer to that?!  Liberator.|||

