DuPont Co. DD 0.43% Chief Executive Ellen Kullman will retire next week, a surprise end to the tenure of an executive who fended off—at least temporarily—one of the most prominent in a wave of activist investor assaults on corporate boards.

DuPont gave no reason for the suddenness of the departure, which takes effect on Oct. 16. Ms. Kullman, who is 59 years old and has led the company since 2009, took on billionaire shareholder Nelson Peltz and his Trian Fund Management LP, which sought board seats and criticized the company—and its leadership—for bloated corporate spending and sagging profits.

Monday’s disclosure came as DuPont lowered its earnings outlook for this year—the latest in a series of such moves in recent years. Those disappointments were a main target of Trian in its attempt this year to gain seats on the Wilmington, Del., company’s board.

After a lengthy proxy battle, Ms. Kullman, also chairman, in May won a shareholder vote preventing Mr. Peltz and three other Trian nominees from getting onto the 12-member board. That victory, while narrow, was widely seen as a triumph given the success of Mr. Peltz and other activists in recent years in their efforts to shake up the executive suite.

DuPont directors were increasingly concerned about the company’s depressed share price and disappointing results, according to Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, a senior associate dean at Yale School of Management, citing a conversation with a senior DuPont official on Monday.

Over the past few days, Ms. Kullman talked to lead director Alexander Cutler and agreed to step down, saying that the company was about to report poor results and she felt she had become a liability, Mr. Sonnenfeld said. Ms. Kullman never confronted the full board, and the exit decision was mutual, he said.

Trian kept its stake in DuPont and repeatedly suggested that it might take further action. Before DuPont’s announcement on Monday, Ed Garden, chief investment officer of the New York-based hedge fund, said operating results of DuPont’s divisions trail those of smaller, standalone rivals and that DuPont remained under pressure to improve its performance.

“The DuPont story is far from over,” Mr. Garden said in a CNBC interview, adding that Trian acquired more DuPont shares in recent months.

Ms. Kullman, who is one of about two dozen women running S&P 500 companies, said on Monday that she had accomplished her goals, including the spinoff to shareholders in July of DuPont’s performance chemicals division, called Chemours, which makes materials for nonstick frying pans and house paints.

“With the separation of Chemours completed and a strong foundation for growth in place, the board and I agree that now is the right time for a new leader to guide the company through its next stage of growth,” Ms. Kullman said. “I believe I’m leaving DuPont well positioned to capture the tremendous opportunities before it.”

She will be replaced on an interim basis by board member Edward Breen, also 59, while the company searches for a permanent replacement. Mr. Breen, on the same conference call, thanked Ms. Kullman for her leadership and contributions, and said he planned a “deep dive” into DuPont’s cost structure and capital allocations “to ensure we deliver appropriate returns for our shareholders.”

Some shareholders in recent months have criticized the performance of Chemours, saying it could add to pressure on Ms. Kullman. Chemours has struggled since its separation, and slashed the dividend DuPont had assigned it. Its shares have declined 64% since its first trading day. One investor called it the “last straw” on Monday.

Ms. Kullman prevailed in the proxy battle in part by embracing some of the moves that activists prize, including a cost-cutting campaign that aimed to trim $1.3 billion in costs by the end of 2017 and the decision to jettison the lower-margin Chemours division. Mr. Peltz had sought more changes, including the possibility of splitting the company further. Mr. Kullman dismissed the plan and accused Trian of wanting to slash R&D spending and establish a “shadow management.”

In the end, one large shareholder voting for Trian would have been enough to place Mr. Peltz on DuPont’s board.

“It was a tenure marked by significant change and innovation, yet unfortunately it wasn’t apparently quick enough for her large investors,” said Charles Elson, a professor of finance at the University of Delaware in Wilmington.

Kevin Walkush, an analyst with Jensen Investment Management, which owns DuPont shares and supported DuPont management in this year’s proxy battle, said he was “surprised” by the announcement. He credited Ms. Kullman for leading DuPont into higher-value products and promising long-term investments. “Her legacy will be tightening up the ship and defending it,” he said.

Other shareholders applauded her departure. “I think Ellen stepping down is a welcome change in management,” said Tony Gleason, a portfolio manager at DuPont shareholder Neuberger Berman LLC.

Shares of the company, down 27% this year, rose 5.6% to $54.17 in late trading.

DuPont said it now projects operating profit of $2.75 a share for the year, down from its prior projection of $3.10 a share, citing the impact on the stronger U.S. dollar and continued weakening of agricultural markets, mainly Brazil.

The company said it would accelerate by a year its cost-cutting plan and would slash $1.3 billion in costs on a run-rate basis by the end of 2016 and about $1.6 billion by the end of 2017. DuPont didn’t release details Monday on how it would achieve those cuts, saying plans are to be finalized in the fourth quarter. Trian had said DuPont’s earnings targets were too high and predicted they would be missed, which would signal the need for management change.

Nick Fanandakis, DuPont’s finance chief, said DuPont will scrutinize “all costs” ranging from operational expenditures to warehousing costs and research and development. “We’ll be looking at decisions [in R&D] and whether those still make sense in the market environment we’re dealing with today,” he said.

Mr. Breen has a record of revamping companies. He was CEO of Tyco International from 2002 to 2012, and oversaw two breakups of the company, resulting in the spinoffs of Covidien PLC, TE Connectivity Ltd. and ADT Corp. , and the merger of Tyco Flow Control with Pentair Ltd.

Ms. Kullman’s seven-year tenure atop DuPont was bookended by tumult. She took the reins as CEO from predecessor Charles Holliday in January 2009 as the global financial crisis battered industrial companies, during which time DuPont cut staff and maintained its dividend.

She steered DuPont further into the food and agriculture business, acquiring food-ingredient maker Danisco in 2011 for $6.5 billion while selling its specialty coatings business to Carlyle Group LP for $4.9 billion in 2013. DuPont finished spinning off the performance chemicals unit in July, after Ms. Kullman and her team prevailed over Mr. Peltz and Trian in a May 13 shareholder vote that went down to the wire.

—David Benoit, Joann S. Lublin, and Maria Armental contributed to this article.|||

DuPont said Chief Executive Ellen Kullman would retire next week as the chemical company slashed its earnings outlook and promised to t would speed up cost-cutting plans.