You all must be willing to appear in IIT JAM Exam 2018 to actualize your dreams of pursuing M.Sc. from IITs or IISc. But before setting up your study goals for Joint Admission Test, you all should be well aware of the essential criteria to appear in exam i.e. IIT JAM Eligibility.

If you aim to score high in JAM 2018 Exam, join Eduncle for smart Preparations! Choose amongst the content rich- comprehensively designed study courses for all JAM Subjects.

JAM (Joint Admission Test) 2018 is scheduled to be held in the 3rd week of February 2018.

 To remove your anxiety of knowing JAM Exam Eligibility, Eduncle has come with the detailed IIT JAM Eligibility Criteria.

Here, we have mentioned all the requisite conditions on which candidates have to be applicable.

IIT JAM 2018 is open to all nationals (Indian/Foreign).

There is no age restriction.

To apply for admission to a desired program, a candidate is required to qualify in the corresponding Test Paper and also satisfy the Minimum Educational Qualifications (MEQs) and Eligibility Requirements (ERs) of the respective Academic Program.

The candidates who have either appeared or are due to appear in the final examination of their qualifying degree in 2018 are also eligible to appear in the test.

By qualifying in JAM 2018, candidates can apply for provisional admission subject to the condition that:

(a) All parts of their final examination shall be completed by the date of registration of the Admitting Institute, and

(b) Proof of having passed the qualifying degree with required eligibility, as specified by the Admitting Institute, will be submitted by September 2018. The admission for a few programs at IISc, IITB, and IITK will additionally depend on interviews that will be held during the time window given in this brochure.

The candidates who have obtained B.Sc. degree through Distance Education/Correspondence Mode and are desirous of admission to M.Sc. Mathematics or M.Sc. Physics programmes of IIT Madras will have to appear for an additional interview.

“If you want to Download Free Sample Theory of IIT JAM Subjects, Free IIT JAM Solved Question Papers and Mock Tests, please visit to the following link - Download Here“

Note:  Aspirants for Joint Admission Test for Masters (JAM) 2018 must go through handy IIT JAM Preparation Tips. These are the “Mantra to get success in IIT JAM Exam” provided by experienced faculty members.

Please check the JAM 2018 Eligibility Criteria for various JAM Participating Organizations.

First class marks or min. 55% aggregate marks, without rounding off, in qualifying degree.

Second class or min. 50% aggregate marks without rounding off, in qualifying degree.

At least (a) 55% marks or 6.0 CPI in a scale of 10, without rounding off, in Major/Honors and Pass in all other subjects, including Languages and Subsidiaries or (b) 60% aggregate marks or 6.5 CPI in a scale of 10, without rounding off, taking into account all subjects, including Languages and Subsidiaries, all years combined.

At least (a) 50% marks or 5.5 CPI in a scale of 10, without rounding off, in Major/Honors and pass in all other subjects, including Languages and Subsidiaries, or (b) 55% aggregate marks or 6.0 CPI in a scale of 10, without rounding off, taking into account all subjects, including Languages and Subsidiaries, all years combined.

At least 55% aggregate marks, without rounding off, (taking into account all subjects, including Languages and Subsidiaries, all years combined) in the qualifying degree.

At least 55% aggregate marks, without rounding off, (taking into account all subjects, including Languages and Subsidiaries, all years combined) in the qualifying degree.

You can also find our detailed presentation on IIT JAM admit card , in which you will get step by step procedure to download admit card for Joint Admission Test 2018.

Want More to nourish your preparation for JAM 2018???

“If you want to Download Free Sample Theory of IIT JAM Subjects, Free IIT JAM Solved Question Papers and Mock Tests, please visit to the following link - Download Here“

If you face any queries, Please feel free to ask us. Drop your message in the comment box below and let us help you out. Also Join us on Facebook and YouTube for latest updates.|||

IIT JAM Eligibility 2017 for Joint Admission Test entrance exam for M.Sc. Are you eligible to take the test?