Oh no, another trip abroad. Some people relish the thought of flying away to a foreign, exotic land. Obviously, they have not travelled frequently on business. Business travel is different than leisure travel- since you want to maximize your time on the road, your schedule is more condensed, with back to back flights/ meetings and limited time to rest. There’s also more at stake- every mistake or delay can ruin the trip altogether. On a vacation if you miss a flight is usually means losing 1 day of your vacation, or some other nuisance. On a business trip this could be disastrous to your carefully planned itinerary. If you lose your suitcase (or more likely, the airline does) on a vacation you simply stroll to the nearest mall, buy the necessities and wait for your luggage to arrive the following day. On a business trip you don’t enjoy such luxury- on the next day you might be in another town (or country for that matter), so you do your best to check in any luggage and stuff everything to your carry on. You also have the burden of packing/unpacking on a daily basis, which increases your chances of losing something small yet significant (damn toothbrush). And all these things add up to build what I call “travel anxiety”.

For me this starts on the day of my departure flight and only diminishes when I drop my suitcase at my hotel room. The whole ordeal of packing, traveling to the airport, check-in, security, boarding, flight, immigration, collecting my luggage, exchanging money and riding to my hotel is a long, stressful process.

What I’ve found is that this feeling only gets worse as I grow older. When I was single I used to pack several hours before the flight, paying little attention to what I was taking, leaving for the airport at the last minute, walking quickly from the check-in counter straight to the gate and boarding last. Now as a father I need to pack days in advance (since I don’t know which emergency I’ll have prior to departing), leave ample time for duty free shopping for the family, check a big, clunky suitcase (need to bring stuff back from abroad, which my wife has bought online and shipped to my hotel) and must never ever miss my flight back home (else the wife will have to face another challenging day with the kids alone). Time abroad is also more stressful, as I now must accommodate skype calls and “good night” sessions ( could be very difficult to coordinate on different time-zones), gift shopping for two girls of varying ages and still try to save as much money out of my per- diem to add to my salary.

So business trips are no great fun, and tend to be stressful. With time, I’ve found several tricks to minimize the pressure and relieve the anxiety. Try these:

Overall, done correctly you can even enjoy business travel (traveling in business class and posh hotels help). But sometimes you actually need to take a real vacation, just to remind yourself that getting on a plane could even be, well, fun and enjoyable.|||

Oh no, another trip abroad. Some people relish the thought of flying away to a foreign, exotic land. Obviously, they have not travelled frequently on business. Business travel is different than leisure travel- since you want to maximize your time on the road, your schedule is more condensed, with back to back flights/ meetings and…