Nearly a year after the ouster of founder and CEO Dov Charney, American Apparel has filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.

This comes as little surprise to investors of the LA-based clothing retailer, who were warned in August that the company had "substantial doubt" it could remain in business and investors could incur big losses. In its latest quarter, the company reported a loss of $19.4 million.

By declaring bankruptcy, American Apparel plans to restructure its debt in the next six months. The company said it will be business as usual for its 200+ retail stores, which will continue to operate without any interruptions.

"This restructuring will enable American Apparel to become a stronger, more vibrant company," said CEO Paula in a statement. "By improving our financial footing, we will be able to refocus our business efforts on the execution of our turnaround strategy."

In an attempt to shore up its finances, American Apparel will convert over $200 million in debt into equity stakes in the reorganized company. Lenders will also provide some $90 million in debtor-in-possession financing, plus $70 million in new financing.

The result will be a reduction in American Apparel's debt from $300 million to no more than $135 million, the company said.

The iconic brand, known for its raunchy ads, has been shuttering stores and laying off employees under a turnaround plan meant to cut costs and revive a steep drop in sales. The company hasn't left its drama with controversial former CEO Dov Charney behind yet, either. In recent months, the company has amassed huge legal bills from lawsuits with Charney, who was fired amid allegations involving sexual harassment and misuse of corporate funds.

American Apparel's stock, which has devolved into penny stock status amid the company's ongoing troubles, dropped another three cents on Monday and was trading at just nine cents per share.|||

An American Apparel store in New York City. (Photo by Spencer Platt/Getty Images) Nearly a year after the ouster of founder and CEO Dov Charney, American Apparel has filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. This comes as little surprise to investors of the LA-based clothing retailer, who were warned in August that the company had [...]