Apple has decided not to renew an expiring VMware enterprise licensing agreement and will be stepping up deployment of KVM, an open-source alternative to VMware server virtualization, multiple sources with knowledge of the matter told CRN this week.

Apple has been using VMware server virtualization and cloud management software to run parts of its corporate IT infrastructure, according to the sources, who all spoke on condition of anonymity because they're not authorized to speak publicly about the matter.

The sources said Apple's decision to cancel the VMware ELA came about a month after its representatives had verbally agreed to extend the deal, which was first signed in 2011 and renewed for two years in 2013. One of the sources said the VMware ELA extension would have cost around $20 million.

The abruptness of Apple's decision may indicate that it wasn't satisfied with the licensing terms VMware offered for the ELA extension, said the sources.

Michael Thacker, director of corporate public relations, said the vendor doesn't comment on the status of customer ELAs or other agreements. Apple declined to comment.

KVM, short for kernel-based virtual machine, is emerging as a lower-cost alternative to VMware's ESXi hypervisor. IBM, which inked a landmark enterprise mobility partnership with Apple last year, is a big proponent of KVM, as is Red Hat.

Apple's decision to use open-source KVM could save the company millions of dollars in licensing costs as its scales up its cloud infrastructure in the same manner as cloud computing behemoths like Amazon Web Services, Google and Facebook.

Apple has talked publicly about how it uses Apache Mesos, an open-source cluster manager, in its back-end infrastructure for its Siri digital assistant. One source close to Apple told CRN the vendor is looking to lower its VMware licensing costs by adopting additional open-source technologies.

"Apple has been quite vocal about getting off VMware," said the source.

Apple has been evaluating OpenStack, a set of open-source software tools for building infrastructure-as-a-service clouds, said the sources. But they said it's unclear if Apple is planning to use KVM and OpenStack to completely replace its VMware private cloud infrastructure, as PayPal has done.|||

Apple recently backed out of an enterprise licensing agreement, or ELA, covering VMware server virtualization and cloud management software for its corporate IT infrastructure, and will switch to KVM. Page: 1