I believe that I can honestly say that the last day in which I didn’t use a smartphone was June 28, 2007. That is, the day before the iPhone launched. Since then, not only have I used the iPhone every single day, the amount of time I use it each day has undoubtedly increased.

Some see this as a problem. Others see it as reality. And still others see it as inevitability.

We now live in a world so utterly dominated by these devices that it’s basically a forgone conclusion that younger generations are going to be far more hopelessly addicted than we are.

But what if that’s not the case?

I found myself wondering that while reading Sherry Turkle’s great piece in The New York Times (adapted from her most recent book, Reclaiming Conversation: The Power of Talk in a Digital Age) earlier this week. In it, she talks to some young people about their device usage habits. Some anecdotes are what you might expect, but what really stands out is how many are not at all what you might expect.

Some kids, it seems, while perhaps not in open rebellion against the devices, view them with a far more skeptical eye than you or I might. And they long for interactions with their fellow human beings in which those devices aren’t present. Remember when we used to hang out with each other, without our phones?

Again, for many of us it has been about a decade since that was the case. Sometimes I have a hard time remembering what we would do in those moments of silence where no one is talking. Look at each other, I guess.

Okay, not weird. Probably natural. Certainly more natural than looking at slabs of glass in our hands connected to all the information ever collected in the world. That’s weird. Cool. But weird.

And what if there’s something naturally ingrained in kids to note how weird it is for us to always be looking at our phones rather than talking to one another? What if that instinct kicks in when those kids see their parents always on their devices? What if it’s not parents who have to worry about their kids having out-of-control device addiction, what if it’s the opposite?

I’m not saying that’s for sure the way the world will play out, of course. But I do believe that the world has a funny way of “course correcting” and making sure that nature can do that whole Darwin thing. What if it’s the kids that get us back on track as a society of social creatures?

Sort of wild to think about, no?|||

I believe that I can honestly say that the last day in which I didn’t use a smartphone was June 28, 2007. That is, the day before the iPhone launched. Since then, not only have I used the iPhone…