Early Monday morning, Twitter announced that Jack Dorsey is going to lose the “interim” title and take over as CEO. This has inspired many industry articles about where Twitter is going, what it can be, and if Jack can engineer a turnaround that’ll make users and shareholders happy.

It’s exciting to talk about potential, particularly regarding a company with as many untapped opportunities as Twitter.

In fact, Twitter’s lack of progress on their core product since 2008 (when Dorsey was last CEO) should be seen as both a blessing and a curse. It’s allowed visions of what Twitter CAN be to dance in people’s heads long after the public usually loses interest in a stagnant consumer Internet startup.

So, potential is fun. And yup — Twitter has plenty of it.

But I think it’s important to recognize a few ways that Twitter has already “won” by influencing countless apps and services that have launched over the last six or seven years.

When Twitter launched in 2006, the dominant social networks were MySpace and Facebook. To connect with someone on one of these services, you had to “friend” them. It was a double opt-in relationship: one party would send a request, and the other party would have to accept that request for a connection to be established. This was the dominant model that was employed by the vast majority of companies in the space during this time.

Twitter immediately stood out, partially because user relationships were more like subscriptions. One user followed another to subscribe to their posts. It allowed celebrities to have wonderful experiences — both reading and writing — on Twitter. They were able to share their posts with all of their fans, and, by only following the people they wanted to keep up with, have a great experience consuming Twitter, too.

Take a look at the major social services that we’ve seen since 2007: Instagram (Facebook-owned), Snapchat, Vine (Twitter-owned), Tumblr, Pinterest, etc. They all depend on a “following” model for users to build out their networks. “Friend requests” have been completely thrown by the wayside, despite Facebook, the biggest player in the game, maintaining that model.

Actually, Facebook saw the benefits of the “following” system from early on. You have to give Mark Zuckerberg credit for jumping on the bandwagon. First, Facebook let users follow pages (different from Facebook profiles) to keep up with their interests. Now, users can follow profiles, too. No longer is the only relationship between users on Facebook a two-way “friendship.”

Twitter fundamentally changed the structure of the relationships we form on social networks.

Ever use an @username to tag or mention someone in a post? You have Twitter to thank for that. It’s not that it was baked into the product in its early days — it wasn’t — but early users used the @username syntax to mention others, and eventually, the powers at Twitter adopted it into the product.

Today, it’s commonplace among social services. Look at the comment sections on popular Instagram and Vine posts. They’re full of people mentioning their friends as a way to say, “hey, look at this post…”

The hashtag was invented by Twitter user Chris Messina. It too was a user-created feature that Twitter later included in the product.

The hashtag is a central tenant in marketing campaigns, events, interests, and communities, and its use spans virtually every modern social app. It’s a little symbol that, because of Twitter, has come to be synonymous with “topic.” Innovation on the hashtag is far from over, and I think Jack and the team at Twitter will build cool products around it.

Twitter revolutionized how we mention people on social apps by way of the @ symbol, and made it possible to connect with people who we share things in common with through #hashtags.

Everyone is on Twitter. Ok, not everyone. Not your mom, or your older sister. Maybe not even you. But when I say everyone is on Twitter, I’m talking about everyone who’s in public life.

Presidents. CEOs. Movie stars. Revolutionary leaders. Musicians. Athletes. Yoko Ono. It’s the most media-integrated app in the world. Basically, if they’re ever on your TV screen, they’re on Twitter.

While that may be a bit of a stretch, Twitter is packed with more famous people (and it’s actually them posting, which is an important distinction) than any other social network.

Why? Twitter made the social web more approachable for celebrities. Ten years ago, the closest thing to a “celebrity” on the social web were the up-and-coming bands who had a presence on MySpace. Otherwise, they basically stayed away. Twitter changed that. Any social app of note out there today has their own little corner of celebrities.

I remember when Diablo Cody — best known as the writer of Juno — was the big celebrity on Twitter. Then Ashton Kutcher came (remember the @CNN versus @aplusk race to 1 million followers?) Then Shaq. Twitter broke down the barriers between public figures and their fans (and haters, if we’re being honest) and gave them an outlet to speak to fans (and listen to them), without distortion from the media.

Now, Facebook has teams of people working on getting celebrities to adopt Facebook as a place to share…but I imagine they’re having a hard time. They have a new app called “Mentions” that makes it easier for celebrities to consume Facebook. Twitter has an app that makes it easy for celebrities to consume Twitter, too. It’s called Twitter.

I can’t wait to see where Twitter goes. They have a stacked team, a visionary leader, a product bursting with potential, a star-studded user base, and millions of people who are passionate about the product and use it every day. The future is bright. Their best days are ahead of them.

But let’s not let what Twitter has already accomplished go unnoticed. Twitter is successful in itself, by any metric. It has hundreds of millions of users and generates billions of dollars in revenue every year. And yes, I know those numbers need to be even higher.

But to measure the real greatness of Twitter thus far, take a look at the other apps near the top of the leaderboards in the App Store. There’s a little bit of Twitter in almost every one of them.

@adamokane is a #shareholder in both $TWTR and $FB. he ❤s both @twitter and @facebook, and if @jack or @zuck ever want to chat, they can email him.|||

Early Monday morning, Twitter announced that Jack Dorsey is going to lose the “interim” title and take over as CEO. This has inspired many industry articles about where Twitter is going, what it can…