Really, with the roads clear, no new snow, minimal wind and even the sun shining brightly on a clear, crisp day, we close our schools in January because it is ... cold?

Alleged global warming aside, we still live in Chicago, no? Consider this the continued wussification of society.

And just what are we talking about? Expected lows of — hold on tight — minus 8. Come on, Mike Ditka would play football sleeveless in minus 8.

Our kids can go to school. Considering that so few even walk anymore, what difference does the temperature make? That Jenny and Johnnie may actually stand at the bus stop shivering for all of 10 minutes? Who cares? Frankly, it's good for the pups.

Children went to school in Milwaukee on Wednesday; that city did not close its schools. Are the Milwaukee school leaders somehow derelict?

Likewise, my hard-working garbage men worked Wednesday, as I heard the trucks slowly rumble down my alley, serving as my backup alarm clock.

The only thing that seemed different Wednesday morning as I walked to the "L" was I saw some kids lugging sleds on their way to a snow hill at the nearby park. Yes they were going to play. Outside no less!

Just what lesson are we teaching our kids by closing schools? And please, spare me the word "safety." It is a complete crutch.

Frankly, more kids will likely be injured — or be "unsafe" — staying at home, often unsupervised, on a midweek snow day, than they would being in school. My brother and his friends would use me as a human tackling dummy on snow days.

Of course, you know what will be crowded on the snow day: ice-skating rinks. Outside no less! The inhumanity! Should such parents be arrested?

This all reminds that two of my kids are set to go on a weeklong, overnight field trip to "Nature's Classroom" in Wisconsin next week. Should the trip be canceled because it will be cold?

Just the opposite actually. The trip is planned, in part, for this time of year because it will be cold, and the kids are challenged with some outdoor, cold activities. The educators view it as a learning opportunity and plan accordingly.

Once upon a time, we looked for excuses to work hard and persevere. Today, however, it seems as if we search for opportunities to call it a day and shut down shop.

Such is hardly a lesson worth teaching.

William Choslovsky, a lawyer who lives and works in Chicago, has three children who attend Chicago public schools.|||

