You may physically visit the rsync.net location that you have chosen for your account and directly access your cloud storage. There is no extra charge for this feature and all customer accounts are available "out of band". Out of band access is currently deployed at both US locations (San Diego and Denver) and will be deployed in Zurich in Q4, 2015.

We don't know why you'd want to physically visit our location and directly access your data - and that's precisely the point.

In a natural disaster or during periods of political instability the full function of the public Internet is not guaranteed. The ability to physically access your data in an emergency may be a valuable component of your overall disaster recovery and and contingency plans.

Further, even during "normal" conditions, you may have an immediate and pressing need for large volumes of data, and even our physical delivery services may not be fast enough.

That's fine. Just drive on over.

More Than Just Cloud Storage

We have provided our storage platform for offsite backup since 2001 and have always been reluctant to refer to it as "cloud storage".

Cloud Storage is a highly abstracted, opaque service whose physical underpinnings and connections to the real world are never well understood. Your data is simply "in the cloud" and you are left to trust a faceless provider who you will never interact with - perhaps not even over email.

We call our product "Cloud Storage for Offsite Backup" because that's the term that the industry has adopted ... but make no mistake, rsync.net offers something more.

When you choose rsync.net, you choose an explicit geographic location and you are given a real ZFS filesystem[1][2] to do with as you please. And now, you can access that even when the Internet is down.

You're also given personal support from real UNIX engineers over email or phone.

Think of us as a safe deposit box for your data. At a really, really nice bank. And the bank is open 24 hours per day.

[1] Yes, you can ZFS send and receive to/from us. 

 [2] Yes, we do ZFS Snapshots of your account. For free.

If you are an rsync.net customer, simply request (in advance) out of band access and you will be provided with the physical address of the datacenter your account lives in as well as the SSID and password of our wireless network operating from inside the datacenter.

If this is not a natural disaster or political calamity, we may even be able to arrange a wired, gigabit-ethernet connection for you, depending on your needs and which location your account is at.

As of September, 2015, drive-up access is enabled in San Diego and Denver and will be enabled in Zurich before the end of 2015. We do not have plans to enable the Hong Kong location as the physical size of that datacenter (enormous) makes it nearly impossible.

Our pricing is 20 cents per GB, per month.

Pricing drops to 14 cents and 8 cents for Terabyte and 10-TB quantites.

Start with a 50 GB account for only $10 per month.

No other costs. No contracts. All transfer/bandwidth/usage is free.

rsync.net publishes a wide array of support documents as well as a FAQ

You, or your CEO, may find our CEO Page useful.

Please see our HIPAA and Sarbanes-Oxley compliance statements.

Contact info@rsync.net for more information, and answers to your questions.|||

rsync.net offers secure cloud storage on an open standards platform for offsite backup and disaster recovery