Anyone who has worked with an agile development team knows that it can be hard to keep everyone on the same page. You’ve got Sergio in Italy working on one part, Marija in Serbia on another element, and Stan in San Francisco working on a totally separate element. In the end, of course, they’re all working on the same thing: a piece of software or a website.

Enter VivifyScrum, a new tool made by users of scrum, for users of scrum. It’s a place for Sergio, Marija, and Stan to all make sure they’re working in tandem toward their common goal and not, in fact, spiraling out into something that’s totally not going to suit the end product.

The goal of VivifyScrum is to make it as easy as possible for your team to work together, even on multiple projects. The cloud-based SaaS tool features clean, modern design that utilizes a single page for all of your boards, making it simple to see exactly what’s going on. They put all of your priorities front and center, so that your team — from Serbia to San Francisco — stays focused. You can even break down each task into its iterations or assign them only to certain members.

Even better? The site updates in real time, so you don’t have to worry about hitting the refresh button over and over again in order to keep up with everyone. VivifyScrum says, “Save your fingers for coding.”

VivifyScrum came from the team at Vivify Ideas, a web development company that makes web and mobile apps. They specialize in PHP and Javascript, and found that they were having trouble keeping their own agile team on board — and that the tools available just weren’t cutting it.

“We’ve made VivifyScrum based on our real life needs in using Scrum everyday,” founder Goran Prijić told KillerStartups. “We wanted to make an intuitive and nifty tool that was easy to use, but not at the expense of its functionality and the number of features. From the moment VivifyScrum went online, it stopped being about our needs. Now it’s all about the users, about making this tool right up user’s alley. And the appreciation we get from users is that one thing that keeps us moving forward and constantly improving.”

If you’re ready to be one of those happy customers — a number which is doubling every quarter — head on over to VivifyScrum and get started today!|||

VivifyScrum was made by users of scrum, for users of scrum, and will get your team working together like never before.