Which Australian tech start-up is the next Atlassian?

One of Australia's hottest tech start-ups Canva has closed a $US15 million ($21 million) capital raising, attracting the attention and dollars of Hollywood stars Woody Harrelson and Owen Wilson. The online graphic design company pulled in the high-profile backers as part of its third funding round, which was led by US-based Felicis Ventures. The latest funding means a total of $27.6 million has now been poured into the company by outside backers, with existing investors such as Blackbird Ventures, Matrix Partners, and Vayner Capital all increasing their share this round Canva co-founder and chief executive Melanie Perkins told The Australian Financial Review the funds would be used for product development and international growth plans. Other early backers of the company include Google Maps co-founder Lars Rasmussen, SEEK co-founder Paul Bassat, Yahoo chief financial officer Ken Goldman, Dave McClure of 500 Startups and prominent US angel investor Bill Tai. Ms Perkins said the company hadn't intended to embark on a fresh funding round, having raised $US6 million in May.

"We just saw an excellent opportunity when Felicis Ventures approached us and were excited about what we were doing and really helped take it to the next level," Ms Perkins said.

"They've got a lot of experience with scaling companies, working with Fitbit and Shopify. We've been growing like absolute crazy." Canva's design tools are used by 40 per cent of Fortune 500 companies and well-known organisations such as Huffington Post, Lonely Planet, Yelp and Hubspot use it in their production. The company is now working on creating its platform in different languages.

"We're currently only in English," Ms Perkins said. "But we've had a crazy amount of inquiries with people wanting it in other characters and languages. We're also looking at developing the product so teams using it can upload their own fonts and collaborate and comment on the work within the platform as opposed to having to send emails back and forward." The funding announcement follows the success of Canva's recent launch of Canva for Work, a subscription offering for businesses and more than 35,000 teams have upgraded to the paid version of Canva in its first few weeks. Felicis Ventures partner Wesley Chan said this was the largest amount it had ever invested, demonstrating its belief in Canva's potential.

Canva was named by Australian venture capital firms as one of the five local start-ups most likely to follow Atlassian and become a billion-dollar tech player. However, Ms Perkins said there were no plans for an initial public offering in Australia or the United States. "It's still early days and it's not something we're actively considering," she said. Getting Hollywood actors on board will help the company in its plans to take on the likes of Adobe internationally, and the company included comments from actor Owen Wilson in material sent to media to trumpet its raising. The company said Mr Wilson and Mr Harrelson were genuine backers, rather than paid brand ambassadors. "Canva is on fire," Mr Wilson said in a statement. "This could be a game-changer."|||

According to Owen Wilson, "Canva is on fire! This could be a game changer. 5 million users in just over two years, the numbers speak for themselves. Great investment and top-notch team."