Spies Travel is joining forces with wannabe grandmas in the fight against Denmark's low birth rate. Introducing Spies Parent Purchase™: Send your child on an active holiday and get a grandchild.

Read more at http://do-it-for-mom.dk



- - - - -



Spies Rejser går nu sammen med potentielle bedstemødre i kampen mod Danmarks lave fødselsrate. Derfor introducerer vi nu Spies Forældrekøb™: Send dit barn på en aktiv ferie og få et barnebarn.

Læs mere på https://do-it-for-mom.dk



- - - - -



DO IT FOR MOM



Last year we at Spies Travels launched the ‘Do it for Denmark’-campaign in order to address the historical low birth rates in Denmark. It turned out quite successful, we made the Danes travel more, have more sex and reproduce for their country. Vitus, the baby conceived by the competition-winners was born in January this year. However the Danish welfare system is still under pressure. The birth rate is still too low despite a little progress after last year’s effort. And this affects us all, but those who suffer the most are perhaps those mothers that will never experience having grandchildren. That’s why we are joining forces with elderly women of Denmark who have become grandma-broody. We have a common goal: More babies.

 

This year we are prescribing active holidays, because studies have proved that couples that sweat together have more sex. This combined with the fact that you have 51% more sex on a sunny holiday will lead to more sex and therefore more babies aka. grandchildren. In order to give potential grandmothers a strong tool, we have developed the Spies Parent Purchase™ product (Spies Forældrekøb™), where they can prepay active holidays for their children and in-laws in order to make the magic happen. To show that we’re in this together, we’ll throw in some discounts as well.

 

This year the Danes will conceive not only for their country but also for their moms. We think that will do the trick.



Link to the danish travel agency Spies:

https://spies.dk

https://facebook.com/spiesrejser

https://twitter.com/spiesrejser

https://instagram.com/spiesrejser|||

Spies Travel is joining forces with wannabe grandmas in the fight against Denmark's low birth rate. Introducing Spies Parent Purchase™: Send your child on an...