And though at first it may seem like doing architectural photography is really easy because the subject doesn’t move, actually that’s what can make it very difficult. The biggest problem is that buildings neither move nor talk. And you will have to live and deal with it somehow.

In this article we will share 10 most helpful tips on how to make beautiful and impressive photos of architecture. Welcome inside!

One of the most important things that will help you improve your architecture shots is getting a wide-angle lens. This will make your pictures look deeper and therefore they will attract more attention. Something like 10-24mm on a crop sensor camera and 14-24mm on a FF one will be great.

Why limit oneself only with the building’s façade? Just think about the poor architect who was designing it and come inside. You will see that there’s another completely different world with its own atmosphere hidden behind the building’s walls.

Generally, the light is what really makes the shot in photography, irrespective of the genre. Try to take more walks around your city in the early morning during the sunrise or in the early evening during the sunset. At the same time, you will be able to make awesome street photos, too.

Many buildings, especially skyscrapers and those in the city’s historic center, have specially designed night illumination, which sometimes makes it look even better than in the natural daylight.

Using long exposure is a great way to attract attention to the building by capturing the skies, roads, and people in movement. Usually, it can be done only at night, but if you shoot with big f number, low ISO, and stack on filters, you will be able to do it during the day too.

One great advantage that architecture photographers have is that they can shoot literally in any weather. You should remember that you can use the weather—sun, rain, or fog—to attract more attention to buildings you shoot.

Photographers often say that the picture changes upside down when a person enters into it. Try to use this rule sensibly and improve your shots.

Reflections are a powerful instrument that you can use to add scale, richness, and atmosphere to your photos. Try to look for reflections in water and glass.

Lines and patterns are as important as the light when it comes to capturing a complex and impressive picture.

When you look straight up, dozens of new composition choices will start flowing into your head. Try to find an unknown angle and create a sense of asymmetry by taking photos of buildings straight up.

Apply these awesome techniques to shoot distinctive photos that people will love, use our platform to sell them, and earn at least 70% of the photo value. Become a KeepSnap independent photographer and go out today to snap people around you and earn a living. It's completely free for photographers.|||

Want to get better at making photos of architecture? Check out our 10-step guide to architectural photography!