You might have heard about a recent 'witch-hunt' and nasty comments, calling Web Summit (known as arguably Europe's most influential tech conference) a scam. Normally I would raise one eye-brow and go back to fighting my inbox. This time I can't be quiet. For three reasons: 1) I interviewed Web Summit's founder, Paddy Cosgrave only a week ago and got to know him a little, 2) as part of my preparation for the interview I talked about Paddy and Web Summit with several industry veterans and 3) I attended Web Summit both as speaker (not on the main stage though) and as attendee.

The reason why I decided to step in, is simple: gratitude. Let's criticise, but stay constructive. Let's give people and companies a chance to improve. Attitude of gratitude when criticising helps others improve and helps us keep a happy heart. No need to be nasty.

It all started on 30th Sep, when Neil Murray wrote an opinion article in Tech.eu about why he wasn't going to attend the Web Summit. While he says he understands the apparent financial motives for moving the conference to Lisbon from 2016, he basically criticised its spammy email marketing tactics and overcharging startups (apparently). It was quickly followed by a response from Paddy Cosgrave, Web Summit's founder. He denied allegations of overcharging by explaining their pricing options, explained their journey, yet didn't respond to criticism of Web Summit's email marketing tactics.

It wasn't long before the chief editor of Tech.eu Robin Wauters came in to offer his point of view, plug in a few smart arguments, questioning whether Web Summit was a scam. Several media outlets like Business Insider or VentureBeat picked up the story, while respected investor Mark Suster stepped in and called Paddy Cosgrave one of the best conference hosts.

Recommended: R.I.P. Dave Goldberg! Here Is Why the World Will Miss You.

According to its founder Web Summit was born, because Dublin desperately needed a reason for its tech community to come together. It was calling for a conference like Le Web, Slush or The Next Web. The first Web Summit was organised in 2010 and it had 400 attendees. All almost entirely from Ireland. In 2011 Web Summit achieved similar figures. It wasn't until 2012, when things started to change.

When you talk to an entrepreneur like Paddy Cosgrave, you can tell he has a calling and is extremely passionate about events. In his own words, Paddy was never employed and was always working on his own ideas. He prides himself in using data and software to deliver a better attendee experience and help people with networking. To him, the mission is clear: "to provide attendees with a great experience!"

Just like Mark Suster mentioned in his article, a conference doesn't go from 400 attendees to over 20,000 if it doesn't deliver value for attendees. The question that many in the conference industry ask themselves is with awe is: how did they manage to grow so fast?

There are several parts to this answer. The truth is, it took two years of tweaking, understanding the audience and getting the feel of what makes a good conference tick. Paddy is a very smart guy. He not only watched his audience, he also asked them for feedback. A lot of feedback.

The second part of the answer contains a touch of genius. Paddy asked Bono Vox, lead singer at U2 to go on a pub crawl with a few keynote speakers. Bono agreed and the magic sauce of the Web Summit was created. Great speakers attended, because they got to go on a pub crawl with Bono and regular attendees came, because they would get inspired by great speakers. Ever since 2011, Bono takes a few high flyers in the industry on a pub crawl during the conference. Paddy mentioned that last year they had over 5,000 people on a pub crawl. I attended one. It had a great vibe, even though November weather in Dublin, Ireland is pretty chilly.

The second part of Web Summit's success was clearly it's social media and email marketing. Just like in any other industry, there are companies that grow fast and those that grow exceptionally fast. Web Summit is clearly the UBER of conferences. It's growth is nothing short of phenomenal. Big part of that growth was achieved with their social media and email marketing, no doubt. I have heard feedback about Web Summit from several hundreds of people. It was mixed and most critics complained about it's aggressive email marketing claims. Many felt miss-led, over-promised and described their email marketing as deceptive.

As someone with marketing background, I followed their email and digital marketing campaigns closely. Surely, I didn't like the way Web Summit led startups to believe that they were selected, while they later admitted that startups still need to buy a ticket for at least €1,950 (valid for 4 people). Many also complained that they were sent way too many emails. When I asked about Paddy about where the limit is to how many emails he thinks he can send, he replied with about 3 per day. I hope he was joking :)

Having said that, Web Summit deserves respect for pushing boundaries, having balls to test new things out and in many aspects for trying to create a better speaker and attendee experience. They use arguably the best landing pages and websites in the events industry. Crisp, interactive, clean, colourful and effective. I like Web Summit's digital campaigns and the way they create scarcity by only selling tickets at set time slots. They have balls to test new things and deserve credit for that.

Before I give you my explanation about the 'WebSummit-Gate', let me first give you a time travel ride on my hypothetical 'DeLorean'. Wise people learn from mistakes of others, as they say. There was another web conference phenomenon that took Europe by storm, before Web Summit did. It as called LeWeb.

Many industry insiders admire Loic le Meur for creating and growing LeWeb the way he did. However, apparently (I have yet to attend LeWeb in person) it became too successful for it's own good. It quickly grew into a big conference, got expensive, and its reputation (especially in Silicon Valley) started to suffer. Why? There are probably two parts to answer this. Charging too much for startups and bloggers, who are trying to make it, creates 'bad karma' and when a conference becomes too profitable, speakers expect the organisers of 'a for profit conference' to start paying for keynote speakers.

You may ask: who am I to judge a conference like Web Summit? Well, I had the the chance to attend the most recent one. Both as speaker and as attendee. I was invited by General Assembly, the exclusive workshop provider of Web Summit 2014, to deliver a few lectures. That means I didn't pay for the ticket. Hence I might be biased. Therefore please take my feedback with a grain of salt.

Web Summit is just another company with great mission that suffers from growing too fast. When you talk to Paddy, you can feel his undeniable passion to organise the best conference, use the best of technology in order to help people network. He has an impressive attention to detail and braveness to improve things that most event organisers relentlessly ignore.

Yet, with success comes responsibility. Responsibility to take care of employees, stakeholders and since it's a for-profit company, to make profit. Unlike other event organisers, I personally think that he did what he could in Dublin. Maybe he forgot a little how it is to be a startup and that their over-the-top marketing claims leave a bitter after-taste. What Paddy created out of nothing is without a doubt nothing short of impressive and exceptional. I can only hope that he is wise enough to learn from their feedback and find the right balance between 'profitable' and 'helpful'. Having spent decent time talking to him, I can tell he does genuinely care and wants to help. I am hopeful that he will course-correct and keep improving and providing great value. Because startups deserve it!

It would not be fair to not mention these fun facts:

Marian Gazdik is Managing Director at Startup Grind in Europe and regularly interviews successful entrepreneurs and influential business figures. He mentors at Virgin Startup, lectures at General Assembly and writes about business on Virgin.com. Follow Marian on Twitter.|||

