Ever wondered if a remote team could supercharge your startup’s productivity and software quality? Here’s 5 ways remote teams do just that:

In a remote team, you simply don’t have an option to micro-manage your team.

Why? Because you almost certainly won’t be in the same time zone as every person and, even if you are, you probably won’t be in the same room.

But, more important than not being able to micro-manage, is realizing you shouldn’t.

Enable and empower your team to work towards their goals as well as your company’s goals, by using autonomous systems like:

You’ll find more work gets done and your team members are more happy. It’s win-win.

Why asynchronous communication? Transparency and flexibility (plus Github think it’s awesome!).

A unique challenge of being in a remote team is that face-to-face conversations aren’t as easy to have. This is because you have time zones and work environments that get in the way (e.g. coffee shop chatter).

This ‘challenge’ naturally drives teams towards communicating asynchronously and, when executed properly, can lead to an overall higher quality in team communication.

Take for example, integrating an instant messaging tool with your project management tool (e.g. Slack and Blossom). Every update on your project board can be sent straight through to your instant messaging tool, so no matter what time zone you’re in, you can see what everyone is up to.

Visualizing work helps teams identify bottlenecks. The great thing about remote teams is that they need to use a tool to manage their work. And most modern project management tools provide useful insights like the ones mentioned above above.

Unless you’re in an industry specific hub, like San Francisco for tech, the best talent is probably not at your doorstep, or even in your country.

The ubiquity of technology and the scalability of startups makes it possible to hire globally and for people to work from anywhere. This result of this is two-fold:

Imagine your product development stopped because a specific team member was away for the day. Not too great, is it? Let’s multiply this ten-fold by adding geographical barriers. Eep…

Remote teams use agile software processes such as continuous integration and continuous delivery to ensure code can be tested and deployed to customers, automatically. To boot, this shift the power of testing and delivery to developers. And the glue that holds this all together is source code management. That’s because it makes an otherwise messy process, quite simple.

Let’s look at an example process.

This enables teams to ship software to their customers multiple times a day, wow!

As you can see, a well formed remote team can perform better than most co-located teams out there. And not only that, your software quality will benefit from it.|||

Ever wondered if a remote team could supercharge your startup’s productivity and software quality? Here’s 5 ways remote teams do just that.