Although Bitcoin is slowly gaining mainstream acceptance (also among banks), financial regulatory authorities is reluctant to accept this fact. Bitcoin is still perceived as a threat to the existing payment systems that must be closely monitored. Especially skeptical is the European Banking Authority (EBA), a regulatory agency of the European Union that provides advice to EU institutions in the areas of banking, payments and e-money regulation. In December 2013, EBA issued a warning to make consumers aware of a series of risks deriving from holding or trading in virtual currencies. It identified the following risks:

In July 2014, EBA published an official opinion on virtual currency addressed to the EU and national supervisory institutions. It concluded that the risks associated with the use of virtual currency clearly outweigh the benefits. To address and mitigate those risks, a substantial regulatory regime is necessary. Such a regime would need to cover governance requirements for several market participants, the segregation of client accounts, capital requirements and, most importantly, the creation of "scheme governing authorities" accountable for the integrity of a particular virtual currency scheme and its key components, including its protocol and transaction ledger. As long as no such regime is in place, the best way to mitigate those risks is to discourage financial institutions from buying, holding or selling virtual currencies.

The proposed requirements for a regulatory regime (especially the "scheme governing authorities") are difficult to reconcile with the concept of decentralized anonymous virtual currencies traded over peer-to-peer networks. While it is clear that virtual currencies should be subject to some regulation (for example, with regard to consumer protection), it does not seem possible to subject them to the same rules as those applicable to fiat currencies that are issued and supervised by national governments. It remains to be seen whether (and how) non-traditional virtual currencies will be incorporated into the traditional financial sector.|||

Although Bitcoin is slowly gaining mainstream acceptance (also among banks),  financial regulatory authorities is reluctant to accept this fact.