You’ve contributed to making our lives absolutely amazing thanks to the startups you’ve funded.

Algolia — makes our Product Hunt searches phenomenally fast.Meldium — remembers all our passwords that we (I) forget daily. Zapier– helps our startup run until our product is complete. The Daily Muse — allows us to reach a massive audience when I write for it. Stripe — processes all of our payments. Airbnb — provides me with infinite options as we consider moving to SF. RescueTime — keeps our productivity in check.

And then of course, there’s hundreds more — Dropbox, Zenefits, Reddit, Wufoo, Scribd, Rapportive… the list of startups you’ve funded that make people’s lives better is endless.

So congratulations on breaking ground in the investing world! It’s got to be a great feeling to know that of the 8 billion-dollar startups to be created in an accelerator all 8 came out of YC. Hats off to you, YC, on your continued ability to spot the most formidable founders with the biggest ideas.

I can only imagine that selecting your next batch of determined founders with billion-dollar ideas without missing a beat serving your current batch of YC-founders is an issue high on your radar screen; and so, we want to help you make one less difficult decision.

You don’t know us at all, and so there’s no way to say this without sounding creepy, so we’ll just say it… We want to sit with you.

That’s the good news. The bad news is we’re not exactly sure how to get your attention without annoying the shit out of you and that scares the shit out of us. Because if we don’t sit with you right now, we have this feeling we’ll never get to sit with you ever.

I don’t know what you’re going to think of us, but I can tell you why you should waste a leap of faith on the likes of us. This has got to count for something, right?

Call me. Or text me maybe? (954–540–9211)|||

(cc: Sam Altman, Jessica Livingston, Paul Graham, Michael Seibel, Kevin Hale, Garry Tan, Geoff Ralston, Alexis Ohanian, Justin Kan, Dalton Caldwell) Algolia — makes our Product Hunt searches…