In this post we are going to discuss about some of the best source code editors for developers. There are a lot of text editors available, some of them offers every possible feature the developers can think of and some offers only limited functionality.Sublime Text Editor is one of the best text editor in recent times, it is well known name amongst developers. It is a cross-platform text and source code editor. According to Sublime Text, it is a sophisticated text editor for code, markup and prose. You'll love the slick user interface, extraordinary features and amazing performance. It has features like GoTo Anything, Multiple Selection. Split Editing, Instant Project Switch, Cross Platform etc.Notepad++ is a free source code editor that supports a lot of language. It is written in C++ and uses pure Win32 API and STL which ensures higher execution speed and smaller program size. The features of Notepad++ includes Syntax Highlighting and Syntax Folding, User Defined Syntax Highlighting and Folding, Auto-completion, Multi-Document and Multi-View and Macro recording and playback.ATPad is a simple Notepad replacement written in pure C and Windows AP. Keeping simplicity of Notepad it provides many additional features like Full customizable editor, Tabbed Environment, Lined numbering, Word Wrapping, List of recently open documents, Bookmarks, Sending documents via email, etc.Komodo Edit is the free and open source version of well known Komodo IDE (http://komodoide.com/). It has features like auto-complete & Calltips. Multiple Selections. Track Changes, Projects & Places Manager etc. It does not supports all the features of the paid version but it is good enough to do all the basic stuff.Crimson Editor is a professional source code editor for Windows. While it can serve as a good replacement for Notepad, it also offers many powerful features for programming languages such as HTML, C/C++, Perl and Java. This program is not only fast in loading time, but also small in size.jEdit is Programmer's Text Editor. It is a mature programmer's text editor with hundreds of person-years of developing time. It is written in java so it runs on MAC, Unix, VMS and Windows. It has features like Auto indent,syntax highlighting for more than 200 languages and supports a large number of charavter encoding including UTF8 and Unicode.If you know any other Source Code Editors please do comment. Please Like and Share the CodingDefined.com Blog, if you find it interesting and helpful.|||

In this post we are going to discuss about some of the best source code editors for developers. There are a lot of text editors available, some of them offers every possible feature the developers can think of and some offers only limited functionality.