ROSELAND, NJ, Oct 06, 2015 (Marketwired via COMTEX) -- A typical large company today operates more than 60 separate applications to manage payroll and HR-related processes*, causing complexity and data gaps due to lack of integration. ADP launched its Marketplace one year ago as a cloud-based "one-stop-shop" where employers can access and purchase HR applications and integrate their employee data between solutions, all through a single, secure sign on. In just its first year, the ADP Marketplace has grown to include over 70 apps.

"One of the ways ADP is making real on its tag line of a more human resource, is by making HR data more readily accessible and usable, while still keeping a focus on security and compliance," said Barbara McGann, EVP at HfS Research. "The doorway to the data, insight and integration is the recently launched ADP Marketplace, which houses APIs and applications for HR and IT professionals, and clients and partners to access. If you are an HR professional or business using ADP, Marketplace advantages include pre-approved integration with third-party software and increasing insight to your workforce."

In conjunction with its one-year anniversary, the ADP Marketplace won two prestigious designations by Human Resource Executive Magazine: 'Top HR Product of the Year' and 'Awesome New Technology,' both of which will be awarded at the upcoming HR Technology Conference on October 19 in Las Vegas.

Several companies that partnered with ADP and joined the ADP Marketplace over the past year have already seen success:

"As an innovator, ADP is living its values by building an open marketplace where partners can benefit mutual customers," said Eric Mosley, CEO of Globoforce. "Being a part of the ADP Marketplace gives us an opportunity to be discovered by many different types of companies globally. It's also bringing together leading companies within HR to help build stronger, more human workplaces and cultures around the world.

"Business owners and HR leaders are always asking for ways to simplify and improve the human capital management (HCM) experience, both for managers and employees. The early success and strong pipeline of interest in the ADP Marketplace validates the concept of an HCM one-stop-shop," said Don Weinstein, senior vice president of product management, ADP. "We're helping developers create the most innovative HCM apps by releasing our APIs. We're helping HR solutions providers gain exposure for their apps. Most importantly, we're providing employers with data and tools to manage of all their workforce needs and enhance the HR experience for their employees."

*From the 2015 ADP Research Institute study: Harnessing Big Data: The Human Capital Management Journey to Achieving Business Growth

About ADP ADP, +0.74% Powerful technology plus a human touch. Companies of all types and sizes around the world rely on ADP's cloud software and expert insights to help unlock the potential of their people. HR. Talent. Benefits. Payroll. Compliance. Working together to build a better workforce. For more information, visit ADP.com.

The ADP logo and ADP are registered trademarks of ADP, LLC. All other marks are the property of their respective owners. Copyright Copyright 2015 ADP, LLC.|||

