For some, "surge pricing," the use of algorithms to automate price increases on products and services in periods of high demand and limited supply, adheres to a basic principle of the free market economy. Others see it as a form of price gouging. Regardless of your point of view, the use of surge pricing appears likely to increase as a growing number of companies in the on-demand economy test its application.

Uber has received the most media attention for its use of surge pricing. The taxi alternative company claims the technique helps to improve customer service levels. According to its site, "At times of high demand, the number of drivers we can connect you with becomes limited. As a result, prices increase to encourage more drivers to become available."

But some are having trouble swallowing that rationale. An app called Cut the Surge, claims to be able to predict Uber's rate for the upcoming hour. If a warning of a surge comes up on the Uber app, Cut the Surge will tell you when you can expect rates to return to normal.

Another company, , claims that surge pricing may be the answer for diners looking for a table at restaurants where it is next to impossible to get a reservation. The table management company recently began testing its Premium Reservations service. According to the site, OpenTable diners have told the company that they are "willing to pay for last-minute, prime-time reservations at popular restaurants."

Many on the BrainTrust of industry insiders at RetailWire indicated in an online discussion last week that they see surge pricing catching on in other industries, but cautioned that the practice could do serious damage to customer loyalty.

"Judging by the bad feelings associated with Uber's surge pricing and the amount of similar competitors who publicize their lack of surge pricing as an added benefit ... I can't see surge pricing becoming the new normal," said Zel Bianco, president and CEO of Interactive Edge. "At the moment surge pricing just seems to drive your customers to the competition."

"I think it's definitely on the increase, but how effective it will be as it scales in popularity still remains to be seen," said Ryan Mathews, CEO of Black Monk Consulting. "There is a point where even the most profligate consumer will balk at the idea of paying a ridiculous premium for the right to spend their money."|||

Regardless of your opinion on surge pricing, its use appears likely to increase as a growing number of companies including Uber and OpenTable test its application.