My co-founder, Karl, and I both grew up on the streets of Oakland. We’ve seen robberies, car jackings and gunfights. Drug dealers would hide their stash of crack rocks in our mailbox when police cars roamed around. This was normal.

We learned to read dangerous situations. We learned to hustle. We learned to appreciate life. There were many times we could have went down the wrong path. But our support system was strong and we both graduated from UC Berkeley.

Karl went on to work at Google and I went to Yahoo. That was more success than anyone could ask for. So we rolled the dice again and started Good Audience. We drew from the experience of non-traditional business people to grow our company. They don’t teach you this stuff in business school.

I’ve never seen any other business generate such a huge demand for their product. I asked the neighborhood drug lord, “How?” He says, “You want a free hit? The first one is on me. You’ll feel great!”

I obviously declined, but there were a few lessons at play here. This guy pitched me on how his product (crack) will fix my problem (life in the hood.) He’s a salesman, a good one, and even offered make sure I receive value from it before taking any money.

Being stupid teenagers, we had to deal with cops. It amazes me how quickly they can jump into a situation, read it, and act. They are always making decisions without all the data laid out.

We applied this kind of decision making process at our company. We often have to make decisions and live with it. Much better than being paralyzed by indecisiveness.

I had a friend who didn’t finish high school because he had a baby. He immediately went to get a job. The mentality was to do whatever it takes to make sure the family didn’t go hungry.

The hard work, the sacrifice, and the grind made a big impact on me. I always make sure the Good Audience family is fed =) I’m not afraid to get my hands dirty to accomplish that.

Good Audience wants to meet and invest in hungry, driven and hard-working hustlers. We want to expose you to opportunities and be the support system that we were lucky enough to have.

We’re hiring across the board in engineering, design, sales, marketing and customer happiness. We’re changing the world one line of code, one pixel, one email, one campaign and one customer at a time.|||

My co-founder, Karl, and I both grew up on the streets of Oakland. We’ve seen robberies, car jackings and gunfights. Drug dealers would hide their stash of crack rocks in our mailbox when police cars…