When it comes to business organization and putting things into its rightful context, it’s very important to understand the various methods of preparation, planning and management available out there to pick the most adequate for your needs.

Having a knowledge basis of all the options will help improving your chances of success, especially when it comes to the Kanban vs Scrum debate!

So, what are the similarities and differences between Kanban and Scrum?

If you’re set on figuring out which alternative suits your needs best, these are the biggest philosophical differences among Kanban vs Scrum:

The epic Kanban vs Scrum battle is heavily marked by their differences, but what you’ll most likely hear is that Scrum, through its detailed descriptions and strong set rules is a very good alternative for project management, for it allows thorough planning from the early steps of a new project, while Kanban is the way to go when it comes to task and process management, with its simple, easy to understand structure and rules.

Kanban, as a task management tool, can be highly beneficial for teams using Scrum, since Kanban Boards offer a simple and practical way to visualize the way work is flowing during your sprints (without the need for greater chances). It also helps with limiting the work in progress, resulting in shorter lead times and higher productivity.

It can take some time to get used to the changes both of these systems bring alongside with them, as well as a lot of beforehand planning.

Try Pipefy! We help companies keep organised and more productive by running their processes and day-by-day routines on an easy and intuitive tool, making them leave in the past inefficient manual forms, spreadsheets and email threads.

Pipefy’s Task Management Template was specially developed to help you manage yours and your team’s tasks without breaking a sweat. This template shows you in an organised and simplified manner what everyone is currently doing, what they have to do, and what is already done.

It also highlights what are the priorities, what’s on time, what’s late and what’s potentially creating bottlenecks.|||

Find out the main features of both and make a well informed decision of which alternative is best for you in the battle of Kanban vs Scrum.