This lose-lose scenario is only possible under the taxi medallion system, a regulatory scheme in which the right to operate a taxi is thoroughly divorced from the actual work of driving one. It’s a classic example of the perils of financialization, the process through which economic potential is turned into a liquid and leveraged asset. By converting a portion of cabbies’ future revenue into a freely tradable asset, New York, Chicago, San Francisco, and a host of other cities have created a powerful investor class, medallion owners and financiers, whose interests routinely compete with those of drivers and passengers.

“Compete” may be the wrong word, however, since owners of the aluminum placards don’t have much experience with losing. Over the last decade, their victories have driven the price of a medallion from around $200,000 to more than $1 million in New York. Medallion owners from Boston to San Francisco have been similarly fortunate, with medallions in Chicago appreciating even faster than the sustained 16 percent per year gains seen in New York.

Studies have even drawn a link between the medallion system and crummy cab service, which might seem far-fetched until you consider that drivers begin each 12-hour shift owing as much as $130 to their leasing company. If you were spending half your shift just trying to break even, you’d employ bat-out-of-hell driving tactics and tell rush-hour Manhattan fares that you didn't know where Queens was, too.

Things weren't always this way. When New York City first issued taxi medallions in 1937, they were just licenses, worth $150 in today’s terms. In the years after, life was pretty good for cabbies, as it was for many low-skill employees in postwar America. Some drivers owned their cabs. The rest were unionized employees who worked on commission and received a full slate of employee benefits.

All that began to change in 1979. That year, New York’s Taxi and Limousine Commission changed its rules to allow medallions to be leased out for 12-hour shifts, making cabdrivers “independent contractors” under federal labor laws. The move cost such drivers their benefits, but the real fallout was far more profound. Even for medallion owners who operated their own taxi fleets, the economic value of the right to pick up fares was now severed from the value of actually doing so.

Under a medallion lease, the medallion owner has a constant stream of income. Drivers are the ones who suffer when gas prices rise or a cab gets stuck in traffic—they’ve still got to make their daily lease payments. More importantly, New York’s tight limits on the number of medallions in circulation has suppressed the supply of cabs. There are 13,237 medallions now outstanding, a few hundred fewer than in 1937, but a huge supply of drivers competing to lease them.

Restricted supply makes for high medallion prices, and that in turn leads to consolidation in the industry. Only around 18 percent of cabs are owner-operated, putting most medallions in the hands of big taxi fleets or brokers who simply rent them out. The limited number of shifts and oversupply of drivers looking to work means that the fleets only rent out cabs by the shift, the shortest term, most profitable way possible.

While owners and financiers thrive, drivers are having a harder and harder time. Though figures for driver earnings are hard to come by and vary widely, shortly after the most recent fare raise in 2006, a report [Page 36] from an independent consulting company found that drivers’ take-home pay for a 12-hour shift averaged $158. (Last year the NYTWA calculated it at $96.) By all accounts, it’s slipped since.

The principal reason for drivers’ diminished fortunes is that every time taxi drivers ask for a fare raise to cover increased operating costs, the medallion owners’ trade association tries to come along for the ride. Known as the Metropolitan Taxi Board of Trade, the organization has been remarkably successful at convincing the Taxi and Limousine Commission to give them a cut of any fare hikes.

In 2004, the last time the TLC increased fares across the board, drivers got a 26 percent fare increase and MTBT secured an 8 percent [Page 36] increase in the lease rate. In 1996, the commission signed off on a 20 percent fare increase and a 14 percent [Section3.8] boost for lease rates. This time around, taxi drivers have asked for a 20 percent hike in fares. How much would the MTBT like to increase lease rates? Why, it thinks 20 percent is only fair.

Unfortunately, there’s not much to show for those good intentions. While medallion owners have dexterously used the courts to block policies contrary to their interest, no one is seriously proposing to overhaul the system that gives them so much power. Even Yassky has reassured investors that change is not on the way. "Nobody would do anything that disrupts the function of the taxi marketplace," he announced in a Bloomberg TV interview.

Such inertia is an inherent trait of the medallion system, it appears. In 2009, Washington D.C., considered legislation to implement a medallion system and asked its finance office to study how it worked in other jurisdictions. Three months later, the finance office issued a report that helped killed the medallion proposal. In every city D.C. looked at with medallions, the quality of service went down and owners earned windfall profits at the expense of drivers and passengers.|||

When New York’s Taxi and Limousine Commission held a public hearing last week to consider whether to raise taxi fares by 20 percent, cabdrivers pled po ...