I’ve been using Uber for quite a while now and one of the things that always turns me off is seeing that little blue lightning. Living in New York City, that little lightning meant I have to hail a cab. The smelly, inconvenient alternative to Uber (that also requires tipping).

All that ended a few months ago when I randomly stumbled on an interesting pattern Uber uses to increase revenue.

I was heading out to meet a friend and was running late. Normal for a Saturday evening for me. I opened the Uber app and saw the blue little lightning. I was almost ready to actually give in and accept the higher rates when I saw the “Notify me when surge drops” button. I’m pretty sure it wasn’t new, but I hadn’t noticed it before. I was curious, so I tapped it and waited.

Two whole minutes went by and I started looking for a yellow cab. Just as I spotted one a block down I got a notification from Uber that surge pricing has ended in my area. Success! I was excited, thinking I’m so lucky. I requested my Uber and got to my destination comfortably and quickly thanks to Robert, who drove his Lincoln Navigator like a fighter pilot.

A few weeks after, I stumbled into surge territory again. Given my previous experience, I hit the magical “notify me” button and was about to hail a taxi. Luck can’t strike twice in a row, right? Oh, it did! Three minutes later, almost exactly, the rates dropped back for my area.

I like finding patterns, and this was starting to seem like one, so over the last month or so I purposely tried to request Uber’s during surge times, and every time I had the exact same experience.

I doubt I’m lucky enough to have this happen randomly more than 10 rides in a row.

The laws of supply and demand state that when there’s more demand than supply, prices increase. Uber has visibility into both supply and demand, and takes advantage of that insight with surge rates.

But with the notification feature, Uber has even more visibility into the demand side. By requesting to be notified, we’re essentially telling Uber we’re a sure ride if the rate was right.

Using this knowledge, I believe Uber then gives the requester some time to stew. Three is a great number of minutes to wait — long enough so that the process doesn’t feel automated, but not too long so that they find an alternative ride.

I don’t have any direct knowledge that this is what Uber does, so at this point it’s no more than speculation based on around 25 rides. It’s worked for me every time I tried and I hope it also works for you.

FYI — As a rider this might seem unfair, but I’ll bet you surge pricing is adding a ton to Uber’s bottom line.|||

I’ve been using Uber for quite a while now and one of the things that always turns me off is seeing that little blue lightning. Living in New York City, that little lightning meant I have to hail a…