Sales success tactics is all about how to acquire more customers and grow the revenue or profit each customer brings into the business. One of the biggest challenges facing sales management is how do they increase the sales selling time. Sales people need to be active in productive sales actions like lead generation, lead nurturing, social selling and closing deals and not dragged into time spent on status updates to the sales process.

Sales management need to be crystal clear to ensure sales success and be clearly able to answer the number 1 sales question – what sales activities do you want me to do? as it not only defines what sales people are expected to do but also the recruitment process. Lets take a step back before trying to answering this question and ask yourself “what does selling activity mean in your business?”.  Is your primary sales activity definition time spent on lead generation, prospecting or maybe lead nurturing (if you supply leads via marketing activity) , is it sales, new customer acquisition or new deals closed. Real sales success tactics comes from a clearly defined definition and process for what sales activity you want the sales force to prioritize.

The world and activity of the sales person is changing rapidly. Now the main sales channel for lots of companies is via inside sales. Terms like social selling,inbound marketing automation, sales force automation, customer success agent and the systems supporting the sales process have gotten increasingly more complex. Sales leadership have to ask the hard question, despite all the new sales tools has the actual selling time by the sales team become less important than the sales process?. Some research into selling techniques now show that sales people and sales management focus more time updating the sales process metrics than actual selling time. Maybe its time to go back to basics and create more time to get the sales team selling!

In the era of big data and data driven sales models, the sales process in lots of companies has become complex and even less efficient in the quest for information. The outcome of this has seen downward pressure on the rate sales forces can acquire customers, reduced sales productivity and as already stated shifting the sales thrust from selling time to sales process time.

Surely one of the aims of sales leadership is to maximize the core selling time, lead generation and relationship building activities of the sales team. This may sound rather obvious to any sales leader, however the reality is that the drive for data insights and sales reports can be polar opposites to the rise of complexity in the sales process. Be ware the sales teams that can over time slip comfortable into being great sales up-daters versus being great sales winners. Every business has to understand and clarify the scope of their sales team activities along with minimizing the various inefficiencies in the sales process.

As a great sales leader once stated “There are thousands of ways to kill a sale but only a few ways to win one”. A few examples of ways to kill a sale include not chasing up on calls, not following up on customer requests, lack of needs understanding, not establishing a customer connection, chasing the deal too early, not recognizing the real decision makers etc. Most if not all of these can be identified by sales management and addressed with sales training so with some practice they can be solved.

However the true sales killers to sales success are the issues that hide beneath the surface that all too many companies and sales managers do not realize they exist.  We call these “sales weaknesses” in the sales process which when combined with sales peoples own activity preferences can act like heavy weights dragging down the sales efforts and end results.

The work of aligning sales activities with the undoubted need for the sales process takes effort. Due to the hunger for data and systems, sales leadership or marketing can be reluctant to change existing sales habits.  Sales managers, marketing and even CEO’s need to overcome the common fear re-prioritizing the sales activities will somehow impact sales revenue or data insights. All stake holders in the sales and marketing process including finance must work together to prioritize the expected sales activities from the sales force. Next, sales success transformations means someone taking the lead to get the senior management from across the company to sit down, share data, and discuss what are the prioritizes for the sales process. The switch to sales success tactics is about sales leadership es overriding any internal concerns, seeing the bigger customer picture while ensure the focus is shifted to the best solutions that will boost sales time with customers regardless of the past.

 Note of caution; moving the sales focus and sales teams activities may mean having to change the roles people are expected to fulfill will change.

The quest in winning back the time spent on sales activities requires constant appraisal. The growth of data driven multi channel marketing can put pressure to add non-selling activities into the sales teams day. Not to mention that old habits die hard and chip away at selling time. Watch for the sales persons fallback response when a customer needs a quick answer to something, they will revert back to dropping everything and diving in, even when a well mapped out sales support process in place to handle any issue faster and better. The new mantra for sales success has to be “A sales persons time is better utilized selling.”

A good example of sales success tactics was a SaaS company who set aggressive targets for sales revenue by providing the sales team with some social selling lead generation tools so they did not need to spend time looking for prospects  By combining more aggressive sales targets with time saving sales tools forced the sales team to adopt to the change in sales focus. Sales success became self-reinforcing: the more time they spent selling the better they performed at sales .

Get the right sales person connected to the customer at the right time.

The buyers journey has changed, they now seek out information on the social networks, they are more influenced in the buying process by reviews, peer discussions, white papers and industry engagement so companies ought to consider restructuring  their sales coverage model meaning defining the sales roles differently. Some questions sales leaders should be asking are; how to include social selling in the sales activity, how much lead generation versus lead nurturing; do you require sales specialists by product or industry; whether to specific sales people to serve certain sales channels or customer segments.

Part of sales success tactics is clearly defining when to hunt for new customers and when to mine deeper within existing customers. Today, too many sales people take refuge in serving their current customer base without committing to upside, so one initial step is to goal them to mine the largest customers to their full potential. That said, the life blood of any business is acquiring and developing new customers.

With more sales channels to reach customers, sales leadership needs to ensure an effective coverage that is deliberate in its direction on what sales resource is focused on customer acquisition and in what channels. Sales managers should meet regularly with sales people involved with new customer sales activity to understand and  refine the target prospects. To lend weight to the strategic value of acquiring new customers, sales people should receive a compensation for breaking into new accounts.

Whether social selling, nurturing, hunting or retention, it’s critical to get the mix and sequence of sales skills and specialists in correct balance. Also never ignore a sales stream because just because there is no sales expertise to cover the area, find someone with the sales skills to target that customer or market segment.

Lastly, the sales profession needs to get excited about selling and sales success, yes the sales channels are evolving and the route to reaching a customer has changed but new customer conversations will always have a priority. Sales activity that involves building and expanding customer relationships is more important that updating the CRM system.  So when a sales person asks “what do you want me to do? you say say, let me tell you.|||

Sales success tactics is all about how to acquire more customers and grow the revenue or profit each customer brings into the business. One of the biggest challenges facing sales management is how do they increase the sales selling time.