Let’s face it: Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 5 wasn’t quite the return to console skateboarding glory we were all hoping for – instead of a next-gen retro flashback, all we got was a game that just looked too retro, with glitches galore, an inconsistent frame rate and horrible texture pop-in. That’s not to say skateboarding games are down and out for the count, though. As if to remind the world of its existence, EA cut the price off all its Skate games on Xbox Live just in time for the launch of Pro Skater 5, and it got us wondering. The Skate franchise has been MIA for five years, but is fondly remembered by fans: now looks like the perfect time for the publisher to step up its game and unleash Skate 4 on the world. If EA can resurrect Mirror’s Edge, why not Skate too?

Bigger and bolder than ever before The Skate series has seen us carving up two different fictional cities over the course of three games: each instalment has seen the environments change, grow and break out in a rash of obstacles and street spots. Of course, Skate 4 needs to go huge and either include all the locations we’ve seen before in one big combination, or a brand new city needs to be the central sticking point, showcasing the power of the Xbox One and PlayStation 4, and truly leaving the past titles in the dirt – as well as THPS5. We’ve already seen that both consoles can offer huge, sprawling worlds, such as the vast world of The Witcher 3 or GTA V’s San Andreas. We’ve often wanted to grab a board and skate down the Vespucci Beach boardwalk, but Skate 4 would need some huge landmarks and spots to hit. Skate 2 proved that some of the best spots to skate were just huge drop-in locations that looked death-defying. THPS5’s map builder isn’t enough – we want a huge level the size of a city created by world-class game designers. The controls need to be fine-tuned from great to perfection

Skate’s underlying control scheme for busting out kickflips and tricks is the right analogue stick. Flicking that stick with your thumb will let you nail a 360 flip or a heelflip in a satisfying way that doesn’t require a lot of learning, but it does require a lot of time and dedication if you want to know exactly how to get every trick dialed down. Throw that in with different triggers for modifiers and flicking it in reverse for nollie tricks and you’ve got a great control scheme already – but it’s not perfect. There are only so many different ways you can throw the analogue stick, and there are only a few different modifiers with the shoulder and face buttons, so before you know it, you’re cramping up your hands trying to get one specific trick just right. EA can rebuild on its control scheme, keeping the solid flick-it controls, but refining just about everything else. Getting off the board needs to be seamless

While the latest Tony Hawk game is being lambasted for its ridiculous physics-defying glitches, EA’s franchise isn’t quite so innocent either (just press play above). But it looks like a lot of those have to do with when you’re off your board, which was introduced in Skate 2, but always felt awkward and stiff right from the start. The next version of Skate – if we ever see one – could be even better just by letting you step off your board effortlessly. Make it feel as fluid and natural as say, Grand Theft Auto V, so we can run up that hill the size of Mount Chiliad and head all the way down on wheels. Each Skate game added in plenty of new tricks with each iteration – remember Skate 3’s darkslides and underflips? – but flatland skating always felt like an afterthought. Ace technical tricks like casper slides, truckstands, spins and primo slides would be incredible additions to the series, and would ratchet up the difficulty for veterans seeking a challenge. Sure, we might run out of buttons and key combinations to make that work, but we’d gladly take some stylish tricks to help make our edits look as gnarly as possible.

Make the best in-game video editor since the Rockstar Editor Part of the franchise’s appeal has always been the built-in video editor that you could use to make quick short edits of your best tricks. Rockstar rolled out its Editor in Grand Theft Auto V, which takes video editing on consoles to a new level, and we’d love to see EA unwrap something similar in the next Skate title, giving you even more editing options, more camera angles, different lenses, and more. Throw in a pivotal online mode to collaborate with friends and it could be the greatest skating game ever.

Online should be like a MMO The Skate series has always had a semblance of story, but it’s never been the strongest portion of any of the games. We’d rather see EA take a page from Bungie’s book on Destiny and give you a vast, interactive world where you’re one of many skaters trying to make your mark on the city. Make your way from zero to hero and use your influence for the better in the wide world among your peers. Form crews with your pals, throw down PVP challenges like S.K.A.T.E or tag, and upgrade your board as you progress. Several months ago, Tony Hawk told us he wanted to make Pro Skater 5 the Minecraft for action sports, but Skate 4 could aim even higher: why not be the World of Warcraft for it instead? While each progressive Tony Hawk became progressively more and more bonkers, the Skate series has been rather well grounded, with only a slight increase in craziness throughout each title. That needs to stay, as the approach felt pretty much refreshing and suited the tone of the game itself. Skateboarding is already pushing the boundaries and we don’t need to see ridiculous, over the top antics like exploding heads. Keep it well grounded, consistent and, with a few laughs here and there, you’re on to something that’ll please pretty much everyone.

Skate 3 introduced a park editor that allowed you to make skateable areas you could only dream of, but it took a lot of time to really get the hang of. We’d love to see a new park editor added into the next iteration, giving you plenty of freedom to make exactly what you want and allowing for easier controls and plenty of complexity. So our ideal Skate 4 online multiplayer utopia lets you throw down across an entire city with players from all over the world. It follows, then, that you need to be able to personalise your player in depth, right? When it comes to character creation, the Skate games have been a fairly mixed bag, letting you customise certain aspects, but not with the same amount of complexity you’ll see in other EA games like Dragon Age: Inquisition. Aside from plenty of branded T-shirts, shirts and jeans, we’d prefer to be able to modify our base character a lot more before diving into accessorising and improving the ability to import your own designs would be a boon, too. Of course, this goes without saying, but while previous Skate games have got plenty of gameplay mechanics locked down tight, some aspects never looked that pretty – and they suffered from a few frame rate drops, too. We’d love to see a full HD title running at 60 frames per second with improved graphics, better character models and plenty of environments we can interact with. It’s a next-gen skateboarding title, and we don’t want to see another THPS5 crush more of our digital skating dreams.|||

After Tony Hawk’s Pro glitch fest, we want Skate 4 more than ever: here’s what EA needs to include.