The microblogging site on Tuesday said its new curation feature, officially called 'Moments,' is now rolling out to users in the U.S. across the iPhone, Android and the Web. product manager Madhu Muthukumar said in a post that Moments is a way to see the "best of what's happening on in an instant." The tool packages full-bleed images, autoplay videos, GIFs and Vines into a continuous story based around a live event, cultural meme or interesting conversation on Twitter. Tapping on a lightning bolt tab in the app takes users to a continually-updated list of Moments highlighted by Twitter's curation team. Users can also find additional moments by tapping on topic pages such as entertainment or sports. While aspects of the feature are designed specifically for following live events, the tool also allows users to view Moments from the past few days.

Twitter first spoke publically about its plans for the feature in June. The new feature will likely please investors who have been eager for Twitter to reverse months of sagging user growth by simplifying the product and making it more appealing to the general population. Twitter's new CEO Jack Dorsey said on a conference call on Monday announcing his appointment that he has been laser-focused on building a company-wide product roadmap and launching products faster and with more discipline. Dorsey said yesterday that Project Lightning would be launching soon and that the company plans to launch a host of bold product changes this year and next.

"Moments helps you find the best of Twitter as easily as tapping an icon – regardless of who you follow," Muthukumar said in the post. "Just visit the new tab called Moments, where you will discover stories unfolding on Twitter."

The majority of Moments currently are created by Twitter's curation and editing team. Twitter is also allowing a select group of partners including Bleacher Report, Buzzfeed, Entertainment Weekly, Fox News, Getty Images, Mashable, MLB, NASA, the New York Times, Vogue and Washington Post to publish Moments on the app. The microblogging site said it plans to expand Moments to additional partners in the future.

"The Twitter community continually surprises us with wonderful storytelling and creativity, so we look forward to seeing new and exciting uses of Moments from more partners soon," Muthukumar said.

Moments are frequently updated as new tweets and content become available. A blue dot in the upper right hand corner of a Moment indicates that the story has been updated since the user first viewed it. Users can also follow Moments focused on live events, such as sports games or awards shows, which sends tweets from the Moment automatically into the user's timeline so the user doesn't have to tap back and forth between tabs.

When a user clicks on a Moment, they'll first see a title and description page. Tapping once gives the users a fuller view of the tweet, which the user can then retweet or favorite. Tapping twice lets the user immediately favorite the tweet. A bar at the bottom of the Moment shows how far the user is into the story. Swiping up or down lets the user exit the Moment and go back to the guide, and the end of a Moment includes a share button, which users can tweet to their followers with a comment.

Although the feature for now is only available within the app in the U.S., users outside of the U.S. are able to view Moments that have been included as links in tweets, direct message or embedded elsewhere online. Twitter said it plans to roll out the feature to more countries in the coming weeks and months.

Follow me on Twitter @kchaykowski and e-mail me at kchaykowski@forbes.com.|||

Twitter's code-named 'Project Lightning' feature is finally here. The microblogging site on Tuesday said its new curation feature, officially called 'Moments,' is now rolling out to users in the U.S. across the iPhone, Android and the Web. Twitter product manager Madhu Muthukumar said in a post that Moments is a way to see the "best of what's happening on Twitter in an instant." The tool packages full-bleed images, autoplay videos, GIFs and Vines into a continuous story based around a live event, cultural meme or interesting conversation on Twitter. Tapping on a lightning blot tab in the app takes users to a continually-updated list of Moments highlighted by Twitter's curation team. Users can also find additional moments by tapping on topic pages such as entertainment or sports. While aspects of the feature are designed specifically for following live events, the tool also allows users to view Moments from the past few days.