You know her. She walks into a room and most, if not all, heads turn to stare.

The whispers hum as she goes by each table. Some are sweet as honey but many are as poisonous as a snake’s venom.

“Who the heck does she think she is?”

The funny thing is, she is not necessarily the most beautiful flower God has planted on this Earth. There are women in that room who, if they stood next to her, would make her look like the twin sister of the ugly duckling. What differentiates her though, puts her a head above the rest, is her sense of self. And that is the very thing that gets her labelled “high maintenance” “bitch,” and names too distasteful to write here.

Just about every woman hate her and an equal amount of men want her. Not all.

Have you ever been on a date, maybe a couple, and the person never calls you again? Ever had a relationship end and the person ending it told you that you are “too high maintenance?” What exactly did they mean?

According to the Urban Dictionary, the most popular understanding and usage of the term “high maintenance” are:

While both descriptions maybe correct in terms of the needy, self-centered behaviours and judgemental attitudes that both men and women display, does it really apply to a woman who knows what she wants and goes for it; has high standards for herself and constantly strive to meet them? Does it apply to the woman who loves to wear certain types of clothing, eat at expensive restaurants and gets a weekly mani-pedicure, paying for all these “luxuries” herself?

Is being the so-called “high maintenance” woman a bad thing?

This is a label that has been slapped on me over the years. In my younger years, it came as a result of my obvious neediness, low self-esteem and my sometimes dramatic behaviour. People with whom I was in relationship – intimate and otherwise – found it a challenge to continue their close contact with me as a result of my attitude. It simply was too much work being friends or having me as a lover.

After months of therapy, spiritual counselling, self-reflection and serious work of accepting, grieving and then finally healing my wounds, the woman who you meet today is not the one who was dumped due to her neediness. Yet, there are people who still label me “high maintenance.” This does not cause me to lose any sleep, however, as I have come to embrace the fact that when a woman finally comes into herself and lives from her highest understanding of who she is, some people cannot cope with that.

What you will find as you grow to love yourself and treat yourself as your most prized possession is that friends, spouse, family members, dates and even coworkers will be challenged by you. You do not have to be the classical beauty, dress in designer clothes everyday or at all, get spa treatment on a regular basis, order lobster on your dates or have diamond dripping off your body. You might very well be like me and have “buckteeth,” wear bargain dresses and haunt consignment stores, your nails might be chipped more than they are painted and the only diamond you have is the one in the wedding ring given to you by an ex husband.

Nonetheless, people will call you “high maintenance” when you have high standards and self-confidence and you are self motivated. You are high maintenance to some because you are educated or have an opinion that you are not afraid to share even if your date holds an opposing one.

I remember being told that I was high maintenance because of my twice a year purchase of really expensive makeup – from my pocket. A date once said I was “too much,” because I rather take my car to the dealership for cleaning and maintenance and not learn to do it myself. My explanation that (1) that was not something that I was interested in learning to do and (2) the hours that I would spend doing that I could read a book to help advance my education, were ludicrous by him.

So, the next time someone calls you high maintenance, if all or most of the following are more in keeping with who you are or how you are living your life, ignore them:

Yes, there are “high maintenance” women, people actually, who fall within the realms of needy. For those persons my preferred term would be wounded, needing support and guidance to become, what is often misunderstood, a woman of substance. Where would you prefer to be?

Share your thoughts with us in the comments below and please, share this post with any woman who has been dumped and now doubting herself because she has been labelled as high maintenance. [tweetthis]Hey girl, you do need to read this post about why you are not high maintenance![/tweetthis]

Subscribe and receive a daily email update of all our posts. We do not spam and that is a guarantee. You will also receive my monthly newsletter as well as an affirmation poster – both free – to help guide and support you throughout the month.

Things change around here often enough, so a subscription keeps you in the loop. One of the latest changes is that we will no longer publish an article on Sundays – not for religious reasons but to afford everyone here a day of rest. What you might see, starting next week, is a video or a Sunday affirmation posted so that we stay connected every day of the week.

Have a great Monday and strut your stuff, women of substance!|||

Have you ever been dumped because you are "high maintenance?" Don't beat up on yourself so fast. Being high maintenance might not be a bad thing.