Louisville, CO – 10/6/2015 -- Rogue Wave Software announced today that it has acquired Zend Technologies, the leader in end-to-end PHP web and mobile application development and deployment solutions. With 50 percent of the web workload running on PHP, including Magento, Drupal, and WordPress, Zend products drive PHP in the enterprise, from code creation through production deployment.

“Today’s announcement expands Rogue Wave into PHP web and mobile application development, underscoring our goal to make developers heroes by accelerating their ability to create great code,” said Brian Pierce, CEO of Rogue Wave. “With the addition of Zend, we now have products that speed C, C++, C#, Java, and PHP development, reflecting how software is created today across languages, platforms, and teams.”

Zend supports and enables millions of PHP developers with its product set: Zend Server, Z-Ray, Zend Studio, and Zend Guard.

Andi Gutmans, co-founder and CEO of Zend said, “Our passion has always been about PHP users. When we founded Zend, we set out to make it easier for developers to use PHP to meet the demands of business development. We’re very happy to have a great match with Rogue Wave, from our shared commitment to customers and how we impact their software development lifecycle. The strength of this combination benefits our customers and expands our ability to deliver products that matter to our users.”

Zeev Suraski, co-founder and CTO of Zend echoes his partner’s sentiments, “Our technologies are incredibly well-aligned. With the combined Rogue Wave products, we can offer customers capabilities ranging from prototyping to DevOps to production. This is a continuation of our vision to support the PHP community and make PHP use easy, accessible, and secure in demanding environments.”

Rogue Wave provides software development tools for mission-critical applications. Our trusted solutions address the growing complexity of building great software, and accelerates the value gained from code across the enterprise. The Rogue Wave portfolio of complementary, cross-platform tools helps developers quickly build applications for strategic software initiatives. With Rogue Wave, customers improve software quality and ensure code integrity, while shortening development cycle times.|||

Zend in the News, Press releases, information on the latest regarding PHP