Here are some further key facts to consider about the current state of STEM in Australia, and how it is being addressed currently, and how STEM will help drive Australia's future economy.

You may have heard about Ahmed Mohammed, the teenage boy from Irving, Texas, who was arrested because he brought a homemade clock to school.

The junior high school student built the clock to impress his teacher, but instead of receiving accolades, he was accused of bringing a “fake bomb” to class.

The story, which made headlines around the world, showed just how massive the disconnect can be between teachers’ perceptions of technology and that of their young students.

What is happening in Australia?

Over the next decade, millions of jobs will become obsolete thanks to software and the continually accelerating pace of technological change will result in getting more people to learn coding.

Coding and technology is disrupting every industry. From accountants to lawyers, to health workers and public servants, legacy systems and bloated applications are old and are slowing down their productivity every day and employers are taking note. Working-class individuals are now slowly being replaced by automated technological systems. Workers are being made redundant because machines and cloud computing software does the job.

Blue collar workers are now feeling the pressure. There are now robots who help with bricklaying which can produce the work much faster and more efficiently.

There are now driverless cars being introduced into the market meaning the automotive industry is also being disrupted.

Also, there is 3D printing. In a report released by Gartner earlier this year, Gartner stated that, “Worldwide 3D printer shipments will more than double every year between 2015 and 2018, by which time worldwide shipments are forecast to reach more than 2.3 million.”

To put this into perspective, 3D printing can essentially build anything. Most of the worldwide shipments are thanks to employers, who are exploring ways to become more efficient and produce quality products and services at a cheaper rate with lower labour costs.

This is the future of Australia

In a recent announcement by Christopher Pyne, the new Minister for Industry, Innovation and Science has already announced one large step in the right direction.

One of Mr Pyne’s final acts as Minister for Education and Training just recently was to announce significant changes to the national curriculum that will see school students learn coding, programming and technical skills from an early age.

This STEM Strategy is a fantastic step into the right direction, however, whilst this is a Strategic Commonwealth Budget support initiative, there is still plenty of work to do.

In the coming decades, coding and programming knowledge will become just as important as learning to read and write in terms of life skills.

Teaching coding to young children also has broader benefits. It can help them to develop strong problem-solving skills, learn to collaborate with each other and navigate technology with confidence.

Powered by the Telstra Foundation, the Code Club program is already running in more than 200 schools across the country with teachers and volunteers showing students the basics of coding all the way up to more advanced programming languages like Python.

One of the most common pieces of feedback Code Club hears from teachers is that while they would love to teach coding skills to their students, they often don’t know where to start.

Teachers themselves need to be taught strong coding and programming skills in order to pass them onto their students. This will be one of the biggest challenges facing the implementation of the new digital technologies curriculum.

Code Club Australia is taking leaps and bounds to making this happen. The organisation will be running Teacher Training sessions later this month and all of 2016.

Here is the link for more info: http://www.codeclubau.org/teacher-training

We could start by introducing a “build your own clock” day.|||

