Matthieu Vaxelaire on starting up in Paris, pivoting and rapidly growing a global business.

Somewhere, perhaps 4,000 miles away from where you’re sitting, a customer Tweets praise about your product. It’s so good that you can use it as a testimonial.

From the other side of the world, a prospect publishes a post to reddit complaining about your competitor. They seem like a perfect fit for you to reach out to.

And elsewhere, a YouTube video is posted featuring your CEO on stage at an industry trade show. You’ll want to save that for your press kit.

The bigger the web grows, the harder it is to keep track of all of these mentions.

And the harder it gets, the bigger the opportunity gets for whoever can step in with a solution that makes things easy for brands and agencies.

That’s the opportunity that Matthieu Vaxelaire and his team at Mention are attacking.

And with more than 350,000 users, it looks like they’re doing a damn good job at it.

We talked to Matthieu about starting up in Paris, making a big pivot, rapidly growing a global business and the mistakes he’s learned from along the way.

Mention’s birthplace was eFounders, a startup studio where Matthieu was a partner.

One of those ideas was for Mention; the eFounders team saw an opportunity to meet a big need in the market as businesses struggled to keep track of all of their mentions around the web.

eFounders helped to turn the idea into a startup, and feedback in the early days suggested that with the right team, the company could become a successful business.

Around the same time, Matthieu was looking for a career change. Rather than working on a handful of companies, he wanted to focus on one.

And so, he decided to make the move to focus 100% of his time on Mention.

Mention’s first product was targeted at what the company called "prosumers": individual consumers, entrepreneurs, freelancers and other micro-organizations.

They offered a plan that was completely free, which helped them drive some early signups as a more polished alternative to Google Alerts.

To get users quickly, mentioned took a page from the book of one of the most rapidly-scaled SaaS companies in recent history:

Because of the built-in virality, Mention had customers sharing their product across a number of different platforms:

There’s no question that Mention’s early days were a success from a traction standpoint.

But the overwhelming majority of those users weren’t paying Mention a dime.

And that, they realized, needed to change.

And that’s when the Mention team decided to make a shift.

They abandoned the prosumer market, and started to position themselves as a better fit for larger companies.

Still, Mention didn’t want to leave their existing users behind and risk alienating (and upsetting) hundreds of thousands of people.

Figuring out that new pricing was—and still is—a challenge.

But one thing that Mention didn’t want, even as they went upmarket, was to lose what their customers loved most: the simplicity of their product.

To accomplish this, the team has worked hard to keep the interface streamlined, even as they’ve added features to make Mention more valuable for bigger companies.

But one thing Matthieu is steadfast about? Not doing custom development for bigger customers.

Those inbound marketing leads help fuel more than 10,000 trial signups for Mention each month.

As the company thought about different ways to grow, they weighed their options.

But while Mention is growing fast today, they’ve had plenty of challenges along the way.

One of the challenges that has hurt the most is a product of being a global company.

Mention launched in Paris, and they’ve recently opened an office in New York.

While 40% of their customers are in the US, most of their customers are in Europe.

And they don’t all speak the same language.

To overcome that, Mention launched in four different languages.

That made things interesting, to say the least.

When Mention launched their content marketing effort, at first they tried doing that in multiple languages—English and French—too.

But they’ve since killed off the French content and now stick to English.

Fortunately, Matthieu says, they’ve found that international customers have been responding well to English-only content, too.

The language issue is part of another interesting challenge: the cultural differences between selling to French companies, as Mention did when they started, and selling to American companies, as they’re focusing on doing now.

The processes are actually very different. 



 If you compare the approach we have to use in New York and the one we use in France, they’re completely different. 



 In the American market, sales is much more direct. Customers are pretty quick to sign up, and they almost always start with the monthly plan. Then, if they’re happy with the service, they’ll switch to the yearly plan in a few months. 



 In France, the sales process is a bit longer and you have to spend more time building a relationship with the customer, but when they sign up, they’ll go straight for the yearly plan from scratch. 



 The SaaS model isn’t as well known in France yet. In the US, it’s really common to buy something for a month or two months, and if it works you keep it, and if it doesn’t you leave. 



 In France—and in much of Europe, perhaps outside of the UK—buying a monthly subscription for Europe is sometimes a bit more unusual.

One of the key elements that Matthieu attributes Mention’s growth to is the organization of the company and the way that they set and track goals.

Business metrics aren’t the only numbers that Mention tracks. They also pay close attention to how their customers are feeling.

Mention uses NPS surveys to track how their customers perceive the product. And one of the most important benefits that comes from it is the customer conversations that the surveys create.

When asked about the biggest mistake the company has made, Matthieu doesn’t hesitate.

To improve retention and keep existing customers happy, Mention started focusing more on building relationships with their existing customers.

Groove’s blog subscribers tend to be voracious readers who work tirelessly to better themselves and their businesses. That’s why we’re asking each of our My First $100K interviewees to share their favorite blogs that they read daily.

Matthieu has (very) generously agreed to answer your questions in the comments of this interview. We’re going to be watching closely and trying to learn as much as we can ourselves, so don’t be shy.

And if you’re looking to join a great startup, Mention is hiring.

Post your questions for Matthieu in the comments below.|||

Matthieu Vaxelaire on starting up in Paris, pivoting and rapidly growing a global business.