Optimized to Handle Time Series Data, Riak TS is the Database of Choice for the Internet of Things

LAS VEGAS – AWS re:Invent – Oct. 6, 2015 – Basho Technologies, the creator and developer of Riak® software, today announced Basho Riak® TS, a distributed NoSQL database architected to aggregate and analyze massive amounts of sequenced, unstructured data generated from the Internet of Things (IoT) and other time series data sources. Riak TS is optimized to deliver reliable and scalable reads and writes at unmatched speeds, so organizations can effectively meet their application time series data storage and retrieval needs.

According to Accenture, the IoT will add $14.2 trillion to the global economy by 2030, enabling companies to capture new growth and boost revenue. As more and more enterprise applications collect IoT data, specifically time series data from sensors, they need fast, reliable and scalable read and write performance. To best accomplish this, the data must be stored, queried and analyzed together. Unlike traditional databases, Riak TS is built to store and retrieve time series data with enhanced read and write performance.

Like Riak KV, Riak TS provides high availability and massive scalability. Riak TS can be operationalized at lower costs than traditional relational databases and is easy to manage at scale. Unlike other NoSQL databases, Riak TS enables customers to take advantage of time series applications with the ability to:

Basho will demonstrate Riak TS at AWS re:Invent, which takes place October 6-9, 2015 in Las Vegas. To learn more, stop by the Basho booth #829 or visit basho.com/products/riak-ts.

Basho Technologies, Inc. is a distributed systems company dedicated to developing disruptive technologies that simplify enterprises’ most critical data management challenges. Basho has attracted one of the most talented groups of engineers and technical experts ever assembled devoted exclusively to solving some of the most complex issues presented by scaling distributed systems and enjoys a large and growing following among influential programmers, architects and academics.

Basho’s distributed database, Riak KV, the industry leading distributed NoSQL database, and Basho’s cloud storage software, Riak S2, are used by fast-growing Web businesses and by one-third of the

Fortune 50 to power their critical Web, mobile and social applications, and their public and private cloud platforms. The Basho Data Platform was recently introduced to help enterprises control and simplify distributed Big Data. Basho is the organizer of RICON – a distributed systems conference.

Riak is the registered trademark of Basho Technologies, Inc. The trademarks and names of other companies and products mentioned herein are the property of their respective owners.|||

Optimized to Handle Time Series Data, Riak TS is the Database of Choice for the Internet of Things   LAS VEGAS – AWS re:Invent – Oct. 6, 2015 – Basho Technologies, the creator and developer of Riak® software, today announced Basho Riak® TS, a distributed NoSQL database architected to aggre...