The bacteria in your gut, long overlooked and considered unglamorous, is now one of the hottest subjects in biology. These trillions of food-digesting microbes seem to play a significant role in our health and ability to fight disease, though scientists are still trying to pin down exactly how they do so. Now a startup that’s conducting a giant, crowdsourced microbiome study is extending that work via a new iPhone app with an eye toward better understanding how your gut may influence your weight.

But there’s a catch: Unlike traditional clinical studies, if you want to take part in this one, you’ll have to pay up.

uBiome, a biotech startup that began life with a crowdfunding campaign in 2012, sells $89 gut bacteria sequencing kits — think of them as the bacteria equivalent of 23andMe’s DNA spit kits, but grosser. Swab some poop off your toilet paper, take uBiome’s health and lifestyle survey, and a few weeks later the company will show you how your microbiome compares to those of others who’ve done the same test, publicly available microbiome study data, and (if you’re a gut bacteria enthusiast) any earlier samples you’ve submitted.

Yet participants’ information will be used to create products sold for profit. In addition to charging participants, uBiome is using their data to create diagnostic tests and may someday open it up to pharmaceutical companies. The service also won’t give you a diagnosis or any actionable advice about changing your diet or health: The microbiome is complex and ever-changing, so there is no “normal” or “healthy” one to aim for.

Still, uBiome notes that studies have linked various lifestyle and medical factors — like being vegetarian or taking antibiotics — with differences in microbiome profiles, even if the exact nature of those relationships aren’t clear. According to uBiome, tens of thousands of people have already submitted samples.

The startup has now adapted that service into an iPhone app available today. Built with ResearchKit, Apple’s open-source software platform that lets iPhone app users participate in clinical studies, the app quizzes people about their diet, exercise, and other weight-related lifestyle factors before directing people to send in a bacteria sample.

Notably, uBiome is the first for-profit company with a ResearchKit app that requires people to use or buy its product. All seven other apps on the platform are led by universities, nonprofits, and academic medical centers, though there are others in the works at pharmaceutical companies.

uBiome CEO Jessica Richman says the app is an extension of the company’s mission to democratize research through the Internet. “Previously, the only science that could get funded was through research grants given to senior researchers,” she told BuzzFeed News. “When you have crowdfunded science or citizen science, and citizens can support science they want to do on their own bodies, you have a tremendous opportunity for people to research things interesting to them and not to anyone else.”|||

A company called uBiome wants to bring microbiome testing and research to the masses. But there are limits to what you'll learn, and unlike...