If you’ve ever headed from the Montgomery BART Station up Post Street toward Union Square, you might have passed the sidewalk sign for the Mechanics’ Institute. Chances are you kept walking, or perhaps paused to wonder why mechanics would need an institute and how they came by such a valuable piece of real estate, in the Financial District, blocks from the first Wells Fargo bank, on the same stretch of high-end retail as Tiffany and Prada.

Look up, and you would see the handsome nine-story steel-framed building that the institute owns. Go inside, and you would find an eclectic directory of tenants at this jewelry district gem that was founded by artisans and craftsmen in 1854 and a century and a half later is growing into a Bay Area literary hub.

A robust two-story library that houses more than 160,000 volumes has long been the heart of the Mechanics’ Institute’s landmark tower, which dates to 1910. Now the building is also home to two prominent literary organizations that moved in not long ago and have helped rejuvenate the institute, making it a vibrant cultural oasis in a landscape of glass and steel skyscrapers.

Those new tenants are Litquake, San Francisco’s largest literary festival, which kicks off Friday, Oct. 9, and runs through Oct. 17, and Zyzzyva, the triannual West Coast literary journal that celebrated its 100th issue last year. The two nonprofits used to share office space on Geary Street until — in what’s become a troubling trend for San Francisco artists and arts organizations — their landlord raised the rent, forcing them to find a new home. The timing was fortuitous, though, since the Mechanics’ Institute, under the new leadership of Ralph Lewin, is looking to work with people who share the institute’s ethos.

“I want people to think of the library,” said Lewin, “as a community living room, a place where they can come and talk about ideas and learn about things that might shift the way they see the world.”

A San Francisco native, Lewin became the institute’s executive director last year after directing the California Council for the Humanities. In his roomy office on the building’s fourth floor, he spoke affectionately of long-term members and enthusiastically about the under-40s, the fastest-growing segment of the membership. These younger members, he said, are “looking for a place that’s not trying to sell them something, a place that represents longevity. ... There’s a real hunger for authentic San Francisco.”

A quick scan of the institute’s directory reveals the diversity of the building’s occupants and shows how the Mechanics’ Institute has stayed true to its original goals: to provide an extensive library, classes and events, a game room (especially for chess), and to welcome everyone regardless of race, gender or economic status. A dramatic spiral staircase leads to the library, which specializes in literature, fine and performing arts, history, philosophy, business and finance.

Members, whose dues are just $95 a year, have full access to the library’s books, its expanding online databases and free Internet, which will be upgraded to fiber this fall.

The institute’s membership list over the past 160 years includes pioneering photographer Eadweard Muybridge, naturalist John Muir, chocolatier Domingo Ghirardelli, blue jean patenter Levi Strauss and writers Ambrose Bierce, Frank Norris, Gertrude Atherton, Oakley Hall and Jack London, who was notorious for returning books late.

More recently, T.J. Stiles researched and wrote part of “The First Tycoon,” his Pulitzer Prize and National Book Award-winning biography of Cornelius Vanderbilt, at the institute. “It’s like belonging to a private club in downtown San Francisco, except it’s for everyone,” said Stiles, who lives in Berkeley. “I love the fact that it’s one of the oldest institutions west of the Mississippi, let alone in San Francisco.”

Lewin will interview Stiles at the library on Oct. 29, following the release of his new biography, “Custer’s Trials: A Life on the Frontier of a New America.”

The Stiles event is just one of more than 100 cultural programs that take place on site or at nearby locations every year. These include book group meetings, genealogical and architectural tours, writers’ workshops, civic discussions and a CinemaLit Film Series of classic and foreign films, which feature introductions by prominent critics and writers as well as audience discussion. The Chronicle also hosts its book club meetings in the institute’s fourth-floor cafe.

The institute hosts dozens of literary events a year, often standing-room-only, and goes out of its way to make them lively and original. One such recent event, for Oakland author Carolina De Robertis’ widely praised novel “The Gods of Tango,” set a standard for what a literary reading should be.

The evening began with three dances by a couple of tango champions who managed to twirl and dip their way through the narrow aisles of the cafe. A conversation followed between De Robertis and the writer (and tango aficionado) Terence Clark. Within the Q&A, De Robertis read a few brief lyrical passages from the book and closed the event by singing a cappella — and beautifully — her grandmother’s favorite song. The evening ended with empanadas, wine and dancing.

For the institute’s new tenants, Litquake and Zyzzyva, the marriage is working out well. “It’s not at all like the typical relationship between landlord and tenant,” Zyzzyva Managing Editor Oscar Villalon said. “It’s rather collaborative, actually, inasmuch as the Mechanics’ Institute has reached out to us and Litquake about participating in their events.”

He and Lewin both cited a co-sponsored poetry reading featuring Jane Hirshfield that was a great success and that brought together established and recent members, Boomers and Millennials, all unified by a common curiosity and love of language and ideas. A party this summer co-hosted by the National Book Critics Circle and Zyzzyva also brought together dozens of members of the Bay Area’s literary community, including Terry Castle, Maxine Hong Kingston, Adam Johnson and D.A. Powell.

“The Mechanics’ Institute,” said Villalon, “could turn into a unique center in the heart of the city that — on top of doing all the important things (it has) done in the past — can now provide a home for various arts groups, giving them ample opportunity to regularly collaborate.”

Lewin agrees: “We have space. We want to make it available. In the future, I can imagine a lot more partnerships, and doing more and more interesting programming here.”

With its doors open to all, and new initiatives under way, word will surely get out about this unusually named well-kept secret where tradition and progress meet.

Porter Shreve’s fourth novel, “The End of the Book,” was published last year. E-mail: books@sfchronicle.com|||

Chances are you kept walking, or perhaps paused to wonder why mechanics would need an institute and how they came by such a valuable piece of real estate, in the Financial District, blocks from the first Wells Fargo bank, on the same stretch of high-end retail as Tiffany and Prada.  Go inside, and you would find an eclectic directory of tenants at this jewelry district gem that was founded by artisans and craftsmen in 1854 and  a century and a half later  is growing into a Bay Area literary hub.  A robust two-story library that houses more than 160,000 volumes has long been the heart of the Mechanics’ Institute’s landmark tower, which dates to 1910.  [...] the building is also home to two prominent literary organizations that moved in not long ago and have helped rejuvenate the institute, making it a vibrant cultural oasis in a landscape of glass and steel skyscrapers.  The two nonprofits used to share office space on Geary Street until — in what’s become a troubling trend for San Francisco artists and arts organizations — their landlord raised the rent, forcing them to find a new home.  A quick scan of the institute’s directory reveals the diversity of the building’s occupants and shows how the Mechanics’ Institute has stayed true to its original goals: to provide an extensive library, classes and events, a game room (especially for chess), and to welcome everyone regardless of race, gender or economic status.  A dramatic spiral staircase leads to the library, which specializes in literature, fine and performing arts, history, philosophy, business and finance.  Members, whose dues are just $95 a year, have full access to the library’s books, its expanding online databases and free Internet, which will be upgraded to fiber this fall.  The institute’s membership list over the past 160 years includes pioneering photographer Eadweard Muybridge, naturalist John Muir, chocolatier Domingo Ghirardelli, blue jean patenter Levi Strauss and writers Ambrose Bierce, Frank Norris, Gertrude Atherton, Oakley Hall and Jack London, who was notorious for returning books late.  Within the Q&A, De Robertis read a few brief lyrical passages from the book and closed the event by singing a cappella — and beautifully — her grandmother’s favorite song.