ASP.net is a free web application framework that allow web developer to build dynamic, Interactive websites, Web applications and services using HTML, CSS and JavaScript. If you are web programmer and searching for useful ASP.net based CMS to edit, manage and publish your dynamic website. here is 30 useful ASP.net based CMS to manage your websites easily.

Composite C1 is a free and open source (FOSS) ASP.net framework based web content management system. It was specially designed for all types of companies and organizations, individuals or communities of users to easily publish, manage and organize a variety of content on corporate websites while maintaining a consistent visual identity. The user interface of Composite C1 is very functional and task oriented and enables users of varying technical skills to complete tasks and co-operate using familiar tools. – Composite C1 Web CMS

DotNetNuke is a leading open source web content management and Flexible application development framework. It’s an Asp.net based CMS to create and keep up fully customizable, dynamic web sites. Through an intuitive, menu-driven interface, even non-technical users can also use DotNetNuke platform to create powerful websites or extend the functionality and features of their existing web applications. – DotNetNuke Asp.net WCMS

Kentico CMS is a Asp.net based CMS that allow you to build dynamic web sites, online shopping carts, intranets and web 2.0 community sites. it has powerful content editing interface – Kentico CMS Desk. which allow user to edit content and preview them before publishing, also easy to organized content into a tree hierarchy of documents (pages). The hierarchy (content tree) represents the site map and the navigation structure. – Kentico CMS – Asp.net cms

Umbraco CMS provides a full-featured web content management system that is easy to use, simple to customize and robust enough to run the largest sites such as wired.co.uk and asp.net. it’s an FOSS (free and open source software) Web CMS built on the Microsoft .NET Framework.  – Umbraco CMS

Orchard Project is a community focused content management system written in Asp.net platform using .net MVC framework. With Orchard Project, user can create content-driven Websites, and an extensibility framework that will allow developers and customizers to give more functionality through modules and themes. – Orchard Project

N2 is an open source lightweight ASP.net based content management system (CMS) to create simple and easy to use user-friendly website that any one can easily Update. Features include full control of content and nodes, drag&drop, versioning, wizards, export/import, security, globalization and more. – N2 – ASP.net based CMS

Kooboo CMS is a flexible and extensible Enterprise grade content management system based on ASP.NET MVC framework. it offer many enterprise grade features such as workflow, version control, publishing and integration service that make your work so easy. Even user can create dynamic website without learning any database coding languages. – Kooboo Enterprise CMS

Axcms is a enterprise class Web CMS and application framework for creation and management of highly scalable and interactive web applications and websites based entirely on Microsoft .NET platform. it allow enterprises to improve their process efficiency and reduce operating costs. Axcms is a first Enterprise Web CMS, who have integrated Silverlight based ribbon toolbar that allow editor to manage and design enterprise websites with an extraordinary usability experience for CMS Users. – AxCMS.net

Sprocket CMS is a Advanced Pluggable CMS for ASP.net 2.0. it has Simple but powerful scripting language (SprocketScript) which can be used in your templates and content to get the most out of your website. Multi-tier database management framework to allow you to use whichever database you want. – Sprocket

Sitefinity CMS is next generation web content management system for creating compelling websites, intranets, portals and blogs. it offer many enterprise features, and simple, easy-to-use online administration for managing your website. The new revolutionary User Interface is very task oriented and simplifies the user interaction with the system. – sitefinity CMS

Spider CMS is a full-featured Content Management System. SpiderCMS allows organizations to manage the content of their website in an easy to use web-based interface without the need of any programming or design skills. – SpiderCMS

Cuyahoga is an open source .NET web site framework. It provides content management capabilities and has a modular approach. Currently it works with MS .NET 2.0-3.5 with SQL Server, PostgreSQL or MySQL as database backend. Also, Mono is fully supported. – Cuyahoga CMS

insiteCMS.net is a lightweight content management system that allows you to run a CMS without any database. it use ASP.net 2.0 technology and it’s based on ASP.net Resx files. insiteCMS.net is a template based CMS engine, web developers can define their own page layout and using a simple CSS class, they can define the behavior for each single page section. – insiteCMS.net

Firebird CMS is a new CMS build on ASP.net 2.0 framework specially designed by web designers for web designers. The CMS is a fully compatible with W3C XHTML standard and cross browser safe, yet flexible enough to suit your design requirements. it has fully Pluggable Architecture – Templates, custom controls and administration functionality are all pluggable for custom development and extendibility. – Firebird CMS|||

30 best ASP.net based CMS. ASP.net is a free web application framework that allow web developer to build dynamic, Interactive websites, Web applications and services using HTML, CSS and JavaScript.