A Strong Appeal in Asia and the West for C.club, DK.club, PC.club and PJ.club 



C.Club and twenty-four 2-character .CLUB domain names are set to hit the auction block on October 29, 2015 in a series of five fast-moving auctions with each auction lasting three days. The popularity and value of one and two-character domains is well documented as witnessed through their global sales and usage by major corporations across verticals such as:

Bid online from the EachNic.com auction platform. Once the auction begins, create an account and bid as frequently as you like. You can also enter a proxy bid for each auction for automated bidding.  Use the free Concierge Service and work with a professional bi-lingual domain specialist to guide you through EachNic.com’s registration and bidding process on your behalf and under your directions. This provides you the freedom to set your limits anonymously before the auction ends. To learn more, contact us at auction@nic.club. Payments will be made through the familiar website Escrow.com for non-Chinese investors and through Union Pay for Chinese investors. To accommodate investors everywhere, teams of bilingual speakers will be available throughout the auction in U.S. and China time zones. 



Be sure to frequently check 



Each auction will end promptly at 10:30 pm Eastern (7:30 pm Pacific) on the indicated End date. Payments will be made through the familiar website Escrow.com for non-Chinese investors and through Union Pay for Chinese investors. To accommodate investors everywhere, teams of bilingual speakers will be available throughout the auction in U.S. and China time zones.Be sure to frequently check http://nic.club/auction/ for the latest news and bidding links for this coveted set of 25 valuable domains. Auction inventory, reserves and dates can be found below.Each auction will end promptly at 10:30 pm Eastern (7:30 pm Pacific) on the indicated End date.



 

Led by Internet entrepreneur Colin Campbell, whose prior successes include Tucows Interactive and Hostopia.com, .Club Domains, LLC is the award-winning registry behind the .CLUB top level domain name. The company recently launched 





EachNic is China’s first professional domain trading and investing website. With over 400,000 registered members, and certified by both ICANN and CNNIC (China Internet Network Information Center). Its services include domain registration, aftermarket trading, brokerage, auction, reservation cancellation and parking and other relevant value adding services. Established in 2000, EachNic is one of China’s oldest and most trusted auction platforms for global domain name auctions. Built on powerful, robust bidding software and more than a decade of experience, EachNic is the only choice for internationally-minded domain investors and for new gTLDs in China. 



EachNic was founded by one of the best-known Chinese Internet industry leaders, Mr. YAO Jinbo (current CEO of 58.com) on August 18, 2000, and was acquired in 2008 and ran independently since then by EJEE Group, one of China’s largest registrar service providers headquartered in Zhongguancun, Beijing, the Silicon Valley of China. Led by Internet entrepreneur Colin Campbell, whose prior successes include Tucows Interactive and Hostopia.com, .Club Domains, LLC is the award-winning registry behind the .CLUB top level domain name. The company recently launched Startup.club to support entrepreneurs building businesses around a .CLUB domain name. With more than 290,000 domain names sold to date .CLUB leads the pack of new domain extensions in sales and usage and was recognized at the 2015 Domain Industry Awards for Best Registry and Company of the Year. More information and links to register .CLUB domains are available now at http://www.get.club EachNic is China’s first professional domain trading and investing website. With over 400,000 registered members, and certified by both ICANN and CNNIC (China Internet Network Information Center). Its services include domain registration, aftermarket trading, brokerage, auction, reservation cancellation and parking and other relevant value adding services. Established in 2000, EachNic is one of China’s oldest and most trusted auction platforms for global domain name auctions. Built on powerful, robust bidding software and more than a decade of experience, EachNic is the only choice for internationally-minded domain investors and for new gTLDs in China.EachNic was founded by one of the best-known Chinese Internet industry leaders, Mr. YAO Jinbo (current CEO of 58.com) on August 18, 2000, and was acquired in 2008 and ran independently since then by EJEE Group, one of China’s largest registrar service providers headquartered in Zhongguancun, Beijing, the Silicon Valley of China.

This auction, to be held on the Chinese EachNic.com platform, marks the first time .CLUB Domains, the Registry behind one of the world’s most popular new domain extensions, is offering this set of domains in a public auction format. The domain inventory included in this auction has been hand-selected by the EachNic.com team to specifically appeal to Eastern and Western businesses and investors alike., making them accessible for businesses of all sizes and budgets..CLUB Domains has already sold reserved domains at considerable auction prices, including the sale of Wine.club for $140,000 in 2015 at the NamesCon Auction, which set the worldwide auction record for all new domain extension sales to date. This was their first and only auction, showing the demand for .CLUB domain sales. Likewise, interest in the first Eastern and Western auction of .CLUB names is expected to attract strong participation, especially with .CLUB’s active focus on buyers worldwide.The auction platform will be available in both Chinese and English, and .CLUB will be offering a Concierge Service to assist Western buyers, thus allowing two ways to bid:|||

One and two letter ".club" domains to be auctioned.