Cheek enhancement, also called cheek augmentation and liquid cheek lift, is a non-surgical procedure of facial rejuvenation. It improves the look of the cheeks and midface. It involves injection of facial fillers into the cheek area. As we age, we lose fat and bony support in the midface. This results in slimming and hollowing of the cheeks. Midface rejuvenation and cheek enhancement, not only improve the look of the cheeks, but also improve the nasolabial folds, corners of the mouth, jawline and under the eye areas. Therefore, Dr. Elseweifi always recommends treating the midface even when the patient’s concern is only the lower face.

Cheek enhancement is both art and science. When you meet with Dr. Elseweifi for consultation, he will discuss your needs and desires, create a treatment plan, and decides on the type of filler and injection techniques that are best for you. Facial fillers most commonly used for cheek enhancement are Juvederm Voluma and Radiesse. Voluma is a thick gel of hyaluronic acid that restores lost volume. Voluma results may last up to 18 months. Radiesse is a collagen stimulating material. It is made of calcium based microspheres. Radiess results may last up to two years.

Injection of facial fillers usually do not require anesthesia. There is typically minimal discomfort associated with the injection. Recovery after injection of facial fillers into the cheek is usually fast and complications are minimal. Some patients may experience swelling that resolves in few days. Few patients experience minor bruising. Swelling and bruising can be significantly minimized by using injection cannulas rather than needles.

Do not feel nervous about getting cheek enhancement (liquid cheek lift). Facial fillers used for cheek enhancement are safe and predictable. Recovery after cheek enhancement is often fast. With proper injection technique, you can get natural look. In addition, the procedure enhances the midface, tightens the skin, and improves the look of the lower face.

Call Bucktown Smiles to set an appointment for consultation.|||

Dr. Yasser Elseweifi, offers cheek enhancement using face fillers such as Juvederm Voluma and Radiesse.