Once I had assessed the dataset, I realised that this propaganda was not just buoying up the IS abroad - attracting new supporters, sustaining old sympathisers and drawing in donors - it was keeping it afloat at home, too.

Put yourself in the shoes of a normal civilian living in any of the many IS-held towns and villages.

You have no free access to the internet and, for those occasional moments that you do, there is an IS fighter breathing down your neck watching your every move.

There is no freedom of information under IS, no counter-narratives, no challenging information, nothing other than that “news” provided in droves by the IS propagandists and broadcast at the myriad makeshift media points across its territory.

In the pamphlets distributed from these points, the videos playing on their widescreen TVs and projectors, the statements and bulletins ringing from their speakers, there is only the propagandists' idealised image of the “caliphate” ringing out.

The audience is well and truly captive.

In a sense, this is happening online, too. I was doing it for research purposes but, for many IS supporters, propaganda is their only stream of news and information.

Social media is well known for its echo chambers, in which users end up self-selecting their own nuance-free virtual existence. When this dynamic is combined with an intoxicating propaganda output like that of IS, it becomes all the more potent.

Even though it is well within their capabilities to access other ideas, the group's online supporters rarely, if ever, go looking for them.

To all intents and purposes, they become addicts of the IS marketing model.

In July, I embarked on this project with the aim of achieving deeper insight into IS's propaganda strategy. But what emerged was something far more useful.

With a full view of its media output, even just for one month, I was able to dissect and evaluate the means by which the group projects itself, both within and without its borders.

Equipped with a continuation of this project, with the exact knowledge of what IS decision-makers want to project - and when they want to project it - perhaps those involved in the fight against IS could more effectively challenge its information monopoly.|||

The so-called Islamic State is known for its brutality. But it's also hooking people in far subtler ways.