Black holes are born when stars violently collapse. But suppose that a coin in your pocket suddenly turns into a black hole. What would happen to you if this was theoretically possible?

The short answer is not surprising: “You, and everyone around you, will die,” says Matt, a doctorate student in physics (Reddit user VeryLittle).

But the way you’d die would be different depending on if the black hole has the same mass as a coin or if it has the same radius as one. To find out how you’d die, the student uses the equation of a black hole:

Your ordinary nickel has the mass of five grams, Matt explains. If you do the math, you’ll notice that the black hole’s radius turns out to be incredibly small. Much tinier than an atom, in fact. To put it in perspective, “the black hole compared to an atom is as small as an atom compared to the sun.”

Everything in the universe dies at some point and the same is true for black holes. Eventually a black hole will lose its mass. For supermassive black holes, this can take millions of years. Since this coin-like black hole has such a small mass, it will radiate all its mass away in less than a second, according to Hawking radiation. And this causes a destructive but glorious result.

“It will produce an explosion three times bigger than the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki combined,” he explains.

Alternatively, if the black hole has the radius of a nickel, then it will be much, much larger. In fact, its mass will be somewhat bigger than Earth’s.

And its gravitational pull will be billions of times stronger than Earth’s. “The black hole would consume you before you even realized what’s happening,” he says.

And Earth? It would get pulled in towards the black hole and sort of orbit it like this:

And the black hole would consume chunks of our planet’s mass each time it passes. Eventually, Earth collapses into a dead, smoldering rock.

“The moon’s orbit is now highly elliptical. Tidal forces from the black hole could disrupt the asteroid belt, sending rocks careening through the solar system—bombardment and impacts may become commonplace for the next few million years. The planets are slightly perturbed, but they stay approximately on the same orbit. The black hole we used to call earth will now continue on orbiting the sun, in the earth’s place.”

“The effects on the solar system are awesome, but moreso in the biblical sense of ‘awesome,’ which more closely means terrifying,” he says.|||

