It might seem more of a philosophical question, but scientists working at the world's biggest atom smasher have raised the question of how small a droplet of liquid can get before it becomes a gas.

The researchers at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN near Geneva, have created what they claim are the world's smallest droplets while conducting experiments to study what the early universe would have looked like.

Scientists had been attempting to produce the primordial soup of subatomic particles that existed shortly after the Big Bang known as the quark-gluon plasma.

By colliding lead atoms and protons together they were able to produce temperatures 250,000 times hotter than the core of the sun to create this plasma.

However, when they examined the resulting material, they were surprised to see that it behaved more like a liquid than a gas in droplets composed of just 100 to 200 subatomic particles.

Quarks and gluons are elemental particles that make up all other subatomic particles and the atoms they form.  In the seconds after the Big Bang, the normally powerful forces that bind these subatomic particles together were weakened. This resulted in a substance known as the quark-gluon plasma - a strange soup of superheated material. But rather than behaving like a superheated gas as scientists might expect, it appears this primordial soup of particles was more of a liquid, according to research from the Large Hadron Collider. The tiny fireballs created inside the 17 mile long particle accelerator, which is buried 300ft beneath the Alpine foothills along the Swiss-French border, have enabled scientists to recreate some of the conditions that existed shortly after the Big Bang.

These plasma droplets were found to be more than 100,000 times smaller than a hydrogen atom.

The findings also suggest that the early universe may have been more like a liquid than a ball of super-heated gas as many astrophysicists believe.

Dr Shenguang Tuo, who was leading the research, said: 'Everyone was surprised when we began finding evidence for liquid behaviour. It caused some very intense debates.'

One of the key properties of a liquid is the ability to flow by exerting an attractive force on its neighbours that is not quite strong enough to lock them together like a solid.

Dr Tuo and his colleagues searched the data from lead-proton collisions in the LHC for correlations between groups of four, six and eight of the particles thrown out by the collisions.

Dr Tuo said: 'These measurements confirmed that we were seeing this coherent behaviour even in droplets producing as few as 100 to 200 particles.

The results have been replicated by researchers at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider at the Brookhaven National Laboratory by colliding gold and helium ions together.

They found hot sports emerged on the gold ions that then merged into a quark-gluon plasma droplet.

Earlier this year scientists at the Large Hadron Collider announced they had discovered a new particle called the pentaquark. This previously unseen class of particle was first predicted to exist in the 1960s but has eluded physicists until now. It was detected by Cern's Large Hadron Collider beauty (LHCb) experiment at the LHC in Switzerland.  The LHCb experiment specialises in investigating the slight differences between matter and antimatter.  LHCb spokesman Guy Wilkinson said: 'The pentaquark is not just any new particle. 'It represents a way to aggregate quarks, namely the fundamental constituents of ordinary protons and neutrons, in a pattern that has never been observed before in over fifty years of experimental searches.  'Studying its properties may allow us to understand better how ordinary matter, the protons and neutrons from which we're all made, is constituted.'

The findings, which were published in the journal Physical Review Letters, have helped to show that not only does this plasma behave like a liquid, it appears to be a nearly perfect liquid.

This means it has zero viscosity and flows without any resistance. If you were swirl it in a glass then the liquid would continue to swirl almost indefinitely.

The findings were being discussed at the conference Quark Matter 2015 taking place this week in Kobe Japan.

They build on some of the first discoveries to be made with the LHC since it was switched on in 2010.

Scientists working on the ATLAS detector obtained results that suggested the super-heated plasma - which was more than 10 trillion degrees Celsius - created after the Big Bang, appeared to behave like a very dense liquid.

The latest findings suggest this plasma liquid would have been unlike anything we are used to.

Professor Julia Velkovska, a particle physicist at Vanderbilt University who was part of the Large Hadron Collider's CMS detector team that conducted the research, said: 'Although the LHC collisions release 25 times more energy than the RHIC collisions, we don't see much difference in the droplet-formation process.

'Once you have reached the threshold, adding more energy doesn't seem to have much effect. I guess you can't get more perfect than perfect.'|||

Scientists working at the Large Hadron Collider in CERN, near Geneva, tried to replicate the quark-gluon plasma from the early universe. It formed tiny droplets that behaved like a 'perfect liquid'.