A few weeks ago (beginning September 2015) Google unveiled their new identity, complete with a nice article covering the evolution of the logo.

One of the points the article made about distribution was:

This helps us make the design pixel perfect everywhere it’s used, and it allows us to optimize these assets for size and latency, including building a special variant of our full-color logo that is only 305 bytes, compared to our existing logo at ~14,000 bytes.

That was intriguing: there are many well-known techniques to make assets lightweight, but 305 bytes sounded too few to me.

Addy Osmani had mentioned that the small logo was SVG, and actually many people were wondering if it was somewhere online to take a look. I thought it should be simple enough to try to write an SVG and check the size of the resulting file. The idea wasn't to replicate the logo pixel by pixel, but to check if, having the right elements in the file, how close the size can get to 305 bytes.

Looking at the logo, it looks like it's not composed of filled-in shapes, but rather a few shapes, drawn with a thick stroke: that is, a rectangle is not a polygon made of four coordinates filled in with colour, but a thick line connecting two points.

I opened the biggest version of the new rasterised logo that I could find, and I start using OSX's Command + Shift + 4 screenshot tool to get measures on screen. I was compressing the file manually on disk to check the compression.

I got Goo and the file was already 304 bytes. Not looking good.

I then started using SVGOMG (Jake Archibald's GUI for SVGO) and the size promisingly went down. I was at Googl at 265 bytes.

The final version -or so I thought!- was complete, with the lowercase g composed of three paths. There's some discussion regarding this, but I think the geometry of that letter can only be done with two arcs of different curvature for the body, plus another arc for the descendent. A circle (like the o letters) is not the same shape.

After posting the final version, Martin Kleppe -code golfer extraordinaire- opened fire reducing 20 bytes (5 bytes gzipped) with several combined tricks.

One of them is removing the XML NameSpace attribute (xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"). This has the side effect of turning the file unrenderable directly on a browser, since it's interpreted as an XML file without any style information, and the browser only shows the document tree. But JS Bin adds the right mime-type header to the file, so the browser correctly interpets it as an SVG file and renders its content. That also means that if not interpreted as the right type of resource, some XML parsers might throw errors (in browser and other tools and editors). Removing the XML NameSpace will also work, when inlining SVG tags in HTML.

We settled on JS Bin as a platform for ping-pong'ing the different iterations of the file. This turned out not to be a great idea, since jsbins created by unregistered accounts have an expiration date (I didn't know that at the time). Fortunately, I kept several intermediate steps.

Big kudos to Remy Sharp for creating and putting so much of his life in JS Bin. If you haven't read his series of posts "The toxic side of free", do it now; it's a very good read and lots of deep insight into side projects and coding.

To test the compressed size of the file we used checkgzipcompression.com, by providing the URL of the JS Bin.

Check the whole twitter timeline for details, but here's a list of techniques that were tried, and how successful they were:

Some attributes can be removed without much effect.|||

Techniques and tricks learned while trying to recreate the new Google logo with SVG in 305 bytes (or less!)