A veteran police officer has been charged with murder over the fatal shooting of a driver during a routine traffic stop in Windsor two years ago.

Leading Senior Constable Timothy Howard Baker, 44, appeared in the Melbourne Magistrates Court on Wednesday, charged with one count of murder over the death of Vlado Micetic, 46, on August 25, 2013.

Mr Baker is alleged to have shot Mr Micetic three times from close range during a traffic stop in Union Street, after Mr Micetic allegedly brandished a flick knife.

Mr Micetic, who had almost 100 criminal convictions before the age of 25, was pulled over in a white Hyundai with stolen plates.

A female passenger in Mr Micetic's car fled but was apprehended later.

At the time, Senior Constable Baker claimed he shot the man in self-defence and received support from Assistant Commissioner Luke Cornelius.

"My advice is that our officer believed his life was in immediate threat ... and he has responded with lethal force," Mr Cornelius said in 2013.

Police prosecutors are expected to allege  Senior Constable Baker fabricated evidence after the shooting to make it appear he acted in self defence, following a two-year investigation by the homicide squad, professional standards command and the corruption watchdog IBAC.

It is also expected to be alleged that Senior Constable Baker planted the knife on his victim immediately after the shooting. An audio recording of the incident is expected to be used as evidence.

Prosecutor Sarah Lenthall told the court Senior Constable Baker was charged on Wednesday morning and investigators would seek a DNA sample from him.

Fairfax Media understands the officer from the Stonnington highway patrol had been arrested and interviewed in January but released without charge.

The Magistrates Court on Wednesday ordered he be remanded in custody until he appears in court again in January 2016.

Defence  lawyer Tony Hargreaves confirmed his client was a serving police officer who would be kept in protective custody and was taking medication for "serious mental health problems".

Chief Commissioner Graham Ashton said it was the first time in 30 years a Victorian police officer had been charged with murder.

"It's always a sad day for the organisation when serious charges are laid against a police officer," he said.

But Chief Commissioner Ashton acknowledged that officers in emergency situations often had to make snap decisions.

He said police officers in day to day work should not lose confidence in their abilities to act, back their judgment and training.

Mr Ashton said there was no suggestion of other police officers being involved in the incident.

He said that at the time, highway patrols did sometimes involve a police officer working alone, or "one-up".

In 2013, Micetic's family had described him as a gentle, albeit troubled, man who was only a danger to himself.

"He'd hurt himself before he would hurt anybody else," his brother Alex told Fairfax Media.

Micetic left behind three children and was on a disability pension at the time of his death.

He'd stayed out of prison in recent years and had taken up painting portraits.

His siblings claimed that his life changed dramatically as a six year old, when he witnessed the murder of his grandparents in St Albans.

"His life has never been the same since," his sister Mira said. "I strongly believe that he was always in trouble because of his mental illness, not because he was a violent person."

Mr Micetic's convictions included assault, recklessly causing injury and several instances of resisting police in the early 90s.

He had previously been convicted of stealing number plates and had once posed as a police officer to search a woman's house for weapons.|||

A veteran police officer has been charged with murder over the fatal shooting of a driver during a routine traffic stop in Windsor in 2013.