Australia’s technology startup environment is flourishing especially in Sydney and Melbourne. Communities, accelerators and co-working spaces have sprouted and more corporates are following the trend. Although things are moving in a very positive direction, the question is ‘What more can be done?'

In isolation and relative to its starting position, the amount of people, resources and money in the system has increased dramatically over the last five years. When compared to smaller and seemingly more agile countries and even less developed economies, Australia is still far behind. According to the ranking of best startup ecosystems, performed by Compass, Sydney dropped four places to 16th and Melbourne fell out of the top 20.

Starfish Ventures based in Melbourne has played in this space for fifteen years and seen it evolve. In talking with Starfish Founder John Dyson and Investment Director Tony Glenning, they see a number of areas of weakness but also many of opportunities to improve the situation.

Starfish is concerned about the gaping hole in Australia’s VC market for promising start-ups looking for series A or B investment in the AU$2-$7 million range. In the whole country, there are only a few who can make those kinds of investments. According to AVCAL, there was only AU$516 million invested into startups in FY2014. According to Compass, the average series A round in Australia is US$2.8-$3 million, less than the APAC average of US$4-$4.5 million.

The government has especially strained the pipeline of capital for Australian startups. Two prime examples are firstly, the Australian government abolishment of the $300 million Innovation Investment Fund and secondly the creation of the Entrepreneurs Infrastructure Program, which is believed to have only half the total funding allocated to Commercialisation Australia. This is startling, considering these were key to stimulating an already weak VC market.

This short-term approach is in contrast to Australia’s much smaller neighbor, New Zealand. “I would look towards New Zealand, who had had a consistent innovation venture capital policy for fifteen years and I think they are spanking our arse,” said Dyson.

Many VCs have been looking to Australia’s deep well of superannuation funds worth AU$2 trillion. That’s even more money than Australia’s total GDP of about AU$1.6 trillion. But according to Dyson, “Superfunds have moved away from this asset class because the industry hasn’t generated returns and there are high management fees.” Dyson believes superfunds have to be more patient, and wait ten years for the strong portfolios to generate impressive returns.

Dyson admits though that across the whole industry, financial returns from VCs in Australia have been disappointing. “The markets have been distorted by sub-standard managers in government programs or high-net worth individuals,” said Dyson. He laments that venture investing at a sub-scale level is next to impossible, to achieve good portfolio diversification and continued support of companies through their growth lifecycle.

Yet the outlook is promising, given that Australia’s largest VC fund, Blackbird Ventures has raised a new AU$200 million fund, with $145 million coming from two superfunds, First State Super and Hostplus Super. If Blackbird continues to be successful, it will be a strong bellwether for other superfunds to get in the ring.

Another major source of capital injection into Australia’s VC market is Austrade’s new Significant Investor (SIV). Under the SIV scheme, investors who invest a minimum of AU$5 million into Australia, with at least $1 million of it going into an Australian venture capital fund will get permanent residency for themselves and family after four years. This could be a major win for Australian VC’s, since the previous SIV scheme brought in a reported AU$4 billion from processing over 800 visas, to mainly Chinese investors.

Starfish is very bullish on how the SIV scheme will positively impact the VC industry. But they are wary of the issues that could arise. “We need to make sure the money goes into fund managers with a strong track record, opposed to those who are inexperienced and could lose the money and become a bad experience for the overseas investor,” said Dyson.

The risk to the scheme and general long-term benefit of it, is that although investors have full discretion of where to put their money, people like immigration agents and bankers who aren’t savvy venture investors will create their own VC funds, or influence overseas investors to put their money in mismanaged funds. If investors lose significant amounts of money, the government may face pressure to prematurely reform the SIV. Ultimately the SIV needs time to develop and be regulated.

If the promise of more money from superfunds and the SIV comes to pass for Australian VCs, a key area that Starfish wants the money to go into is commercializing Australian research and development. With already a strong investment focus on life sciences, Starfish knows there’s much more that can be done in this arena. Culturally, Australian researchers focus on being academic and measure their success on getting their paper published. Ideally Dyson wants to see better partnerships between research and commercialization to truly take Australian innovation global and drive economic benefit back to the country.|||

Australia’s technology startup environment is flourishing especially in Sydney and Melbourne. Communities, accelerators and co-working spaces have sprouted and more corporates are following the trend. Although things are moving in a very positive direction, the question is ‘What more can be done?' In isolation and relative to its starting position, the [...]