There's been no shortage of new streaming media devices. , Amazon and have all released new versions of their gadgets in a short time span. And surprise, surprise: the biggest player in the category, Roku, is now making a move.

On Tuesday, the Saratoga, Calif-based company announced the Roku 4. The most important part to its new $130 set-top  is the support for streaming video at 4K and 60 frames per second. The new remote also has its own little speaker designed so if it ever gets lost, the user can push a button on the Roku 4 and the remote will start talking.

The device contains a quad-core processor (versus a dual-core processor in the Roku 3), and supports the latest WiFi standard, 802.11ac MIMO (multiple-input and multiple-output).

The company doesn't talk about who the chip provider is, but the company is able to use cheaper silicon than the other set-top boxes because the device's operating system doesn't require much power, said Roku founder and CEO Anthony Wood. Meanwhile, other company's use some version of a mobile operating system: Amazon uses a modified version of Android on its Fire TV it calls Fire OS, and Apple uses a slimmed down version of iOS in its new Apple TV it's calling tvOS. "Our software is just way more efficient than competitors," Wood said.

And that ultimately lets Roku enjoy fatter margins on each device it sells. "It's the reason we make money and others don't," he said.

Along with the Roku 4, the company is announcing the company's new operating system, Roku OS 7. The biggest update here is in the new discovery features under "Roku Feed," which lets users follow specific TV shows, actors or directors and get an update whenever new content becomes available. Previous versions of the Roku Feed only let users follow movies, so they would know when they became available on one of Roku apps. Roku OS 7 will also be available for previous Roku boxes.

Roku claims it now has 300,000 movies and TV episodes to watch from around its 1,700 third-party apps. The search function on the Roku homescreen is able to search through only about 20 of the apps, but the company is working on adding more.

Roku, Apple, Amazon and Google own 86% of the market for the streaming media device market in 2014, with Roku leading at 34% market share, according to Park Associates. That's a nice lead, but these others competitors are keen to catch up in a fast-growing market.

Apple kickstarted the most recent round of upgrades in September with the fourth generation version of Apple TV. The new Apple TV features a beefier processor with Apple’s 64-bit A8 chip, and a big upgrade to the controller. The revamped Bluetooth-connected controller includes a glass touch screen, motion sensors, and a dedicated voice button to allow users to quickly access Apple’s intelligent assistant, Siri. It also costs the most out of any of the other streaming media devices: $149 for a 32Gb version, and $199 for 64Gb. The new Apple TV misses out on supporting 4K resolution.

Amazon's new $100 Fire TV, announced earlier this month, will support 4K. The upgrade includes improvements to its voice command capabilities, which is powered by Amazon's version of Siri that it calls Alexa.

Lastly, Google announced the second-generation Chromecast -- a $35 dongle that users just plug into their TV's HDMI port -- in September. The update was mostly designed to support a more modern WiFi standard, 802.11ac at 5Ghz frequency.

Despite all the talk about 4K and how much Apple is missing out on 4K support in the latest Apple TV, there's still not many options for 4K content available --  and to even stream that level of resolution requires a steady 15 megabytes per second connection. (According to 2014 ranking put together by Akamai, the U.S. has an average Internet speed of 11.5Mbps.)

“I don’t know that 4K is a deal breaker for anyone right now,” said Paul Erickson, a senior analyst at research firm Technology. “The reality is that there remains a considerable lack of 4K content. It has more value as a buzzword in the market right now."

For now, these companies are trying to take advantage of the surge happening right now in streaming video.

“Streaming media is getting seriously mainstream. Tons of content is coming out that used to be locked up in TV bundles," said Wood. "It's like a dam has broken."

Follow me on Twitter @aatilley or send me an email: atilley@forbes.com|||

There's been no shortage of new streaming media devices. Apple, Amazon and Google have all released new versions of their gadgets in a short time span. And surprise, surprise: the biggest player in the category, Roku, is now making a move. On Tuesday, the Saratoga, Calif-based company announced the Roku 4. The most important [...]