Apple’s decision to make Swift it’s coding language of choice is having a predictable effect on former favorite Objective-C.

The October index of programming languages from Tiobe Software shows Objective-C falling down the list at a rapid rate, dropping from third to 14th in just 12 months. The language has been been a constant presence in the top 10 for at least five years and has played a major role for developers building apps for iOS and Mac OS X.

Objective-C has been replaced by Ruby in the top 10, with the scripting language undergoing something of a mini-revival after falling victim to the hype that comes with being feted by developers in 2006. Commenting on the results of the October Programing Community index, Tiobe said that it was almost inevitable that Objective-C would drop in popularity after Apple switched to Swift, although it was not expecting Ruby to fill the gap.

This month Objective-C dropped out of the TIOBE index top 10. Scripting language Ruby exploited this drop and entered the top 10 again. Ruby’s small revival is a bit surprising. The language was a genuine hype between 2006 and 2008. Rubyists were shouting all over the Internet that Ruby and Rails were the best gift to mankind. It even became TIOBE’s language of the year 2006. The hype stopped quite abruptly when Twitter announced to shift from Ruby to Scala in 2009. The hotness was over. Scala was the new thing. Without evangelists, Ruby dropped out of the top 10 and had to reinvent itself.

See also: Apple’s Swift Breaks Into The Top 20 Programming Languages

Ruby might have taken advantage of Objective-C’s fall to 14th this month, but the real winner is Swift which sits one spot below. Apple’s language has only been available for around 15 months and is already making waves in the developer community, although Apple has stressed that it can work alongside the venerable Objective-C.

While Swift has not yet made the step up into Tiobe’s top 10 programming languages, its usage has increased by 0.52% in the last year and the expectation is that the language will build on this rapid growth as Apple pushes not only an alternative to Objective-C but also the benefits of its fast coding capabilities for iOS, OS X and watchOS.

Apart from the downward trajectory of Objective-C, the rest of the October index has a familiar look. Java remains the most popular language with a rating of 19.543%, with C, C++, C# and Python making up the top five coding resources for developers.

The Tiobe index uses 25 search engines to assess what are the most popular languages and ranks them accordingly. Based on a series of set criteria, these search engines provide the compilers of the index with a formula that creates a list of 100 programming languages.|||

The legacy of Objective-C is not in question, but it is being usurped by Swift.