There are three kinds of users; ghost, unhappy and happy. You should start investing time in understanding each of them to better understand your product or services because after all they are part of it.

This is the most common type of users. I call them ghost because they almost never contact you! They use your product. They pay you. But it's like they never exist. You only see their side effects, like for SunSed you can see their blog posts.

Some companies love this type of users, mostly because they don't like customer service. A good indication that a company prefers Ghost Users is when they send you an email the return address is something like do-not-reply@example.com.

But some companies cannot live without ghost users. They cannot afford other types of users. It would be too expensive to support their service. These companies try to automate the hell out of everything. Their job is also easier because it's almost always easier to deal with hardware than people.

Google is a good example of a company that likes and basically cannot live without ghost users! When was the last time you contacted google? And how much do you use their products?

Imagine how much it would cost for google to support everyone emailing and asking questions like: dear google I cannot find this or that on the web? :)

Unhappy users have one thing in common with happy users. They usually give you their feedback and help you focus on what to do next.

I sometimes prefer unhappy over ghost users, specially at the beginning where you really need your users feedback to improve your product.

You should resolve the problems that cause their unhappiness as fast as you can otherwise they will start to harm you.

You can buy yourself some time to work on the problems by acknowledging the problems publicly and say we are working on it. Unlike hardware, people show mercy because they have emotions but be careful not to abuse this power or it will backfire.

Oh, I love happy users. They are the Red Bull for business. In my opinion a single happy user is more valuable than a million dollar investment because money is raw energy that can be misused but a happy user gives you the kind of energy you need right now!

Keep your users happy! They are too valuable! Over time they become your fans! They keep coming back to you to see if you have something new to say. They constantly check your blog, twitter account and search the web for articles about you.|||

