Red Hat, Inc. (NYSE: RHT), the world's leading provider of open source solutions, today announced that it has joined the Node.js Foundation as a Platinum member, underscoring its commitment to developers, Node.js, and open source collaboration. As a Platinum member of the Foundation, Red Hat will have a seat on the Node.js Foundation Board of Directors and marketing committee, collaborating with other members to help promote and accelerate the development of the Node.js project and technology.

Node.js is an open source, server-side JavaScript runtime that has seen greater growth and adoption in enterprises over the last few years. Node.js has become an important technology for developers building high performance, low latency applications for web, mobile, and Internet of Things (IoT). The Node.js Foundation is represented by a broad spectrum of collaborators from software vendors, ISVs, end customers, and individual developers.

Established in June 2015 and run as a Linux Foundation collaborative project, the Node.js Foundation provides independent oversight over the adoption, development, and long-term stewardship of the Node.js project. The Foundation's open governance model and community collaboration aligns with Red Hat's dedication to transparency, openness, and community-powered innovation.

As a growing server-side framework for developers, Node.js plays an important role in Red Hat technologies that support mobile application development, such as the Red Hat Mobile Application Platform, and is available in OpenShift by Red Hat and Red Hat Software Collections.

Supporting Quotes

 Rich Sharples, senior director, Product Management, Red Hat

 “We are always mindful where we invest our resources and focus our efforts, and believe the Node.js Foundation has an important role to play in helping to make Node.js successful, as well as the developers using the technology to deploy Node.js applications. We look forward to working alongside our colleagues in the Foundation to help guide the project in the future.”

Danese Cooper, Chairperson of the Node.js Foundation Board

 “Node.js is becoming a platform of choice for many large enterprises, including those leveraging Red Hat mobile application development technologies. We anticipate that Red Hat will be a valuable member of the Node.js Foundation Board with its knowledge in this space and its overall company ethos of openness.”

Michael Facemire, principal analyst, Application Development & Delivery, Forrester Research – quote from September 2015 report “Brief: IBM Acquires StrongLoop”

 “In our daily discussions with clients, we hear a constant drumbeat of demands for a scalable, highly performant application platform. Forrester's recent Mobile Infrastructure Services Wave evaluation also showed this trend, as each of the three solutions in the leaders category provides data integration facilities by leveraging Node.js.”|||

Red Hat joins Node.js Foundation to help promote and accelerate the development of the Node.js project.