Her own loss and an encounter with a medium got her interested in trying to quantify the mental-health effects of mediumship, as it's called, versus traditional grief counseling and drugs. "Our real interest is in what you can do with this," she says. "And as you experienced, it's super helpful in grief. As long as you know the scientific method, you can apply it to anything. There are all these people, mostly women, saying they're experiencing this communication with the deceased. So I'm testing them."

Her goal? That the medical establishment might recognize mediums as bona fide therapy for the bereaved. It sounds extremely farfetched, but not so many years ago, no insurance company covered acupuncture. Now, the state of California requires that all insurers do.

Not surprisingly, Beischel is running a shoestring operation and is perpetually seeking funding for her studies, for which she goes to great lengths to prevent any suggestion of "cold reading." That's the name for how a reader begins a session with generalities, pays attention to the reactions of the client—words, body language, skin color, breathing patterns, dilation or contraction of the pupils of the eye—and then tailors observations around the information conveyed. The bereaved are particularly easy marks for cold readings; we're highly motivated to find meaning in what we hear, and to hear what we want to hear about our dearly departed.

To prevent such fraud, Beischel keeps the "sitter" (the term of art for the seeker of a reading) and the medium from having direct contact. Typically, that means Beischel herself gives the medium the name of the deceased, along with five questions about him or her—appearance, personality, hobbies, cause of death, and whether the "discarnate" (the term of art for the dead person) has any messages for the relative or friend left behind. That person is then given the answers—but also a set of decoy answers from a reading done for someone else. The sitter scores both readings for accuracy, and picks which one she thinks came from her loved one.

Beischel says that sitters pick the right reading about 70 percent of the time, but that mistakes during readings are just part of the process. The reason TV mediums—which is how most people experience this profession—"seem so accurate is that they're most likely heavily edited," she says. "The theory [behind the errors] is that there's static or noise in the system. Your medium might be picking up the deceased family members of, say, a passing truck driver. As a medium, you have to have this sort of right-brained ability to hear from the dead, but also have one foot grounded to be able to differentiate the noise from the signal."

Lisa Kay works only over the phone, she says, in part to keep the reading "more pure," to avoid the "distractions" of an in-person reading. But precisely because I'm a left brainer, because I've spent my professional life as a journalist, I became determined to meet her, to report her out, to use one of my profession's terms of art. I was convinced that if I observed her body language, looked her in the eye, that if I grilled her about her job and how it works, I'd know if what had happened between us was real. I wanted to demystify the mystery.

I called her and invited her to lunch. Somewhat reluctantly, she agreed.

We met in an Upper East Side Manhattan restaurant Lisa picked; I told her what kind of bag I'd be carrying and she spotted me first. She was not the New Agey lady I was expecting. She was attractive, well-coiffed, and beautifully turned out in pink cashmere, black pants, and flats. I'm guessing that she's a few years older than I, but her age remains a state secret.

"I knew you'd call again," she said as we sat down among all the ladies who lunch and ordered a salad Niçoise and a frittata. How did she know?

I began to ask her about how it works, the mechanics of reading, of seeing spirits.

"First," she said, "I don't talk to dead people. I don't see dead people. I hate that." It drives her nuts. "Spirits are energy—energy can't be destroyed, just read the quantum physicists. Max Planck. They're just on a higher vibrational frequency, and I have to tune in to that."

What did she do to prepare? "I meditate. I quiet my mind. I connect to my heart, set an intention to read. I make sure I'm well hydrated. I leave my problems at the door, making myself completely available to be a receiver." What happens when the signs, or "hits," as she calls them, start to come? "Sometimes it's a little movie. Sometimes a picture. A symbol. Sometimes it's just one sign—a smell." Or a sharp, fleeting pain in her head if, say, the deceased had a brain tumor.

She says she gets some of her best hits in the shower: "Water conducts energy." And at Bloomingdale's! She's quite funny. "I'm joking, but truthfully, I will go to Bloomingdale's when it's empty and walk around, and I get some of the biggest hits that way."

She's self-taught. She did not study under another medium, but she's very well read, in her field and beyond it. Later, she'd send me quotes often, about the power of intuition, from Kahlil Gibran, Albert Einstein, Ram Dass, Helen Keller, Molière, William Blake.

"Somebody called them my 'powers' the other day," she said dismissively. "They're not 'powers.' It's an ability I've worked on."

So, when did she know she had it? I asked. I sensed that she was weighing something, trying to decide whether to trust me. I later learned that she'd been approached by media people before and had decided not to participate in whatever they were offering—magazine stories, TV projects.

Here's some of what I learned over the last year about Lisa Kay:

She and her sister were raised in Switzerland, Belgium, and the Upper East Side. Her parents were divorced. Her dad was a Marine who fought in World War II and ultimately became a senior vice president of Morgan Stanley Dean Witter & Co. Her mother remarried and had one more child, a boy named Patrick, whom Lisa adored.

It was hard to get her to focus on questions about her personal life. She frequently went off on tangents, and I wondered: Was she a little ADD? Was it possible she was hearing more than one conversation at once? Or, the reporter in me feared, was she trying to avoid my questions?

She came back to the States as a teenager and enrolled at Jacksonville University in Florida. "I took a criminal-justice course there and I was fascinated, so I transferred to John Jay [College of Criminal Justice in New York]." After graduation, she interned for a year in Manhattan's 30th Police Precinct as a youth aide officer. "One detective said to me, 'You're too sensitive. You want to change everything, and that's not gonna happen.'"

So she left and worked as a flight attendant and in a nursing home, took singing lessons, and ended up in high-end fashion retail, as a sales associate at Gucci, Calvin Klein, and Bottega Veneta. "I was lost over the years," she says. "My dad was a good man, but he'd say, 'You never finish anything.'" One day at Bottega Veneta, she was taking a phone order. "I said, 'Okay, Doctor, I'll send that off to you.' And he said, 'How did you know I was a doctor? I didn't say I was.' I said, 'Yes, you did, it's right here on my paper.' But it wasn't. So I tried to explain it away—'Well, it was just your cadence'—and he sort of laughed and said, 'My dear, you have a very special gift.'"

About five years later, on her fortieth birthday, the love of her life died. "Almost immediately, I started getting psychic information. On the set of the film Serendipity, I was working as an extra, and that's when I got my first mediumship impression. I met this woman at the craft-food services table, and she started to talk to me about her losses. And I started telling her about people who'd passed. This is back in 2001.

"Then I went to see a psychic, and he said, 'I'm sorry to tell you this, but they're clapping for you; they're throwing a party for you; they're saying you're doing great work.' It was exciting but upsetting. I said, 'Can you ask them to postpone the party?'"

For a while she read people for free, practicing. But she had to eat, pay the utility bills, and a few years after that first impression, she began to charge for hour-long readings. She spends a lot of her time on the phone with clients. She has a group of good friends, psychics and civilians both, but says of her work, "Sometimes it's lonely." She felt that some of her relationships changed when she first became a medium; not quite that she was being used, but…. I imagined her job was like being a doctor; people accosting you in restaurants, trying to get free advice: "Do you mind taking a quick look at my shoulder?"|||

The medium delivered the message that eased her unrelenting grief. Then the doubt set in.