Over the past few years we have been fortunate enough to try quite a few different technologies outside the world of Qt. We've done native development for iOS, Android and Windows Phone and more recently have done some stuff on the web. After using these other platforms, we noticed that they all had something that Qt did not: a package manager for handling application dependencies.

Back in August we decided that we would try to make a prototype to see how far we could get in a few weeks. A few weeks turned into a few months and today we have something that we are reasonably happy with. We bought a spiffy domain, a slick HTML template and a DigitalOcean droplet. When you put it all together you get qpm.io!

qpm is a command line tool for installing and managing dependencies for your application. It is based around Qt's .pri file support so everything gets compiled into your application binary. No libraries, no plugins, no qt.conf, no deploying QML/JS files. Everything gets rolled into your app for easy deployment. The tool itself follows the same principal. It's a single static binary executable with no dependencies, no config files, and no environment variables.

Believe it or not, one of the things we struggled with the most was how to distribute a single command line binary to the 3 main desktop platforms. We're still evaluating the best way to do this, but head over to qpm.io to see what's available now, but also leave a comment about how you would like to get it.

So let's say you have an app and you want to use a 3rdparty package that is available in qpm. You should navigate to the source root of your project and install what you want ("qpm list" lists all packages in the registry) :|||

qpm is a command line tool for installing and managing dependencies for 
your Qt application. It is based around Qt's .pri file support so 
everything gets compiled into your application binary. No libraries, no 
plugins, no qt.conf, no deploying QML/JS files. Everything gets rolled into 
your app for easy deployment.