What new technologies are emerging as a result of this? If you look five years ago, it was broadly big data and cloud computing, but there has been a lot of evolution lately.

Those trends that you mentioned were things that one should have looked at five years ago to skate to today’s puck. When I think about skating to the puck five years from now, I think about things like machine learning, as an example. It’s a natural extension of analytics and big data, but done in ways where software inherently becomes more intelligent through its use of data. Starting to deploy machine learning as opposed to business intelligence is one area it might take off.

There’s also a very interesting trend, relating to the relationship between datacenters and endpoint computing. If you look back over the history of computing, it started as mainframes or terminals. As PCs or work stations became prevalent, computing moved to the edge and we had applications that took advantage of edge computing, and the CPU and processing power at the edge. Cloud computing brought things back to the center. There has been an ebb and flow in enterprise IT, of centralized versus distributed.

I think with the proliferation of mobile devices, and then eventually the Internet of Things, we literally have supercomputers in our pockets and supercomputers that will hang on telephone poles and in light bulbs. That latent capacity will be used for applications running at endpoints, which will change the dynamics of cloud computing just like the PC did. I think that that’s going to be a very profound shift, that more and more computing will be done at the edge as opposed to always relegating it back to the datacenter.

That sounds like a feasible vision, but most of my apps are still cloud services.

I am starting to see the seeds of new projects that are starting to look at that. I think it’s very early, but I can see a world where endpoint distributed computing becomes more popular, just like we saw when corporate IT shifted from mainframes and onto workstations and PCs. Are there hot projects right now? Not yet, but I’m starting to see university work being done in this area.

Then, there’s the discussion of what happens to datacenter architectures. If you believe that the mobile phone is the next supercomputer, which I do, you can imagine a datacenter that is modeled after, literally, hundreds or thousands or millions of mobile phones. They won’t have screens on them, but there’ll be millions of lightweight mobile-phone processors in the datacenter.

Over time, we’ll see commonality of architectures and applications that will become a very effective model for running apps and doing things where the boundaries between the datacenter and the endpoint may be a lot less clear than they are today. Where’s the boundary between the datacenter and the endpoint? It’s an amorphous blob of stuff and applications can move all around it.

That may be very futuristic, but if you look at past trends I think there very likely could be something there. Just like the PC supply chain ate into the mainframe, I believe that the mobile supply chain will eat into the datacenter.

If we were sitting here in 1980 and somebody suggested that the IBM PC and then the 8086 or 8080 architecture for processors would become the basis of datacenter computing, people would think you’re crazy. There were two floppy disks and it had no RAM and all that stuff. What has happened? The Intel architecture, which began on the PC, has become the standard in the datacenter.|||

Andreessen Horowitz general partner Peter Levine has a long history in enterprise IT, dating back to his early career as an engineer and EVP at storage company Veritas. He is best known as CEO of…