Part of our October series, “On Fear,” where we unpack fear in the startup world.

When you start your company, one of the most common questions you get is about how big your business could be. It comes from a variety of angles: “How big is the market?”, “Is this a feature or a product?”, “How do you compete with X, Y and Z?”, “What is your long term vision?”, “Is this scalable?” Investors want to know where your startup is going, and more importantly, whether YOU want to build a big, meaningful company.

That may sound like an odd question. Of course I want to do the biggest, most meaningful thing I can. I’m not spending all my waking hours on something small. But experienced entrepreneurs know better. Big ideas are scary… but maybe not right away.

Let’s say you have a big startup idea. It’s not scary to think about all of the grand possibilities. It’s not scary to work out the details of how to take the first steps toward it. It’s only a little bit scary to build a prototype, release it to a few hundred people, iterate, then fundraise based on your progress toward an audacious goal.

But it will inevitably become scary in one way or another. When your original thesis turns out to have flaws, it will be unclear how to adjust. And you’ll need to re-rally your investors, employees and users around that modified vision. Conversely, when your startup begins to take off, it feels like everything is breaking and it’s your fault. You’ll be ping-ponging from engineering scale problems to hiring issues to lawsuits from competitors. You will make a few decisions a week that could be blunders.

Zenefits is one of the fastest growing startups in history. By all accounts it’s a startup doing incredibly well. Parker Conrad, CEO of Zenefits, puts it nicely: “It doesn’t feel like we’re successful. It feels like we’re bouncing from one terrifying near-catastrophe to the next.”

This is scary stuff. This is where you see whether you truly want the pressure and responsibilities of building a billion dollar business. That requires insane ambition, which almost all rational people smartly avoid.

Being scared isn’t always a bad thing. Fear focuses you on the areas of your business you need to improve. You just need to balance it with rational optimism about how you and your team will make it work.

On a personal level, self-doubt is natural. Great entrepreneurs grow into the role. Get better every day and surround yourself with the best team. It’s the only way to go from nothing to something great.|||

When you start your company, one of the most common questions you get is about how big your business could be.