When it comes to being a successful business owner—like being a professional athlete or a movie star—we tend to shoot ourselves down before we even start. We make excuses: it’s for the lucky ones, those who are in the right place at the right time.

Yes, while luck and timing can be connected to how successful a business can become, as an entrepreneur you should focus on overcoming plateaus and solving problems.

During AccelerateOTT on September 24, 2015, Shopify CEO Tobias Lütke sat down for a fireside chat and discussed the importance of pursuing business ventures, as well as his role within the whole eCommerce ecosystem.

“I think one of the most interesting things you can do on this planet, in my biased opinion, is creating a business,” said Lütke. “It’s one of the most pure form of self-expression. There’s so much emphasis on ‘follow your passion.’ I don’t buy that. What you should follow is follow your contribution. Follow your input. What do you actually have to give back to the world? Rather than what you have to take out of the world. One way to give something back, something meaningful in my eyes, is the process of creating a business than creating a product and then seeing real humans interact with it.”

With approximately 175,000 stores, operating in 150 countries, and employing 900 people, Shopify is one of the most recognized eCommerce platforms on the planet. It’s simplified the process of creating a digital store.

Building a business was something Lütke had problems with at the early stages of his career, before Shopify. He was selling snowboards out of his company Snowdevil and figured that there must be an easier way to sell products online. The idea eventually led to the conception of his billion-dollar company.

When starting a business, Lütke believes that every person has an unfair advantage they can bring. It all begins by acknowledging what needs to be solved in their world. “I know this problem. I actually would be a customer of this software I’m building,” said Lütke. “I would be a user of this tool I’m building. It’s interesting how often that is the underlying philosophy behind a lot of the best tools. I can guarantee to you that Apple built a phone they wanted to use.”

There is a lot of internal and external resistance when starting a new company and creating a new product. Even though you might believe in what you’re doing, how are you going to market it? How are you going to convince others that there is value?

“Whenever you bring out new technology—something really novel, you have to explain it in the context of old technology for other people to understand. The way Netscape explain the Internet to people who don’t know what the Internet was, was saying you connect all those computers together: think of the Sears catalogue […] on your computer where you can buy things directly. What Netscape was explaining was eCommerce.”

“The most important trait I find is authenticity,” said Lütke. “Authenticity leads to people admitting what they don’t understand yet. Here’s the thing I tell everyone of my executives when I hire them: ‘the reason why I hired you for this position is not because of all the things you know, but how you react when you don’t know how to solve a problem.’ There’s a big difference. What does that mean? It means, if you can admit what you don’t know, and you can make your skill learning about the things you don’t know. Then it almost doesn’t matter how much previous experience you have because you are going to be extremely useful in the context of a small company and a startup.”

In the grand scheme of things, the eCommerce network is a relatively new trade route for merchants. Rules are being created and altered almost annually and business innovations are changing the playing field for everyone. The ability to adopt new technology and adapt to the volatile environment is crucial. The first step is to admit that anything you do know—what ever you are an expert at—may be irrelevant in a year, a month, or even a week from now.

The word “business” is synonymous with “profit,” but if wealth is what you are solely after, then starting your own company may be a lost cause.

Lütke presented us with the cold hard truth: “Don’t sell. What are you going to do with that money? You didn’t start this company because you wanted to make money. Startups are a horrible way of making money. It’s terrible. The odds of you making money are nothing. […] Be personal growth greedy. Do it for being amazing at things that are meaningful to you.”

Whatever problems your business is solving, Control is here to help. Our powerful app helps monitor, measure, and manage payments activity. Try it today!|||

Problems. That is why you should start a business. So before you start your own, ask: What problem will your business solve?