Several weeks ago we published an article that featured five most wanted lenses ever for owners of Nikon cameras. Today we’d like to continue our series of posts with reviews on Nikon lenses, and as part of it we’ve prepared a guide that’s a bit more specific.

Keep reading to find out the features and characteristics of the best wide-angle lenses for Nikon cameras with 1.6x cropped sensors.

Nikon 10-24mm f/3.5-4.5G is the latest ultra wide-angle lens by Nikon for DX cameras. It’s really wide, however it could have been a bit sharper and better built. It present distortion but barely has any flare or ghosts. The lens weights 460 grams, has 77mm filter size, 7 diaphragm blades, and is made of solid plastic.

This baby is the newest ultra wide-angle lens by Tokina, which became the successor of 11-20 f/4 lens. Now it became even lighter, sharper, and faster. The strangest thing of it all that the lens presents very little distortion and chromatic aberrations, and it’s really well-built. It weighs 560 grams, has 88mm filter size, and 9 diaphragm blades.

Sigma AF 10-20mm f/3.5 is a solid ultra wide-angle lens which is built very well. The image quality, however, is worse than that of Nikon or Tokina. The lens is pretty fast. The lens weights 520 grams, has 82mm filter size, 7 diaphragm blades, and is made of solid plastic.

This Tamron is a very good optics piece for beginners and amateurs who would like to practice wide-angle photography. It’s solidly built, really wide, and fast. However, sharpness is its soft point. The lens weights 425 grams, has 77mm filter size, 7 diaphragm blades, and is made of solid plastic.

Try out these simple and useful tools to shoot distinctive photos that people will love, use our platform to sell them, and earn at least 70% of the photo value. Become a KeepSnap independent photographer and go out today to snap people around you and earn a living. It's completely free for photographers.

This article contains images and excerpts the use of which have not been pre-authorized. This material is made available for purposes of analysis and critique, as well as to advance the understanding of rhetoric, politics, and visual culture.

The ‘fair use’ of such material is provided for under U.S. Copyright Law. In accordance with U.S. Code Title 17, Section 107, material on this site (along with credit links and attributions to original sources) is viewable for educational and intellectual purposes. If you are interested in using any copyrighted material from this site for any reason that goes beyond ‘fair use,’ you must first obtain permission from the copyright owner.|||

Like shooting wide-angle? Check our guide on the best Nikon DX ultra wide-angle lenses.