It has been said that traveling abroad in your twenties can ruin your life. My recent travels have certainly made me step back and evaluate life from a completely different perspective. How would I live my life if I knew I was going to die next month? Where would I want to be and what would I want to be doing? What would I do differently if I knew I was going to be dead in a year?

If you had asked me that question 5 months ago, I would have responded, “Nothing. Life is perfect the way it is.” And that was the truth. I was living a life that I loved, and working with an amazing team of people that were like family. I enjoyed waking up every morning, diving into my work, and spending my evenings at tech and startup events. I’ve always had a deep thirst for knowledge, and my startup lifestyle quenched that thirst. The reality of life itself was perfect, and I had never been more content in my 28 years.

Shortly before my 29th birthday in May, I left the USA for 1 1/2 months of international travel. My company allowed me to introduce an experimental perk: work the month of June abroad. I told anyone who would listen about this awesome perk, and how excited I was to take advantage of it. I was going to volunteer on an off-the-grid, chemical-free, permaculture farm in the middle of the Costa Rican jungle! The idea of this month abroad first surfaced while at Rancho Margot with Under30Experiences in November 2014. I fell in love with the farm and wanted to come back and experience this way of life.

After arriving at the farm, I set my schedule to work on Synapp.io 5–8AM, volunteer 8:30–3PM, and back to Synapp.io 5–9PM. It wasn’t easy. There was no cell service in the bunkhouse, so using my phone as a hotspot wasn’t an option. As the rainy season commenced, the solar-powered wifi began to suffer. There is limited bandwidth, and once it runs out, someone has to ride a horse up a mountain and fetch the wifi box to recharge the signal. When there were large groups of guests combined with 20 days straight of heavy rain, it wasn’t uncommon for the wifi to go out in the late afternoon and not be back on until after 9AM the next day. This greatly affected my ability to collaborate with the team, which was my main responsibility.

When I wasn’t sitting in reception (the only place with wifi) and working at my computer, I was spending my days working in the garden, exploring the ranch, learning about snakes, teaching photography, and educating and interacting with the students at La Escuela en El Castillo.

The simplicity of life on the ranch and the seclusion from the outer world made me appreciate things I would never have considered before: clean laundry, toilet paper, plastic bags, internet access, dry socks, electricity, ice, books to read, transportation, and the list goes on. Plastic bags are essential to protecting electronics, and aren’t easy to come by. The only way to get to the nearby pueblo was to walk or beg one of the few people with cars to drive. Near the beginning of July, there was a problem with the hydro-electric generator due to insane amounts of rain, and the owner and ranch workers had to rewire the entire ranch’s electrical system in two days during torrential downpours. Sometimes email took several days to download. I was never able to update all of the apps on my phone using the wifi. I once had to wear the same clothes for 4 days in the garden because the washer and dryer were broken, and I couldn’t find a ride to El Castillo to take my laundry to get washed.

This was all part of the experience.

I started caring less about what was happening on Twitter and more about watching the birds and finding red-eyed frogs.

The highlight of my weeks was spending time with my students at La Escuela en El Castillo. Rancho Margot has a wonderful program where the volunteers, guides, and guests come to La Escuela and El Colegio and spend time with the students. English is an important component to the program, but it is also focused on teaching values and exposing the students to people from all walks of life. Tourism is a large part of Costa Rica’s economy, and Rancho Margot’s program helps educate children from a young age to embrace different cultures, respect the land, and speak English.|||

It has been said that traveling abroad in your twenties can ruin your life. My recent travels have certainly made me step back and evaluate life from a completely different perspective. How would I…