We have simplified employee referral program for small, medium and large organization. This referral program can be used by any organization from 10 employees to millions.

 If your company already has referral program, this will supercharge your exist referral program with 10x speed to next level.

 Our application built with more HR managers interaction and gathered all the requirements of referral program to solve current referral problems. Once you implemented you will feel this is very simple with more functionality to improve current referral program. We assure that you will come back our website for your referral program.

We are small dedicated team to make sure you love our product instead of you like it. Our program can be useful for all the industries like IT, non-IT. This can be useful for white collar and blue collar employees.

We knew these employees don’t have any email access. Our application provide SMS and mobile app job notifications to them to recommend their friends.

We knew that this is main concern to migrate your current referral program. Our app comes with 100% secure of all employees details. Your employee details are encrypted with new secured techniques. It means your employee email / phone number and name not stored as plain text instead it stored as encrypted format.

 No one can access your employee details even SkilledTree support team and developers. Your employee details will be safe with triple layer secured. You can go through our Secured measurements here.

Yes. SkilledTree is role based application such as HR Admin, HR Regional Manager, HR Manager, Recruiter and manager. For information of these roles check our Documents. HR Admin can view whole employee referral program of the company, HR Regional manager can view only his regional referral program, HR manager can view only his location referral program and Recruiter can view only small team of referral program. Suppose, company has four regional head office. You can split this referral program to these 4 different regionals, so each region has own referral program. If the regional head office has different branches in different location, you can again split this referral program to location level. And if your company has many offices in single location then you can again split this program to office or team level. This adds more flexible to your referral program.|||

Employee referral program to hire quality candidates through your employees networks. It supports multi level referral program to hire quality candidates