When OpenSignal released its State of LTE report last month, we compared 183 operators side by side showing how they stacked up in terms of speed and coverage. As a follow up, though, we’ve decided to drill down into that data to check on how the first countries to enter the 4G race are performing.

Comparing the U.S. — which launched LTE in 2010 — with Argentina — which turned on its first 4G network nine months ago — doesn’t tell us much. But comparing the U.S. with fellow early mover South Korea can give us insight into the evolution of networks that have had more than 4 years to mature. This post is just the first of several deep dives we plan to do into report data. Later this week my colleague Teresa Murphy will look at how the 4G networks in the wealthiest and poorest countries compare.

For this analysis, we took the first 20 countries to launch commercial LTE networks, starting with the NetCom and TeliaSonera’s Scandinavian debut in 2009 and ending with the Etisalat’s rollout in the United Arab Emirates in 2011. Not every operator in each of these countries launched LTE at the same time, but overall these countries have had at least four years to build out their 4G footprints and capacity as well as populate their networks with LTE devices. They’re all well past the network infancy phase we’re seeing in many countries where relatively unloaded networks produce fast connections among limited subscribers. And almost all of these operators have already deployed LTE on a second frequency band and several of them are already using three frequencies.

Let’s see how 19 of these operators stack up on a plot graph showing speed and coverage (We left out Uzbekistan because we didn’t have enough data points from that country to accurately gauge its performance):

As in our overall LTE report, South Korea and Singapore are clearly dominating when it comes to both 4G speeds and coverage, but for the rest it’s a bit of a mixed bag of speed and coverage. In general, these early movers have built highly available networks. OpenSignal uses a metric we called time-coverage which tracks what proportion of time users have access to an LTE signal (you can find a complete explanation of that methodology here), and 11 of the nineteen operators had time-coverage numbers of 70 percent or more. In fact, these early adopters make up half of the overall top 20 globally in terms of coverage.

Over the last four years, building high-coverage networks seems to have been a much bigger priority in Asia than in Europe, though Asian operators did have a bit of an advantage. It’s easier to build high-coverage networks in Singapore and Hong Kong – which are essentially city-states – or densely populated counties like South Korea and Japan. But then again, the U.S. has managed to achieve to 78 percent LTE availability in five years — beating nearly all of its European peers — despite its enormous land mass. Even Saudi Arabia, which has one of the lowest population densities in the world, has 62 percent coverage, beating out Germany, Austria and Poland.

Turning our attention to speed, however, the results are all over the graph, ranging from Saudi Arabia’s average of 4 Mbps to Singapore’s 33 Mbps. In general, these first-to-LTE countries are ahead of the curve. All but five of the 19 beat the overall global average of 12.6 Mbps, and five of them ranked in the overall top 10 of world’s speediest countries.

Europe along with Asia shines in this category with several countries averaging 20 Mbps or better speeds. But there’s not much consistency within regions. While Denmark and Austria have some of the fastest networks in the world, Sweden and Norway are only just above average. Canada is far outpacing its neighbor to the south, the U.S. And while Japan and Hong Kong have built out some of the highest coverage networks in the world, they certainly can’t say the same about speed.

Clearly 4G maturity doesn’t dictate the speed of your country’s networks, though it’s a better indication of more robust coverage. This likely has to do with the unique spectrum situation of each country. While any operator can add coverage by building more cell sites, they can’t manufacture airwaves. In South Korea, SK Telecom and LG U+ have plowed 40 MHz of download capacity into their networks, and they’re using new LTE-Advanced techniques to boost speeds further. We’re seeing similar high-capacity networks in Austria and Denmark.

Meanwhile in the U.S., most operators have 20 MHz or less of 4G capacity available for downlink connections. Except for Sprint, U.S. operators have exhausted their designated 4G spectrum and have started cannibalizing their 2G and 3G networks for more 4G capacity (a trend we’re seeing in Europe and Asia as well). That’s one of the main reasons why next year’s upcoming spectrum auction is such a hot-button topic in the U.S. Operators hope to use that 600 MHz spectrum to create more 4G capacity or possibly even as a foundation for future 5G networks.

That wraps up our look at the performance of the early LTE adopters. Be sure and check this blog later this week though to read Teresa’s comparison of LTE performance against a country’s wealth.|||

Page description