The tool can fetch summaries from any MediaWiki wiki with the API active, but defaults to the English Wikipedia.

To be able to install with requires you to have your setup and your added to path as described here http://golang.org/doc/code.html#GOPATH.

If you don't want the man file you can just install it with .

If you want to install the man file you can install with , but then use the command from the source directory.

or just copy the man file in to or where you keep your man files.

To get a summary from Wikipedia in English just invoke the tool with a query.

$ wiki golang Redirected from Golang to Go (programming language) Go, also commonly referred to as golang, is a programming language developed at Google 2007 by Robert Griesemer, Rob Pike, and Ken Thompson. It is a statically typed language with syntax loosely derived from that of C, adding garbage collection, safety, some structural typing capabilities, additional built-in types such as variable-length arrays key-value maps, and a large standard library. The language was announced November 2009 and is now used some of Google s compiler targets the Linux, OS X, FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, Plan 9, DragonFly BSD, Solaris, and Windows operating systems and the i386, Amd64, ARM and IBM POWER processor architectures. A second compiler, gccgo, is a GCC frontend. Android support was added version 1.4, which has since been ported to also run on iOS. Read more: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Go_(programming_language)

To get a localized result, e.g. in Swedish use the -l flag.

Use the -h flag to see all options (or if you have it installed)

To get excerpts from another wiki use the -u flag to give another url to the API to use.

This gives the excerpt from the wiki at wikiversity.org instead of Wikipedia.

If you frequently use the tool to fetch data from a custom url, add an alias. E.g. for bash. Add an alias to your or file.

And call it using

or using System Environment in your or file.

Run the tests using the make target test , this runs both the unit and the integration tests. For running only one type of tests use and respectively.

All contributions are welcome! See CONTRIBUTING for more info.

The code is under the MIT license. See LICENSE for more information.|||

Command line tool to fetch summaries from MediaWiki wikis, like Wikipedia