Last week was quite a whirlwind for the advertising industry.

First there was the annual Woodstock for industry insiders, (aka Advertising Week), featuring a maelstrom of panels, presentations and pugilism on the industry’s buzziest topics, including  the flood of major brands putting their agency business up for review (either “Reviewmaggedon” or “Reviewpalooza” depending on your perspective); the desperate chase for the attention and affection of millennials (“What’s the matter with kids to-day?!”); and the dynamic “new” trend toward more directly blending content with brand messaging (although Macy’s Betsy Spence gently pointed out in an interview with MediaLink’s Michael Kassan (CEO of my employer, MediaLink) that they’ve been at this since the advent of “Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade”!).  We also saw the kickoff to the fall broadcast television season, with networks and media buyers everywhere wondering where and how to find this year’s version of FOX’s , the surprise hit of last season. And finally, and most significantly, we saw the announcement of a potentially game-changing merger between comScore and Rentrak, two companies little known to most of the general public but with the potential for great disruption in the world of media measurement long dominated by Nielsen.

Speaking of Nielsen, last week also happened to be the week for me to explain to my graduate students in Media Economics how Nielsen ratings work in the television business. Have you ever tried to explain something in your clearest, most thoughtful, and deliberate voice and then realized that your listener actually speaks a different language? Well, that was kind of my experience in class last week.

Nielsen has held a virtual monopoly on the measurement of television audiences for decades, and has been accepted as the “currency” for media buying (no matter how grudgingly) from all sides. Whether you were a network seller or a brand (or their agency) buyer, and needed to set the table for negotiations over the buying and selling of advertising, you used Nielsen numbers to tell you how many people watched and what kind of demographic profile they represented. But in an age with access to  every imaginable digital media data point, try explaining this to a class of bright, logical, media-consuming millennials: that we are still largely relying upon the permitted access to the homes of 20,000 paid customers with Nielsen boxes to determine the fate of $70 billion of advertising in 117 million households with over 300 million people who watch billions of hours of premium television (shorthand for broadcast and cable) not only in their homes but on phones, iPads and office computers.  I felt like the poor schlub given the task of explaining: “Look, I’m tellin’ ya, the Emperor is definitely wearing clothes!”

There are a number of reasons why the blending of comScore and Rentrak has attracted not only the attention but the not-so-quiet rooting by many participants and leaders in the advertising and media worlds:

We're not waiting for the “tipping point” in the traditional television business – we’ve “tipped” – We’ve been observing the migration and fragmentation of video consumers from broadcast to cable to over-the-top video for years, but the heat has been turned up very clearly and precipitously. Just a day before the comScore-Rentrak announcement we heard Linda Yaccarino, head of all of NBCUniversal’s advertising business proclaiming an “acute crisis” in measuring “cross-platform” viewing (measuring viewer behavior of the same program across multiple traditional and digital outlets). Add to that a summer of Wall Street angst about the financial future of big media holding companies. Despite the extraordinary vitality of television content in this second “golden age” (from The Sopranos to Mad Men to House of Cards), the decades-long balancing act of sharing the freight in paying for that creativity (through cable/satellite subscriber fees and advertiser commercial dollars (not the absence of both for House of Cards) is under siege. The market needs a break – and a breakthrough.

A lot of key players are rooting it on – The financial markets often provide short-term thumbs down on competitor mergers (concern with price, fit, execution, etc.), but not this one as both companies have seen a pretty significant rise in their stock prices. More importantly, some of the most significant players in the advertiser “ecosystem” are applauding this. Sir Martin Sorrell (whose not incidentally has been a shareholder in both companies) spoke for many during Advertising Week when he championed the deal’s benefits for competition in measurement, and similar words emerged from many of those bloodied by battles with Nielsen for years.|||

Last week was quite a whirlwind for the advertising industry. First there was the annual Woodstock for industry insiders, (aka Advertising Week), featuring a maelstrom of panels, presentations and pugilism on the industry’s buzziest topics, including  the flood of major brands putting their agency business up for review (either “Reviewmaggedon” or [...]