26 Proven Growth Features That All App Developers Should Know About Have you ever wondered what makes some apps and games more successful than others? To help us learn from the best, both what to do and not to do, we have had the pleasure of playing through and dissecting some of the top mobile games out there: It’s a good mix of games that’s been ranking high on the Top Downloads lists lately. Dissection in itself is a great exercise to learn the nitty gritty details of other games! Dissection in itself is a great exercise to learn the nitty gritty details of other games! We are doing this because other developers were constantly asking us for growth tips after we successfully launched the Fun Run games as part of the Dirtybit team: How did you get those 70 million players organically? In this post, we are presenting our best practice list of what you as a developer can do to grow your player base organically. The best practice is based on lessons learned from dissecting the games above and our own experience from growing Fun Run. This post is only focusing on what you can do from within your game and not external factors like PR, user acquisition, etc. As our dissections, this summary post will be structured into three parts: Our emphasis will be on the last part: Growth. We hope that these best practices will help any developer that want to maximize the potential for organic growth. Not a game developer you say? There’s still a lot of important information for you. Learning from games are more than including badges and rewards! Learning from games are more than including badges and rewards!

#1 Write a Short and to the Point App Store Description Think about it: How often do you read an app description before downloading? Most players don’t read the description when downloading a new game, but for the ones that do, make sure to write a short description using max 255 characters above the fold (the read more breakpoint) that is short and to the point. If you absolutely need to write a wall of text, do it in a new paragraph below the fold, like Angry Birds 2 does. Players care about good videos and images on the App Store page. It’s usually the first thing players look at before deciding whether or not to download the game. All images are shown vertical on iPhone, so if your game is horizontal, convert the screenshots to vertical images and add text above or below them. It’s a lot easier for the player to read instead of flipping the iPhone 90 degrees. Also, make sure to show a nice and authentic presentation of the game. If you show graphics that gives the player the wrong impression of the game, you’re likely to experience higher churn. OBS: If you show devices in your video or images it’s smart to use iPhone for Apple App Store and Android devices for Google Play! The app size is important for players. This might be intuitive for most, but yet we see too many apps not size optimized. Too large games can’t be downloaded over cellular networks and in addition you lose the market of low-end devices. Agar.io has therefore a natural competitive advantage compared to i.e. Angry Birds 2.

Throughout our careers, we have experienced a lot of different onboarding techniques. There is no right way, but there are a lot of useful tips to consider when onboarding a new player. It’s also super important to test this process. 80% of your players will only open your app once. If we can take a guess, this is due to long sign-up time and tutorials when starting a new game. How can you avoid that? When downloading a new game, the player is looking to try your game as quickly and smoothly as possible. Unless you have been featured or are spending heavily on user acquisition, your growth is driven by some sort of word-of-mouth: Someone told them to download it and explained what the game was about. Then why, WHY, would you put your new and excited player through a tutorial and sign-up, and not straight into the game? You only have one shot to prove to the player that this is worthwhile their time! You only have one shot to prove to the player that this is worthwhile their time! With Fun Run we had the mantra to have few clicks to enter the game; type username, hit play and then quick play. The player was supposed to get into a game as soon as possible. We even A/B-tested the onboarding during soft-launch with Fun Run 2: with and without an interactive tutorial. It turned out that we had higher retention from players without a tutorial! We encourage all app developers to A/B-test whether to onboard the player straight into the game or to do tutorial and sign-up first. The result will guarantee surprise you! We encourage all app developers to A/B-test whether to onboard the player straight into the game or to do tutorial and sign-up first Of the games we dissected, both Agar.io, Crossy Road and Block It had a short onboarding. Angry Birds 2 took you through a long video and loading sequence before getting to throw some birds. They sneaky taught you how to play with new birds and abilities through the first 10 levels. #5 Remove Barriers to Entry — Make it as Simple as Possible to Sign-Up If you build a game where the player needs an account to sign-up, make sure to make it as simple as possible. Apple prefers to feature games that use Game Center as log-in, but if you absolutely have to do your own sign-up, only ask for a username and prompt the player for password and email later. If the username is supposed to be unique, make sure to give suggestions if the player’s username is already taken. This all helps smoothen the onboarding for the new player and increases the chance for Apple Featuring. When Fun Run first launched back in 2012, we experienced a 30% drop-off when we asked for both username, password and email address upon sign-up. Don’t make the same mistake! #6 Clearly Show Where to Start In both Agar.io, Crossy Road and Block It, it was clear to the player how to get started, while Angry Birds 2 had a lot of buttons and moving elements that were distracting. Candy Crush Soda Saga made it hard to understand what your first move should be as there was announcements that didn’t make sense to a first time player. It should be so easy that the player won’t have to think when getting started! It should be so easy that the player won’t have to think when getting started! #7 Don’t Ask for Push Notification Opt-In Right Away! As players, we have never accepted to receive push notifications from games or services when it asks right after opening it. Why not wait until the player understands how it will benefit them? Players are sick of getting spammed down with notifications from different apps and games that don’t give them value. Chances are you get a higher ratio of opt-in for push notifications if you communicate clearly why it’s valuable to the player and not only for you. Both Block It and Agar.io have pretty aggressive ads in the beginning. Both seemed to mostly use them to cross-promote their other games, but it still felt too aggressive for a first time player. Block It shows an ad right away, while Agar.io sent two ads as messages when starting up, as well as showing ads between games. We assume that cross-promotion is the main growth driver for Ketchapp games, which is also why they’re always present on the Top downloads charts. “Good artists copy, great artists steal” — Pablo Picasso. From the very first version of Candy Crush, the positions of your friends progress have been visualized on a road of levels. This triggers competition to be the one reaching the furthest. It’s also a great incentive to connect to Facebook and to invite friends to compete for the best score. Both Candy Crush Soda Saga and Angry Birds 2 used the social road map. Candy Crush Soda Saga showed what appeared to be fake Norwegian friends as placeholders on the high score list before connecting to Facebook. It made us stop for a moment to wonder who these people were. It’s a nice way to learn what will happen when connecting to Facebook, instead of the blank list used in Angry Birds 2.|||

Have you ever wondered what makes some apps and games more successful than others? To help us learn from the best, both what to do and not to do, we have had the pleasure of playing through and…