At Sensor Tower, we’re keenly focused on the mobile app ecosystem and specifically on finding new ways to help our customers refine and grow their businesses.

Our App Intelligence and Store Intelligence platforms have received widespread acclaim and adoption from mobile marketers and analysts by helping them grow their installed bases through ASO and by profiling competitors and investment opportunities through comprehensive app download and revenue estimates for millions of apps.

But these powerful platforms only paint a portion of the mobile picture.

We felt these questions were not only rational - but highly answerable! So we got to work… and we think you’re really going to like what we came up with.

Ad Intelligence is a market insights and decision making platform that provides daily, detailed information about the advertising reach and creative content being used to promote hundreds of thousands of apps around the world.

With Ad Intelligence, you can:

Having these kinds of insights is great, but how critical are they to today’s mobile marketing budgets?

In 2015, spending on Mobile ads will likely surpass $10 billion world wide.

Facebook’s recently reported ad revenue and expected growth for global mobile advertising already exceeds $3 billion per quarter.

The scale of these budgets demands information that can be used to validate and optimize spend.

How can Ad Intelligence help optimize performance within this dynamic and growing industry?

Here’s a quick look at Ad Intelligence’s major features and user-interface components

Perhaps the most powerful aspect of Ad Intelligence is its trove of visual content, which provides a perspective across the mobile advertising industry that simply hasn’t been available to app developers or investors until now.

If you have a business critical need to understand and visualize the dynamics of the mobile advertising industry in action, Ad Intelligence will open your eyes - and deliver results you can see.

Interested in learning more about how Ad Intelligence can revolutionize your app marketing initiatives? Schedule a demo today? Schedule an Ad Intelligence demo with our team, and we’ll show you how!|||

At Sensor Tower, we’re keenly focused on the mobile app ecosystem and specifically on finding new ways to help our customers refine and grow their businesses...