Still struggling to generate traffic on your website?

You can spend countless hours writing content and building the “perfect” site, but it’s all for nothing unless people actually see it. So that’s why today we’re going to discuss some of the best ways to attract visitors to a website.

Although its SEO value has seemingly diminished in recent years, guest blogging remains a safe and effective way to generate traffic. It involves writing articles, or posts, for other blogs in which you can include a link pointing back to your website. The other blog benefits from the free content (always a plus), while you benefit from the free backlink and traffic. It’s a win-win for everyone involved.

When guest blogging for traffic you will want to keep the following points in mind:

• If you want to increase your website’s authority make sure your author bio includes a link back to your website.

• If you want to increase traffic to your site, make sure that you become a regular contributor to at least one good industry related blog.

We can’t talk about ways to generate traffic without mentioning social media. Facebook once had more monthly visits than Google.com, attesting to its widespread reach. While Google has since regained the throne of being the most visited website, social media sites like Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest and Instagram can yield enormous amounts of traffic. When you publish a new article on your website, post a link to it on your social media accounts.

If you are willing to spend the money, consider using pay-per-click (PPC) platforms like Google Adwords, Bing Ads, and Facebook Ads to promote your website. One of the great things about PPC is the fact that you only pay when a user clicks on your ad. If no one clicks your ad, you aren’t charged. Click prices can range anywhere from a couple cents to $100, although the $0.25 to $0.75 cents seems to be the average price.

I personally use Google PPC as part of online marketing campaigns for almost all of our clients. PPC when used properly can be an effect way to dominate local search or drive conversions for Ecommerce websites at a scalable level.

Not to be confused with guest blogging, blog commenting is yet another method for generating traffic. Because most of the leading blogging platforms (including WordPress) allow visitors to include their website URL in comments field, this tactic can be highly useful at driving traffic to your site. Just find blogs that are related to your niche, submit meaningful comments, and specify your site’s URL.

Last but not least, you can also drive traffic to your website via forum commenting. It may require some legwork, but search for forums that are both related to your niche, and allow URLs in signatures. Once you’ve made an account on the forum, you should edit your signature to include your website’s URL. Whenever you make a thread or reply to an existing thread, it will automatically display your website’s address.

ProTip: Don’t talk about your products or services when commenting on forums, instead focus on building relationships – it will get you a lot further.|||

6 Ways to Attract Visitors to Your Website: Here are 6 of the best ways to attract visitors to a website online that you can make part of your daily or weekly routine.