Yafet and Segen had met nine years earlier at a neighborhood café in Asmara, the Eritrean capital. He was in 10th grade, she was a year behind him, the coffee shop was a popular hangout for their school friends. It was frowned on for girls and boys to socialize too much, so larger groups of teenagers would often get together to provide cover for a couple who were dating. That’s how Yafet and Segen met: They were accompanying two friends who were seeing each other secretly. And when those friends needed a little privacy, Yafet and Segen would fill the time by chatting with each other. Slowly, he started to fall for her. “When we started to talk… not actually in one day, but after months, I started to like so many things about her: The way she talked; the way she laughed; the way she smiled,” Yafet says. “I fell in love, and I asked her to start a relationship.”

Yafet was born in 1987. He was the youngest of seven children; his father was a high school physics teacher and his mother taught typing; together they all lived in a four-bedroom house in an upscale district of Asmara. Back then, Eritrea was at the tail end of a 30-year war for independence from Ethiopia, and families like Yafet’s — middle class, educated — were poised to form the backbone of the new nation. Freedom came in 1993, but the optimism didn’t last. In 1998, a new conflict with Ethiopia escalated, and within two years 100,000 people were dead. President Isaias Afwerki came under scrutiny for his leadership: He responded by cracking down on dissent, banning the country’s privately-owned newspapers, and imprisoning anyone who opposed him. He has ruled ever since. Today, Eritrea is one of the world’s most repressive states: There are extensive reports of torture, forced labor, arbitrary arrests, incommunicado detention, extrajudicial killings, and disappearances. Its primary mechanism of control is national service: Citizens are conscripted for an indefinite period and forced to work in government enterprises for almost no pay. There are restrictions on freedom of expression, assembly, and religion. Even though he was just a young teen when it happened, the crackdown sticks with Yafet. And once his eyes were open, he couldn’t look away. “I used to ask my mom, ‘Mom, why?’” he says. “My mother told me to keep quiet, don’t talk like that outside. I’m in my country. I’m just asking what happened. Why can’t I say? Later, I saw what happened to the people who asked.” Today, more than 400,000 people — one in every 16 Eritreans — have fled the country.

By September 2007, he and Segen had been dating for two years. Like everyone else in the country, he reported for six months of military training after finishing 11th grade, before returning to high school. After graduating, and just a few days before he was to be officially drafted, he took Segen aside. He was leaving Eritrea, he said. She wasn’t happy. Not because she couldn’t see the oppression — she had dropped out of school herself after 10th grade to avoid national service. The fear was that they would never have a chance to build a future together. But they understood that staying didn’t give them that chance either. “We couldn’t imagine having any future there with the government. That’s why she accepted it. I promised not to forget her. She told me that she would pray for me… and that one day we would be together and have kids.”

The border between Eritrea and Sudan is a desert of cracked earth where temperatures soar into the 100s. The only distinguishable feature marking the boundary between the two countries is a low mountain ridge that cuts across the horizon. “Beyond the mountain is Sudan. In front of it is Eritrea,” Yafet says. Reaching it meant reaching freedom. After saying goodbye to Segen and his family, Yafet reported for duty at a military camp in the west of the country. He stayed there for three days while making final arrangements before heading into the desert with eight friends. He was 20 years old, and he knew he’d never be able to go home again. “I knew where the west was, and I knew if I went to the west [I would reach Sudan],” Yafet said. But it was a two-day walk from the camp to the border, and the government did not treat deserters kindly. There was no cover — no trees, no bushes — to obscure them from sight, so they travelled mostly at night. But even after dark the moon was so bright that they didn’t have much protection. So they devised a system. Each of them would take turns walking several hundred feet in front of the others: That way, if they came across a military patrol, only the scout would be captured, and the rest of the group would have a chance to escape. It wasn’t just the Eritrean patrols that were a threat, though. There was also a chance of running into criminals or security forces on the Sudanese side who would deliver them back to Eritrean authorities in exchange for money. After walking for two nights and a day in the desert, the group reached the mountain. On the other side, they found it difficult to find their way — nobody in the group spoke Arabic, just the main Eritrean language, Tigrinya, and a little English. Then they came into some luck: A friendly Sudanese man brought them to his house. “He gave us food, water, even milk. We were wearing military clothes. He brought us civilian clothes.” The man pointed the group in the direction of a nearby refugee camp. Yafet had made it. Now he could begin his new life.

“It was the worst place I have seen in my life. There was no food service. There were no houses… There were tents that were donated by UNHCR, but it wasn’t enough for the people. There was no clean water for the refugees, there were no medical services, there was one nurse and the refugees were maybe 2 or 3,000 at that time. If you had money you could pay for food, but there were people who didn’t have money. They were really in trouble.” Yafet was in Wad Sherife, a refugee camp about 10 miles from the border. It was against the law to leave, so three months later, he paid a smuggler $100 to take him to Khartoum, the capital of Sudan, where he could think about going further — to Europe or the U.S. But Khartoum itself was another horrible shock, an unforgiving and legally precarious place, where Yafet was constantly exposed to danger and abuse. At first he relied on the help of others: One relative in the United States sent him money, another who lived locally gave him shelter. He shared a small room with five other people — it was bare, hot, and didn’t even have beds — but still, Yafet was happy. It was the first time he could process being outside of Eritrea. “It was good for us. We had freedom. We felt that we could relax. We could speak about what we wished… things that we wouldn’t dare say in Eritrea. We discussed our country. We discussed our futures. They were the things that we hadn’t ever expressed.” Things got progressively worse, though. His support network faded, his money ran out. Most nights he scraped together enough to sleep in the underground hotels run out of people’s houses; sometimes he slept outside, mingling with other homeless people and keeping away from the police. Eventually, he found a job in a bakery: The owner gave him $3.50 a day in wages and let him sleep in the back of the store at night. It was a tiny bit of stability, but not enough to build a future. So, when Segen told Yafet that she was coming to Sudan in the summer of 2009, he was not happy. “I just told her to be a little patient, to wait for me to try something,” he says. “I didn’t want to bring her and see her be in trouble and I also didn’t want to be in more trouble.” Segen decided to come anyway. She didn’t have much money, but her cousin— a people smuggler — agreed to help her escape from Eritrea if she could find three friends to come with her who would pay.

Segen finally married Yafet in September 2010 — a church service, with about 30 people in attendance. “I was happy that day because I got my dream girl and it was my wedding day,” says Yafet. Things were looking up. They moved in together, and he had a new job marketing agricultural products online, with his own office, his own computer, and a salary of $500 per month. Finally being united, however, didn’t reduce the insecurity. They argued about whether to stay or try to get out. Segen’s family was encouraging her to flee Africa altogether, either to Israel — by crossing the Sinai desert — or to Europe, by boat across the Mediterranean. Both options were dangerous. “I didn’t want to put our lives at risk in order to get a better life,” Yafet says. “That’s why I wanted to let her know that if we found a better way, a safe way, if we get resettlement or a visa and could leave by plane, that’s ok, but, no, we don’t have to risk our lives.” Then Yafet’s company closed, and he lost his job. Their first daughter, Shalom, was born a month later, on August 16, 2011. He’d work wherever, whatever way he could: cleaning houses, manual labor, restaurants, anything. Then, a few months after she gave birth to Shalom, Segen got pregnant again. Their second daughter, Abigail, was born on October 29, 2012. Nothing was steady, and Segen was more unsettled than ever. Finding a way to leave became the main topic of discussion. It was too much. “She wasn’t able to get sleep. She wasn’t able to eat food. She wasn’t able to care for the children… She used to cry without any cause. She used to get angry about small things. She was not at peace. I tried to make her feel free, to make her relax. She got worse and worse.” Then, one day, she told him she couldn’t wait anymore. The couple weighed their options. In the end they agreed: Segen would cross the desert to Libya and get on one of the boats smuggling people across the Mediterranean to Italy. Once there, she would head for Norway, which has one of the fastest asylum and family reunification processes in Europe. Yafet would follow. Initially, he wanted both of their daughters to stay with him in Khartoum. But Segen thought that having Abigail with her would help keep them both safe from abuse during the trip and maybe even win some preferential treatment, like receiving extra food and water — things which could make a big difference during the long desert crossing that lay ahead. Yafet conceded.|||

Her name was Segen. In the early hours of the morning of June 28, 2014, she had boarded a boat in Libya with her youngest daughter, Abigail. Segen was 24, slender; Abi was not quite two years old, a…