Slack is one of the best ways to get new customers and users for your startup. This is the definitive guide on how to network, prospect and sell on Slack. As with any early online community, Slackers are happy to help each other, talk and network. As Slack communities start to grow so will the noise and these techniques just won’t work as well. So read on and learn how to get customers from Slack. The obvious caveat: your customers/users need to be the type of person that hangs out in Slack communities.

Since you’re reading this on Medium Slack is probably your 3rd favorite word after “disrupt” and “IoT” and you know it’s spectacular for team communication. But it’s not just teams, Slack is blowing up for communities for everything from developers, startup-lovers, product-hunters, gamers, to digital nomads.

Join communities with people that make sense for you. Some ask you to pay a nominal fee; it’s worth it 4 outta 5 times. So just do it. I personally like finding communities on Chats.Directory and SlackList. Sages also speak of the mighty google as a place to find more communities.

You’re here to network, learn from people, and build relationships so make sure you look good and play nice. Skip this section if you’re already a good internet citizen.

Do fill out your bio, add your name, add your company! This is how and why people will be interested in you and your story.

Do use a real profile picture, unless you’re really scary looking in which case this is fine. It’s amazing how differently you feel about a chat box with a randomly generated coloured-block versus a human face.

Do introduce yourself in the #general or #introductions channel. Tell people who you are, why you joined the community, what you work on, and how you can help people in the community. People will reach out to you if they’re genuinely curious. It’s also nice to let people know that they can feel free to DM you if they’ve got questions.

Do join the #channels that have a lot of people in them. You’ll run out of bandwidth if you start poking into channels with less than ~10% of the user community’s user base.

Do not scrape everyone’s emails and send them messages.

Do not write a bot to DM everyone.

Do not send everyone the same cut & paste message via DM.

Do not use @everyone, @channel, etc.

Do not get caught with your pants down. Please don’t show up in the iOS Developers slack and not know how to program. These communities welcome and support newbies but if you’re going to try and sell someone something make sure you’re competent and add value to their community.

This is not a place for the tried and true “do it anyway and ask for forgiveness later”. You just won’t end up building the quality relationships that you want.|||

Slack is one of the best ways to get new customers and users for your startup. This is the definitive guide on how to network, prospect and sell on Slack. As with any early online community, Slackers…