In previous android development tutorial I wrote about Volley Library in details and how can we import Volley library in our project. I also explained how we can parse JSON data using volley library.

Android developers can find all my android tutorials in Android section.

In Android, user interface is displayed through an activity(Screen). Activity is used to represent the data to user and allows user interaction. In an android application, we can have multiple activities and they can interact with each other.

Interaction between multiple activities can be done only using Intent. Intents are objects of the android.content.Intent type. Your code can send them to the Android system defining the components you are targeting. In Android app development you face situations where you want to send or receive your data between one Activity (Screen) to another. In this android tutorial I will be discussing about how to Send or Receive data from one Activity to another.

Before getting started with sample app development, I will explain what are the methods needed to send data between activities using Intent.

Now we know all the important methods that are used in our project. For this android tutorial for android developers I created two xml layout files which are first_screen.xml  and second_screen.xml. There is also two java files which are FirstScreen.Java and SecondScreen.Java file. Lets get started.

So lets gets started with our sample android App:

Below is the code for first_screen.XML file

Below is the code for second_screen.XML file

Below is the code for FirstScreen.Java file

Below is the explanation of highlighted lines because that Java code  is behind First Screen.

Now we have to create a JAVA file in which we will do coding for the action performed by SecondScreen.

Below is the code for SecondScreen.Java

Below is the explanation of highlighted lines because that Java code  is behind Second Screen.

We are ready to run our TransferDataBetweenActivties android app. To run our app I used Genymotion Emulator as it’s fast. Also its performance is better than default Android emulator.

If you have not already installed I highly recommend Genymotion emulator. You can install from here: Android Emulator Genymotion Step by Step Installation. If you face any errors while installing android studio this is a good reference point.

Congratulations! If you reach this point means you have followed all the steps correctly and android app is running fine. If you are a beginner android developer and learning android, I recommend go through below android tutorials to get started.

If I missed any point or you have any doubt regarding this blog just let me know in the comment section.

If you like my article please like our Facebook page and also follow us on Twitter so that you get regular updates. For regular updates you can also subscribe to www.hackpundit.com with your email.

Please also share on Facebook and Twitter to help other android developers. Thank You..!|||

Intent android development tutorial android developers switch data between activities using Intent class. Android app development explain Intent library