Hurtling deep underground in a Tube train, it can be hard to picture the streets overhead, and harder still to learn much about their eight million inhabitants. But London is one of the most linguistically interesting cities in the world, with more than 100 languages in use across the city.

One way to get a taste for this rich diversity of languages would be to jump on London Underground's Victoria Line and surface at various stations along the way. The line runs north to south for 13 miles (21km), passing through rich and poor parts of town and beneath migrant communities new and old.

The video below combines footage shot from a Victoria Line train, synchronised with its route above ground. The soundtrack echoes the most widely spoken language, after English, at each stage of the route. The underground journey takes just over 30 minutes, but we have condensed the footage into three minutes.

Hear the stories of some people belonging to the major linguistic communities above the Victoria Line, from Portuguese in the south through French and Arabic in the centre of town, via Bengali around the transport hubs of Euston and King's Cross, and finally Turkish and Polish at the northern end.

In some parts, about 13% of people told the census that their main language was Portuguese, with about 65% saying it was English. There is also a secondary Portuguese-speaking area in the borough of Brent, north-west of the centre of town.

Explaining this relatively even distribution, Oliver O'Brien, a researcher at UCL's department of geography who has previously studied the data, says that new arrivals from France would not feel the same need to cluster around their peers as others from further afield because London would probably already feel very familiar.

Pictured above, London's St Pancras, from where trains depart for France and Belgium, compares favourably with its Parisian counterpart, according to Ms Balay. "It's so nice and tidy. As soon as you arrive in Paris, you think: 'Ugh, is this really Paris?'"

But many of London's most central areas, especially to the west of town, also have a substantial Arabic-speaking population. In the area immediately surrounding Green Park station, for instance, just over 6% of residents mainly speak Arabic. Here property is among the costliest in the world.

But the area where Bengali is most dominant is Tower Hamlets, the borders of which are almost perfectly delineated by the darkest shades of red on the map to the east of the Victoria Line. A secondary population just to the east is only slightly less loyal to the borough of Newham.

Turkish is one of the most popular languages along the stretch of the Victoria Line from Finsbury Park to Tottenham Hale, but as Ali Gul points out this is also one of the most linguistically diverse parts of the city. "There are over 200 languages spoken on this street," he says of Green Lanes, a vibrant high street that intersects the Victoria Line.|||

Hear the stories of some people belonging to the major linguistic communities above the Victoria Line in London's underground.