On the fourth anniversary of Steve Jobs’ death, Apple CEO Tim Cook sent out a memo to Apple employees. It is slim on details but it does outline some of the priorities Jobs seemed to hold and it’s a fascinating and beautiful document from one friend and co-worker about another.

“Steve was a brilliant person, and his priorities were very simple. He loved his family above all, he loved Apple, and he loved the people with whom he worked so closely and achieved so much,” wrote Cook. “Each year since his passing, I have reminded everyone in the Apple community that we share the privilege and responsibility of continuing the work Steve loved so much.”

Jobs‘ illness and death were unique primarily in the outpouring of grief that seemed to well up around the world. Most would say that a man who made shiny boxes didn’t deserve as many tears as he got but Cook knows the score:

￼What is his legacy? I see it all around us: An incredible team that embodies his spirit of innovation and creativity. The greatest products on earth, beloved by customers and empowering hundreds of millions of people around the world. Soaring achievements in technology and architecture. Experiences of surprise and delight. A company that only he could have built. A company with an intense determination to change the world for the better.

It can also be said he left too soon.

“He told me several times in his final years that he hoped to live long enough to see some of the milestones in his children’s lives. I was in his office over the summer with Laurene and their youngest daughter. Messages and drawings from his kids to their father are still there on Steve’s whiteboard,” wrote Cook.

Today marks four years since Steve passed away. On that day, the world lost a visionary. We at Apple lost a leader, a mentor, and many of us lost a dear friend. Steve was a brilliant person, and his priorities were very simple. He loved his family above all, he loved Apple, and he loved the people with whom he worked so closely and achieved so much. Each year since his passing, I have reminded everyone in the Apple community that we share the privilege and responsibility of continuing the work Steve loved so much. What is his legacy? I see it all around us: An incredible team that embodies his spirit of innovation and creativity. The greatest products on earth, beloved by customers and empowering hundreds of millions of people around the world. Soaring achievements in technology and architecture. Experiences of surprise and delight. A company that only he could have built. A company with an intense determination to change the world for the better.

 And, of course, the joy he brought his loved ones. He told me several times in his final years that he hoped to live long enough to see some of the milestones in his children’s lives. I was in his office over the summer with Laurene and their youngest daughter. Messages and drawings from his kids to their father are still there on Steve’s whiteboard. If you never knew Steve, you probably work with someone who did or who was here when he led Apple. Please stop one of us today and ask what he was really like. Several of us have posted our personal remembrances on AppleWeb, and I encourage you to read them. Thank you for honoring Steve by continuing the work he started, and for remembering both who he was and what he stood for.|||

On the fourth anniversary of Steve Jobs' death, Apple CEO Tim Cook sent out a memo to Apple employees. It is slim on details but it does outline some of the..