At the onset of Nobel Week, National Geographic presented our list of great discoveries that were incomprehensibly overlooked for the prestigious award. Now, as we enter day two, we take a look at the Nobel Laureates we could have done without.

Some failed to credit the female colleagues who had made their achievements possible. Others used their fame to promote junk science. And still others, under the guise of continuing their pursuit of knowledge, revealed their inner bigotry.

In particular, he warned of “retrogressive evolution” because he believed blacks were reproducing faster than what he considered to be intellectually superior whites. His proposed “solutions” included replacing the welfare system with financial incentives for “genetically disadvantaged” individuals to allow themselves to be sterilized.

Kary Mullis, the 1993 winner of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, revels in his reputation as a "maverick." In his autobiography, Dancing Naked in the Mind Field, he extols the virtues of astrology, describes a possible encounter with aliens (which appeared to him in the form of a talking, glowing raccoon), and cheerfully admits his repeated use of LSD.

But Haber would become known for another innovation: industrialized mass-killing. During the First World War, he initiated the program to develop and weaponize chlorine for use on the battlefield. On April 22, 1915, Haber personally oversaw the deployment of 6,000 cylinders of gas at Ypres, Belgium, killing 1,000 French and Algerian troops in less than ten minutes.

Nils Gustaf Dalén won the 1912 Nobel Prize for Physics to commemorate his groundbreaking research into… lighthouses. His invention, the Solventil, was a solar valve that regulated the operation of gaslight. It would shut down a beacon at sunrise and automatically relight it again at night—or during the day, if conditions became cloudy or foggy.

It was later revealed that the academy originally had intended to offer a joint-prize to Nikola Tesla and Thomas Edison for their contributions to developing electricity. Tesla, however, refused to share the honor with Edison. Some historical accounts say Tesla remained bitter over a financial disagreement with Edison; others say that Tesla considered it an affront to share the award with a mere inventor.

The British biochemist created a social media tsunami in June 2015, when, during a luncheon for female journalists and scientists in Seoul, he remarked: “Let me tell you about my trouble with girls. Three things happen when they are in the lab: you fall in love with them, they fall in love with you, and when you criticize them they cry. Perhaps we should make separate labs for boys and girls?”

Hunt later issued a pseudo-apology, saying that he was sorry for causing offense and that his remarks were "intended as a light-hearted, ironic comment." But, he had also told a co-panelist that his comment was rooted in “honesty”—reflecting an apparent cluelessness about the vast underrepresentation of women working in STEM fields.|||

Racists, frauds, and misogynists: Meet the rogues’ gallery of Nobel Prize winners.