I’ve already written about establishing a presence online and one of the things I mentioned there was publishing content on LinkedIn. As a network for professionals, it’s the perfect place to show you know what’s what in your chosen field, so today I want to tell you in detail how to publish a post on LinkedIn. I’ll take you through the actual mechanics of how to post on LinkedIn as well as give you advice on making your post the best it can be.

If you want to jump to a certain section, you can use these links:

Why publish on LinkedIn?

 The nuts and bolts of publishing on LinkedIn

 What should I write about?

 Creating awesome headlines

 What should I include in my posts?

 How long should my posts be?

 When should I publish my posts on LinkedIn?

 How can I make sure people see my posts?

 How can I see how well my posts performed?

LinkedIn is a network explicitly built around connecting professionals. That makes it an ideal, ready-made audience for you to show your know-how to, whether to potential employers, employees or customers. There are over 380 million people on LinkedIn and many of them see it as a place to learn about their industries. Check out these LinkedIn audience insights (from Design Infographics):

You can start your LinkedIn publishing career directly from the home page. All you have to do is click on the “Publish a post” button.

Then you should see this screen:

Once there, LinkedIn’s editor makes it very simple to create your post. You should always include a header image, for reasons we’ll talk more about later. For now, take my word for it. LinkedIn helpfully tells you what size this image should be (700×400 pixels). To add your image, click anywhere in the grey box that says “Add an image to bring your post to life” and select the file from your computer.

If you REALLY don’t want to add an image, I can’t force you to and you can click on the small “x” at the top right of the grey box.

Next, add your headline (More on headlines later, but if you are really anxious to know all about them, you can click here). Just click the cursor where it says “Write your headline” and type or paste yours in.

Then click underneath that, where it says “Start writing”, and, well, start writing. Type or paste the body of your post into this section. You can use LinkedIn’s editor to create headings; make text bold, italic, underlined or scored through; left or centre align your text; add bullet points or numbered lists; and add links, images or videos. All these functions can be performed using the handy little buttons beneath your headline.

Once you’re finished, click on the blue “Publish” button at the top right. Add some tags and you’re good to go. When you start typing a tag, LinkedIn will give you suggestions of popular terms.

TIP: LinkedIn has a detailed section in their Help Centre devoted to publishing posts. You can find it here.

OPTIONAL EXTRA (Click here to skip to the next section): Of course, you want to use keywords that people are actually looking for, so you can also research popular keywords using Google Adwords’ Keyword Planner, which you can find here. You’ll need to make an account (if you haven’t already got one) to use the Keyword Planner. Make sure to click on “Skip the guided set-up” to avoid having to enter billing information.

Once you are logged in, click on “Search for new keywords using a phrase, website or category”. Then type in some keywords related to your topic in the first box and hit enter (it’s not necessary to fill out the other sections). Then you will see how many times those keywords are searched for monthly and get suggestions for similar keywords.

LinkedIn’s own advice is to “write about challenges you’ve faced, opportunities you’ve seized, or important trends in your industry.” That’s definitely a good start, but there are a few tricks you can use, with that mindset, to kickstart the ideas process.

Now that you have a topic for your post, you’re going to need a headline. Here are some rules you should follow:

Different studies have come up with different answers to this question, but the basic answer is: longer than you thought. Our favourite little OkDork study reported that posts from 1,900 to 2,000 words performed best.

A study by Medium found that, on their site, posts which take seven minutes to read held the attention of readers best. A seven-minute read equates to around 1,600 words, but this could be less if there are a lot of images.

When Buffer analysed their posts, they saw that posts with over 2,500 words were getting the most social shares.

The takeaway? Aim to write in-depth pieces that really do your subject justice. The varying answers from these sources also mean that you should do some testing of your own. Publish posts of different lengths and, over time, you will be able to see which perform best.

Once your post is written, you’ll want to publish it. But when? Bear in mind that LinkedIn is a business network, so you should adjust your posting times accordingly. First thing in the morning or right after lunch are good. It seems like people like to check out a few posts immediately after sitting down at their desks.

The day you choose to post on is important, too. As with the length of your posts, this is something you should test for yourself but OkDork found that posts on Thursdays received the most views.

Now that you’ve posted on LinkedIn, you’ll want to make sure as many people as possible read it and then proclaim you a genius. Here are a few things you can do to boost your post’s reach:

Of course, we want to see the results of all our hard work, so here are a couple of ways you can see how well your post actually did.

And there you have it, a comprehensive guide to LinkedIn publishing. Good luck.|||

Taledo is a recruiting platform for startups. The Taledo Blog covers topics on recruitment for startups and tips and advice on getting hired.