Companies Collaborate to Serve Customers on the AWS Cloud; Rackspace Introduces Fanatical Support® for AWS

Las Vegas – October 6, 2015 – Rackspace® (NYSE: RAX) announces an agreement with Amazon Web Services (AWS), under which Rackspace will offer tools, expertise, application management, and operational support to customers on the AWS Cloud.  The core offering, Fanatical Support® for AWS, plus three additional beta offerings – Managed Security for AWS, Compliance Assistance for AWS, and Managed Cloud for Adobe Experience Manager (which runs on AWS) – reflect Rackspace’s strategy of delivering best in class expertise and support for the world’s leading technologies and platforms.

Many businesses want to realize the power of the AWS Cloud and in doing so seek assistance from a trusted partner with a track record of managing business-critical cloud environments. In addition, many enterprises are on a multi-phased journey to the cloud and benefit from migration services that speed deployment, as well as ongoing operating expertise that can adapt to a company’s evolving set of business and technology needs.

Fanatical Support for AWS provides businesses with managed cloud services, tools, and applications that allow customers to focus on their core business. Rackspace blends automation, technology, and human expertise to deliver ongoing architecture, management, security services, and 24x7x365 operations, all backed by AWS-certified engineers and architects.

In addition, Rackspace has become an Amazon Web Services (AWS) authorized reseller, completed the audit to become a Managed Services Partner, and is joining the AWS Partner Network at the Advanced Consulting Partner level with over 100 certified AWS engineers.

“We have been with Rackspace since 2004 and the company has a proven reputation of delivering the highest level of customer support,” said Jonathan Issler, director of operational technology at Infosnap. “We have some workloads that run on AWS as well and we’ve researched other companies that could potentially provide support for this platform, but none were a good fit. When Rackspace approached us about its Fanatical Support for AWS offering, we signed immediately based on the strength of their managed cloud experience and expertise.”

The inaugural set of offerings addresses a wide range of customer needs, for both infrastructure and application use cases:

“We’re pleased to see Rackspace support AWS customers and achieve membership in the AWS Managed Service Program,” said Terry Wise, vice president of worldwide partner ecosystem, Amazon Web Services, Inc.  “A growing number of businesses who want the benefits of the AWS Cloud will find value in working with AWS Managed Service Partners like Rackspace. We have been impressed with Rackspace’s commitment to include beta customers in their AWS managed service offerings, along with certifying a large number of their technical staff.”

“Our mission is to provide best-of-breed customer service and expertise on top of the world’s leading technologies, and we see substantial demand from customers who want to leverage AWS for mission critical applications,” said Chris Cochran, senior vice president and general manager at Rackspace. “Launching our new business unit and adding AWS support to our portfolio of managed service offerings enables us to give our customers more choice in their infrastructure deployments. Fanatical Support and the AWS Cloud are a potent combination; we’re thrilled to now make it available.”

For more information on these products and pricing details, visit:

Rackspace (NYSE: RAX), the #1 managed cloud company, helps businesses tap the power of cloud computing without the challenge and expense of managing complex IT infrastructure and application platforms on their own. Rackspace engineers deliver specialized expertise on top of leading technologies developed by AWS, Microsoft, OpenStack, VMware and others, through a results-obsessed service known as Fanatical Support®. The company has more than 300,000 customers worldwide, including two-thirds of the FORTUNE 100. Rackspace was named a leader in the 2015 Gartner Magic Quadrant for Cloud-Enabled Managed Hosting, and has been honored as one of Fortune’s Best Companies to Work For in six of the past eight years. Learn more at www.rackspace.com.

This press release contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. If such risks or uncertainties materialize or such assumptions prove incorrect, the results of Rackspace Hosting could differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements and assumptions. All statements other than statements of historical facts are statements that could be deemed forward-looking statements, including any statements concerning expected development, performance or market acceptance associated with the offering of Fanatical Support® for AWS and beta offerings of Managed Security for AWS, Compliance Assistance for AWS and Managed Cloud for Adobe Experience Manager; anticipated operational and financial benefits from the offering of Fanatical Support® for AWS and beta offerings of Managed Security for AWS, Compliance Assistance for AWS and Managed Cloud for Adobe Experience Manager; any statements of expectation or belief; and any statements of assumptions underlying any of the foregoing. Risks, uncertainties and assumptions include the possibility that expected benefits from the offering of Fanatical Support® for AWS and beta offerings of Managed Security for AWS, Compliance Assistance for AWS and Managed Cloud for Adobe Experience Manager may not materialize because this product and services are not generally accepted in the marketplace, which could occur due to certain factors including (i) a failure to market the product and services cost effectively, differentiate the product and services from competitive products or communicate differentiations effectively, (ii) the reliability, quality or compatibility associated with the product and services, (iii) changes in technology which adversely affect the product’s benefit, (iv) slowdowns in the general economy or technology industry that impact consumer spending habits, (v) internal strategy decisions that impact the product; and (vi) other risks that are described in Rackspace Hosting’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015, filed with the SEC on August 10, 2015. Except as required by law, Rackspace Hosting assumes no obligation to update these forward-looking statements publicly, or to update the reasons actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, even if new information becomes available in the future.|||

Rackspace offers tools, expertise, application management and operational support to customers on the AWS Cloud.