Some of the most productive devices on the planet are right at your fingertips. Designed for the way you work, play and all of the moments in between, the Microsoft Surface collection delivers innovative technology that will transform your day, bring new life to your projects, and help you spend more time doing what you love.



Discover the latest Surface devices and accessories – and experience technology that delivers a new level of style and functionality.

Explore our complete collection of Surface devices and accessories, including our ergonomic keyboard and Surface Mouse – and discover how Surface can help you work, relax, design and create as never before. For questions about any of our products, contact one of our stores, or talk to an expert and we'll help you choose the right devices for all that you do.

A credit card is required for pre-order, but your card will not be charged until your order is shipped or the product is made available for download. However, an authorization hold or small temporary charge may be placed on your credit or debit card as a result of your pre-order. Note that we can't charge your card and complete your order if your card expires between the date you pre-ordered the item and the date the item becomes available. Please ensure that your billing and contact information is current at all times. Pre-orders are covered by our Pre-Order Policy and can be reviewed, updated, or canceled at any time before pre-order items are released.

*Microsoft Complete for Surface is available for all Surface devices and must be purchased at time of device purchase or within 45 days after purchase with device inspection required at a Microsoft retail store. Hardware coverage is described here. Two claims are allowed within the two-year warranty period. Each claim is subject to a $49 deductible. For service plan support, please call 1-877-696-7786 or visit myservice.surface.com. Microsoft Complete is underwritten by Amtrust, and additional terms apply.|||

The Microsoft Surface collection. From the Surface Book, to the Surface Pro 4 and Surface Studio, a world of design possibilities is at your fingertips.