New $28M project is based on Dell XC Series appliances for a leading, scalable hyper-converged infrastructure solution This solution will deliver improved management and scalability for the U.S. DoJ and offer a secure solution to access corporate data and applications on any device Dell announced today it was awarded a contract for a Department of Justice unclassified virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) deployment. The $28 million partnership includes new Dell XC Series of Web-scale Converged Appliances, powered by Nutanix software, as well as Dell Networking and Dell AppAssure data protection software. Supporting up to 55,000 named users, specifically within the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the deal includes more than 600 Dell XC Series appliances and represents one of the largest VDI deployments the U.S. government has undertaken.



                                                The foundation of this solution is the Dell XC Series appliances, hyper-converged systems that combine compute, storage and virtualization resources in one solution built on preconfigured, industry-leading Dell PowerEdge 13th generation servers. These appliances are integrated with industry-leading software from Nutanix, the hyper-converged market leader according to IDC.



The FBI will be able to take advantage of a truly comprehensive IT solution that offers simple deployment and management and also scales-out incrementally, one node at a time, and seamlessly as demands increase. Moreover, these appliances excel in supporting desktop virtualization, while also providing lower total cost of ownership and faster time to value when compared to a traditional VDI solution approach. With this addition, the FBI will be able to better empower its field agents and administrators, as well as dramatically expand its operations across its global footprint. Furthermore, the FBI will be able to leverage Dell’s world-class global support–all while working with one technology partner to satisfy these multiple needs.



This new Dell solution will allow the FBI to create a flexible and easy-to-manage virtual desktop infrastructure that can easily scale as needed. The XC Series deployment will scale to more than 600 nodes and support VMware Horizon 6 desktop virtualization software . The addition of these hyper-converged appliances offers FBI users the opportunity to reduce the number of elements managed in the IT environment, increase overall savings and decrease time-to-value. The infrastructure also enables users to securely access agency data and applications at any time across any device. “As a trusted technology provider to federal agencies for more than 20 years, Dell is committed to providing its government customers with the tools they need to solve complex problems with efficient and effective IT solutions,” said Steve Harris, vice president and general manager, Dell Federal. “We’re very excited to have the opportunity to help a key government customer better accomplish their mission, and we are always looking for any way we can work with customers like this to best leverage their IT.”



 About Dell 

Dell Inc. listens to customers and delivers innovative technology and services that give them the power to do more. For more information, visit www.dell.com.  Dell’s flagship event bringing together technology and business professionals to network, share ideas and help co-create a better future. Learn more at on Twitter.



Dell is a trademark of Dell Inc. Dell disclaims any proprietary interest in the marks and names of others.|||

Dell announced today it was awarded a contract for a Department of Justice unclassified virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) deployment.