Online marketing contributes heavily to business success, yet many businesses neglect it because it’s a specialization unrelated to what many entrepreneurs do. The programmer, fashion designer, or engineer doesn’t necessarily have the core strengths of a marketing guru. Plus, many online marketing tasks are repetitive and time consuming when you don’t use online marketing solutions to get organized.

Interestingly enough, remote businesses and distributed teams may be at an advantage for getting these tasks done via outsourcing. Online marketing can be done from anywhere as long as you have the right tools with a good setup, clear organization, and consistent delegation. The focus of this article will be setting up the key online marketing solutions for your business success.

Giving your remote employees access to your website and blog will be key later on for SEO and content marketing tasks, so take care of it in your setup process. Ideally, this could be a part of your onboarding process for new employees. This article covers the process for a WordPress blog, but you can also do it in Wix, Blogger, or directly in your website’s cPanel.

To set up a new user in WordPress, just:

Learn how to share access to your company’s website in Wix or Blogger.

Having a set project management software to assign tasks in your remote business is vital and will help you streamline your online marketing solutions and tasks. Some popular ones include Asana, Trello, Freshdesk, and GitHub. Any of these will work if you want something that integrates with Hubstaff so you can track time to individual tasks.

Track time to your projects with Hubstaff

Whatever you choose, it’s vital that you set up projects with clearly described tasks and invite your team members to those projects so that they can access the instructions they need to get their work done. If you use Trello, you can invite users to your organization, then invite them to boards. As for Asana, you can invite them to your team and assign them to projects and tasks from there.

Google has several tools that form the backbone of many online marketing tasks and reports. It’s not a question of whether you should use these, but rather how – so get them set up for your business and give your remote workers access by following these steps.

In a nutshell, Google Analytics lets you monitor where website traffic comes from and the value it creates for your business. For example, this is a screenshot of one of the many different views of Hubstaff’s data, where we can see how much traffic comes from which sources over a period of one month – all for free.

Here’s how to set up your Google analytics account in a few easy steps.

Google Search Console (previously Webmaster Tools) is an invaluable resource for making your website easier to read for Google, for checking your site for errors, and for seeing the top search queries that send traffic to your site.

The information it provides on search queries can be integrated with your Google Analytics account as well, which gives you even more data on how people come to your website and how long they stay. To get set up, all you have to do is:

Google AdWords is Google’s system for paid advertising in search results and on other spaces around the internet. If you’re open to paid advertising now or in the future, you should absolutely consider setting this up so you can delegate tasks to your freelancers. Even if you’d rather grow organically, having a free AdWords account gives you access to Google’s Keyword Tool, which lets you see average monthly searches for a certain keyword along with related searches. For SEO or content, this tool is one of the best assets you can have.

When another website or blog mentions your brand or something related to your core product, you’ll want to know as soon as possible so you can join the conversation and share it on social media. Google Alerts gives you these notifications so you’re always informed when your brand is mentioned. Setup is very easy:

Online marketing via social media (also known as social media marketing) is key to getting the word out about your brand and driving traffic to your website. It’s vital to make sure your remote contractors and team members can access your brand’s social media profiles and any other related tools you use like Followerwork, SproutSocial, Hootsuite, etc.

Sharing access depends on the system you’re using. Steps for the social networks and most commonly used services are below:

How do you handle online marketing for business success? What are your most valuable tips and insights to marketing in remote companies? What online marketing solutions did we miss? Let us know in the comments below, we are always looking for ways to improve our content.|||

Set your remote team up for success with this primer on the best online marketing solutions to use and how to adopt them in your team's workflow.