IMPORTANT NOTE: Relax isn't yet ready for production, stay tuned for releases, beta version will come soon. You can see what we're working on here and what's missing in the beta milestone.

You can check out a demo here. Credentials:

Relax is a powerful new generation CMS on top of React and Node.js which aims for a better way of building websites.

It features a live page builder based on components and a smart and easy way of binding dynamic data to them.

Our goal with Relax is to update the world with a new standard, having as the basic premise that anyone should be able to create a website without having to code.

We're currently working on releasing the beta version which should come up in December. If you want to collaborate in the meantime or just say anything join us at Relax Slack.

Relax uses sharp to resize images. If you're using OS X and have libvips installed globally, e.g. via brew, it may cause problems with sharp's compilation. You may need to uninstall via . See https://github.com/lovell/sharp/issues/602 for more information.

You'll also need and MongoDB.

Since we are yet to tag our first release, git clone this repository and run the following commands:

By default the application runs at port . Go ahead and visit , here you can setup the first user and you're ready to relax.

To configure the application you can use a file. You can place it next to the application, on any parent folder, in your folder, etc.

You can find a sample with the default values here.

While in development it's convenient to keep your application running while watching for changes, for that you can run .

The application will automatically restart when needed and keep your bundles up to date.

To build your assets ready to go for production run and to start the application.

To use our latest docker image you just have to have MongoDB running on a different container and link it to Relax.

To start MongoDB in the background you can run . Afterwards run to start Relax on .

For more information about Docker please check their documentation.

Support us with a monthly donation and help us continue our activities. [Become a backer]

Become a sponsor and get your logo on our README on Github with a link to your site. [Become a sponsor]

Thanks to these amazing companies for supporting open source projects including Relax:|||

relax - New generation CMS on top of React, Redux and GraphQL