I spent some time attempting to refactor my Gulp based front-end build to use Browserify. After reading several blog posts about all of the workarounds I might need (debowerify, deglobalify, browserify-shim) just to get existing dependencies to play nice, I got the gist of what's going on.

Then I realized my build was really, really slow. So I read about insertGlobals, noParse, and external bundles. Great, more work I need to do just to get my build to run at a decent speed. Even reading some blog posts it seems like people put up with 1sec+ rebuild times when making code changes, unacceptable to me.

Here are my JS build processes

bower-files, gulp-inject, gulp-changed, gulp-conact, gulp-uglify, gulp-ngmin. In dev, it just copies the files to /build. In prod, it will concat, minify, etc and copy to /build. bower-files let's me automatically find all of my bower dependencies and run them through this same process. gulp-inject then scans the appropriate build/ directories and updates my index with script tags. I end up with a crap load of script tags in dev, and only 2 (vendor and main) in prod.

Initial build time: ~600ms for vendor scripts, ~100ms for my scripts (in development).

Rebuild time: ~20ms since it only rebuilds the file that changed, usually very small, and there is no preprocessing.

My production builds take about ~4s for the script portion, this includes all necessary transforms.

Initial build time: 8s (!?!) even for a development build. I would assume this is because of concatenation processing and no external bundles. I didn't want to spend the time to set up external bundles, because it seemed like it would be slow regardless.

So what am I doing wrong and how do I make browserify work for me? It seems to me like there is no way to avoid the overhead of concatenation, sourcemap generation, etc, and it will always be slow. Is the benefit of having CommonJS in the browser really worth the slow feedback loop? Is it also worth the hassle of setting up external bundles and dealing with non-CommonJS dependencies?

Anybody else got some build times they can share?|||

I spent some time attempting to refactor my Gulp based front-end build to use Browserify. After reading several blog posts about all of the...