Today is a very exciting day for Zend and Enterprise PHP as Rogue Wave Software announces the acquisition of Zend. As part of Rogue Wave, we will be able to dramatically accelerate our ability to reach and serve the largest enterprises and help them accelerate innovation. With this acquisition Rogue Wave broadens its reach into the huge PHP space powering over 50% of the Web.

Rogue Wave is a leader in software development counting over 3,000 enterprise customers across all industries. With its long heritage in mission-critical software development, Rogue Wave, like Zend, is passionate about supporting the development of great, high quality code.

Rogue Wave brings to the table credibility and reach into the biggest enterprises in the world, with most of them using PHP in some shape or form. Through its acquisition of OpenLogic in 2013, Rogue Wave has an ongoing commitment to OSS, with enterprise-class support for hundreds of open-source software packages. Now, with Zend, Rogue Wave supports the full LAMP stack including Linux.

Zend enables Rogue Wave to expand into the Web & Mobile space and with Zend Server, broadens its reach from development all the way into production. We also deliver strong Continuous Delivery and DevOps credibility – critical to today’s application development.

Our commitment to open-source including PHP, Zend Framework and Eclipse PDT continues to be very strong. In fact, we’re working harder than ever to make PHP 7 (powered by Zend Engine) the most improved, most exciting release yet. And, of course, Zend Framework 3. But more on that at this month’s ZendCon.

From a commercial point of view we’re very excited about the innovation we’ve been driving with Zend Server including the revolutionary Z-Ray capability, a must-have in every developer’s toolbox. We will continue to innovate on this front and others and at the same time continue to align with open source efforts such as PHP 7.

What’s the biggest change? Our ability to accelerate enterprise reach and adoption of PHP while being able to serve customers from the application all the way to the operating system. We see this as a very exciting opportunity not only for the two entities, but for the PHP community as a whole.

This all comes at a time when innovation around PHP is at an all-time high. PHP 7 will be out by end of year with 2X the performance and 3X the throughput. In addition, the application eco-system is going through a major refresh including upcoming Drupal 8 and Magento 2, at a time when overall standardization across frameworks and tools is bringing the PHP community together like never before.

These are exciting times for the PHP community & Zend. We look forward to accelerating Enterprise PHP!|||

