My name is Rahul Chhabria, and I joined Atlassian this September to be the product manager of SourceTree. For as long as I can remember, I’ve been using one or more Atlassian products as part of my development workflow. I can’t tell you how excited I am to be joining Atlassian and supporting an amazing community of users.

Prior to joining Atlassian, I worked on a variety of projects ranging from space hardware and education technology to web apps for the California DMV. Most recently, I worked as the product manager for Apple’s database product, FileMaker. I led the product direction for their mobile application, FileMaker Go. Before working at Apple, I was the product manager for Originate, a boutique consulting firm that partnered with small businesses and brought their products to market. At Originate, my team built the first generation Active Learning Platform for Echo360. The platform included a robust content management system, scheduling tools, and an interactive digital classroom experience. Lastly, I co-founded Eduschedu, a cloud-based lesson planning tool for K-12 teachers. In my spare time, I advise and help grow early-stage companies in the Bay Area.

Where does SourceTree fit into my story? As you can see from my previous roles, I’ve always been a fan of building tools with the goal of improving their respective industries. Now I have the opportunity to directly improve the lives of every developer using Git and Mercurial. That is mind blowing! I am ready to take the leap.

SourceTree has given us a massive head start. It takes a complicated workflow and simplifies that workflow without any compromises. I never want to see SourceTree lose that. So, at Atlassian, we’re building a team to take SourceTree to the next level. I am stoked!

I’ve been a consultant for the past ten years and have been looking for a place to call my home. I’m thrilled to be at Atlassian and am looking forward to working with you all to make SourceTree the number one graphical Git and Mercurial client in the world. Onward and upward! Look out for more communications, frequent updates, and new features in this blog.|||

