I’m a long time software engineer. I’ve spent most of my career hating most recruiters. In early 2015, through a minor twist of fate, I became involved with a group of recruiters who were trying to make the recruiting process better for everyone. This is a story about the lessons I learned and how we’re trying to make it better for everyone involved.

My initial view of recruiters was pretty poor. I felt they were keyword searching email blasters who didn’t even bother to open (much less read) your resume. I’ve worked in several industries and done everything from embedded software in C to JavaScript frontends. My resume is a veritable smorgasbord of keywords. Years of 3–7 low quality contacts a week did a pretty good job of cementing this viewpoint. Not every recruiter was bad of course, but the good ones were the rare exceptions, not the rule.

Early this year, through a group on entrepreneurship, I met Lane Campbell. Lane was a recruiter and entrepreneur who stood out. He was as frustrated with recruiting as I was. He began to explain to me how recruiting works from the inside and I came to understand why my impression of recruiters was a result of the unfortunate dynamics of the “death race of the man in the middle”.

Recruiting is a race with only 1 winner. To borrow a (slightly modified) line from Glengarry Glen Ross:

If a recruiter spends 3 weeks looking for a candidate, and another recruiter finds a “good enough” fit first, they just lost 3 weeks of effort. This includes not only their time, but the time of their staff, the cost of their office, the cost of getting access to candidate databases like LinkedIn, etc. By some estimates, this can average around $5,000 per role that they attempt to fill. As if losing $5,000 wasn’t bad enough, they may ultimately lose the client for failing to produce.

The recruiter’s client (or in the case of internal recruiters, the boss) is pushing them hard to find the perfect match. Unfortunately only 5% (if they’re lucky) of the people they reach out to ever return their email or call.

Of those that do contact you back, some will only do so to pour derision on you. Imagine fishing with a net where the holes are bigger than the fish you’re trying to catch. You need a massive net just to accidentally catch something.

A recruiter will get paid between 20% and 30% of your first year’s salary for making a permanent placement (things are a little different for contractors, it’s still a portion of your rate but it’s not as clear cut). On a $100,000/year a recruiter will, on average, make $25,000. Not a bad haul for a month or so of work, until you consider that a number of other companies are also after that $25,000 and only one of you is getting paid anything while all of you are spending money.

Imagine for a moment as a developer that you work for a month on a project, spending not just your time, but also your money (perhaps buying an IDE licence you needed), only to find out that you won’t be getting paid because another developer got a solution in just ahead of you. You’d be pretty motivated to shift things around for pure speed. Out goes anything that doesn’t directly feed into completion (usually the first to go is quality control). That’s where recruiters are today.

What if we could motivate ideal candidates to return calls. This would result in higher quality candidates for the client, fewer low quality contacts for us as software engineers, and a better experience for the recruiter.

Compensating people for their attention or patronage is a time honored means of getting that attention or patronage. Maybe we hand out the best swag from our booth at a tradeshow to get people to stop by so we can have a conversation. Maybe a store uses a coupon to get people to come to a local pizza shop instead of Pizza Hut. We started June based on a very similar concept.

If a recruiter can have 10 conversations with candidates that are a very good match for an average of $100 each on a $100,000 role, they can submit far higher quality candidates than their competitors. The end result is that they stand a much better chance of winning the “recruiting race” and taking home the prize. On a $1,000 investment (and a far shorter turn around) they stand to make an average of $25,000, keeping their company open, helping a candidate get a job they’re ideally suited for, and garnering a reputation with the client as a performer.

The additional benefit to candidates is that there’s a lot less noise. If it’s free to bother you, lots of people will. If you have any doubt, check your spam folder. If you attach a cost to bothering you, no matter how small, the number of people who will bother you with useless messaging will drop dramatically. Compare the spam in your inbox to the spam in your physical mailbox. Inbox spam (for all practical purposes) is free, while there is a real cost to sending you physical mail.

The reception to this idea amongst recruiters has been phenomenal, from both small shops with 2 recruiters to large companies like Amazon, everyone we’ve spoken to has wanted to do it. We’re being pretty selective about what recruiters we allow into the system initially to ensure the quality of the contacts that our candidates get.

Currently, we’re opening the system to candidates. We’re looking for people with the following characteristics:

If you’re interested in joining us in this experiment, here’s how it works

Recruiters will be allowed in the system sometime in October if things keep going at the current rate. If you’re a great fit for a position one of our curated recruiters has, and your rate for a call is what they’re willing to pay, you’ll get a contact from them.

If you’re interested in joining us in this experiment to see if we can make recruiting a win for everyone involved please visit https://joinjune.com.

I’m a polyglot developer deeply interested in high performance, scalability, software architecture and generally solving hard problems. You can follow me on Medium where I blog about software engineering, follow me on Twitter where I occasionally say interesting things, or check out my contributions to the FOSS community on GitHub.

If you enjoyed this post, I’d really appreciate a recommend (just click the heart below).|||

I’m a long time software engineer. I’ve spent most of my career hating most recruiters. In early 2015, through a minor twist of fate, I became involved with a group of recruiters who were trying to…