San Francisco’s rolling hills, Bay views, beaches and cosmopolitan feel make it an aspirational place to live. Those looking to live in San Francisco — home to more than 700,000 residents — have a wide variety of options, from historic Victorian homes to ultramodern high rises.

The City by the Bay is going through a renaissance of late, with a variety of tech-centric businesses opening up within its borders. These companies are attracting an influx of residents, all looking for the best the city has to offer. As such, construction is underway on housing units in a variety of neighborhoods.

We spent more than 25 hours conducting extensive research on San Francisco’s apartments, neighborhoods and residential options. We looked at more than 75 apartment complexes in the San Francisco area, categorizing them by location and comparing them with a set list of criteria. Besides basic information such as year constructed, number of units and average rent prices, we factored in community amenities such as outdoor spaces and fitness facilities.

We delved into the interior design, looking for features such as hardwood flooring, stainless steel appliances, balconies and other modern features. We also placed strong consideration on Walk Scores and accessibility to their respective neighborhoods, all to make confident decisions to determine the best of the best.

From the hip Mission District to Fisherman’s Wharf with its awe-inspiring views, we explored eight of the most popular San Francisco neighborhoods. Regardless of your reason to move west, we hope this apartment guide helps steer you to your next perfect home.

Known simply as “the Mission,” San Francisco’s Mission District is a thriving, multicultural hodgepodge of artists, musicians, fashion designers, tech founders and everyone in between. It is revered as one of the city’s oldest neighborhoods and gets its name from Mission San Francisco de Asis (or simply Mission Dolores), one of a string of seven missions built in the 1700s along California’s coast.

Today the area is lively at all hours of the day, buzzing with children playing in Dolores Park and rich venture capitalists wearing hoodies and making million-dollar deals on their smartphones.

It is one of the hottest places to live in San Francisco, and apartments are hard to come by. Rents have increased quite a bit here over the past five years, thanks to the influx of tech money (case in point: Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg just built a house here, and already home prices are skyrocketing).

Visitors to the Mission can find things to do at all hours of the day, from singing at a karaoke bar and going to an art class in a gallery to shopping at designer boutiques and relaxing in outdoor cafes. (Note: The area can get a little sketchy in the evenings, so travel with a group.)

A few fun restaurants to try include Foreign Cinema, Mission Chinese Food, Lolinda and La Taqueria (recently named home of the world’s best burrito). Those in need of some retail therapy can’t go wrong wandering down Valencia Street or Mission Street. Make sure to stop into Therapy, Thrift Town and Dog Eared Books.

Getting to the Mission is easy. You can take the Bay Area Rapid Transit (better known as BART) to the 16th Street Mission station or the 24th Street Mission station. Multiple bus lines also serve the area, including routes 14, 22, 33, 49, 53, 48, 49 and 67.

Parking can be a challenge, but there are a few lots (the Mission & Bartlett Garage is a good one, at 90 Bartlett St.). If you do find a street spot, be sure to check the signs as you can easily get nabbed with a ticket for parking during prohibited times.

The Civic Center district is a cultural hub of San Francisco. Within just a few blocks, visitors will find attractions including the Asian Art Museum, SHN Orpheum Theatre, San Francisco Opera, San Francisco Symphony, Bill Graham Civic Auditorium and City Hall.

During the day, you will mostly see professionals buzzing from one building to the next on their way to important meetings. Civic Center borders the Tenderloin, considered the most run-down area of town, so some of that bleeds in. You will find a large population of homeless people in this area, and it is not advisable to walk alone at night.

You can find something to do in Civic Center nearly every day and night. The lawn in front of City Hall is a nice place for a picnic and the frequent home to festivals, public speeches and protests.

Across the street at UN Plaza, Heart of the City Farmers’ Market is a fun place to hang out; it’s open 7 a.m.–5:30 p.m. on Wednesdays and 7 a.m.–5 p.m. Sundays. The Bill Graham Auditorium is always hosting concerts; artists range from little-known bluegrass bands to big names such as The Killers and Janet Jackson.

Popular restaurants in the neighborhood include Jardiniere, O3 Bistro & Lounge and Mela Tandoori Kitchen. Coffee lovers can’t go wrong with a cup from Philz (the line is always worth the wait).

Street parking is available in Civic Center at metered spots and in a few underground lots including Civic Center Garage. Public transportation is the easiest way to get to the district; the Civic Center BART station takes you right into the center of the action. Multiple city bus lines go through the area, including the 47, 49, 38, 19, 7x, 31 and 27.

Nestled in San Francisco’s southeast corner, South Beach is a rapidly changing neighborhood that once housed run-down warehouses and today sports sparkling high-rise residential and office buildings. The district is almost entirely bordered by the San Francisco Bay, and views of the Bay Bridge from this area are unparalleled.

Several restaurants and a few shops line the streets, but AT&T Park, home to the San Francisco Giants, is the most appealing attraction. Especially on game days, South Beach comes alive with families and professionals of all ages headed to watch Major League Baseball’s reigning world champions.

Going to AT&T Park (even if you aren’t a baseball fan, the views of the Bay are worth the ticket price) for a Giants game is the most popular thing to do in South Beach, trailed by renting a kayak from City Kayak and parking yourself behind the stadium wishing for a chance to catch a fly ball (this was especially probable in the Barry Bond years).

As for restaurants, you can’t leave South Beach without having a coffee or beer at Red’s Java House, a dive-looking spot on the water that has been around forever (on warm days, snag a seat outdoors). Excellent dinner options include Chaya, Paragon and Delancey Street Restaurant.

It is pretty easy to find parking in South Beach — just look for open lots with posters advertising daylong parking passes. When you do this, make sure to pay in advance and get a receipt.

As for public transit, Caltrain, a train line that connects San Francisco to several cities south (including the entire Silicon Valley), goes straight into the neighborhood (the 4th and King Street stop will drop you at the center). MUNI’s train lines N and T also go to the area, as do bus routes 30, 45, 47, 8, 27 and 10.

If you are looking for trendy restaurants, tech startup offices, co-working spaces and boutique retail shops, look no further than SoMa. An acronym for “south of Market Street” (San Francisco’s main thoroughfare), SoMa is a very hip place to be these days.

This is one of the only places in the city where you will find loft-like living, thanks to converted warehouses and shiny high rises. The demographic skews toward tech-focused young professionals wearing designer eyeglasses. Visitors with a sincere appreciation for nightlife and award-winning food and wine will feel at home here.

Eating is the thing to do in SoMa, and you can’t go wrong by visiting one of the following restaurants: RN74, Marlowe, Boulevard or Waterbar. But to just focus on food is to miss half of the allure of the neighborhood.

Stroll the streets and find gallery openings most nights of the week, as well as incredible exhibits in a number of world-class museums such as the Contemporary Jewish Museum, SFMOMA (scheduled to reopen in early 2016 after a two-year renovation project), Museum of the African Diaspora and the Children’s Creativity Museum. Not to be missed: the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial at Yerba Buena Gardens, especially beautiful at night.

Like South Beach, you can find places to park in SoMa. There are a few garages and several open lots where you can keep your car for a daily fee. MUNI’s above-ground trains N and T go along the Embarcadero and will drop you at the edge of SoMa. Buses are also a simple way to travel; lines that serve this area include the 12, 45, 8, 30, 14x, 27 and 45.

Nob Hill is an iconic San Francisco neighborhood with historical roots dating to the Gold Rush days. It was then that wealthy gold barons and celebrities would hop the city’s cable cars to the top of “the hill” and spend their afternoons in bars, cafes and high-end hotels. Very little has changed since then; Nob Hill is still an address for those with means (including some famous people).

The area is perhaps most well known as the home to The Fairmont Hotel, Intercontinental Mark Hopkins Hotel and Huntington Square Park (all in the same block). Walking around, you will notice established families strolling with their beautifully groomed dogs, as well as some young professionals.

Lower Nob Hill is a district just south of Nob Hill that offers a variety of shops and fun restaurants. Being closer to the Tenderloin, there is some spillover of crime, so walking alone at night isn’t advisable. But during the day, the cafes are bustling.

Step back in time at the Mark Hopkins by taking the elevator to the top floor and having a drink at Top of the Mark, a bar — usually with grand piano accompaniment — that offers 360-degree views of the city (best in the evening). Finish off your evening with a more casual experience at the Tonga Room, a Polynesian-themed restaurant/bar in The Fairmont; note the band perched on a boat in a pool.

Other Nob Hill attractions include the Cable Car Museum and Grace Cathedral, which welcomes everyone and even offers a donation-only yoga class every Tuesday evening. Down in Lower Nob Hill, make sure to check out delicious food at Sons & Daughters, 398 Brasserie and BDK Restaurant & Bar.

San Francisco’s cable car lines serve Nob Hill, so hop on the Powell/Hyde, Powell/Mason or California lines for an open-air ride through the City by the Bay (a one-day pass costs $13). Several bus lines run through both neighborhoods, including the 10, 12, 1, 19, 38, 2, 3 and 45.

Mission Bay is a rapidly changing neighborhood just south of AT&T Park, right on the San Francisco Bay. While the area has long been known for its sprawling parking lots and warehouses, today you are likely to see soaring high-rises housing modern lofts and condos. The demographic skews toward young professionals here.

In February, the district welcomed the opening of the $1.5 billion UCSF Medical Center. This state-of-the-art facility is drawing dozens more buildings and spurring the opening of several attractions, shops and swanky restaurants.

Mission Bay is largely residential, although that may change given the new hospital. The area heats up with crowds around baseball game days. On an average evening, though, you can find excellent food at Tsunami Sushi, Stem Kitchen & Garden and Oda.

Parking in Mission Bay is simple in garages and on the street (watch for street-cleaning hours). Getting here is also a piece of cake. Try the MUNI T-Third Street line; it stops at the UCSF Medical Center. Several bus lines also go to the area; try the 14x, 8Bx, 55, 22, 48 and 10.

The Western Addition is a working-class neighborhood that attracts a multitude of ethnicities and individuals of diverse financial backgrounds. Deemed a slum in the late 1940s, the district has somewhat grown out of that stigma and today has pockets of hip restaurants and nightlife options.

Within the greater Western Addition neighborhood, you can visit Japantown and NoPa (north of the Panhandle), both nice areas to walk around. Families and young adults can be found in this area, thanks to moderate rents and its central location.

Check out live music at places like The Fillmore; a few blocks to the east you can find a plethora of karaoke bars in Japantown (Playground is a local favorite). Alamo Square is a fun place to spend an afternoon, and you might feel nostalgic for Full House reruns upon seeing the line of historic homes with the city in the background (known as the Painted Ladies).

Restaurants of note in the Western Addition include Nopa, State Bird Provisions (call months in advance for a reservation) and Little Star Pizza.

Parking is difficult in this area, so it is best to take a bus or cab. Bus lines that serve the Western Addition include the 22, 24, 31, 5, 2 and 3.

Fisherman’s Wharf is one of the most visited areas of San Francisco, welcoming more than 12 million people per year. Views of the Golden Gate Bridge, Marin Headlands and Alcatraz are incredible here, and there are plenty of opportunities to take boat rides for a closer look.

On the streets you will find a variety of souvenir shops and street performers. Rents aren’t over-the-top expensive in this district (some residents stay away because of the crowds), but you can find apartments in high rises that overlook the Bay.

A visit to Alcatraz is one of the best things to do while visiting San Francisco; make sure to book your ticket at least two weeks in advance. Stroll along Pier 39 and wave at the seals beached on boat buoys, then get some ice cream at Ghirardelli Square and mingle with the artists selling their wares on the street.

While you can take a sunset boat ride aboard an expensive yacht, it is advisable to walk along the water around 5:30 p.m. and snag a ticket for an evening float onboard a retired fishing boat (tickets are usually around $25 per person). Bring your own wine and snuggle under the blankets provided by the crew.

Irish coffee was created in San Francisco; taste the real thing at The Buena Vista. Then get dinner at Gary Danko (advance reservations and required) or Scoma’s (excellent seafood).

Parking can be found in this district, but it is best to opt for a garage or paid spot. MUNI’s F line as well as the Powell/Hyde and Powell/Mason cable cars serve Fisherman’s Wharf. Buses that frequent the neighborhood include the 30, 30x, 22, 28, 49, 43, 19 and 47.|||

From the Mission District to Fisherman’s Wharf, we explored eight of the most popular neighborhoods to bring you the best San Francisco apartments.