This is the first release candidate for Drupal 8.0.0. Release candidates are not supported for production sites, but they are intended for widespread testing in preparation for the upcoming stable release. Release candidates also provide an opportunity to begin developing with Drupal 8, especially for:

We will schedule an official release date for 8.0.0 when we are confident that the rate and nature of incoming critical bugs has slowed enough to ensure a stable release. Until then, release candidates of Drupal 8 will be released twice a month alongside Drupal 7 release windows.

There are currently 0 known critical issues with this release candidate. We expect to identify and resolve additional critical issues as the release candidate is tested more widely.

There is a known issue with response cache headers sometimes exceeding hosting configuration limits that may cause some pages to not be viewable on some hosting providers. If you run into this, see that issue and its related issues for details.

Starting now, any security issues discovered for Drupal 8 should be kept confidential and reported using the Report a security vulnerability link on the Drupal project page in order to protect existing sites. Through December 31, 2015, the Drupal 8 security bounty is also still active, so you can get paid for finding security issues and reporting them in our private tracker! See the security team page for more information on Drupal security.

A handful of backward compatibility breaks were introduced since beta 16 in preparation for the release candidate, which may require updates to existing modules and themes:

Also see the full list of API changes in Drupal 8.|||

This is the first release candidate for Drupal 8.0.0. Release candidates are not supported for production sites, but they are intended for widespread testing in preparation for the upcoming stable release. Release candidates also provide an opportunity to begin developing with Drupal 8, especially for: New sites. Sites that rely mainly on the expanded functionality provided by Drupal 8 core alone. Projects that will take months of development time.