I am proud to report that for the first time ever, the tech community has some skin in the political game. Yet, this is no game, it’s our future. My first official appearance as a presidential candidate at TechCrunch Disrupt last week was a great success. We met many people and I sat down for a number of interviews, sharing my vision and principles with a receptive crowd.

The iPhone app “1600 Pennsylvania Avenue” ran the first poll that included my name among all the current  presidential candidates. This poll was sent to their beta testers, an extremely technical crowd. The name John McAfee ranked 10 out 10 points on the issues. I can’t think of a better endorsement than that that is coming from the technical community.

The message is getting through to the right people. The time for technology at the core of our national issues is now. The ineptitude that has besieged us on all national fronts can no longer be tolerated.

We cannot endure the thinly veiled imagery of this Potemkin village that is sold to us on technological leadership. We are in a state of constant cyber war throughout every waking moment, every resting moment. A few minutes spent looking at the Norse Cyber Attack World map will tell you quite a bit about this constant threat. We must do better, and we can do better.

Cyber security is more than just technology and it is more than a collection of practices, it’s a state of mind. How do you feel about the current state of security? This is one of the most serious challenges to our national security and economic prosperity today, yet we are constantly faced with news that yet another company or agency has been infiltrated. All the while, there is reckless abandon and even apathy on both sides.  Do better.

In a speech this past week in Seattle, Chinese President Xi Jinping committed to fighting cybercrime.

Tremendous words, but there is little there to enforce anything. Consider the variety of nebulous points within. These include the terms of what their definition of punishment is, what accordance to the law is, and what relevant international treaties cover such acts. There are so many loopholes and non-binding elements of this position, that it’s not even funny.

Let us not fool ourselves, we need to prepare. At a minimum, the interdependence of Chinese-U.S. economics gives us some positioning in the matter, but it is hardly the type of assurance we need that would prevent the further loss of intellectual property and national security information. In the meantime, Xi’s administration has caught the attention of freedom watchers due to the imprisonment of human rights advocates and lawyers. We need to enforce serious economic trade sanctions to reinforce our sovereignty and precious assets. Statements only go so far, and if Mr. Xi is as committed to addressing these issues as he suggests, he should have no problem coming to a treaty.

The path to Washington is one that has to feature technology in every regard. The McAfee Administration will prioritize security and technology as our top tools and prized possessions. Within this mission, we can ensure that the entire spectrum of threats to the United States is secured through the means of advanced counter-threat methods and technologies. Education is another foundation of the McAfee Administration. From the grassroots, to companies and the highest offices in the land, security is a mindset that will take hold. For all the technology we put in place to secure information, the break in the security chain in many intrusions has been the individual. Information is critical, and there is a base of information we receive towards strengthening security that belongs in our own minds that is just as critical. We also live in an information age and we need to capitalize on the tools and capabilities bestowed upon us.

In just under 240 years since this country was founded, what has made us different has been our collective resolve, our right to our freedoms, and our technological advancements. It’s time we went back to that magic formula.|||

