Parent Co., a company committed to building technology for internet-connected parents around the world has announced the Android version of http://www.notabli.com, its powerful private social network. Notabli allows parents to curate a collection of their children’s photos, videos, audio or quotes and then safely share them with an inner circle, or selectively share from Notabli to public social media. Notabli, now fully functional on the web, iOS and Android, serves highly-engaged users in over 80 countries who use Notabli an average of 2.5x per day on both web and mobile devices.

Originally designed as an iOS app, Notabli’s features have transformed it into a vibrant social network, an elegant solution for parents to build, protect and responsibly share a digital collection as their children grow. Images are full resolution, video is HD and all content is fully owned by parents and easy to download, export or sync with Dropbox. Notabli has all the familiar elements of social media. It’s networked; you invite people, you share things, ‘heart’ posts and comment, but the end result is so much more fulfilling, it’s about building an enduring collection of their kids’ best moments. Notabli is ad-free and doesn’t sell the data of parents or children.

“Parents have a new responsibility to protect their child’s digital footprint and teach them how to manage it as they enter young adulthood,” says Mike DeCecco, Parent Co.'s CEO. “Notabli empowers parents to evolve from selfies and status updates to saving the moments in their child’s life that they want remembered. Social media as we know it is not a solution. Images are compressed, they’re hard to find and organize and privacy is never certain. Notabli allows multiple people to contribute to a child’s account as admins. This makes it easy for family and friends to be a part of building the child’s collection. Notabli wants to help parents teach young adults the value of protecting and saving their images until they are mature enough to take the reigns themselves.”

Parent Co. is a Burlington-based company building a better web for families. Parent Co. was formed in Summer 2014 to build technology for internet-connected parents around the world. Notabli is their first product introduction. Parent Co. is anchored online at Parent.co, a place where Parent Co. produces original writing, curates articles from around the web, and publishes stories, ideas and inspirations from parents around the world. For more information, visit Parent.co. Connect with us on Twitter and Facebook. Notabli is available on the iTunes App Store and Google Play Store.|||

Parent Co., accelerates on mission to build technology for parents with announcement of the Android version of Notabli (http://www.notabli.com,) its powerful private social network.