As a long time television veteran both as a former Line Producer for ABC, PBS & NBC and as the former CTO of Wexler Video, I have long battled the issues of lit & damaged pixels in cameras.

For a camera rental house lit pixels are more than a nuisance as it drives clients with the pixel problem to reason the issue is with the rental house and or the cameras.

As a long time television veteran both as a former Line Producer for ABC, PBS & NBC and as the former CTO of Wexler Video, I have long battled the issues of lit & damaged pixels in cameras.

For a camera rental house lit pixels are more than a nuisance as it drives clients with the issues to reason the issue is with the rental house and or the cameras.

In October of 2014 I had a Deja Vu moment when a client shooting in Los Angeles called in to report that their 6 F800 cameras were experiencing repetitive lit pixels which they described as coming right back shortly after being cleared by a black balance or APR function. Despite diligently clearing the cameras at the start of the day, at lunch and at dinner they always had more lit pixel issues. Of course the immediate conclusion was that the cameras were broken and needed to be replaced.

When the camera arrived at our shop at the end of the day each had 1-3 lit pixels and a simple black balance cleared all but one and that was cleared with Sony’s APR function.

Now back in 2002, I remember having similar issues during high solar activity and I had heard on the news that morning that there was a rather large sunspot on the sun at the moment. As it turned out the spot in question was the largest sun spots in the last 24 years.

Shortly after that image was captured sun spot 12192 erupted with a massive Coronal Mass Ejection (CME) which spewed among other things a mass of Gamma Photons out into space.

Now as anyone with passing interest in the Sun and solar flares knows there is an 11 year cycle to solar activity and it just so happened like back in 2002 we were once again at the peak of the solar cycle and like back in 2002, I began to suspect that there was a more direct connection between Solar Flares / CME’s and significant lit pixel occurrences.

So armed with this seemingly self evident though I told the client that they had just become victim of one of the largest sun spots in the last 24 years and they should just Black Balance as often as was practical for a day or so till the incident passed.

Imagine my surprise when their reaction was less than satisfied.

So I did what any good technology executive would do when faced with such a challenge, I asked the oracle of all things Google.

Much to my surprise I found … .  absolutely nothing that directly supported my theory.

Now everyone is willing to accept that this guy might have some issues outside his control but it seems when it comes to earth bound cameras you are paying for by the days to your favorite rental house there is a different set of expectations.

Now when it comes to pixel issues there seems to be more myth than truth on the web.

That the issues are the result of manufacturing issues in the sensor.

Camera heat is another popular issue with the assumption that it triggers a latent malfunction in the imager.

There is also a large contingent that believes pixel issues are the result of old cameras or pixel death by age.

The truth however is something much more interesting.

Now the major manufacturers of broadcast cameras have for a long time quietly admitted that they knew that pixels in imagers were susceptible to damage from “Cosmic Rays” but in fact what they are referring to is gamma radiation or gamma photons.

Gamma photons are ultra-short wavelength light that are only produced under extraordinary circumstances when an atom is split into two or more pieces, either spontaneously or because it gets hit by a high-speed neutron.

The manufacturers long ago concluded that travel by air and even more travel by air using polar routes tend to on an inconsistent basis cause pixel issues.

The higher you are the less of our atmosphere there is to shield you from the more prevalent sources of gamma radiation from space. Hence exposure in Vail, Colorado is potentially greater than Los Angeles.

Likewise the closer you are to the poles the more exposure you have to radiation that is pushed there along with the solar wind as our atmosphere and magnetosheath protect the rest of the planet more.

So you are more likely to be exposed to pixel problems in Fairbanks, Alaska than in Los Angeles.

There are multiple sources of gamma radiation:

Perhaps the most common and consistent influence on pixel damage comes from pulsars and collapsing star from 400 light years distance and beyond.

Above on the right is an image from the Fermi Large Area Telescope which shows gamma radiation sources from different types of pulsars.

Now shockingly during my research I discovered a surprising cause closer to home in lightning burst.

In 1991 scientist first discovered that lightning generated gamma radiation and more recently using the Fermi telescope they were able to observe burst of gamma coming out of the top of thunderstorms during lightning strikes.

Now up until the launch of the Fermi Large Area Telescope in 2008 there was no firm proof that a solar flare / coronal mass ejection was a direct source of gamma radiation.

In the image above you can see the sun passing in front of the the Fermi telescope on an average day and registering no notable gamma radiation.

However on March 7th during a significant X5.4 solar flare the sun gave off 1,000 times more gamma radiation out stripping the brightest gamma source which is the Vela Pulsar.

So clearly solar flares do emit gamma radiation.

It is important to realize that gamma photons (they are not particles) can pass through anything. While it is true that if a gamma photon must pass through enough (and I mean very large amounts) dense material such as lead and solid earth it will eventually lose enough energy that it will stop being being a highly energized photon however there is no practical way to shield a camera this way.

To understand what is happening when a pixel is damaged by gamma photon let’s look at what a pixel in an imager looks like.

Above is an extreme close up of several pixels from a Canon 1D camera and below is my own drawing of a theoretical CMOS pixel.

Light/Photons pass through the color filter (CFA) and strikes the Photodiode and the collected energy is transferred to the potential well and the photodiode is reset as the energy is read from the potential well. That info is passed on in sequence through the imager. There are of course analog to digital conversions and other functions performed and in some imagers that is done at the pixel level and in others it is done somewhere else on the imager chip.

Keeping these images in mind, let’s look at the types of pixel damage that exist:

In this case a gamma photon has damaged the pixel causing an ionized trace to be left and that trace is conducting energy between the photodiode and the potential well bypassing the reset transistor. In essence the photodiode is shorted to the potential well. Hence, the potential well will always reads with more energy as it is constantly being fed energy from the photodiode.

In this case a pixel is showing either as hot or dark/dead but is not really damaged. This can be caused by various things but one of the more specific examples is when you shoot a camera at under 5 frames per second. In this case, since the imager is not being read / reset as often, the potential well is full of energy for 5 to 10 times longer than typical. This can cause the potential well to have issues clearing the energy which ends up leaving some residual during the reset and hence the pixel will appear hot or lit.

In this case a gamma photon has passed through the pixel and left an ionizing trace or has damaged the pixel in such away that either the potential well can’t hold a charge and or no charge is getting from the photodiode to the potential well and so the pixel reads with no value.

So since we can’t shield or protect an imager from damage we must resort to fixing the problem.



Most professional cameras have a Black Balance option and this is the first line of defence to cure pixel issues.



If you will excuse my extremely inaccurate pixel representation above the concept of a Black Balance is that the imager is closed off from light, read and any irregularities in pixels is noted and normalized. Slight issues that might cause an pixel to read above or below the expected black or zero level can now be considered zero.



Each manufacturer has their own deeper solution when a standard Black Balance does not resolve a pixel problem. In this case what is started in the Black Balance procedure and repeated in these procedures are taken a step further and a truly damaged pixel that can’t be normalized is mapped out and the camera from here out will ignore that pixel and extrapolate data from adjacent pixels and in some case from data immediately prior and post any given read sequence to fill in the data hole.

If all else fails a very qualified camera technician can perform a deep maintenance to target and map out the problem pixel manually.

Not a great issue as it costs in terms of time and money but when all else fails a good post provider can mask and fix a lit pixel ina scene.

So ultimately you can’t avoid the causes of pixel damage whether it be Solar Flares, Lighting, a long ago collapsing star or even a spurious gamma photon given off by the bananas from craft services (who have thought it but look it up).

So first and foremost, following the manufacturer’s recommendations for regular Black Balances (after warming up the camera) once a day in normal conditions and much more frequently during high solar activity or thunderstorms and certainly after flying a camera. Periodically running the higher level APR style functions is also a good idea.

As I write this in 2015, we are cresting the end of the 11 year peak of solar activity however a solar flare can happen even at the low point of activity.  By 2019 or so we will be at the bottom of the cycle however it never hurts to keep an eye on the solar weather.

SolarHam’s Solar Flare Risk indicator is probably your best quick look at the potential of a Solar Flare.

The NOAA Space Weather Prediction site is also a great resource and has the additional benefit of having an email alert system.

Lit Pixels -Solar Flares and Other Causes by Joel Ordesky is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.|||

