The Swedish government is having another crack at pinning responsibility for piracy on Sweden's top-level domain registry for .se, IIS.

This spring a Swedish district court ordered two Pirate Bay domains at .se addresses to be handed over to the state, marking a major victory for long-time pirate-hunting prosecutor Fredrik Inblad.

While it cleared the way for prosecutors to pursue further .se domain seizures through the courts, the ruling didn't give the prosecution everything it wanted, holding that IIS wasn't liable for piracy even though it was fully aware the domains it leased facilitated piracy.

IIS for several reasons has argued that domain seizures are a poor tool for combating piracy, as it outlined in 2013. However, the registry did consider it a victory in that it was not obliged to judge which domains are involved in illegal activities and should be seized.

The ruling gave some certainty to a position IIS has taken in the face of repeated attempts to require that it decide what action to take when .se domains are used for piracy.

Unhappy with that part of the ruling, Swedish prosecutors are now making another attempt at holding IIS responsible, recently appealing the decision to Sweden's Court of Appeals.

IIS lawyer Elisabeth Ekstrand explained the legal issues this week: "The dispute stems from which responsibilities IIS can have in its role as a top-level domain administrator and therefore if a domain name can be treated as an object or property.

"The prosecutor has, among other things, argued that IIS, through its domain-name business, promotes copyright infringement and that this is sufficient for making a forfeiture of the domain names from IIS."

While the court ultimately did not hold IIS responsible for piracy, Ekstrand notes that it also said IIS "acted intentionally and therefore should be considered as contributing to copyright infringement".

However the court came down in IIS's favour after acknowledging the differences between a registry and an ISP. ISPs have also faced lawsuits accusing them of being complicit in piracy for not blocking access to local piracy sites, such as Swefilmer and Pirate Bay.

As Ekstrand explained, IIS's position is that, "We have no obligation to act but rather an obligation not to act without a direct order", for example, from a law-enforcement agency.

"The statement is based on the view that the assignment of managing an important function in society does not include judging over whether an individual case can be considered illegal or not," she added.

Despite an appeal having been filed by the prosecution, there remain a number of uncertainties due to the particularities of Sweden's court system.

For one, no date has been set for a hearing at the appeals court and that, according to Ekstrand, means the district court that ruled on the matter could change its decision. And if it actually goes to appeal, whoever wins gets greater certainty for their position.

"So again, the saga continues...," Ekstrand wrote.|||

Unhappy with a ruling this spring, Swedish pirate-hunting prosecutors are going after the nation's domain registry to nail it as a willing accomplice to piracy.