Children can be really messy no matter what time of the day it is. For them everything is defined through their own magnifying glass that only highlights the things that they want to see. Therefore, parents stand a small chance when it comes to contain all the rumpus that ensues a tyke’s play activity.

This post will shed a light on the incommodious query: Should Kids be Allowed to have their Way with things? I think the most important question is at what age should kids be allowed to have their way with things? However, unfortunately, most parents believe that children should never be allowed to have things their way unti8l they reach the age of maturity because as the culture tells us, parents know it all, and the kids don’t. But don’t you think we are over-controlling our kids when we don’t let them do some of the stuff by themselves?

Studies show that most parents scrutinize every activity their children engage in, including the playground activities around an outdoor playground equipment. There is a fine line between over-controlling and monitoring, and most parents fail to see that. I understand that it is impossible for us to let our kids be on their own, but I think maybe kids need a little freedom in making their own decisions.

So back to the question, should we or should we not? Research suggests that a certain amount of control should be allowed to children at an early age with specific restrictions. Toddlers and preschoolers are totally at your mercy, but for school going children it is okay to handle things on their own.

When children have a little freedom in the way they do things, they learn to cope well and handle different situations on their own. And that’s not it. With responsibility, children learn to understand that there are always repercussions to certain things and rewards to other things. They learn about the balance, and develop the ability to develop a profound perspective about everyday things. When children are constantly restricted, they feel constrained and avoid using their decision making and problem solving skills.

For toddlers and preschoolers, allow them to have their way with commercial playground equipment, school homework, play dates and some household chores. Let kids decide how a certain thing should be. Let them know that their opinion matters and their suggestions are effective. This plays a great role in helping kids develop self-esteem and confidence that help him in their academic life as well.

If your kids seem not to have a handle on things, help them instead of restricting them. This is your chance to build a strong foundation for your children so they can have a prosperous, independent life.

Do you allow your child to have it all? Under what conditions a certain amount of freedom is granted to your children in your house? Share your opinion with us through our comment section below and help guide other parents.|||

All that Rumpus: Should Kids be Allowed to have their Way? Children can be really messy no matter what time of the day it is. For them everything is defined through their own magnifying glass that...