Twitter is alit today, it seems, with news of Google neutralising AdBlock Plus. The popular extension, originally created by Wladimir Palant in 2006, is used by many to bypass ads hosted on the internet, including the video ads served by Google's video streaming site.

It has drawn the ire of many web publishers and websites alike for allegedly curtailing their revenues significantly. In an attempt to shore up the almost non-existent profits from YouTube, Google might have finally found a way of skirting the extension. Multiple Twitter users are now posting their accounts, including images, of Chrome circumventing the extension's ad-averse net:

Google's workaround seems to be applicable to all similar extensions and isn't exclusive to just AdBlock Plus.

The company has not stopped at just skirting the extension, however. Users with AdBlock enabled will now have to see full-length video ads with no option to skip them half-way through, a feature YouTube has offered for a very long time. The only way to get the option back is to disable AdBlock, or to whitelist YouTube.

Ever-industrious, the internet has already found a way of bypassing Google's own bypass, though:

This move is likely to please content creators and publishers, but is obviously a blow at users' ability to choose how they interact with the internet and what content they consume and what they don't. Blocking ads has always been a controversial issue and it will likely remain so in the future.

Update: We have been contacted by Rob Wu, a developer on the Chromium project - the open-source foundation for the Chrome browser - who has informed us that this change was not intentional but, rather, an unintended result of fixing a previous security issue (CVE-2015-1297). He confirmed that the issue will only be seen if the YouTube app is installed and that, at the moment, apart from disabling AdBlock or whitelisting YouTube, the only solution, as described above, is to uninstall the app. The problem is expected to be patched in the upcoming weeks or, at least, when Chrome 46 is released.|||

A number of users have started complaining that the latest version of Google Chrome is not only bypassing the popular AdBlock Plus extensions but also stopping users from skipping ads.