Less than a year ago I came across the web service Buffer. If you’re unfamiliar with Buffer, it’s a platform that allows you to post to multiple social networks from a single dashboard. That in itself is a big time saver and helper for promoting your posts. But that’s not the main reason I continue to use Buffer on a daily basis. I’m going to show you a few easy techniques I use to measure and promote my own content.

If you don’t have a buffer account already, head over to their website and register. Once you’ve signed up, login in and add a few of your social media profiles. Make sure you add Twitter because that is the main one I’m going to talk about. Once you’re hooked up, schedule a few posts on your Twitter account. If you don’t have a ton of original content to pull from, find some related content that you can post. On my Twitter feed, I primarily tweet about web design & development. Along with my posts, I add links from websites like Smashing Magazine and Tuts+ to name a few.

The next thing you should do is setup up some feeds so that you have a regular stream of content to pull from. Feeds are a premium feature in Buffer but the $10 a month is well worth it. This is a small price to pay in the growth hacking or advertising space. Yet if you don’t want to upgrade, you don’t have to. You’ll still be able to measure content to see what is working the best; more on that a little later.

Once you’ve upgraded your account, import the feed to your own blog. I’d also recommend importing a few blog feeds from related blogs and content sources. When you are posting content, you don’t want to overwhelm your followers with your own blog posts. Your priority should be to be useful to your followers and this will allow you to grow your twitter audience. For every one of your posts you share, it’s a good idea to share 3-4 from other reputable sources.

Once you’ve setup your account and started posting content, you’ll want to do that every day for a week or so. You won’t start to see any meaningful feedback until you’ve been posting for a few days. Give your followers a chance to click on your links and the hit counter to grow.

Once a few days have passed, come back to your Buffer dashboard and click on the Analytics tab. Here you’ll see every post you have buffered over the last week. You can see how many retweets, favourites, mentions and clicks your tweet received. You’ll also see the size of the audience that the tweet was exposed to. Scroll the list and you’ll start to see what posts are receiving the most interactions. This is why you need to wait a few days before viewing your stats. You need to give it a few days to build up so you have a large enough amount of data.

Make sure during this week you are posting some of your own content so that you can measure it against your other related sources. Find your most popular posts and hover over them. You’ll notice a Re-Buffer This Post link will appear. Clicking this will reschedule the tweet to be posted again on your feed. Remember it’s a good idea to repost your best content as a large percentage of your followers may have missed it. Continue to watch and measure your tweets on a daily basis and you’ll begin to get a feel for what types of posts get the most interactions. This will likely surprise you a bit when you see a blog post perform better than you thought. You’ll also see some do poorly that you thought were great. This is exactly the type of measurement you need to be paying attention to when you are brainstorming what content to write next for your blog.

Like anything worthwhile this will take a little bit of time and work to achieve the maximum benefit. However, the effort is minimal and can help boost your twitter followers and your blog traffic. Using this technique over the last few months has doubled my Twitter followers and allowed me to write more targeted content that my readers want to consume.

Don’t forget to also keep an eye on how your competitors content is performing that you’ve added to your Buffer. This is a great idea to see what works and then perhaps write a similar post on your own blog. Keep at it on a daily basis and you’ll start to see your follower and website traffic increase.|||

Learn some easy techniques to measure your content to see what's working on your blog or website.