This challenge has ended and winners received their prizes. 

 

 -------------------------------------------------------

 

 We are excited to announce 



Are you enjoying the service? We know you are! Do you want to help us to spread the word?

Are you ready to become more productive? Start using our time tracking apps today! 

 

 General Rules 

 

 No purchase is necessary to enter or win

 

 

 Contest begins on Monday October 05, 2015 Pacific Time  and will end on Thursday November 19, 2015 (PDT). Winners will be announced within 3 business days on AdaptRM’s blog. / Winners will be notified via the email they register on AdaptRM’s website.

 

 

 Eligibility: This contest is open anyone who is 18 years of age or older at the time of entry. (Except Where Prohibited By Law)

 

 

 Employees of AdaptRM, their immediate family members, and persons residing in the same household of such employees are not eligible to enter or win.

   Contest begins on Monday October 05, 2015 Pacific Time  and will end on Thursday November 19, 2015 (PDT). Winners will be announced within 3 business days on AdaptRM’s blog. / Winners will be notified via the email they register on AdaptRM’s website.: This contest is open anyone who is 18 years of age or older at the time of entry. (Except Where Prohibited By Law)Employees of AdaptRM, their immediate family members, and persons residing in the same household of such employees are not eligible to enter or win.

We at AdaptRM believe that You Can't Improve What You Don't Measure. In order to improve your productivity we dare you to track how you spend you time for six weeks with our time tracking apps.You have a chance to improve your productivity and win great prizes!Theperson who uploads the most hours (using our apps) will win one year of free pro service with AdaptRM!will receive 6 months of free pro service with AdaptRM.The next 9 contestants who finishwill get 3 months of free pro service with AdaptRM.We will reward you if you refer your contacts (colleagues and friends) to AdaptRM. Once registered, they can also participate in the challenge.You just need to copy your unique referral address and send it to your contacts. You can learn how to find your referral link in our referring guide.You can refer your contacts with your unique referral address. You can find it when you log in, click on your name in the upper right corner and choose “ Settings ”.who refer the most people to the challenge will receive 1 year of free pro service with AdaptRM!who refer the most new contestants will get 3 months of free pro service with AdaptRM.|||

