Building a startup, in the early stages, is a lot like solving a jigsaw puzzle. You have the final image in mind, but after you scatter the pieces, getting them to fit together takes effort—especially under time constraints like all startups are.

A business leader must understand the organization’s product and market fit (i.e. what will differentiate your product or service from the competitors?). The big picture. Not the individual pieces. You need to build a product, attract an audience, reach out to investors; there is little time left for you to manage onboarding, payroll, taxes, recruiting, etc.

When to Try: Outsourcing Quickly to Get to Market

In that six months you spending recruiting, interviewing, and hiring, your competitor could have outsourced that same work and gotten a viable product to the market. Depending on the condition that can be the death of your young startup.

You need tools in the early stages and it’s good practice to try before you buy. Where possible, outsource and use on-demand services so you can scale. Then when you have capital, cut them out just as quick.

Rather than approaching the conventional buy, build, or partner paradigm, at Control, we chose the “lease or rent” mentality.

Trying out contractors before committing long-term reduces risk. And in the grand scheme of things, it will speed up your startup's growth.

We approached our team framework in the same way. Invoke Labs, a digital media agency, was a godsend and their early support helped fill in the gaps where necessary. We also lucked out with German app development company, which we outsourced at the start and continue to work with to this day. They have a team of contractors that are embedded, competent, conscientious, and cost effective.

When to Buy: Staying In Control of What Matters

While many aspects can and should be outsourced initially, others should be done with assiduous consideration. The fear of outsourcing is the fear of losing control of your company and product. You must ask yourself: “What does your company pride itself in?” Whatever the answer is, you should consider hard before outsourcing that. For example, if your company is built around an application with great usability, you would want to find UX/UI designers and programmers, who are ingrained in the product. You want them to be your all-stars, even if they are outsourced.

At Control, we need a top-notch tech team who can hack everything together. To do that, we asked our technical staff rigorous questions when hiring. Don’t hesitate. Ask questions, prod, open closet doors, and scrutinize their experience and backgrounds.

Seek qualified and quality experience over someone with vague experience and  has not launched actual software applications into a live environment . Having experience working within an engineering practice is essential. Rarely are hackers with no organizational experience going to scale your startup to a billion dollar business. You need a balance of soft and hard skills.

For Control, getting the right tech leadership is the most important hire we could make.

When I had some funds, I made my first elite hire. I poached a Dev Manager from a well-known eCommerce company. Right away, he put his expertise to work by dismantling the cluster of discombobulated services we had accumulated over time, in order to make our product scale efficiently.

A Time to Rent and a Time to Invest

Overtime, your company should stop outsourcing talent and start adding more permanent team members. As a young startup, these initial team members will be the core of your company.

They bring something to the table a contractor can’t – seeds to grow culture and emotional investment in the your company.

Building a strong culture will define your brand and keep the internal and external workings of your organization healthy. Your company culture will be born from your early round of hires’ synergy. Their attitudes, work ethic, quirks, etc. will be integrated into the way your office functions day to day.

This startup metamorphosis does not—or is unlikely to—happen amongst a group of hired contractors. Contractors work toward a specific goal or deadline. They were great in getting your viable product onto the market, sure, but they do not have to be believers.

A company culture is constructed upon a vision, a vision every member on board shares. A great company is not simply about a product; it’s about a collective. And like all significant relationships, you want the end result to be a marriage of talent, shared values, and complementary traits.

You cannot buy a company culture like a new shirt, it’s more than that, it’s a whole wardrobe—you need to mix and match, try and buy, until you have the style that suits your brand.|||

