Dynatrace Ruxit is the first monitoring solution to offer a pure pay-as-you-go pricing model. You can get started monitoring for as little as 15 cents an hour—and you only pay for what you use. No long-term contract or commitments. Get started for free with Dynatrace Ruxit today. The first 1,000 hours of monitoring are on us. We also offer a special program for startups. Our startup package allows you to monitor up to 10 machines and 2 million user visits per month for up to 12 months.

Ruxit offers more then monitoring. For us, ruxit gives a objective vision and intelligence for IT operations that needs high performance. Is fantastic see quickly the impact of bad performance to my customers and fix this in a fast time!

Small startups, stay away from ruxit, I signed up with them because their pre-sale service was amazing, they spent time with me and went over very impressive ui. But once I started paying, the level of service just went down. First, the very impressive dashboard, just doesn’t provide any ...

Dynatrace Ruxit includes monitoring features that cover your entire application stack: • Real user monitoring (browser-based performance monitoring) • Application performance monitoring for Java, Node.js, and .NET (PHP and Ruby coming soon) • Server and process monitoring for Windows and Linux • Network monitoring • EC2 virtual infrastructure monitoring Dynatrace Ruxit provides all-in-one monitoring and operations management for DevOps teams working in startups, mid-sized companies, and large organizations. Using proprietary artificial intelligence technology, Ruxit enables companies to manage thousands of servers using a simple interface. Dynatrace Ruxit removes the complexities and manual work typically involved in problem analysis, enabling you to: • Visualize your entire application infrastructure, from the browser to the server. • Automatically discover all application dependencies in your environment. • Receive automatic root cause analysis of all performance issues.

No alerting noise! Artificial Intelligence analysis and baselining Dynatrace Ruxit learns your environment and analyzes anomalies so you don’t have to. When something goes wrong, you get the solution—not just an alert. With the ability to discover all dependencies in your application stack, Dynatrace Ruxit delivers fast root-cause analysis. All-in-one solution. One agent covers everything The Dynatrace Ruxit all-in-one approach to monitoring combines user-experience-, network-, server-, and cloud-monitoring in a single agent. This makes deployment easy. Just install a single agent on each host. No data sampling! Response times are measured in customers' browsers Dynatrace Ruxit automatically measures response times and detects JavaScript errors directly in your customers’ browsers. Dynatrace Ruxit even monitors the performance of 3rd party calls or applications that you rely on (for example, Facebook, Twitter, or CDNs).

Web, application and infrastructure monitoring has gotten out of control, and DevOps teams are often the ones feeling the heat. Ruxit is a web-based monitoring platform with a simplified solution, automatically monitoring applications, analyzing problems, and notifying users immediately when systems have gone awry.

Used by more than 100 top companies, including QMETHODS, Sofico, and BarBri, Ruxit acts as a monitoring command center. Ruxit automatically handles configurations and scales to thousands of machines. It provides DevOps teams with complete visibility into dependencies in their web-based applications, including third-party providers, infrastructure components, database services, and server-side services.

Ruxit is an all-in-one application performance monitoring solution for DevOps teams. Offering browser-based performance monitoring, Ruxit is frequently used by startups, mid-sized companies, and large organizations. Ruxit’s proprietary artificial intelligence technology makes it possible for users to manage thousands of servers in a single, centralized place.

Ruxit’s most important features include application performance monitoring for Java, Node.js, and .NET, server and process monitoring for Windows and Linux, network monitoring, and Docker, Vmware and EC2 virtual infrastructure monitoring. Visualizing the entire application infrastructure, DevOps teams using Ruxit are able to discover all application dependencies, visualize their application infrastructures, and receive an automatic root cause analysis of any performance issues.

Through a central dashboard, Ruxit users are able to monitor all of their web and mobile applications. Examples of the types of server-side-services that Ruxit monitors include web services, web containers, database requests, and custom services.

Once you’ve setup Ruxit, the solution is able to visualize services across multiple machines to provide you with a clearer picture of the health of your application’s services, processes, and infrastructure. Ruxit will track each application component by identifying all the details of that component, and it will provide you with valuable insight into the performance of your application stack.

Ruxit enables users to correlate events across time, along with user actions and varying monitoring perspectives. The solution monitors the infrastructure that supports the services that applications rely on, and it correlates actions of users with server-side services.

Start correlating events to pinpoint the root cause of any problems that you may be experiencing in the delivery chain. Ruxit’s root cause analysis can work across physical and virtual infrastructure components, identifying problems in the application’s infrastructure and looking for correlations between seemingly unrelated events.

Full stack monitoring means that Ruxit is capable of detecting and diagnosing both availability and performance problems across a user’s entire stack. DevOps teams can quickly gain insight into impacted applications, actions, and components with AI algorithms and data analytics.

Dig deeper into your applications and services at the method level. When you use Ruxit to locate problematic methods in the execution call stack, you increase your chances of finding and resolving performance issues. Ruxit provides you with detailed insights, including NoSQL queries, and support for the monitoring of SQL databases.

Ruxit enables DevOps teams to detect the impact of every vMotion event. In addition to detecting vMotion events, Ruxit also learns the baseline performance of a user’s applications and notifies users immediately if a code deployment results in high resource consumption.

Using Ruxit to detect vMotion events means you no longer have to worry about manually adjusting your own dashboard’s monitoring configurations. Ruxit adjusts to infrastructure changes automatically. Ruxit tracks performance stats like response times, error rates, and behavior under load, and it issues instant notifications when load times have slowed.

Ruxit pricing starts at $0.15 per host hour for application monitoring, and $0.15 per 1,000 visits for real user monitoring. Custom pricing plans are available for users with more than 20 hosts and those with high-traffic sights. With no contracts to sign, Ruxit allows users to stop using the service at any time without any cancellation fees.|||

Dynatrace Ruixt is an all-in-one application performance monitoring