How to have Effective Meetings? Meetings are an integral part of an everyday life in a corporate and the number of hours that you spend in meetings keeps increasing as you rise higher in an organization.  Except for a few roles that are of an “Individual Contributor” in nature where attending meetings is relatively less, in all other roles a substantial portion of a person’s working day will be spent in meetings.

While at entry level the percentage of time spent in meetings can be as low as 5-10% of the total time, at senior levels these time can shoot-up to 90-95% of the working time. No wonder senior level persons need to be workaholics as they need to find time over and above their working hours spent on meetings to get their work done.

Since, so much of an organization time is spent on meetings it is important to understand why do we have meetings? Since, in a large organization all tasks are completed by teams of people working together, most of the meetings in an organization are internal meetings to accomplish any one of the specific purpose like.

Besides the internal meetings there can be meetings with external stake holders that a person may need to attend. For the purpose of these article we will confine our discussion to internal meetings that entry level and mid effective meetings management level person needs to attend.

Is there something like cost of meetings (COM)? The answer is a definitive yes, and it is the summation of all the costs of the persons, who are attending the meetings plus the cost of infrastructure for having that meeting. For our discussion we can assume that cost of meeting is the cost that the company incurs in terms of the time spent on that meeting by the participants.

Let me clarify this further by giving you an example. In most of the companies the head of various effective department meetings will typically meet once a week or a fortnight for one or two hours to discuss about operational issues.

Let’s say that in an organization XYZ Ten of the senior leaders are meeting once a week for two hours. Also, let’s assume that

Hence, the cost of this meeting is 20,000/- Rs. However, we have used a very simplified model in the above, if we add more complexity by considering the benefits of effective meetings and the fact that employees work only for 22 days in a month etc. the actual cost of meeting will easily be double this amount.

Now that you have understood that meetings have a cost. It is no brainer to understand why having effective meetings is very important for any organization as a significant portion of time of its employees is spent on meetings.

So, let’s get into how to avoid having meetings that are dull, unproductive, disorganized and too long?  Based on my 20+ experience in the corporate and attending on average 3+ meetings everyday here are some tips on making the meetings more effective.

First and foremost with proper planning and preparation, any meeting can be effective and enjoyable. If the facilitator plans properly and executes flawlessly and has proper follow-up the meeting will be effective.

The effective meetings tips can be divided into three parts

The agenda for the meeting needs to be very the clear about the outcomes expected.   If the agenda of the meeting is not clear than the desired outcome will not be achieved. Let me give you an example to clarify this – Let’s say that you are asked to organize a meeting to review the sales no. of the last quarter and decide on action for the next quarter. Than in that case, you may send the agenda for the meeting in any one of the ways like

In each of the above cases the agenda is not very clear and chances are that the meeting will go all over the place and the participants would not be prepared for the meeting, reducing the meeting effectiveness drastically

So let’s look at what a good agenda for this meeting would look like:

As you can see from the above effective meetings agenda it becomes very clear that the structure of the meeting is clearly defined. The participants who are supposed to present know what they need to present and the duration within which they need to complete the effective meetings presentation.

Such detailed agenda will therefore help in ensuring that meetings become more effective.

In case, if some of the required participants are missed out than the decision cannot be taken. Alternatively if we end up inviting participants who are not needed in the meeting than they will be wasting their time, feel bored during the meeting and may create disturbance impacting the discussions.

So you had a good productive discussion in the meeting, where people have agreed on the action that needs to be taken. So is it OK for you to relax?

The answer is a big “NO” and the reason is that the biggest challenge in any organization is that people after attending the meeting do not follow-up on the actions that are assigned to them and as a result the actions are never completed and the outcomes expected do not come thru.

To ensure that you achieve the expected outcomes, immediately (within max2-3 working days) you need to send to all the participants Minutes of the Meeting “MOM” along with the actions that came out of the meeting.

Your MOM and Action items in general should contain the following

Now coming to MOM and Action items, in my experience I have seen that most of the participants do not catch the actions clearly and as a result they do not get implemented. Let me explain this with an example.

In the meeting that we discussed above, most of the time the action items will be sent like this.

The above Actions are not very effective as it does not have the following

So a better way of presenting the Action Items will be

As you can see from the above action items, these actions are a lot more likely to be completed as there is no ambiguity on who is going to complete the action and the time line within which the meeting needs to be completed.

To summarize a lot of organizational time, efforts and money is spent in meetings and it is therefore imperative on each and every employee, to ensure that the meetings are effective.

By following some of the simple steps mentioned above you will be able to improve the quality of your meetings quite a bit.  Additionally, do a critical review of all the meetings that you are attending to check what went right and what was wrong in meeting and this will go a long way in ensuring that you become a master at having effective meetings.

Hope that we have justified the answer to the question,  How to have Effective Meetings?|||

eduCBA brings you the article on How to have Effective Meetings, where you will learn the nuts and bolts of an effective organizational meetings.