Young entrepreneurs? Dr. Ruth will see you now.

Ruth Westheimer, the world-famous 87-year-old sex therapist, took the stage Tuesday morning at the Forbes Under 30 Summit in Philadelphia to help the founders of Genius, Grove Labs, and Adore Me iron out the personal, relational, and emotional lumps and bumps that so often plague founders in the ultra-demanding initial stages of building a business.

“Tell me both of you why did you come to see me? What’s the worse issue that you have? What’s the worst fight you ever had?” she asked.

Ilan Zechory and Tom Lehman, founders of Genius—formerly Rap Genius—took the first session on the doctor’s couch. The two have talked openly in the past about the decision to regularly attend couple’s therapy, originally predicated on a spat en route to Penn Station that underlined a number of their existing difficulties.

“We started as friends and had a great friendship,” said Zechory, describing the premise of so many cofounder relationships. “When the relationship moved into working on projects together we had that context of how we each behaved, so starting as friends made us both sensitive.”

Westheimer stressed that just like in a marriage, a great deal is riding on learning to work and live successfully alongside a cofounder.

“This is not something like for one day or 24 hours,” said Westheimer, “and I think even getting angry at each other, you’ll learn something from that. You’ll learn which button not to push.”

Lehman raised that being the face of a company often requires a certain discretion and diplomacy that may not translate to effective communication with your business partner.

“Whether it’s emotional stuff or business stuff, you can’t tell everyone everything all the time,” said Lehman. “You have to put on a bit of a face, but you can’t do that with your closest friend and collaborator.”

Westheimer said that while she often advises couples not to tell each other absolutely everything, holding back won’t help a business relationship—total honestly is required.

In a relationship, she said, “you can use some fantasies and keep your mouth shut. Business-wise, you can’t hold back. You have to put some things on the table.”|||

The 87-year old sex therapist is against entrepreneurial one-night stands and says that to make your business relationship work, you better be ready to commit.