Hello, Welcome to Blog Central. I want to discuss with you about online scams.

I’ve had my share of online scams.  It’s hard to tell what’s right and wrong. I’ve been trying to find an online business for a long time. Do you know how hard it is? Well, do you? It is very hard.

So many people and companies want to just strip you of everything you have. I try so hard to find that right online job but for people to take advantage of you. Why are people like that? Don’t any of these people have a heart? I have put a countless amount of money trying out different things online. They either don’t work or they are just outright scams.

I want to give you a few things to look for when it comes to scams. How you can tell if it is the real deal or not.

These are just a few ways to tell if they are trying to scam you or not. Even if you go to the BBB (better business bureau), it’s not guaranteed. I’ve tried a few online jobs that the BBB has credited and still was not legit. Heck, most of the businesses you do find are not listed with them anyways.

I use to get this home business magazine delivered to me, at home and in my inbox. You can’t even trust them. Half of those jobs sounded too good to be true. I researched a few of them, and some of them are not even around anymore. Go Figure.

I’ll be writing a post about that magazine and it will not be a pretty post. I can promise you that. Most of the businesses in there will be getting a very nasty review. I’ll admit, there are a few I will be giving a good review about.

There are some that I found by just using that good old search engine, google that I do respect. Other I could not care about.

I did and finally found a place that I enjoy and I’ll be giving a review about them and the two people that started it all. That’s Wealthy Affiliate. If it was not for them this website would not be possible and I would not be blogging with to you today.

I can tell you that so far this is not a scam. But let me just tell you to beware of all the wrong businesses out there. In the age of the internet, you get a lot of crazy people out there. People who could care less about you and me.

Trying to find online work can be very challenging. There are so many scams out there, that you don’t know what to do. I can tell you and help you out by keep tabs on these people who make false promises.

So come here if you want to find something that is worth it.

So if you have any question or would like me to help you to stay away from the scammers, please leave a comment Thank you for coming to blog central.

Get on my mailing list and I’ll keep you up to date about all these scams.|||

Keep away from online scams. Research as much as you can before giving up your hard earned money.