LAST YEAR SOME OF THE nation's greatest math minds gathered at Manhattan's elegant Tribeca Rooftop for stunning views, fancy food and wine--and a series of complex equations to determine who among them would be king of the geeks. The annual event was hosted by the Museum of Mathematics, which was underwritten in 2012 by Google and the world's richest quantitative Wall Street traders, including Renaissance Technologies' billionaire founder, James Simons.

In the end there was little surprise that the finals featured Terence Tao, 40, considered one of the greatest mathematicians of this generation. A professor at UCLA, Tao has won the Fields Medal, often described as the Nobel Prize of math, and the $3 million Breakthrough Prize. But Tao didn't win that night. He was beaten in the final round by a secretive Wall Street hedge fund manager named John Overdeck, who solved a problem involving infinite sequences and prime factorization. In fact, it was the second time in its short history Overdeck, also a backer of the museum, had won the competition.

Like Tao, Overdeck is a math genius, but unlike his contest rival, he never wanted to be a professor. After winning a silver medal at the International Mathematical Olympiad in Poland at age 16, young Overdeck told the Washington Post that writing papers didn't seem fulfilling and instead he wanted to make the math "do something."

Do something? How about build the fastest-growing big hedge fund on the planet and make multibillionaires out of its two founders? Overdeck, 45, and partner David Siegel, 54, run Two Sigma Investments, a little-known quantitative hedge fund firm that gathers seemingly random bits of information and tries to detect patterns that can be used to forecast the price direction of stocks and other securities. They are card-carrying members of the growing tribe of quants who use big data and machine learning in an attempt to beat the market consistently. And they join the ranks of the most successful of such traders, including James Simons (worth $14 billion), Ken Griffin (worth $7 billion) and David Shaw (worth $4.7 billion).

To follow the stock picks of the world's best billionaire investors, subscribe to Forbes Billionaire's Portfolio.

Within the last five years Overdeck and Siegel's for-profit Wall Street think tank has quietly swelled from $5 billion to $28 billion in assets--one of the biggest hedge funds in America, even besting Simons' Renaissance. What is yet more impressive is that Overdeck and Siegel's rocket-science-fueled operation is able to command fees in its biggest fund of 3% of assets and 30% of profits, versus the industry standard of 2-and-20. The firm's biggest fund, Spectrum, has earned an annual average return of 9.4% net of fees since 2004. Growth + returns + whopping fees = a great wealth-building formula. This year Overdeck and Siegel debut on The Forbes 400, each with a net worth estimated at $2.8 billion.

"The challenge I think facing the investment world is that the human mind has not become any better than it was 100 years ago, and it's very hard for someone using traditional methods to juggle all the information of the global economy in their head," Siegel said at an investor conference earlier this year. In fact, Two Sigma's data scientists and systems analyze more than 10,000 data sources, using 75,000 CPUs with 750 terabytes of memory. Their hedge funds have executed more than 1.2 billion trades over the last 14 years.

Said Siegel: "Eventually the time will come that no human investment manager will be able to beat the computer."

Must Read: The Little Black Book of Billionaire Secrets|||

Galileo believed that mathematics was the language God used to write the universe. Four hundred years later a brilliant practitioner and a computer scientist are quietly translating these secrets--into the newest great hedge fund fortune. (pity the employees who get in their way.)