Nowadays is the time when people expect both web UI and mobile client application in their phones for almost every project. And it’s actually pretty tough and time consuming problem to ship all of this stuff at the same time. In this tutorial we’re going to build backend, web UI and hybrid mobile application using AllcountJS and ionic in less than a hour.

Let’s start with backend and web UI. For this example I’ll use twenty two lines hello world application template. If you haven’t set up AllcountJS develeopment environment yet please visit our Getting Started or watch Video tutorial from one of our previous blog posts.

I’m using default name for my project. The next step is to install dependencies as CLI suggests:

And to get our server up and running we should execute following command at the project dir (don’t forget to startup your local MongoDB instance)

If all went ok we should see something like

So when you open http://localhost:9080/ you’d see your application up and running.

First part is finished here and we’re going to create mobile application as our next.

If you haven’t installed ionic it’s time to do that: Getting Started. Actually it’s as simple as

Now let’s change directory to parent of our and run init for ionic:

Now let’s change current directory to newly created ionic app’s directory and run in order to check what we have now:

If all went nice you’d see blank ionic starter app. Now let’s install allcountjs-ionic with (if you haven’t installed bower yet please run )

Then open and add AllcountJS dependencies just right after declaration

And also replace contents of with

So we should get something like in our

Then let’s change . First we need to add module dependency using

Then we need to setup our server url by requiring dependency in module and setting url as following

The last one thing is to add standard AllcountJS routes by adding call

Final should look like

Let’s check our result by running from directory. You should see login dialog where you could just enter admin/admin. After login you’d see your app menu described in AllcountJS app config.

Cool! But let’s go further and build and run native iOS application then. In order to do this we’d need to add cordova ios platform

But before you’ll run app on emulator you should change your app server url to something accessible for it. For myself I used my IP on local network. Let’s change it in

Another one thing I definitely need to mention is the new Apple security policy for iOS 9. So in order to use insecure http endpoints you should add this to your just after first tag before run (see http://stackoverflow.com/questions/30731785/how-do-i-load-an-http-url-with-app-transport-security-enabled-in-ios-9 for details):

After all you would see something like:

Pretty same list of operations are required to build and emulate on android as well

Questions? Opinions? Suggestions? We’re happy to hear all of that in comments below and in our Gitter chat.|||

Mobile application and backend with Ionic and AllcountJS in less than a hour Nowadays is the time when people expect both web UI and mobile client application in their phones for almost every project....