Ever since the VW scandal broke several weeks ago, one facet of the problem has remained unclear. Why would VW design such an elaborate cheating program when it knew that being caught could be so ruinously expensive for the company? German officials are in the midst of an investigation to answer that question, but the early details suggest a straightforward answer: VW cheated because it knew its diesel engines weren’t good enough to meet modern air quality standards in the United States or Europe.

According to the New York Times, VW discovered in 2008 that the new “clean diesel” engines it had spent years creating simply couldn’t deliver what it needed. That’s particularly significant given the gap between US and European regulations on particulate pollution and NOx. The US has tighter regulations in some of these areas than Europe does, but VW’s vehicles weren’t capable of meeting either standard. The engine in question, the EA 189, is manufactured in 1.6L and 2.0L variants and is used in millions of vehicles across VW’s brand family.



The problem was stark. Back in 2007, VW had chosen not to use the urea-based diesel exhaust fluid system (marketed as AdBlue) that its higher-end rivals, Mercedes and BMW, had adopted. The company didn’t have time to retrofit the engine with the AdBlue system or to make the changes that would’ve been necessary to retrofit the system to existing vehicles. It looks as though VW had to choose between missing the 2009 model year in the United States or cheating on its tests — and chose to cheat. VW does use the AdBlue system in other vehicles, incidentally, though some of these are also under investigation for whether they violated US and EU law.

It’s still unclear exactly which executives made these decisions, but the former CEO, Martin Winterkorn, had a reputation for setting extremely ambitious goals and harshly disciplining subordinates that failed to meet them. The chances that a call this critical was made by some random low-level engineer are essentially zero. We suspect that when VW talks about the EA 189 failing to meet emission control standards in the EU and Europe, VW means that it failed to meet emission standards while delivering the performance and fuel efficiency goals that the company had previously set. If the EA 189 engine hadn’t been capable of meeting emission standards at all, it never could’ve cleared EPA or EU testing in the first place.

VW’s new chairman, Hans Dieter Poetsch, has called the scandal “an existence-threatening crisis for the company,” and VW has taken out full-page ads to apologize to owners and to plead for public trust. Investors have responded to the growing scandal by fleeing VW’s stock, wiping out an estimated $34 billion in value. Before this crisis, VW was a healthy company with significant cash reserves, but fines and recall requirements could cost the company tens of billions of dollars depending on the nature of the fix and just how many vehicles it has to fix. Between Audi, Skoda, and VW itself, the combined total is over 14 million cars.

Regulatory fees and repairs won’t kill the company outright, but heavy penalties would significantly reduce the cash VW has on hand to invest in future vehicles. If dealers and customers respond to the crisis by buying from other companies, VW could enter a death spiral, where slumping sales and falling revenue left the company unable to regain market share or compete effectively.

There are still questions we don’t have answers to. How did VW miss the fact that its new EA 189 engine couldn’t pass EU or US emissions tests, when EU tests are far more lenient? Keep in mind that these vehicles emit up to 40x more NOx pollution than allowed by law. VW’s alternate emissions control technology didn’t miss by a little, but by more than an order of magnitude. Do these problems affect vehicles that use the AdBlue injection system, or are they confined to the EA 189 engine? Does VW’s newer engine, the Type EA288 TDI, have the same problem, or did VW solve it by adding AdBlue? And, finally, was VW the only company cheating like this, or are other diesel manufacturers going to be caught in the same trap?

The answers to these questions will determine whether VW survives — and ultimately, perhaps, whether or not diesel passenger vehicles remain on the road.|||

Evidence in VW's cheating scandal continues to come to light -- including the reason why the company chose to cheat ...