Starting from iOS 8, any deleted photos or videos from the Camera Roll will be transferred over to a new folder called Recently Deleted. This new album was added to store deleted media files on your iPhone or iPad for 30 days and it will then remove permanently after that.

For some people, this might be a useful feature because you can easily restore a deleted photo just in case of a mistake. However, most iOS users found Recently Deleted to be an annoying feature because they have to get rid of their photos and videos twice. Not to mention that the data will continue to be counted, which means your storage will stays the same as is.

To make things simple and straightforward, a developer just released a new jailbreak tweak for jailbroken iPhone and iPad called DeleteForever to make the task of deleting photos and videos on iOS devices easier. With this package installed, you will no longer have to go on the Recently Deleted folder to delete your photos forever. There is a new option added to the stock Photos.app.

From now on, you can still perform the remove action normally but noticed that there is a new button added named Permanently Delete Photo whenever you choose to delete any photos from the Camera Roll. If you choose the first option, any chosen images or videos will be deleted forever. The second option, which should be the default before you install this tweak, will transfer any photos or videos you selected to the Recently Deleted folder.

DeleteForever tweak is now available in any of the default repositories in Cydia. You will need to add the following source: http://repo.ioscreatix.com/

Be aware that once you select the Permanently Delete Photo option, there will be no way to restore the images or videos. Don’t forget to choose carefully and if you’re not sure, have them stored in the Recently Deleted folder.|||

Looking for a way to get rid of your Recently Deleted folder on iPhone or iPad? This jailbreak tweak will help you delete your photos and videos permanently