The best part of Reddit has always been you: The anecdotes you contribute, the photographs and illustrations you post, and the comments you leave.

Today, we’re launching a hub to give the stories of Reddit—from the seemingly ordinary to the extraordinary—the creative space to expand, breathe, and grow. In the last few months, we’ve been expanding our original content creation as a means to give users the opportunity to learn more about each other and our world, and share their stories with a wider audience. You called it, ownage516.

In January, we launched a podcast called Upvoted to give voice to the Redditors whose stories grace our tens of thousands of frontpages. We’ve surpassed 1.6 million downloads and heard the amazing, sometimes heart-breaking, and often times inspirational, stories of people who have affected us in the most subtle or the most profound of ways.

In April, we began delivering a curated weekly newsletter called Upvoted Weekly to surface and attribute some of our favorite posts you probably missed during the week. Today, it has over 212,000 subscribers, an average open-rate of 32 percent and CTR (Click-Through Rate) of 35 percent (…those are really good percentages).

With such positive data trends, we took it a step further and recently began writing articles we directly posted to r/upvoted. And you enjoyed those, too.

This launch of upvoted.com is the next logical step in celebrating the Reddit community: a hub for original content to give Redditors credit, as well as go beyond the original story to learn more about the people and ideas that bubble up across this site of 202 million monthly users (bigger than Brazil!). And of course, you can discuss every piece of original content at r/upvoted.

Over this past year, we’ve talked to hundreds of Redditors who have been so excited to see their ideas and stories reach even more people and we’re grateful for the chance to expand this further.

As always, we can’t do this without you and we hope this will be a new way to amplify all the unique conversations and stories of Reddit to an even larger audience, provide more depth to stories that otherwise would only last 24-hours tops on our front page, and all while giving you the credit you deserve.|||

