It is an occupational hazard of poets laureate that, however far they flee the public, rustic local books will be shyly pressed into their hands. But when the British laureate Robert Southey was passing through the Scottish Highlands in 1819, literary discovery came from the simplest act of any tourist: he idly picked up a local guidebook from a table. “Striking and Picturesque Delineations of the Grand, Beautiful, Wonderful, and Interesting Scenery Around Loch-Earn,” the title page announced, by one Angus M’Diarmid. The rugged Highland landscape that the book described was, Southey marvelled, rivalled only by the prose itself from “the first sentence—if sentence that may be called which hath no limitations of sense or syntax.”

The book’s dedication to a local noble, the Earl of Breadalbane, though wildly self-abasing—“With overpowering sentiments of the most profound humility, I prostrate myself at your noble feet”—is at least written in recognizable English. But after M’Diarmid expresses his “tumid emotions of heart-distending pride,” he commences with this extraordinary opening line:

The sentence occupies—overthrows is more like it—the entire first paragraph of “Striking and Picturesque Delineations,” and its massed armies overrun and conquer every page thereafter. Southey had discovered no common guidebook. As it now quietly celebrates its two-hundredth anniversary, Angus M’Diarmid’s slender 1815 masterpiece belongs to that same rare class of unintentional humor as “English as She Is Spoke”—the would-be reference work, written by an author whose second language was English, that achieves a strange linguistic greatness.

Angus M’Diarmid had, at first glance, a decidedly unrequited love of the English language. A “gillie” or hunting guide, on the Highland estate of the Earl of Breadalbane, M’Diarmid’s first language was Gaelic, with English a distant second. This was not unusual in Lochearnhead; though thirty-six miles north of Glasgow, it was a world away, on the other side of the Highland boundary and surrounded by mountains—a place one contemporary termed “a small, straggling village.” Gaelic remained the first language of most of its residents, as it still did throughout rural Highland districts.

The area’s fine grouse-shooting and fishing, though, attracted enough cosmopolitan visitors that M’Diarmid’s ambitions with English soon vaulted over creag, loch, and ben. Fired by his fascination with the language and a much-abused dictionary, he undertook a guidebook for outlanders to Loch Earn and what he called “your Lordship’s delicious estate.” The book’s backer was apparently a visiting colonel taken with the author’s monologues, and its publisher explained its language thus in a preface: “Like the torrent shooting impetuously from crag to crag, his sentences, instead of flowing in a smooth and equal tenor, overleap with noble freedom the mounds and impediments of grammar, verbs, conjunctions, and adverbs, which give tameness and regularity to ordinary compositions.”

Here, for instance, is M’Diarmid on an echoing gorge:

In stirring accounts of castles, moors, and local feuds and massacres, we are informed that “they daggered the piper, and throwed him in a hole,” and told of “womens bewailing over the deprivation of their correlative husbands.” (One unfortunate is “seized of no less than nine arrows: Which occurrence in lower degree would enforce many to retire.”) Robbers, mystifyingly and yet somehow suitably, are repeatedly referred to as “men of incoherent transactions.”

M’Diarmid’s prose has had an underground of fans among writers and linguists ever since. Vladimir Nabokov, no stranger to the alchemy of second-language writing, even has his “Pale Fire” narrator suggest “Finnegans Wake as a monstrous extension of Angus MacDiamid’s ‘incoherent transactions.’ “ The book went through four different editions between 1815 and 1879, though a fifth, promised in 1897 by the head of Oxford’s Bodleian Library, never materialized. Copies of the guide fetch over two hundred pounds at auction—but, thankfully, it can now be read online.

But who, exactly, was Angus M’Diarmid?

Southey, it turns out, was not quite the first visitor to take notice of this strange little volume. Writing fifty years later to the Victorian miscellany Notes & Queries, the contributor “R.S.A.” recalled visiting Lochearnhead in 1815, the year of the book’s publication—and meeting Angus himself.

“I saw the book at the inn, and was also introduced to the author, then a fine athletic young man . . . manifesting abundantly the enthusiasm which prompted him to compose his Delineations,” he recalled. Notes & Queries promptly received a second recollection, by “J.Ss.,” who had been in a Breadalbane shooting party soon afterward. “I was very soon made acquainted with the talented Mr. Angus M’Diarmid,” he recalled, “. . . We became purchasers of his work, and got him to read it to us—to the great amusement of his fellow gillies as well as ourselves. They constantly called him the poet.” Suitably enough for a poet in the time of Keats and Shelley, M’Diarmid eschewed local plaids to dress in black. Equally suitably, he was poor: “He was, I remember, the worst dressed of all the gillies,” J.Ss. recalled; he wore stockings “not very sound at the heel.”

Such accounts belie the “suspicion,” as one Victorian bookseller put it, “that Angus M’Diarmid is an altogether fictitious person”—something anticipated by the book’s own preface, which maintains that any doubts could be satisfied by “whoever will take the trouble to visit Loch-Earn.” The Gaelic scholar J. F. Campbell, writing in 1883 on the flyleaf of a copy now in the National Library of Scotland, was convinced: “A sample of language which I believe to be genuine.” There was certainly no lack of M’Diarmids around Loch Earn, including an Angus M’Diarmid, who was twenty-four years old in 1815—which fits that description of a “fine athletic young man.” The homestead address noted in the book, Carstran, also shows up in local property records. So, along with two detailed eyewitness accounts of the man—and possibly, depending on how one reads the poet laureate’s journals, a meeting with Robert Southey himself—Angus M’Diarmid sounds very real indeed.

All of which makes his guidebook all the more astounding: if it wasn’t a deliberate hoax, then how did he write it?

The linguistic influence of Gaelic seems to have played some part: Highland English has traditionally possessed such peculiarities as double plurals, hence his “womens bewailing.” The substitution of simple verbs (“be”) for perfect (“have been”) also appears in Gaelic: “But it might be of old a lurking place to a man of incoherent transactions.” And M’Diarmid’s odd word choices, as J.Ss. recalled to Notes & Queries, came from ransacking what was essentially a foreign dictionary: “His knowledge of English not being extensive, whenever he was in want of a word he looked into his dictionary, and adopted generally the most important-looking word connected with the one he was looking for, whether it might be noun, verb, adverb or otherwise.” This, he adds, is why his Grampian Mountains have an “asperity aspect”—it’s M’Diarmid’s version of “wild appearance.”

That explains the words, but it does not explain the sentences. Such transmutations might make someone “seized of” arrows instead of the slightly less odd “caught by.” But what amount of dictionary abuse can account for the entirety of the sentence around it?

The ravishers was well furnished with bows and arrows; their eyes were close upon the foresaid gallant gentleman, their jaws were open to embrace every opportunity to cut his tract of life, in consequence of observing that he was a daring adventurous man, and the slaughter of indiscriminate done by him in the fatal action, besides depriving their commander of his life, a coalisive number of these assassinate devourers plunderers, thirsty after this eminent gentleman’s blood, assayed to encompass him to have their sanguinary design executed, by which he was seized of no less than nine arrows: Which occurrence in lower degree would enforce many to retire; but in state of that he shewed such splendid courage that swimed over that of the river near Killin’s Inn, in that posture, to his habitate, to have himself extricated of the arrows.

It is M’Diarmid’s sentences—fantastically clausal helices that would make a sentence-diagrammer faint—that defy explanation, even two hundred years later. All, perhaps, save one: “Striking and Picturesque Delineations” is art, and art created by someone intoxicated by language. While his gloriously weird vocabulary and grammar may be the artifact of a second language, the architecture of his sentences is M’Diarmid’s alone. And in that he was indeed what his fellow villagers called him: a poet.

So perhaps it’s fitting that Southey was among his earliest readers. The poet laureate didn’t linger for long in Lochearnhead, though. His journey took him onwards to Aberfeldy, which he did not find as charming. (“A place which might properly be called Aberfilthy,” he grumbled.) But as the little village disappeared in the valley behind him, he carried in his bag a new book, and left in his journal one last hint about the mysterious Mr. M’Diarmid.

“The author,” he observed, “verily believes it to be the best book in the world.”|||

Paul Collins on “Striking and Picturesque Delineations,” a book by Angus M’Diarmid, a Highlands writer who had an unusual take on the English language.