A courtroom showdown is currently brewing between a $90 million crowdfunding superstar and a gaming website. Star Citizen developer Cloud Imperium Games has threatened legal action against The Escapist over what it calls false allegations and unethical reporting.

At the heart of the conflict is a story published by The Escapist on Oct. 1 that used quotes from unnamed sources to paint a troubled picture of what's going on at Cloud Imperium (CIG). The studio immediately denied the claims, prompting a back-and-forth between the two parties. It all culminated Sunday with CIG's threat of legal action.

But that's a gross oversimplification of what's going on — especially when $90 million of CIG's crowdsourced money for Star Citizen development is hanging in the balance.

We're not here to assign blame or find fault with one party or another; what follows is merely a rundown of the facts as we know them. This drama is far from finished.

Cloud Imperium Games was founded in April 2012 by Chris Roberts, creator of the Wing Commander series, and his longtime legal counsel Ortwin Freyermuth. After building a development team for a few months, CIG launched a crowdfunding campaign for the game Star Citizen in Oct. 2012. The campaign launched initially on CIG's Roberts Space Industries website, but incoming traffic crashed the site and led Roberts to bring the campaign to Kickstarter.

Star Citizen was conceived as a sandbox space simulation in which players would travel the starways together in a persistent online universe. Think World of Warcraft, except swap out the orcs and elves for first-person cockpit views. You fly around and shoot stuff. Maybe you're a pirate. Maybe you're a trader. Maybe your behaviors defy designation. That's what a sandbox is all about.

The original $500,000 crowdfunding target was quickly shattered on Kickstarter; the campaign there closed with just north of $2 million pledged. After the Kickstarter closed, CIG returned to its original plan of hosting crowdfunding via Roberts Space Industries, allowing people to pre-buy in-game ships and other goods with their pledges. Currently, Star Citizen's crowdfunding total sits at just over $90 million.

The Escapist launched in 2005 as an online magazine focused on the geekier end of the entertainment spectrum: video games, film/TV, comics, board games and more. It's also one of the earlier examples of online media offering premium subscription content to its readers (as of 2010).

Over the years, The Escapist has been home to some of the more recognizable names in the video games press: Jim Sterling, Russ Pitts, Susan Arendt, Tom Chick, Ben "Yahtzee" Croshaw, Jerry Holkins (Penny Arcade's Tycho) and others. Though it seems to have undergone philosophical changes in recent months, The Escapist is still a respected source for news and commentary in many circles.

While the Oct. 1 story was the one to draw a response from CIG, this whole thing really started on Sept. 25. That's when The Escapist contributor Lizzy Finnegan wrote a separate piece with the headline "Eject! Eject! Is Star Citizen Going to Crash and Burn?"

Finnegan examined a series of blog posts by Derek Smart, a noted critic of CIG's efforts and an independent game developer himself. Smart is also a disgruntled Star Citizen backer who, since July 2015, has used his website as a public destination to discuss alleged internal issues at CIG.

Since the summer, he's raised questions on his blog about CIG's alleged misuse of crowd-sourced funds, delays in Star Citizen's release and seemingly unadvertised changes to the Terms of Service that all backers agreed to. He also followed up his most recent post with a Twitlonger alleging multiple CIG employee departures, both voluntary and involuntary, as well as a plan to shut down the company's Austin location before 2016.

Finnegan's Sept. 25 story prompted her Oct. 1 follow-up — "Star Citizen Employees Speak Out on Project Woes" — after multiple CIG sources allegedly came forward to comment on some of the details in the earlier report. The details and quotes fall in line with much of what Smart has said about Star Citizen, as well as Finnegan's earlier report.

The Oct. 1 story also included a note that The Escapist had reached out to CIG for comment, but the studio didn't respond prior to the media outlet's deadline. Not long after the story went live, Roberts responded on his own, publicly sharing the email response he'd sent. The Escapist countered that Roberts' response had only been sent to the site's managing editor, John Keefer, and not the other staffers copied on the email chain.

In Roberts' email, shared on the Roberts Space Industries website, the game's creator lays out his troubled history with Smart, which extends all the way back to his Wing Commander days. He also addresses some of the allegations raised in The Escapist's Oct. 1 report.

Roberts denies some of the allegations completely, including claims about the studio's Austin location closing ("...we are actually increasing our worldwide headcount in order to complete the game as effectively as possible") and misuse of crowdsourced funds ("No crowdfunding monies are used for any private purposes –- these allegations are completely false and defamatory."). He also points out more than once that there are two sides to every story.

"I’ll put my 261 [staffers], their passion and energy against the complaints of a few disgruntled ex-employees any day," Roberts writes, after inviting The Escapist to visit CIG's four studios.

"We have backers visit the offices all the time," he continues. "They all come away with the same impression –- that the entire team is dedicated to making the best game possible. If you took the time to research this, you will find that it is a common comment and that the 'noise' that has been generated is really from a very small number of people and some quite bitter ex-employees."

One other major point from the Oct. 1 story is Finnegan's focus, via her sources, on Roberts' wife, Sandi Gardener, CIG's vice president of marketing. Here's what was written:

While we're trying to present a neutral picture of things, this bears repeating: a secondhand quote from an unnamed source should never have been printed here the way it was. We're reproducing it simply to lay out all the facts, and not to perpetuate any questionable reporting. Here's what the Society of Professional Journalists has to say about the handling of anonymous sources.

Finnegan's story drew additional criticism when it was discovered that some of the quotes from her anonymous sources had appeared on Glassdoor.com, a website where current and former employees from different companies can anonymously post reviews of their employer and management. Reddit user MisterBurkes made and shared the discovery, pointing out that the most quoted entries were posted to Glassdoor between Sept. 26 and Sept. 28.

The Reddit post surfaced on Friday, and The Escapist's Keefer responded shortly after with a rough rundown of the outlet's process for vetting the Oct. 1 article's multiple sources — which he claimed includes seven ex-employees and two current ones. Six provided their names and spoke with Finnegan both via email and by phone/Skype. A seventh source withheld "his" name, but offered proof in the form of pay stubs and a CIG ID card.

The last two reached out via Lockbin, a service that allows users to send private, secure messages. Keefer points out that those two weren't quoted because their identities couldn't be verified, but the things they had to say "reiterated claims by the other seven."

Of the seven sources Finnegan spoke to directly, three contacted her separately by phone on Sept. 26 after receiving her number from "a mutual contact." Four others reached out via email on Sept. 27. Communications continued in the days that followed, leading up to the Oct. 1 story.

Keefer also notes that Roberts' email response to the earlier story, the one he published on Star Citizen's website, showed up "almost three hours before publication time" on Oct. 1.

"Unfortunately, the response ended up in my spam folder, as it came in unformatted and the pictures did not load," Keefer wrote. "Since Roberts did not copy Lizzy or the Editor-in-Chief, who were on my original email to CIG PR head David Swofford, they did not get them and there was no back up to ensure someone saw it."

All of that back-and-forth brings us to Oct. 2, the day after Finnegan's big story picked up. Through Freyermuth (that's the studio's co-founder and legal counsel, don't forget), CIG delivered a formal, five-page "demand letter" to Keefer laying out specific acts of alleged wrongdoing and the steps that must be taken in order to avoid legal repercussions.

Here is CIG's justification for sharing the letter publicly:

In the letter, Freyermuth outright denies what he calls "unsubstantiated and highly damaging allegations about CIG." He specifically highlights the discussion of Gardiner and the suggestion of discriminatory hiring practices as slanderous and personally defamatory, taking issue with Finnegan's Oct. 2 report and an episode of The Escapist Podcast that repeated and supported many of the report's allegations.

It's also worth pointing out that Freyermuth doesn't accept Keefer's explanation of The Escapist's source vetting process, noting that CIG does not use employee ID cards (which one source used to prove his connection to the studio).

The letter goes on to make a number of demands of both The Escapist and its parent, Defy Media. They are as follows:

Freyermuth gave Keefer 24 hours to comply before CIG begins the process of legal action in the U.S. and U.K., the latter of which has more stringent anti-defamation laws. The Escapist told Game Informer's Mike Futter on Oct. 4 that it has no comment at present.

Finnegan's "Star Citizen Employees Speak Out On Project Woes" story has since been updated with a formal statement from The Escapist on Freyermuth's legal demands letter. The statement reads as follows:

In simple terms, The Escapist has opted to stand by its reporting and ignore CIG's demands. Now the decision falls to CIG on whether or not to make good on its threat to litigate.

UPDATED Oct. 6 8:01 a.m. ET: The post has been updated to provide a more thorough account of Star Citizen's crowdfunding journey.

UPDATED Oct. 6 8:50 a.m. ET: The post has been updated to include The Escapist's formal public response to Freyermuth's legal demands letter.|||

There's a big legal dust-up unfolding since 'The Escapist' published details of alleged internal strife at Star Citizen studio Cloud Imperium Games.