Today the Blackstone Group agreed to pay $39 million to settle a Securities and Exchange Commission case charging that it ripped off investors over "monitoring fees"; $29 million of the settlement will go to the investors.  It is a strange case: When you read in the SEC order about what Blackstone did, it does sound a bit like a rip-off, albeit a common one. But then when you read about what Blackstone disclosed -- basically, everything -- it is harder to figure out why the SEC is involved.

The Blackstone-advised private equity funds would buy companies, and then Blackstone would charge those companies "an annual fee in exchange for rendering certain consulting and advisory services to the portfolio company concerning its financial and business affairs." That monitoring fee would be paid to Blackstone (the company, i.e. in large part its managers and employees) rather than to the fund (i.e. to Blackstone's investors), though in effect half of it would go to the investors in the form of reduced management fees. So the fee created a conflict of interest: Every dollar paid to Blackstone would reduce the value of the portfolio company by a dollar, but would increase Blackstone's own revenue by about 50 cents.

But, you know, such is life. The root of the conflict is that Blackstone is both advising the private equity funds (and charging fees for finding them good investments and making them more profitable), and helping to manage the portfolio companies (and charging fees for consulting and advising). Those two jobs are conceptually distinguishable, and have some synergies, and in theory it is not at all crazy for Blackstone to do both of them, or to charge separate fees. Your model could be that Blackstone thought carefully about the value of the services it provided to the funds, and charged them for that value, and then thought carefully about the value of the services it provided to the companies, and charged them for that value. Even though ultimately the funds own the companies and all the money comes out of the fund investors' pockets.

The alternative model is that Blackstone just thought of as many fees as it could think of, and then charged them to whoever would pay them, without sweating too much how exactly it was earning those fees. That model gets some support from the SEC order. Here is what got Blackstone in trouble:

If you get paid the monitoring fees for years after you stop monitoring the company,  and in a lump sum as soon as you stop, they don't look like actual fees for services. They look more like just another way to extract money from the company without anyone noticing.

Except that they weren't a way to extract money without anyone noticing, because Blackstone disclosed them copiously. As the SEC helpfully says in the order:

The LPAC is the Limited Partnership Advisory Committee, a group of limited partners that was supposed to review potential conflicts of interest. Blackstone told its investors that it was taking these fees -- after they'd signed up for the funds, sure -- and the investors never objected. They never objected because this was just how private equity operated. As Blackstone's Peter Rose explains:

I have to say, when you put it like that, it doesn't really sound bad at all? Obviously the marketing documents for a fund cannot explicitly disclose everything that Blackstone will ever do over the life of that fund. The point is to lay out some basic principles, to clearly disclose what Blackstone does when it does it and to have a way of resolving disputes that investors feel is fair. And that pretty much happened.

So what is going on here? The SEC seems to think that Blackstone failed to follow its fiduciary duties to its investors. It had a conflict of interest with them, and it charged them fees that it shouldn't have charged them, hoping that they wouldn't object. This is not a crazy theory at all: Sitting here in 2015, those fees do sound kind of bad! On the other hand it's not a slam-dunk either: Blackstone's own limited partners didn't think there was anything objectionable about the fees, and they were "a common industry practice."

But the thing is that the SEC is not really in charge of preventing conflicts of interest at private equity managers. You can tell from the "Violations" section of the SEC's order, which never mentions conflicts of interest or fiduciary duties or excessive fees. Instead it is about deception: It accuses Blackstone of engaging in a "transaction, practice, or course of business which operates as a fraud or deceit upon any client or prospective client," and of making an "untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in the light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading, to any investor or prospective investor in the pooled investment vehicle." Those charges seem plainly wrong: The fees were disclosed repeatedly, and there is no real claim that any investors were deceived.

In June, the SEC settled another private-equity fee case with KKR, over the allocation of broken-deal expenses. That case was a bit like this one, in that KKR's disclosure actually seemed to have been accurate, but the SEC just thought that the fees were unfair. I cut the SEC some slack, though:

That just doesn't seem to be true of this case. Blackstone did explain the monitoring fee acceleration to its investors, more or less clearly, when it accelerated those fees, and the investors did not tell Blackstone to knock it off.  They were fine with it.

The subtext here is that they shouldn't have been. And that is, to be fair, a popular view. There is a widespread sense that private equity fees are too high and complex and rapacious, and that private equity limited partners -- many of them public pension funds -- do not do enough to monitor them. So Dan Primack has criticized Calpers for saying that "it doesn’t know the amount of profit-sharing fees it has paid to private equity managers," Scott Stringer has criticized New York City's pensions for overpaying for private equity, and Yves Smith has criticized limited partners for not demanding more information from their private equity managers. There is a sense that someone needs to step in and save private equity investors from themselves, and there is a sense at the SEC that it should be the regulator to do it. When we discussed the KKR case, I quoted this speech by Marc Wyatt of the SEC's Office of Compliance Inspections and Examinations, in which Wyatt said that "Many managers still seem to take the position that if investors have not yet discovered and objected to their expense allocation methodology, then it must be legitimate and consistent with their fiduciary duty." Again: Fee legitimacy is not a traditional core concern of the SEC.

As far as I can tell, this is a story of changing norms for private equity. Once upon a time, private equity was a sexy asset class that charged silly fees that were not subject to too much scrutiny by investors. (It was also a very well lawyered asset class that disclosed those fees reasonably clearly.) But as returns have gotten less exciting, and as outside observers have called on public pension funds to pay more attention to what they pay for investing advice, limited partners have realized that some of the fees they paid to private equity firms were pretty silly. One response has been to stop paying those fees: Even before this SEC case, Blackstone got more conservative about accelerating monitoring fees, presumably because that's what investors wanted. But another response has been for investors to regret that they ever paid the fees in the first place, and to attribute that regret not to their own failure to care but to the private equity firms' failure to disclose. There's an obvious emotional appeal to that result -- it's much better to blame sophisticated Wall Street fat cats for overcharging than to blame public pension managers for overpaying -- even though it doesn't quite fit the facts.

This column does not necessarily reflect the opinion of the editorial board or Bloomberg LP and its owners.

To contact the author of this story:

 Matt Levine at mlevine51@bloomberg.net

To contact the editor responsible for this story:

 Zara Kessler at zkessler@bloomberg.net|||

The agency mostly enforces disclosure rules, but it takes a broad view of disclosure.