Lately I’ve been working with a lot of founding teams on improving their investor pitches, and one thing they consistently need help with is how they talk about competition.

To see what I mean, look at the pitch template used by most teams I meet: Guy Kawasaki’s “Only 10 Slides” deck. Kawasaki and others advise discussing competition only after you introduce the problem you’re addressing, your product, your business model and your go-to-market plan:

The trouble with this approach is that it treats you and your competition as if you’re all running some kind of race together, all striving to reach the same finish line, all solving the same problem.

Jobs was a master at a different approach. To understand his technique, let’s look at three of the most momentous pitches of his career: his introductory keynotes for the iMac, iPhone, and iPad. (To be sure, these were product pitches, not fundraising ones, but the lessons apply to any pitch you ever make to anyone.)

Let’s start with Apple’s 1998 iMac announcement. Before he unveils the new machine, Jobs shows his audience a photograph of a competitor PC, along with five reasons why it sucks (that's Steve in the blurry inset):

Jobs essentially prepares his audience to think of the iMac not simply as a new product, but as a way to reach a future that competitors aren't even thinking about.

In other words, instead of competing on features, he's competing on the Promised Land his product will deliver. As such, Jobs isn’t saying competitors suck. He's just saying that if you want the future he's talking about — in this case, getting on the Internet simply and quickly—competitors won't get you there, and here's why.

Nine years later, in 2007, Jobs demonstrates the same approach when launching the iPhone. Before his audiences sees the phone, Jobs show them this slide:

Again, by referencing competitors — and strategically framing their shortcomings  before revealing the product — Jobs gives his audience a context in which the iPhone is a savior. When he unveils the multi-touch display and the proximity sensor, his audience immediately understands these not just as cool features but as proof points in his narrative about the iPhone delivering a new kind of future experience.

The danger in this approach is coming off as contemptuous about competitors. The last thing you want to do is actually walk into a sales pitch and start rattling off all the reasons competitors suck.

Jobs offers two clues for remaining above the fray.  First, he usually talks about competitors as a group (even when he names the smartphones, above, he doesn't single one out for criticism). Second, he always frames the criticism by first defining a future vision for customers. His point is not that competitors suck. They may have lots of great attributes. His point is that they're just not going to get his customers to the the Promised Land he's laying out.

You can see his approach again during the iPad launch, in 2010, when he explains why netbooks aren't great for browsing the Internet:

In all, we can discern three big lessons about how you address competition in your decks and presentations:



That’s not to say you can’t revisit competition later in your pitch. But by introducing competitors early and showing why they can't deliver the future you're offering, you shift the narrative in a crucial way: from us against them, to us fighting for a better (and differentiated) future for customers.

To me, that’s a benefit worth rearranging your deck for.

About Andy Raskin: 

I help leadership teams craft strategic stories — to power fundraising, sales, marketing, recruiting, and product. My clients include companies backed by a16z, KPCB, First Round Capital, and other top-tier investors. I also lead storytelling workshops for teams. More at http://andyraskin.com.|||

