Nest Cam is Alphabet's way of fully folding the Dropcam brand into its smart home ecosystem. Nest acquired Dropcam in 2014, and almost exactly a year later, it's launching a newer, better version of the home security camera. While Nest still supports existing Dropcams with its software, it wants to entice the newly smart home curious with a tiny Wi-Fi-connected camera that's a no-brainer to use and that quietly watches over your home without much input on your part.

But while it's simple to set up and use, the $199 Nest Cam is like most other Wi-Fi security cameras in that it's limited by a subscription paywall that prevents you from using some of its best features unless you pay up. Surveillance doesn't come cheap, but Nest Cam does have solid features that make it a decent security camera and an even better watchful eye.

Dropcam slimmed down, at least in frame, to become Nest Cam. The neck of the device, which connects the bulbous camera head to its magnetic base, is much thinner than the Dropcam Pro's. The pivot joint is more adjustable, too, allowing you to turn the cam sideways and tilt it up and down to get the best angle to view the room it's in. You can twist the back of the device's head to spin the lens and the indicator light a full 360 degrees.

The magnetic base is great if you plan on placing Nest Cam on top of appliances in the kitchen, and it feels sturdy enough to resist getting knocked over easily. Nest gives you a wall mount for the camera, so you can use it instead of the magnetic base and attach the camera to a wall.

It takes only a few minutes to set up Nest Cam. After unboxing it, you plug it into a power source with the AC adapter and scan the QR code on the back of the camera with the Android or iOS app. You'll then be asked to sign into your Wi-Fi network with your password, and once you're connected, the camera turns on and begins recording.

Nest Cam features 1080p video recording, which is a step up from Dropcam's 720p video but otherwise standard in comparison to cameras such as Canary and Netatmo's Welcome. The video stream was pretty clear and crisp, but there was about a one-second delay in playback when I watched from my iPhone or from my laptop.

The lens is circled by eight LEDs that help improve the quality of the camera's night vision. The light combined with the higher-resolution video make the night vision clear and easy to watch, but still grainy compared to regular recording in a lit room. While figures closer to the camera had more detail, you're still able to easily pick out figures, moving or immobile, in the room in the dark. You also don't have to turn on night vision manually—by default, the camera automatically turns the feature on during the night and when it senses the lights go out.

Nest Cam has motion and sound detection, so its main purpose is to alert you when it senses either in your home. You can set it so the camera only detects one or the other if you prefer, but when you're out of the house, both come in handy if you want to catch burglars or just keep an eye on your children and pets.

You could have the camera on at all times, but then your smartphone would be bombarded with notifications. Instead, you can schedule times for each day of the week when you want the Nest Cam to automatically turn on and off. This makes it easy to monitor your home when you're at work or when you know no one will be home to keep an eye on things.

The other option, Home/Away, can work in tandem with schedules or by itself. With this feature enabled, you can manually set when you're home or away by tapping the circular button on the homepage of the app. The Nest Cam will turn on when you indicate you're away and then turn off when you switch back to Home. If you're busy and forgetful like me, you'll want to use both schedules with Home/Away as a backup—I mostly relied on schedules, but when I left my apartment randomly, I could turn on the camera by switching it to Away in the app as I rushed out the door.

When Nest Cam is on and detects a disturbance in the force, it pings your mobile device and you can check out a live video feed in the app. With the device's two-way audio, you could talk to the children or pets at this point by simply speaking into your smartphone or tablet. They'll be able to hear you and you'll be able to hear them—while that's hardly a major security feature, it provides peace of mind to busy people who want to make sure the rest of their household is safe and sound even when they aren't around.

One caveat to the alerts is that you'll only get one every 30 minutes when the camera detects activity. Let's say you accidentally trigger an alert as you're on your way out the door—for the next 30 minutes, if there's any other motion or sound disturbance, the camera won't alert you to it. That's a big oversight, especially if a thief were to see you leave and immediately try to break in to your home. And unlike Canary, Nest Cam doesn't have an alarm you can trigger remotely, so you may be able to spot a thief, but you'll have to make your next move on your own.

It's also worth noting that Nest Cam now works with the new Nest Weave smart home system. Originally developed to help the Nest Protect smoke detectors communicate with other detectors in the home, Nest Weave uses Thread to create a mesh network for many of the smart home products you have. This means you can connect the Nest Cam to other devices, like a smart door lock or Wi-Fi or light bulb, and set actions that will control multiple devices in tandem. For example, if your smart door lock senses someone inputting too many wrong passcodes, it could trigger a Nest Cam to begin recording to catch any potential thieves breaking and entering.|||

Quality is good and it plays well with other Nests, but subscription costs add up.