A group of do-gooder hackers calling themselves The White Team have taken responsibility for a large peer-to-peer botnet that compromised more than 10,000 routers to improve the security of the devices, and have explained to FORBES some of their future plans to fix more broken machines.

The vigilantes contacted researcher, Mario Ballano, this week, sending him a link to a Gitlab page where they had opened up their code for Wifatch, the software that broke into routers by using weak and default passwords (their favourite one being “password”), going on to clean them of malware, Bitcoin miners and other dangerous code. Not all the code is quite there, though the White Team has promised more is coming.

Bollano confirmed to FORBES that the signatures posted on Gitlab matched those in the Wifatch code he’d explored. “Those guys are the real deal… It's the real source code, it's public and now even licensed,” he noted, evidently excited at having met those responsible for the ostensibly-altruistic malware he studied.

As for why the White Team decided to create software that appeared to have broken the law in breaching the admittedly-poor security of people’s routers without their permission, the crew or individual responsible noted on Gitlab: “First, for learning. Second, for understanding. Third, for fun, and fourth, for your (and our) security. Apart from the learning experience, this is a truly altruistic project, and no malicious actions are planned."

They said though they felt bad for abusing resources that didn’t belong to them, the positives were manifold. “The amount of saved bandwidth by taking down other scanning malware, the amount energy saved by killing illegal bitcoin miners, the number of reboots and service interruptions prevented by not overheating these devices, the number of credentials and money not stolen should all outweigh this. We co-opted your devices to help the general public (in a small way).”

What’s more, The White Team responded to comments from free and open software activist Richard Stallman to this publication, whose email signature had been used in some of the comments delivered in the exploits. They agreed with Stallman that people’s permission should have been obtained, but they hadn’t done that for unexplained reasons. They also placed their malware (or goodware depending on which way you look at it) under the General Public License, the widely-used free software license written by Stallman.

There's still a concern that despite the hackers' promises, they could still use Wifatch for evil - something The White Team even warned about. When asked if they could be trusted, the hackers wrote: "Of course not, you should secure your device."

Some are unimpressed by the illegal tactics of the hackers. As Ted Harrington, of Independent Security Evaluators, told me last week, though there are too many insecure devices on the market, "violating systems as a path to remediation is not the right way to go".

Whatever the morals at play, the question remains: who are the White Team? The name itself reveals little; it's often the term for those in an organisation who referee training practices amongst security staff, traditionally between the offensive Red and defensive Blue teams.

The Wifatch code looks well-written and doesn't contain any revealing comments, whilst the email listed on Gitlab has no links to other activity on the web whatsoever, indicating the hackers have been careful about covering their tracks. For now, there's only the following White Team statement to go on: “We are nobody important. Really.”

FORBES spoke with the controller of that apparent White Team email using encrypted messages and asked them a few more pertinent questions:

Why did you decide to respond to Richard Stallman's request you put the code under GNU licence?

Because he is right: software should be free software, for ethical reason and many more (I wholeheartedly agree with the philosophy of the FSF, so will not repeat that).

The question is "why not earlier?"

Fighting other malware works best when they don't know they are being fought. Now that every malware author knows Wifatch is out there, this element has been lost, and there is no reason not to publish the sources.

Of course, there are trade-offs - the published software (and the actual botnet) does not have any attack functionality or the access key(s), so while it might help researchers to better understand what it does, and might even help criminals design their botnet, it will not give potentially dangerous attack code into the wrong hands.

Do you plan to create any other kinds of software that exploit systems to fix them?

There are plans to refine the existing system and include more routers and malware signatures.

Currently, we disinfect about 100,000 devices on the internet, but can gain access to about 400,000 with trivial means. Even more are out there that have some firmware bugs that are actively exploited - for example, the Moon worm is mostly unaffected by Wifatch.

There are technical problems to be overcome. For example, as of today there are 5,853 malware signatures (which indicates the size of the problem: there are many thousands of router malware specimens out there). These signatures take too much memory, so this needs to be reduced.

Can you tell me any more about who you are?

I am a (mostly) normal citizen - I am not a well-known security researcher, no activist, am not paid for this by company or state, and strictly do this in my free time.

Do you worry about being tracked by police for this, or do you think they won't bother?

Clearly both. I am concerned we are all being tracked at any time, and losing my anonymity can only mean problems.

Regarding police, it is always a possibility, because access to these devices was gained without explicit consent, which is illegal in many jurisdictions.

There are mitigating factors, though: Wifatch doesn't do anything malicious, tries to be nice to the devices, and even does some good, such as avoiding overheating and reboots caused by bitcoin miners. And since currently no bugs nor hidden backdoors are being used, it is even questionable whether these devices were even secured in the first place - many of these devices do not even ask for a password and just offer you a command line when you telnet to them.

Because of this, it is my hope that nobody with the intent of prosecuting me is trying to track me - it might be illegal to access these devices, but if no harm is done, the punishment should be small.

Better be safe than sorry, though.

Are there others who do this kind of work? Or are you the only ones?

Viruses and worms that disinfect/remove others are quite old (for example, there was an Amiga virus called Northstar that tried to disinfect other malware without doing anything malicious itself), and just as old is the discussion of whether this is ethical or not.

There was also a well-known research botnet called the Internet Census 2012, where some researchers used access to these devices to make measurements of the internet. Curiously, they decided to block access for some malware, too, so it is a kind of precursor, although their main intent was to publish data, and our main intent is to kill malware.

Right now, with respect to the Internet of Things, I am not aware of anybody else doing anything like this, certainly not on this scale.

Is this the kind of activism you'd like to see more of? Or should this be something legitimate businesses and governments should be doing?

There are a few truly benevolent dictators that actually did good to their country. The vast majority ... not so much. I can do this because I trust myself to not abuse this for something real evil, and fortunately, most existing botnets are technologically much else advanced, so I have an edge. But a more criminally-minded person might at some point pop up and use similar technology to do a lot of evil.

This includes governments and companies - you should not trust them, and you should not have a need to trust them.

There is a much better thing that governments can do, namely cause manufacturers of devices sold to care more for security. Embedded device security is atrocious, but the same is true for smartphones (sadly, not few of them run malware and Wifatch as well).

The details of this process are not trivial, but without doubt, it is necessary. We already see the effects of cars being hackable and remote controllable, with the manufacturers not fixing this for years, and this will become much worse in the future.

Only strong data protection laws, together with incentives for companies to actively invest into designing more secure devices and keeping them up to date, will help.

What do you make of cases where Microsoft has gone into others' systems to take out botnets?

What is permission? If I enable automatic updates, then Microsoft most likely has permission to do that, legally, whether you think you want to permit it or not. If your home router is not asking for a password, is accessing it like accessing a public web server, or is it illegal?

I think the idea should be whether harm is done. Declaring activities as illegal that cause no harm is not very useful.

In the end, what is so shocking (to some people) about Microsoft doing this is simply the realisation that Microsoft has total control over their computers. But they had this even before they actually used it to remove botnets.

Looking at it from this viewpoint, I think people should regain authority over their devices - Apple, Amazon, Samsung and other companies shouldn't be able to install or remove things on your device that you don't want, or dictate what kind of software you are able to run or even how you view movies.|||

The vigilantes who broke into others' routers to clean them of malware and vulnerabilities have spoken out, saying they did what they did for learning, understanding, fun and security.