Cristiano Ronaldo wrote a new record in the history of his football career. Cristiano Ronaldo was able to score more than 500 goals in his career during the Champions League match Malmo vs Real Madrid. Bettingrunner want to celebrate this amazing milestone with the Cristiano Ronaldo best 10 goals in his entire career. Watch the best goals selected and choose your favorite, and then choose your football betting tips you like the most on Bettingrunner Marketplace.

Cristiano Ronaldo scores in a deadly counterattack for this first Cristiano Ronaldo Top 10 Goals. Long pass by Sami Khedira and amazing heel control of Cristiano Ronaldo slaying Victor Valdes after he placed the ball with a stylish stop. No way for Barcelona defence.

Real Madrid played at the Velodrome stadium in Marseille a treacherous Champions League round against the home team. Cristiano Ronaldo immediately unlocks the match with a fantastic free kick from about 30 meters over the bar and into the top of the poles of the goalkeeper Mandanda.



 It’s the Madrid super derby: Atletico vs Real at the Vicente Calderon on April 11, 2012. Real Madrid will win the league with a super Cristiano Ronaldo unleashed that season!





 What a performance of Cristiano Ronaldo in this friendly match between Portugal and Ecuador. See 00.17 in this video. Cristiano Ronaldo equalized for the Portuguese 1-1 with a fantastic volley diagonally with attached a sombrero against the Ecuadorian defender. Incredible goal and definitely one of the best Ronaldo score with his national team for this Cristiano Ronaldo Top 10 Goals.



Cristiano Ronaldo scores his 50th goal of the season with a stun worthy of the milestone. Real Madrid lost at home against a tough Valencia until a few minutes left. But Cristiano Ronaldo pulls out of the hat a back-heel that triggers the Santiago Bernabeu at the 95th minute.

At La Rosaleda staged a Cristiano Ronaldo “unstoppable” version. See at 01.38. In La Liga match against Malaga he struck his tenth hattrick with the Blancos jersey thanks to a beautiful back-heel that displaces the Malaga goalkeeper. His dance of exultation with Marcelo will go down in history!





 All football fans know this goal. One of the best ever scored in the Champions League. This is the year of triumphant ride of Manchester United to final victory in the Champions League. Cristiano Ronaldo receives the ball in midfield, as a glance at the Porto goalkeeper and let fly a magnificent rocket. The ball remained in the air without touching the ground up to stow the net. What a show!



We come to the podium of Cristiano Ronaldo Best 10 Goals. The best 10 sports predictions of the day you can find on our BettingRunner Tip Store. This time, the pearl gets during a defeat for Real Madrid in Champions League against Borussia Dormund. The game will end 2-1 for the Germans but Ronaldo scores the equalizer goal with a beautiful lob that displaces Roman Weidenfeller.



 The second of the Cristiano Ronaldo Top 10 Goals is the historical free kick of a young Ronaldo in Premier League. The referee gave the foul on the edge of the area, around 23 yard. Ronaldo takes his typical run-up and Rooney whispers to the ear of the Portuguese champion. Ronaldo then shell the shot and the ball comes out of the wall placed by James. Amazing effect of the ball and standing ovation for Cristiano Ronaldo!





 Top of the list of Cristiano Ronaldo Top 10 Goals could only be this one. Impressive and memorable: all the best of Cristiano Ronaldo in this spectacular finalization. One man show (Ronaldo will do an hattrick and the match will end 1-6 in favor for Real Madrid). The Portuguese concludes a Real Madrid attack at the Türk Telekom Arena with three dribling (with three defenders put on seat) and a cannon on the goal of Muslera which can not even see the shot. Is there any betting tipster who could predict this magic finish?|||

Find out Cristiano Ronaldo Top 10 Goals ever. Check out the best goals picked for Cristiano Ronaldo fans and choose your favorite!