Recently at .NEXT, Nutanix announced that it is introducing Acropolis hypervisor (AHV) and integrating virtualization management to its existing product. With this addition, Nutanix is expanding hyper convergence to include virtualization and its management. You can find more information on this announcement here.

Nutanix Acropolis 4.5 that was released today ( download here ) marks a significant step in building this advanced hyper converged stack. This solution comes pre-built with open source KVM based Acropolis hypervisor (AHV). A central component of this solution is a new management layer that is hypervisor and runtime agnostic and has a distributed and scale out architecture. As a first step, we are using it to provide converged virtualization management.

So, why should this matter to you?

Because this approach makes your life as an admin even easier ! By converging virtual infrastructure management with server and storage management, we are extending the simplicity of Nutanix to virtual infrastructure management.

To give you an example - if you order new nodes, they come pre-imaged with AHV from the factory. You need to then rack / stack the hardware, give it power and network and then from a webUI, you can create a cluster using a few clicks. If your network admin has already trunked some VLANs to a TOR switch, then you can immediately proceed to create VLAN backed virtual networks from the Prism UI. It takes another couple of clicks and your virtual infrastructure is ready for provisioning virtual machines ! There is no need to have a separate management tool for virtual infrastructure management in this solution.

When you add a node to your cluster, you not only expand storage and compute capacity of the cluster, you also expand VM management capacity just a bit as every node runs an instance of the management service - hence management plane never becomes a single choke point.

The management layer is highly available and protects against both planned and unplanned downtimes. AHV and its management software can be upgraded through the 1 click workflow from Prism in a rolling non-disruptive fashion. Similarly, in case of a node failure or a CVM failure, you can still manage your virtual workloads running on the cluster.

The Prism webUI hides the complexities of KVM from the admin user and the learning curve for VM management is minimal.

Finally, Nutanix provides a single point support for the entire infrastructure stack - including servers, storage, hypervisor and virtual infrastructure management. So, you can have peace of mind knowing that the formidable award winning Nutanix Support team has got your back !

While 4.5 is technically the first big release for AHV, we already have several customers using AHV in production environments and loving the experience. 4.5 release adds many important management features to enable even more use cases. To learn the details behind what's new in 4.5 , stay tuned for my follow up posts in this space.|||

This post was authored by Manish Lohani, Director of Product Management Recently at .NEXT, Nutanix announced that it is introducing Acropolis