What makes you say that web Push are a cornerstone for the web industry?Frédéric Mahé: Because it gives websites the ability to re-involve and chase-up their users, an asset that was until then iOS and Android apps’ private turf. By subscribing - through opt-in/opt-out system - to a website’s notifications, the user agrees to receiving incentives and messages from that website, even when they are not logged in. Web push (Push notifications for websites) ­are displayed on either the user’s browser or their smartphone’s login page. Messages can be highly targeted, according to the user’s tastes, experiences, or career path.

This innovation will have various consequences: on Google’s position as the unavoidable intermediary in CRM/web-to-user relationship, and on the dualism of web and mobile apps, as those last apps do not own the exclusive rights to alerting anymore. Digital marketing will face a serious upheaval, starting with email marketing. While it may still seem to be the established communication model for webmasters, I think it can today be affirmed that email marketing is a thing of the past, and that web push notifications are the future of customer loyalty.

So, you think web push are going to chuck away newsletters?

F.M.:  Absolutely. Sending a newsletter is a heavy and expensive process, and seldom does it provide more than an 8% click through rate. Too slow and too costly, email marketing is not suited for a world that’s refocusing on mobile. In the tweet era, a web push, with its 140 characters, is the best way to target every single user, with the right message, in the right place, at the right time, as it can instantly be disclosed on both desktops and smartphone screens. It hence is the ideal work tool to trigger users’ reactions and re-engage them on one’s website.

Don’t you think that web Push are only designed for a tiny part of web users?F.M.: That’s not true anymore. Today, around 40% of web users are equipped with browsers that support web push. And we can foresee that a vast majority of browsers will be upgraded for web push by the end of the year, due to the automatic roll-out of Chrome and Safari updates, but also to Mozilla’s efforts to provide Firefox with this innovation.

Isn’t it actually just a new umpteenth advertisement method, just one more try to renew pop-up windows?

F.M.: Not at all! Contrary to what’s happening with advertisements, the user remains the game master. They may put an end to their subscription to a website’s notifications at just any time, if they consider that the messages they receive are worth no interest. Here lies the main difference with emailing, text messages, and ads.

I grant you, at the beginning, some websites will be tempted to mess things up and drown their users under a continuous flow of information and unimportant alerts. Then the relationship between a website and the user will become more personal, and push notifications will grow more targeted by taking into account every single user’s needs and wants and desires. This way, push notifications will settle as *the* way to create customer loyalty and develop customer base.

What does Google has to gain from the opening of push notifications to websites?

F.M.: It is quite hard to say. In the mobile market, Google long held a position of unavoidable gateway to contents access. I think Google is now feeling that they are losing this key-position at the cost of a “walled garden”, that is a closed ecosystem under total control from Facebook, soon to be the new mobile “go-between”. By opening push notifications to websites via the last versions of Chrome, Google is giving back to editors the keys of their relationships toward their clients. It is the opportunity for Google to get rid of Facebook’s influence today, in order to matter tomorrow.

How does the WonderPush technology go beyond Google Chrome progress?

F.M.: Not only is Google’s web push service designed for HTTPS websites, but it is also tedious to implement. WonderPush has developed the first SDK javascript in IT history, which allows any website, be it HTTP or HTTPS, to integrate web push in less than 5 minutes. Thanks to WonderPush, a Chrome feature, once only available for a handful of websites, is to be widened to the World Wide Web, from the simplest blog to media or e-commerce websites.

WonderPush is free of charge. Why?

F.M.: For the WonderPush user, the sending of push notifications is totally free, as we firmly believe that any website, even the smallest, must be able to communicate with their willing users without having anything to pay. We believe that, in the current context of acquisition costs increase, smartly developing the relationship between a website and their users not only makes the aforementioned relationship long-lasting but also grants the service with a better quality. In the end, it’s a win-win experience, for both the editor and the user.

That said, how do you intend to cover developing and operating costs?

F.M.: WonderPush’s business model is “freemium”. On the one hand, we have a free offer, available for any website and mobile applications editor – whatever profit they may clear. The editor is then able to send push notifications to their users. On the other hand, we have a premium higher-end offer, with previously unseen features. The cost is €50 per month per 50,000 notifications subscribers.|||

