Much has been written around the internet about this geeky kernel maintainer Sarah Sharp who left kernel development. I have now spent two hours reading through lkml posts, and want to summarize a few mails from the long thread, since most of the usual news sites just rewrap the original blog of hers without adding any background.

The whole thread evolved out call for stable kernel review by Greg Kroah-Hartman where he complained about too many patches that are not actually in rc1 before going into stable:

from where it developed into a typical Linus rant on people flagging crap for stable, followed by some jokes:

Up to now a pretty decent and normal thread with some jokes and poking, nobody minded, and reading through it I had a good time. The thread continues with a discussion on requirements what to submit to stable, and some side threads on particular commits.

And then, out of the blue, Social Justice Warrior (SJW) Sarah Sharp pops in … with a very important contribution:

Onto which Linus answers in a great way:

On goes Sarah, gearing up in her SJW mode and starting to rant:

Linus himself made clear what he thinks of her:

It is easy to verify what Linus said, by reading the above two links and the answers of the maintainers, both agreed that it was their failure and were sorry. (Mauro’s answer, Rafael’s answer) It is just the geeky SJW that was not even attacked (who would dare to attack a woman nowadays?).

The overall reaction to her by the maintainers can be exemplified by Thomas Gleixner’s post:

What follows is a nearly endless discussion with Sarah meandering around, changing permanently her opinion what is acceptable. Linus tried to explain to her in simple words, without success, she continues to rant around. Here arguments are so weak I had nothing but good laugh:

> Sarah, that's a pretty potent argument by Linus, that "acting > professionally" risks replacing a raw but honest culture with a > polished but dishonest culture - which is harmful to developing > good technology. > > That's a valid concern. What's your reply to that argument?   I don't feel the need to comment, because I feel it's a straw man argument. I feel that way because I disagree with the definition of professionalism that people have been pushing.   To me, being "professional" means treating each other with respect. I can show emotion, express displeasure, be direct, and still show respect for my fellow developers.   For example, I find the following statement to be both direct and respectful, because it's criticizing code, not the person:   "This code is SHIT! It adds new warnings and it's marked for stable when it's clearly *crap code* that's not a bug fix. I'm going to revert this merge, and I expect a fix from you IMMEDIATELY."   The following statement is not respectful, because it targets the person:   "Seriously, Maintainer. Why are you pushing this kind of *crap* code to me again? Why the hell did you mark it for stable when it's clearly not a bug fix? Did you even try to f*cking compile this?" > Sarah, that's a pretty potent argument by Linus, that "acting > professionally" risks replacing a raw but honest culture with a > polished but dishonest culture - which is harmful to developing > good technology. > > That's a valid concern. What's your reply to that argument? I don't feel the need to comment, because I feel it's a straw man argument. I feel that way because I disagree with the definition of professionalism that people have been pushing. To me, being "professional" means treating each other with respect. I can show emotion, express displeasure, be direct, and still show respect for my fellow developers. For example, I find the following statement to be both direct and respectful, because it's criticizing code, not the person: "This code is SHIT! It adds new warnings and it's marked for stable when it's clearly *crap code* that's not a bug fix. I'm going to revert this merge, and I expect a fix from you IMMEDIATELY." The following statement is not respectful, because it targets the person: "Seriously, Maintainer. Why are you pushing this kind of *crap* code to me again? Why the hell did you mark it for stable when it's clearly not a bug fix? Did you even try to f*cking compile this?"

Fortunately, she was immediately corrected and Ingo Molnar wrote an excellent refutation (starting another funny thread) of all her emails, statements, accusations (all of the email is a good read):

Last but not least, let us return to her blog post, where she states herself that:

and she made lots of use of it, I counted at least 10 instances. She seems to remove or “fart fart fart” any comment that is not in line with her opinion. Further evidence is provided by this post on lkml.

Everyone is free to have his own opinion (sorry, his/her), and I am free to form my own opinion on Sarah Sharp by just simply reading the facts. I am more than happy that one more SJW has left Linux development, as the proliferation of cleaning of speech from any personality has taken too far a grip.

Coming to my home-base in Debian, unfortunately there is no one in the position and the state of mind of Linus, so we are suffering the same stupidities imposed by social justice worriers and some brainless feminists (no, don’t get me wrong, these are two independent attributes. I do NOT state that feminism is brainless) that Linus and the maintainer crew was able to fend of – this time.

I finish with my favorite post from that thread, by Steven Rosted (from whom I also stole the above image!):

Post Scriptum (after a bike ride) The last point by Linus is what I criticize most on Debian nowdays, it has become a sterilized over-governed entity, where most fun is gone. Making fun is practically forbidden, since there is the slight chance that some minority somewhere on this planet might feel hurt, and by this we are breaking the CoC. Emotions are restricted to the “Happy happy how nice we are and how good we are” level of US and also Japanese self-reenforcement society.

Post Post Scriptum I just read Sarah Sharp’s post on “What makes a good community?“, and without giving a full account or review, I am just pi**ed by the usage of the word “microaggressions” – I can only recommend everyone to read this article and this article to get a feeling how bs the idea of microaggressions has taken over academia – and obviously not only academia.

Post3 Scriptum I am happy to see Lars Wirzenius, Gunnar Wolf, and Martín Ferrari opposing my view. I agree with them that my comments concerning Debian are not mainstream in Debian – something that is not very surprising, though, and I think it is great that they have fun in Debian, like many other contributors.

Post4 Scriptum Although nobody will read this, here is a great response from a female developer:

Nothing to add here!|||

Much has been written around the internet about this geeky kernel maintainer Sarah Sharp who left kernel development. I have now spent two hours reading through lkml posts, and want to summarize a few mails from the long thread, since most of the usual news sites just rewrap the original blog of hers without adding [...]