How I’m Informed is a look into the reading and learning habits of people from all walks of life.

Jacob Laukaitis is a co-founder of ChameleonJohn.com, an online coupons company in the US. He's a digital nomad and tweets about his experiences as @JacobLaukaitis.

What is your daily reading habit?

I read Kindle books on my phone almost every day, usually in short spans of time while commuting on planes, busses and trains. Most of the books I've ever read fall into two main categories - business literature and biographies.

When working, I often read up to a dozen marketing-related articles per day. It can be anything from monetizing an e-mail list to in-depth keyword analysis to up-selling products on order confirmation e-mails. I'm also a big fan of Groove and Buffer blogs, since they are so transparent in sharing their company insights, data and tips.

What's one piece of literature that still influences you today?

I couldn't choose one, since I've read so many wonderful books that have shaped my attitude in one way or another. A few really good ones were: Lean Startup by Eric Ries; How To Get Rich by Felix Dennis; and The 4-Hour Work Week by Tim Ferriss.

How do you pick your areas of focus? How do you stay relevant in that focus area?

It has to be very interesting, potentially profitable and highly scalable. That's why I currently focus on search engine optimization and e-mail marketing. I'm convinced they are the two best customer acquisition channels online.

As for staying relevant, I learn by reading online articles, books and talking to people who are experienced in the field. Whatever I learn, I try to apply in real-life. If I can't use something on my main project, I might start a side one to test it out.

A search expert today is a very different role from say 10 years ago. What's changed?

Search engines have become much smarter and more complex.

I think in the old days it was mostly about knowing what keywords to use, how to interlink a website and how to write the meta texts. These days search experts solve much more advanced problems, such as indexing the right pages, avoiding duplicate content at all costs and doing off-site optimization that follows Google's guidelines.

You're a fellow digital nomad. Can you tell me something unique about the lifestyle and how it impacts your work?

The fact that I'm currently traveling 9-10 months every year has had a tremendous impact on my personality. I've been exposed to dozens of different cultures; became conversational in Mandarin Chinese (and I'm currently learning Bahasa Indonesia); got my scuba diver's license in Indonesia; became pretty good at driving motorbikes, which lead me to a wonderful adventure when I drove 8,000 kilometers in 4 weeks across 15 European countries completely alone; and much more.

Work-wise, I'm much better connected; have tons of outsourcing opportunities; acquired valuable information about the Asian online markets and I'm pretty sure my next venture will be in Indonesia due to its population size and growth rate.

Know someone interesting to feature on How I’m Informed? Nominate them to me here: @kaviguppta.|||

How I’m Informed is a look into the reading and learning habits of people from all walks of life. Jacob Laukaitis is a co-founder of ChameleonJohn.com, an online coupons company in the US. He's a digital nomad and tweets about his experiences as @JacobLaukaitis. Jacob Laukaitis with everything he carries while traveling. What is your [...]