This question already has an answer here: The Goal of Teams: Our Follow-Up to Your Questions A follow-up to this post has been made here: "The Goal of Teams: Our Follow-Up to Your Questions" We're proposing a new area called Teams. The goal is to allow groups (of varying sizes) to publicly share about themselves (who they are and what they build) on Stack Overflow. Content can include information about The Team (Overview, Meta Information), a member roster, projects, community interaction (Questions), and recruitment (Jobs, Get Involved). Team affiliations will be reflected in your user profile. This past spring, the product team held a multi-week brainstorming session where we thought about how we could build on Stack Overflow's current success of improving the lives of developers. What other valuable information does the programming community need, but is trapped elsewhere online and offline? Documentation is one of those ideas. Teams is another, and that’s what we’re excited to share with you today. First let me state what Teams are and why we’re excited about them: Teams are a new way to share your knowledge with the world. This includes what you build, who you build it with, answers to questions about how you build it, and how others can get involved. These groups can vary in size from a few people working on a small open-source project to companies and sub-teams within those companies. Teams allow for a new kind of Q&A that wouldn’t be allowed right now Teams let you show off more of what you do professionally Teams help you hire developers or recruit for your open source project How does adding Teams to Stack Overflow solve this? It introduces a new kind of Q&A. Teams addresses a need the community wanted solved from the beginning, but didn’t fit in our original Q&A. Documentation is our attempt to help the community address questions which would typically be considered too broad. Teams is our attempt to address items which typically are considered too localized. What do we mean by "too localized"? Well, let’s start off with what we don’t mean. Questions such as "please fix my codes" will still not be allowed. Instead, we’re looking to provide a place for questions such as: "How does [Company X] run PostgreSQL at an enterprise scale?", "What's a typical budget for [Company Y] when they upgrade their data centers?", or "How does [Company Z] keep their distributed team working together even though they’re spread across multiple time zones?" These are interesting questions which don’t have room in the community right now. These questions allow us to start sharing how various teams have arrived at solutions others can learn from. It lets you show off more of what you do professionally. Your user profile lets you show off your own achievements: what you have done on Stack Overflow, who you are, how you’re involved. Teams are an extension of your profile by letting you now share about your team, what you’re building, who’s working on it with you, how you’re solving problems, and how people can get involved. It helps you hire and recruit other developers. After salary, two of the top job search considerations for developers are team culture and what they’re building. But, despite that, job listings are typically dry and boring lists of requirements, responsibilities, and expectations. A short team blurb might be included, but it may not even represent the development team fully. Teams can cut through that by giving developers a fuller picture of the team, created by the team. Inversely, if you’re looking for a job, now you have one place you can go to learn about a team, their culture, what they’re building, and who’s involved. Maybe this information is the motivation you needed to apply or maybe it helps you feel more secure in your possible decision to join the team. Or, maybe it’s the info you need to realize just how miserable you’d be working with that team. Either way, Teams can help you make more informed decisions. We Need Your Help This is the first step, sharing where we’re at. We’ve been thinking about what Teams on Stack Overflow look like, what they can offer, and how they might behave; but now we need your feedback. We’re still in the early stages, but we believe involving the community is vital to strong, successful ideas. The second step will be a private beta, where the community will use this in ways that we never dreamed of or intended test things out and identify where we need to work harder. The private testing timeline is the obligatory six-to-eight weeks. A sign-up form will be at the end, so please keep reading. The Proposal (On How Teams Will Work…Initially) We've got a lot of crazy ideas for these pages, and probably won't have a clue which makes sense until you give us some feedback, but here’s what we think the first version will look like: Teams are open-ended…for now. Meaning we aren't prescribing how they should be used. We reserve the right to change this, but we're interested in seeing what people create teams for and how they organize them. Teams are self-forming. We aren’t going to create them. That’s up to you. They can be of any size…even 1 person. Anyone can sign up and join a team. We’ve considered having a required rep level to create a team, but want anyone to get involved with a team if they want to. So for now, we’re starting without a requirement. If chaos ensues, then we’ll revisit this area... Teams are formed around groups of people and the projects they work on. Most likely this will mean companies (i.e. Stack Overflow, HBO, etc.), sub-teams within companies (i.e. the Trello mobile team, the Microsoft Excel team, etc.), organizations (i.e. Mozilla, W3C, etc.), or open-source projects (i.e. KVM, ASP.NET MVC, etc.). Teams can share how they work and what they’ve learned. What’s your tech stack? What’s the purpose of your team? What projects do you work on that you’re excited about? How can people join your team? Joining a team is public. We are not doing private teams. The goal here is to share information, not hide it behind some secret curtain. When you join a team, you’re added to the team’s roster. Eventually we will also add a list of teams you’re a member of onto your profile, but it won’t be in the beta. People can only ask questions about the team on the team page. Wait, does this mean Stack Overflow is a social network? Emphatically no. You cannot directly message a particular team member or start random discussion questions. When a new question is created, the team will be notified through their inbox that a new question has come in. If teams receive too many questions, we will explore rolled up notifications or other ideas. Once notified, anyone on the team can answer the question. If the team feels it’s a question that should be on Stack Overflow, they can move that question out into the general questions area. As far as mechanics are concerned, right now we are thinking that the only things that will be different with team questions are that you will not be able to earn reputation (from asking or answering questions) or offer bounties. Up and downvoting questions/answers, comments, flagging, deleting, and admin functionality will all still apply. Team questions will be kept on team pages…for now. For the time being, we don’t want to clutter the community with questions most people can’t answer. This is all great and all, but do you have anything else planned for Teams? Well, yes. Yes, we do. It’s still early and everything is subject to change as we move along and hear to your feedback. But we have considered other ideas as well. They are: Projects. A place where teams can share about projects and the challenges they face(d) while working on them. Team Artifacts. Blog articles, conference talks, podcast episodes. All the various things that feature your team but that’s strewn across the worldwide interwebs. Team Opportunities. Have an opening on your team? Want developers to know how to get involved with your open-source project? We’ll provide an area where teams can list job opportunities or sign-up instructions. Following Teams. Stay up-to-date when teams answer a new question, update or post a new project, post a new job, or anything else that updates their page. Team Rep & Badge Totals. Show off your team’s brilliance within an aggregated reputation and badge area. Top Questions & Answers. What are the top questions and answers for the team? Team Timeline. View a team’s activity within one default view. What questions has the team answered? What questions and answers have team members written within the community? New team members. New projects and project updates. New job opportunities. All of this within one view that you can easily scan and catch up on a team’s activity. Can you earn reputation answering team questions? No. Much like answering questions on Meta, answering team questions is also a reputation-less activity. Badges could potentially be earned however. More details on this will follow. Will you be able to vote on questions and answers? For now we will allow normal upvoting and downvoting, but mainly because we want to see how voting differs here versus community questions. If we identify areas which could be tweaked, we will address those then... What if someone asks a coding question on a team page? There will be an easy way to move it into regular Q&A. Will I be able to send a private message to a team member? Nope. We still have no intention of becoming a social network. Who can join a team page? Initially people will be able to join team pages through one of two options: A unique URL link which would grant you access into the team. You will be able to set an email address domain, allowing anyone who has a valid email address to join your team. Looking ahead we also foresee other ways people can join teams: Being invited by other team members. When adding roles, schools, or projects onto your profile, you will be asked if you would like to join the team at that time. When linking a GitHub or open source project to your profile, you’ll be asked to create or join a team page at that time. Who can create a team? Initially anyone can create a team page. You will be able to create a team from the Teams “Overview” page. Eventually you will also be able to create a team from your user profile page when you add a job role, school, or project. Who can edit the team’s summary information? Any team member can edit a team’s overview, meta information, team members, and projects. We will maintain a historical record of these changes so they can be rolled back in the event something was changed that shouldn’t have been changed. If you would like to help us test this out, please sign up at the form link below. We will need to know the following things about you: Your team size (team size especially helps us because we will want to see how teams of varying sizes will utilize the team page).|||

