aacgain is a modification to Glen Sawyer's excellent mp3gain program. It supports AAC (mp4/m4a/QuickTime) audio files in addtion to mp3 files. If you are not familiar with mp3gain, stop reading this, and go to http://mp3gain.sourceforge.net.

aamath is a program that reads mathematical expressions in infix notation and renders them as ASCII art. It may be useful to send mathematics through text-only media, such as e-mail or newsgroups.

Armed Bear Common Lisp (ABCL) is a full implementation of the Common Lisp language featuring both an interpreter and a compiler, running in the JVM. Originally started to be a scripting language for the J editor, it now supports JSR-223 (Java scripting API): it can be a scripting engine in any Java application. Additionally, it can be used to implement (parts of) the application using Java to Lisp integration APIs.

abcm2ps is a command line program which converts ABC to music sheet in PostScript or SVG format. It is an extension of abc2ps which may handle many voices per staff. Here are an (old) example, its features and some documentation. Latest stable version: 7.8.7 (320Kb) (Changelog) Development version: 8.1.5 (246Kb) (Changelog) Older stable versions: 6.6.22 (291Kb) 5.9.25 (249Kb), 4.12.30 (209Kb), 3.7.21 (191Kb), 2.11.3 (171Kb), 1.6.12 (134Kb) Binaries: Many binaries (Linux, MS-Windows, MAC) may be found in the ABC Plus home page. For Atari MINT, here is a rpm package (maintained by Martin Tarenskeen). Here is a abcm2ps example of static XHTML formatting using a Bourne shell script. New: abc2svg is a Javascript program with (almost) all the features of abcm2ps. It should work in any web browser. Look at this page for more information. abcmplugin-1.0.1 (26Kb) is a simple plugin for WEB browsers which offers dynamic rendering of ABC files referenced or embedded in HTML/XHTML pages. For more information, look at the README. If you need transposition, you may use this perl script (transpose_abc.pl - 2008/12/23) from Matthew J. Fisher and updated by Sebastian Orlowski, Christopher David Lane and Christoph Dalitz. If you want a tune index, you may run this Tcl script (abcmaddidx.tcl - 2014/07/01) as a back end for PostScript output or this one (abcmaddidx2.tcl - 2013/11/02) for XHTML output.

abduco provides session management i.e. it allows programs to be run independently from its controlling terminal. That is programs can be detached - run in the background - and then later reattached. Together with dvtm it provides a simpler and cleaner alternative to tmux or screen. abduco is in many ways very similar to dtach but is actively maintained, contains no legacy code, provides a few additional features, has a cleaner, more robust implementation and is distributed under the ISC license.

Abuse is a dark 2D side-scrolling platform game developed by Crack dot Com in 1995. It features beautiful lighting, realistic animation and nasty alien-like creatures to destroy. It is now maintained by Sam Hocevar in an attempt to prevent it from vanishing from the Internet.

acmetool is an easy-to-use command line tool for automatically acquiring certificates from ACME servers (such as Let's Encrypt). Designed to flexibly integrate into your webserver setup to enable automatic verification. Unlike the official Let's Encrypt client, this doesn't modify your web server configuration.

The ACPI Component Architecture (ACPICA) project provides an operating system (OS)-independent reference implementation of the Advanced Configuration and Power Interface Specification (ACPI). It can be easily adapted to execute under any host OS. The ACPICA code is meant to be directly integrated into the host OS as a kernel-resident subsystem. Hosting the ACPICA subsystem requires no changes to the core ACPICA code. Instead, a small OS-specific interface layer is written specifically for each host OS in order to interface the ACPICA code to the native OS services.

CMS (stands for C++ Messaging Service) is a JMS-like API for C++ for interfacing with Message Brokers such as Apache ActiveMQ. CMS helps to make your C++ client code much neater and easier to follow. To get a better feel for CMS try the API Reference. ActiveMQ-CPP is a client only library, a message broker such as Apache ActiveMQ is still needed for your clients to communicate.|||

Homebrew (The missing package manager for OS X) formula list to search and discover new formulas