Overfitting is a subject that isn’t discussed nearly enough. In machine learning, overfitting is when an algorithm learns a model so specialized that it is unable to generalize or handle new tasks... Read more...

Posted May 30, 2016 So, you’ve got a Kubernetes cluster, and a cron task you need to run. Running it on your machine is an obviously bad idea, as is shoe horning it into another machine in your cloud fleet. Wouldn’t it...Read more...

Posted May 19, 2016 Accidentally deleted a topic, but hadn’t set delete.topic.enable in your server.properties file, and need to undo the topic deletion? Just delete the topic deletion in Zookeeper! Just ssh into your...Read more...

Posted December 17, 2015 Deploying Python projects can be a pain - especially with Python 3.5. Anaconda is the emerging replacement for pip/virtualenv deploys, with its scope expanding past Python packages to binaries like...Read more...

Posted October 24, 2015 The genesis of the software industry to stream processing is well underway. Open source systems like Kafka handle huge throughputs with surprisingly few resources, and aid heavily in decomposing...Read more...

Posted October 21, 2015 Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is a fantastic tool for topic modeling, but its alpha and beta hyperparameters cause a lot of confusion to those coming to the model for the first time (say, via an...Read more...

Posted October 7, 2015 The analytics market is crowded - there are countless companies offering nearly identical services. What’s worse, the technical task of recording analytics has become easy: many technologies...Read more...

Python 3 on Spark - Return of the PYTHONHASHSEED Posted September 8, 2015 If you’re anything like me, you’ve been stuck using Python 2 for the last 10 years, and for 8 of them you’ve been trying to switch to 3. Since the release of Spark and PySpark 1.4, Apache has started...Read more...

Posted March 10, 2015 It’s finally time to implement that new personalization service — the one you’ve been pushing for for months. With it, your app will be serving up relevant, personalized content to every user. But the...Read more...|||

Sample blog