People are colossally underestimating the Internet of Things.

The IoT is not about alarm clocks that start your coffee maker, or about making more regular “things” accessible over the internet. The IoT will fundamentally alter how humans interact with the physical world, and will ultimately register as more significant than the internet itself.

Here are the major pieces that will make up the real IoT:

Universal Daemonization will open entirely new categories of possibility, but here are a few examples. Consider that these aren’t necessarily universally desired, and some of them are downright frightening in their power and scope.

But what I’m describing here is what I believe is going to happen, not what I necessarily believe should happen. These are two separate things, but if they are useful to the right subset of people or markets they will happen regardless of who approves.

This interactive capability between objects will not come without downsides. Universal Daemonization, and the services that emerge from it, will introduce an extraordinary new surface area for attack.

Here are some example abuse cases:

This is just a small subset of the security issues that we’ll need to address. But don’t convince yourself that these are so serious that it’ll stop Universal Daemonization from happening. They’re not. The functionality offered by this model will be so compelling that it will be rolled out regardless. It’ll be our responsibility to secure it as it happens, just like many times in the past.

IoT isn’t about smart gadgets or connecting more things to the Internet. It’s about continuous two-way interaction between everything in the world. It’s about changing how humans and other objects interact with the world around them.

It will turn people and objects from static to dynamic, and make them machine-readable and fully interactive entities. Algorithms will continuously optimize the interactions between everyone and everything in the world, and make it so that the environment around humans constantly adjusts based on presence, preference, and desire.

The Internet of Things is not an Internet use case. Quite the opposite, the IoT represents the ultimate platform for human interaction with the physical world, and it will turn the Internet into a mere medium.|||

The IoT will fundamentally change to how humans interact with the physical world, and will ultimately register as more significant than the Internet itself.