IoT comes in many forms. Variation of use cases seems endless. IoT devices itself has many types and can be arranged in different configurations.

Following are of those device classes.

Those devices can be used to solve a wide range of problems. Obviously, it is hard to do a complete taxonomy, yet writing even a subset down would help us lot with understanding IoT.

The taxonomy is arranged around people, and each level moves further away from individual and becomes high level. Different levels are categorized from personal (e.g. wearables) to macro-level control ( smart cities). The following picture shows each category.

Let us look at each category in detail.

Wearables are devices that are with you. They range from pills you might swallow, a Fitbit, a watch, to your mobile phone. The goal of these use cases is to make your life better.

These use cases try to monitor and improve your home giving you peace of mind, comfort, and efficiency.

You can find more information from 9 Ways A Smart Home Can Improve Your Life.

Appliances have a duel role. On one hand, they provide new experiences to the end user, hence play a role in Smart Home. On the other hand, they provide better visibility and control of appliance to the manufacturer. Devices include your car, smart lawn mowers, kettles etc.  Most products will have a digital twin, that will provide analytics and important information both to the consumer and the manufacturer.

Following are some use cases.

HBR article, How Smart, Connected Products Are Transforming Companies, provide a good discussion about some of the use cases.

Smart spaces use cases monitor and manage a space such as a farm, a shop, forest etc. It would involve pre-designed sensors as well as ad-hoc sensors like drones etc. Often camera’s computer vision also plays a key role.

Following are some of the use cases.

For related use cases, see How The Internet of Things Will Shake Up Retail In 2015 and The Future Of Agriculture?

These use cases use IoT to improve the services industry and logistics. They focus on monitoring and improving underline processes of those businesses. Following are few examples.

Smart health will be a combination of wearables, smart home, and smart services. This would include use cases like better health data through wearables, better care at hospitals, in-home care, smart pill bottles etc that would monitor and make sure medications are taken, and better integration of health records.

The Idea of the industrial internet is to use sensors and automation to better understand and manage complex processes. Unlike smart spaces, these use cases give owners much for flexibility and control. Most these environments already have sensors and actuators installed. Most of these use cases predate IoT and falls under M2M.

Following are some use cases.

You can find more use cases from GE’s making world 1% better initiative.

Smart Cities ( and my be Nations) brings everything together and provides a macro view of everything. They focus on improving public infrastructure and services that make the urban living better.

Following are some of the use cases.

You can find more information from articles How Big Data And The Internet Of Things Create Smarter Cities, and Smart Cities — A $1.5 Trillion Market Opportunity.

As we saw, use cases come in many forms and shapes and likely they will get integrated with and change our lives at many different levels. This is the reason that analysts have forecasted an unprecedented number of devices (e.g. 15-50B by 2020) as well as a market size (e.g. 1-7 Trillion by 2020) for IoT that dwarfed any earlier trends like SOA or Big data.

Following are few observations about the use cases.

Hope this was useful. I would love to hear about if you thoughts about different categories and use cases.|||

IoT comes in many forms. Variation of use cases seems endless. IoT devices itself has many types and can be arranged in different configurations. Following are of those device classes. Ad-hoc/ Home/ Consumer (Embeddables , Wearables, Holdables, Surroundables, see Four types of Internet of Things?) Smart Systems - ( they monitor the outside world, have…