For the past few year, all the tech world's money and effort has been focused on mobile. Most of the best chips, sensors, batteries and software have been tailored to fit into our smartphones. Now that technology is starting to seep out into every other gadget. One potentially interesting area: cameras.

Palo Alto, Calif.-based startup Light is doing just that with the L16. Announced on Wednesday, the L16 is a DSLR-quality camera that fits in your pocket and is slightly more reasonably priced than some comparable cameras.

The L16 has 16 camera lens modules on the front. The software on the device combines all those images together to achieve a single image that's up to 52 megapixels. The camera will have strong low-light performance, depth of field control and low image noise. The L16 will also have 25-150mm optical zoom using what’s called folded optics, which is a method of bending light to make the camera more compact.

The camera will need a lot of processing power to handle all that data that it's bundling together into one image. That's why the camera will come equipped with the Snapdragon 820, upcoming quad-core 2.2Ghz "system on a chip." That practically makes the L16 a smartphone on its own -- the only thing it's missing really is a cellular modem.

A five-inch touch screen will allow for some editing and the ability to share on social media. The L16 will run on a modified version of the Android M operating system.

The pocket-sized camera will look quite a bit like a smartphone. The size will be slightly larger than iPhone 6+, which is 6.22 inches (height) x 3.06 inches (width) x 0.28 inch (depth).

It goes up for preorder today at $1,299 -- and increase to $1,699 at full price. The company hopes to ship the camera by the end of summer 2016 and it will only ship a couple thousand cameras as preorders.

"The L16 is actually providing all the functionality of a $6,000 DSLR camera gear," said Dave Grannan, cofounder and CEO of Light. "It's like having a full-frame DSLR with a zooms lens and prime lens."

This is a nice demonstration for Qualcomm of how its Snapdragon chips can be used in other places outside of phones, where it has dominated in the premium Android phone market. The San Diego chipmaker is hoping to diversify the types of devices it powers. A Qualcomm spokeswoman said its Snapdragon processors have powered other cameras before, but never one that has used so much of the chip's processing capabilities.

“What we’re really doing is repurposing technology found in cell phones,” said Grannan. “We’re taking multiple small, inexpensive camera modules and putting them into a high-quality camera that’s a fraction of the cost of traditional big glass optics.”

Light did a survey of 28,000 owners of DSLR cameras and found that half of them don’t even use them anymore, because they're too big and inconvenient to lug them around. Instead, their phones have taken over that role.

Taiwanese contract manufacturer Foxconn -- best known for making Apple's iPhones -- will build the new cameras. Foxconn made a strategic investment in Light's $25 million Series B round announced in July.

But Light hopes its technology will make it into phones. Besides making this camera, Light is also licensing out its camera technology for Android phones. Foxconn will also play an important role here, as it will offer Light's camera technology to its own smartphone partners.

Follow me on Twitter @aatilley or send me an email: atilley@forbes.com|||

For the past few year, all the tech world's money and effort has been focused on mobile. Most of the best chips, sensors, batteries and software have been tailored to fit into our smartphones. Now that technology is starting to seep out into every other gadget. One potentially interesting area: cameras. Palo [...]