An essential part of onboarding new support operators is teaching them the right way to talk to customers who aren't happy. Today Alex Ivanovs, of CodeCondo and business/startup columnist for Huffington Post, shares some of his tips for handling customer complaints.

Difficult customers are part of the business process. Nobody likes dealing with them, but often we have to. It's best to be prepared for these situations - like when a customer is typing in ALL CAPS - as some customers might take it a little bit too far.

In this time of social media and global interconnectedness, customer complaints can sometimes gather momentum before we even realize there's a problem. Customers, like us, have the gift of voice and sometimes this gift can get really loud, even uncomfortable.

The best way to tackle unhappy customers is by establishing a customer complaints strategy that can be applied immediately after a complaint is received. To begin with, we first need to fully understand what the customer is complaining about.

Each customer complaint is unique, but typically the personality of the complainer is repetitive, so it's easy to categorize it. That is not to say that we should assume the position of power and dismiss complaints from customers who are "not getting it", even if you win an argument; that customer is never going to do any business with you ever again. You can't put out a fire by throwing more gasoline at it.

Here are just a few customer personalities you may encounter:

If you have ever have had to deal with a customer complaint before, you will know that these are very frequent personality types, so getting accustomed to them doesn't take very long.

You have to have some kind of empathy skills if you wish to work in customer service, as customers can, at times, be relentless and spiteful in ways that will make the flowers in your office decay faster than you can blink.

Whether it is on the phone, or through email, whenever you encounter a customer spitting flames all over the place, take a deep breath and let it go. Don't allow all that anger and frustration to distract you. Let the customer say everything they have to say, allow the complaint to unfold until this person no longer has anything else to say (read: complain about) and understand that they're only trying to get help.

Also - don't take customer complaints personally. Just because they're unhappy with a particular feature or aspect of your product, doesn't mean you've done something wrong. As you are digesting what the customer is trying to complain about, simply recollect yourself and try to decipher what you can do to help the customer.

If a customer comes in 'hot', it's always a good idea to start with a friendly salutation. Sometimes a simple, "Hello!" can help drop a customer out of the red zone. It gives the customer a sense of being listened to, and in many cases that's all you need to get things back on the right track.

But the questions and answers process can be a bumpy ride, so take into consideration the following tips:

You should at this point have full control over the situation (complaint) and the experience gained from just a few of these types of situations is going to be extremely rewarding. And once the complaint has been solved, there's only one thing left to do.

Despite the channel of communication the customer used to reach you, make sure to do a follow up a few days -- one or two -- after the initial complaint.

It will help to clear the air and the memory of that particular incident, and it's generally considered good practice to take good care of your customers. Besides, there are countless benefits to maintaining a good customer experience.

You could send out an email such as:

Hope all is well.

Please let me know if you're still experiencing problems with [the problem]. I'm more than happy to help you out if you're still having troubles.

Let me know if you have any other questions, I'm here to help. Have a great day!

You can adjust the email to reflect your own feelings and style of writing, but make sure that your customers feel valued and understood at all levels possible. Express your gratitude to the customer for being understanding and receptive of your helping hands.

Being grateful will not make your budget shrink, but it will help it grow -- happy customers means more sales to take care of.

October is for Onboarding -- what's the one tip you'd offer new operators for dealing with unhappy customers?|||

Alex Ivanovs explains how customer support operators should talk to customers who aren