Promoting your startup is essential after you have developed your product, in order to find new customers and new leads. There are tons of methods to promote and market your startup. One of the ways to promote your startup is to submit your startup to various directories and blogs.

In order to decrease the effort you have to spend on submitting your project to directories and blogs, there are now projects doing the legwork for you. Using those services seems to be the easiest way to promote your startup. Of course, in exchange for a little money.

Two prominent ones are Startuplister and Promotehour. Both services seems to be valid and working. They both have nice designs and, most importantly, they both help you get submitted to dozens of places.

Startuplister offers 2 plans; basic and pro. Basic plan is priced at $99 and Pro plan is priced at $299.

With Basic plan, your startup gets to be submitted to 40+ startup directories (free to submit directories), press outlets and blogs. In addition to that, your startup is shared on their social networks 10 times over 2 months to around 10,000 followers.

With Pro plan, your startup is submitted to 80+ startup directories including premium ones, press outlets and blogs. Additionally, your startup is shared on their social networks 20 times over 4 months to around 10K followers.

Both plans also include free listing on Startuplister and promotion on their newsletter to around 3K subscribers.

Submissions plan costs $99 and your startup is submitted to 50 startup communities within 3 days.

Promotehour’s Growth plan, in addition to the submissions, provides a review on Startupguys.net and 3 tweets to 40K followers. Additionally, it includes you in newsletters with a total of 7K subscribers in problemSolved, Startupguys and Launchlister. This plan costs you $119.

They both seem to be close to each other in terms of offerings.

Promotehour seems to be a little bit more affordable than Startuplister in terms of submission price but if you are willing to spend more, Startuplister’s Pro plan seems to be the better choice as it also submits to some premium places.

So, it all depends on your budget and, to be honest, it is a little hard to choose one over the other. However, they both can help you save some time and get a good amount of exposure and traffic to your startup. What do you think?

Please share your experience with either of them or any similar service with us in the comment section. We would very love to hear it.|||

Promoting your startup is essential after you have developed your product, in order to find new customers and new leads. There are tons of methods to promote and market your startup. One of the ways…