The Serverless Framework – Build applications comprised of microservices that run in response to events, auto-scale for you, and only charge you when they run. This lowers the total cost of maintaining your apps, enabling you to build more logic, faster.

The Framework uses new event-driven compute services, like AWS Lambda, Google CloudFunctions, and more. It's a command-line tool, providing scaffolding, workflow automation and best practices for developing and deploying your serverless architecture. It's also completely extensible via plugins.

Serverless is an MIT open-source project, actively maintained by a full-time, venture-backed team.

Watch the video guide here or follow the steps below to create and deploy your first serverless microservice in minutes.

You can create a new service or install existing services.

Use this when you have made changes to your Functions, Events or Resources in or you simply want to deploy all changes within your Service at the same time.

Use this to quickly upload and overwrite your AWS Lambda code on AWS, allowing you to develop faster.

Invokes an AWS Lambda Function on AWS and returns logs.

Open up a separate tab in your console and stream all logs for a specific Function using this command.

Removes all Functions, Events and Resources from your AWS account.

This is a convenience method to install a pre-made Serverless Service locally by downloading the Github repo and unzipping it. Services are listed below.

Check out the Serverless Framework Guide for more information.

The following are services you can instantly install and use by running

Note: the command will only work on V1.0 or later.

Use these plugins to extend or overwrite the Framework's functionality.

We love our contributors! Please read our Contributing Document to learn how you can start working on the Framework yourself.

Check out our exp/beginner, exp/intermediate or exp/expert labels to find issues we want to move forward on with your help.

These consultants use the Serverless Framework and can help you build your serverless projects.

You can find projects and plugins relating to version 0.5 here. Note that these are not compatible with v1.0 but we are working diligently on updating them. Guide on building v1.0 plugins.

You can read the v0.5.x documentation at readme.io.|||

Serverless Framework – Build web, mobile and IoT applications with serverless architectures using AWS Lambda, Azure Functions, Google CloudFunctions & more! –