When building your software product in outsourcing model you are dependent on how the team will realize your goals, intentions and processes. For some time you will be very close with them,  like two hands forming new things. Therefore, this article will help you to select the proper team.

The chart below shows the correlation among technology, requirements, and people building a software product. Based on their nature, software projects are complex, rarely complicated. But if a good team is found, ‘complex’ might become ‘complicated’, because most of the times technology is not certain, requirements are not certain, and people are changing. And a good team means a permanent one.

They’ve had the time to develop communication patterns. They can provide reasonable increment every single time, in every single Sprint. This can lower the ‘chaos factor’ and a complex software project suddenly becomes just complicated. A great team can build the software from the bottom up.

5. Tuckman’s stages development model shows the characteristics of an effective team. In the ‘forming’ stage, team members get to know each other. In the ‘performing’ stage, everything is right in the place. If your team is to be formed for the project, you have to be aware that these stages will affect your project and the velocity of development of your Development Team. A properly formed team becomes a High Performing Team and can be 100% more productive than a Working Group (Forming Team). And as Boston Consulting Group claims:

6. What percentage of developers have an engineer degree? How many of them can speak English and/or any other popular language? Statistically, developers with higher education and languages are more mature and disciplined, they can bring the software to the end. On the other hand, what are the team members software development years of experience? A reasonable median might be 3 to 6 years.

7. Do developers run in the same cultural circles as the Partner? Laughing at the same jokes, understanding the same context and background brings people closer. More importantly, the same context helps developers understand the Partners’ business .

8. Price. Lower prices don’t mean bad quality, it’s just the geographic, cultural, and economic reality. However, unexpectedly good prices often mean a ‘too-good-to-be-true’ situation and contract. And as a result – the lower quality of the product itself.

This article is a part of our eBook: How To Outsource Scrum Projects.|||

In outsourcing model you are dependent on how the team will realize your goals. I will give you some tips to choose right development team