As a Canberra cop, Rod Anderson rises most days to fret about traffic crashes in the ACT. On Fridays, he'll leaven the weekly mix by meeting a bunch of mates for coffee and a natter. But before they were done on a winter morning last year, Anderson was headed to the other side of the globe to investigate something bigger – an aviation crash.

July: it was cold; 5.30am: it was dark. The venue for the catch-up was the Chisholm Cafe & Patisserie, run by a mate of Anderson's, and the breakfast joshing was easygoing: family plans for the coming weekend and a post-mortem on a birthday bash the previous weekend for Anderson's 18-year-old son. But all that came to a jarring halt because the cafe's owner had been keeping an ear on the radio, and told his mate from the Australian Federal Police about a breaking news story. While Australia was sleeping, a Malaysia Airlines plane flying through Ukrainian airspace had crashed. Lots dead, not sure about any Australians.

Anderson had not finished his coffee when his phone rang. The caller was the AFP's chief forensic scientist and national disaster victim identification (DVI) commander Dr Simon Walsh, and Anderson grasped very quickly that he needed to pack a bag. He'd be going to Ukraine, another disaster destination for the officer who had been at the 1997 Thredbo landslide, a couple of air crashes, the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami and Victoria's 2009 Black Saturday bushfires.

When Anderson, as officer in charge of traffic operations, was not investigating fatal car smashes around Canberra, he was Walsh's ACT counterpart in essential DVI business. They took turns heading to the frontline when Australians were in trouble.

Walsh was still in bed when he got the first word – a text about 5.30am – of the crash of Malaysia Airlines flight MH-17. Then he received calls from a colleague who was about to board an early flight at Canberra Airport, but instead was glued to a transit lounge TV relaying the latest news. Activating Anderson was part of a well-practised drill, in which Walsh had to prioritise calls and marshal resources. The flight had originated in Amsterdam, so he liaised with his Dutch counterparts. He needed eyes and ears on the ground, so the AFP's liaison officer stationed in Belgrade, the Serbian capital, was dispatched to Kiev, the Ukraine capital.

Usually when the phone rang in the middle of the night, Walsh quickly moved to another room so his wife could sleep as he talked shop. But here he was, sitting bolt upright in bed, trying to absorb detail after detail of an unfolding catastrophe: a missile fired, hundreds dead, 25 or more thought to be Australian. It didn't stop – a succession of calls with information so graphic that the 43-year-old recalls responding in technical terms: "F..., holy shit, you're kidding me."

More a dumb mistake in war, the strike on MH-17 did not have the premeditated evil of the 9/11 attacks or the Bali bombing. Walsh, Anderson and dozens of their AFP colleagues were about to be absorbed into a unique disaster investigation. It unfolded at the forbidding intersection of a civilian air crash and a hot separatist war, in a corner of the globe where Moscow and the West were spitting at each other. There could be no sustained forensic examination of the crash site; the remains of the victims would have to be airlifted and much of the wreckage trucked by road to the Netherlands, more than half a continent away, to see what secrets they might reveal.

This Boeing 777 was a phenomenal construct: a machine hurtling through the ether with hundreds inside, kicking back as though at home – eating and drinking; a book, a film, a game. Snoozing at 33,000 feet. Two huge Rolls-Royce engines holding it up there: 63 metres long and almost the same in its wingspan; a staggering 300-tonne weight cruising at close to 1000 km/h. But what makes a jet aircraft amazing makes it fragile, too. A pressurised cabin that rips apart if pierced. Which is what happened at 4.20pm, local time, on July 17, 2014.

MH-17 came down in a sprawling rural triangle, which suggests that the aircraft broke up in the air, with the cockpit section being first to break off as the rest of the aircraft careened eastward, towards the Russian border. Its passengers and cargo tumbled into fields of sunflowers and barley. At a road junction on the edge of a town called Hrabove, a big section of the wreckage landed spectacularly and explosively. The engines and the wings, which were filled with aviation fuel, ignited on impact, creating an inferno that reduced much of the Boeing 777's mid-section to ash and molten metal.

Locals were startled when human remains crashed into their homes and gardens. "There was a howling noise, then I heard a roar and she landed in the kitchen," 65-year-old Irina Tipunova said of a woman's naked body that fell through her roof.

The Dutch Safety Board will release a report on the cause of the crash next week, which is sure to be controversial amid a swirl of conspiracy theories and geopolitical grandstanding. An interim report, released in September 2014, stopped short of apportioning blame or of naming any weapon that might have targeted MH-17, but it embraced a widely held view that the aircraft had been targeted by a Russian-made Buk surface-to-air missile.

It said the aircraft had crashed "as a result of structural damage caused by a large number of high-energy objects that penetrated the aircraft from the outside", which is consistent with the Buk, a missile designed to explode before impact, releasing thousands of metal fragments intended to shred parts of its airborne target. Only a couple of months ago, Dutch prosecutors conducting a parallel criminal investigation upped the ante, claiming to have found "seven considerable fragments of some size" at the crash site, which they said might be parts of a Buk missile system.

Rod Anderson was bound for the Netherlands when news emerged that rebels who controlled the crash site had ordered the victims' remains to be packed into a refrigerated train. So he was rerouted to Kharkiv, in north-east Ukraine, to help receive a ghastly, if precious, cargo. When that was done, Anderson was set to return to the Netherlands. Instead, he received a new assignment: the Dutch, who lost 193 citizens in the disaster, wanted Australia to lead a multinational search party that was assembling at Donetsk, a war-strapped city near the crash site.

Anderson was one of a small group of investigators who actually got to walk around the MH-17 crash site. But none of them saw it at its worst: mangled, bloodied bodies strewn in the fields, some naked, some still strapped into their seats; fires raging; passenger's baggage scattered on a landscape in which the sunflowers seemed to turn their heads in shame. Locals had marked some of the bodies with a long stick, from which a swatch of white cloth fluttered. Other remains were covered with plastic, held down by stones or globs of earth.

"We'd be up till 2am and 3am waiting for the rebel leaders to agree to what we could do the next day," recalls Anderson, who first put foot on the site seven long days after the crash. "Each day we were allowed to go to just one nominated area and we had to leave by 4pm." Pointing to a wall map of the debris field, on which confetti-like yellow dots in varying concentrations mark the spread of the wreckage, he explains the enormity of it all. "This was a big area – we'd need weeks, a month. Each grid on the map is one kilometre wide, one kilometre long – 45 of those squares have dots."

There were days when the search party had the blessing of the rebel leadership, but it was thwarted in getting to the crash site by the intensity of the conflict between rebel fighters and Ukrainian government forces. "We were being told we couldn't go beyond those trees because 'We've got a sniper over there', " Anderson notes. "And when a separatist, smelling of alcohol and waving an AK-47 from his clapped-out Hyundai, tells me not to go somewhere, I'm not going there."

When they could get to the crash site, Anderson was absorbed in collecting human remains. But one day, near the aircraft's tail section, he was stopped in his tracks by a mess of dead animals: MH-17's live cargo. "There was this pile of baggage and cargo," he says. "Then I saw the dogs. We were there for the human victims, but this brought home that it was not just people. It was everything about life; the victims lived lives, they had pets."

The Australian-Dutch-Malaysian search parties had constructive access to the crash site for a maximum of 18 hours between August 1 and August 5. Faced with the war-induced time constraint, AFP search strategist commander Mark Harrison devised what his colleagues said was a first in DVI. Instead of a conventional grid-based search, with officers walking straight lines, Harrison adapted the go-to-it principles of geocaching: a sport blending orienteering and treasure-hunting in which small containers given a GPS reference are hidden and recovered by contestants. "Using GPS satellite imagery to pinpoint the location of debris and map prospective search locations," Anderson explains, "we could quickly go to where the debris was when we got to the crash site."

Because he had dealt with the contents of the train of the dead in Kharkiv, Anderson figured as many as 50 to 60 bodies were still missing, about half what the Dutch had estimated. He made allowances. "You expect confusion with fragmentation and co-mingling of remains in the body bags." But, after Anderson and his colleagues spoke to the rebels and local emergency services about the thoroughness of the first search in the immediate aftermath of the crash, the urgency went out of demands for a fully-fledged foreign search for bodies still believed to be missing. Anderson concluded: "Now I'd have to say there were thousands of body parts and, as it turned out, most were on the train."

The stamps in the passports of Australia's DVI force reveal them as regulars at the gates of hell. Collectively, they've turned out for pretty well every criminal or natural disaster you might recall, from the first Bali bombing in 2002 to the Christchurch earthquake in 2011. Essentially it's a part-time effort, comprising experts and volunteers who, like Anderson and Walsh, tend to their AFP day jobs between disasters. Danielle Woodward is another. An avid canoeist – she bagged silver at the Barcelona Olympics in 1992 – she's been a federal cop for 29 years. When Woodward is not chasing human traffickers, she volunteers as one of the AFP's 40 FILOs – family investigation liaison officers.

The FILOs' duties in a DVI operation are to serve as a conduit. Assigned to individual victim families, they are charged with getting accurate information to them, hopefully before they read or see a version of it in the news; to help collect information from them that would help in identifying the victims; and to see that family wishes are honoured on how the family is to be notified as each piece of a loved one is identified. Then there is the matter of how the remains are to be repatriated, if indeed the families want the return of all the remains.

It becomes a delicate dance. The FILOs shield victim families from horrific detail as much as the relatives want to be. At the same time, they shield members of the DVI team from the emotional drama of direct contact with family members and friends – as happened in the aftermath of the 2002 Bali bombing when, for a time, family and friends were able to wander through a makeshift morgue. "It's better for the forensic teams not to deal with the families," Woodward observes. "It's easier for them to remain in their clinical space."

The MH-17 DVI operation became so big that Woodward was dispatched to the Netherlands to serve as a super FILO, gathering information on multiple victims, which she relayed to her FILO colleagues in Australia for dissemination to the individual families with whom they liaised. "In Australia I'd have to liaise with one family; in The Hague I was acting for them all," she explains. "I still have pictures of all the Australian victims in my cell phone and a sheet of paper with all their names. As each was identified, I'd put a little Australian flag by their name."

Woodward was based in the Dutch capital but she drove 85 kilometres to Hilversum for each meeting of what was called the MH-17 Identification Board, a legally supervised panel of experts that ratified each identification – body by body, body part by body part. "They wouldn't let me into the meetings, so I'd sit outside, fingers crossed. They started at 11am, which made it 7pm in Canberra. But I knew all the FILOs back home were waiting for news, especially for the names of the kids, to get it to the families."

Between the Ukrainian city of Kharkiv and the Dutch town of Hilversum, it was as though a switch had been flipped. Instead of the horror of the train of the dead, with its appalling odour and lethal gases, the victims' remains were received into state-of-the-art laboratory conditions at the Korporal van Oudheusden army barracks, purpose-built for the MH-17 operation in a disused World War II aircraft hangar on the outskirts of the sleepy Dutch town.

Here, there was a production line aspect to the DVI process, five lanes in which bodies and remains went from table to table in a space the size of a football field. It was never quiet but neither was it rowdy – more a hum – with as many as 300 specialists and support staff, police and military working the lines. In a first for many, they had to wear respiratory masks to guard against lethal formalin, a preserving fluid in which Ukrainian rescue workers had doused the bodies.

Each line was run by a national team. Associate professor David Ranson, a forensic pathologist and deputy director of the Victorian Institute of Forensic Medicine who also was in the Australian team, likened each line to conveyor belts. He said the German, Dutch, Australian and British teams all worked on "largely complete bodies and remains with hands," and a Malaysian-Indonesian team was assigned to a "body parts line". There were four stations on each line: fingerprinting; clothing, marks, scars, tattoos and prostheses; DNA sampling; and dental.

AFP Detective sergeant John Giles was stationed at the head of the Australian line. "Looking for tattoos and body piercings was my job," he says. "The work was relentless but everyone wanted to be the last to leave. We'd work all day in the mortuary, grab a quick bite and then unload another convoy of hearses. To see so many coffins coming in was unimaginable."

There are two phases in the DVI process: PM and AM, or post-mortem and ante-mortem. While the PM operation geared up at Hilversum, a parallel AM process was underway in Australia and around the world, as police teams visited the homes and families of victims. In the course of those visits they collected identifying information that would be matched against the material collected from the remains at Hilversum.

"It's not quite as simple as a family member handing over what might have been the victim's toothbrush or razor," says Simon Walsh, Australia's DVI commander. He describes a painstaking process that belies the whirlwind procedure that CSI and other TV dramas suggest. In one case, a razor collected in Australia with family assurances that only the MH-17 victim had used it produced three different DNA profiles. It turned out that two of the victim's sons had absent-mindedly used the razor in the days after the crash, Walsh says.

As results of the DNA analysis of the smaller body parts came through, something wasn't right. Data matches that initially seemed perfect no longer made sense. "It was clear we'd have to re-examine these parts more closely," says Walsh. "It became apparent that some of these were co-mingled remains that belonged to more than one person." Body parts can get co- mingled in transport or when the burnt remains of different victims are compressed by the impact of the crash. Walsh adds: "There were hundreds of re- examinations, some of which I believe were Australians."

Of the 298 victims, about 160 were recovered as whole or "almost whole" bodies. Less certain is the number of victims who were identified on the basis of a single or several small fragments. In the wake of 9/11, almost 200 separate fragments ultimately were identified to be parts of one person.

Detective superintendent Andrew Donoghoe, now in his second rotation as head of the AFP team in The Hague, explains a grim DVI reality but refuses to say if it applied to any of the Australian victims: "Even with a formal identification, there are a few families who will receive no remains. These are cases in which the high-speed fall or the fire's intense heat left little to recover, and when there was only a little tissue to work on, the ID process is destructive."

The rate at which the different parts of individual passengers were identified drove one of the most sensitive aspects of the FILOs' work – explaining to families that a relative might not be coming home in one piece. Predicting how families will react to this – and its part in their grieving process – is challenging.

"It's a difficult decision for them," reflects Donoghoe, who has done a series of face-to-face Q&A sessions with victim families in Melbourne and Sydney. "Some wanted to get on with their grieving and they told us that once they had been informed of an initial positive identification, they didn't want to be told of the subsequent identification of more parts – and those families gave the government authority to deal with those later remains."

All the MH-17 victims from Australia have been identified but that does not mean all of the remains that might be Australian have been recovered. Donoghoe acknowledges that body parts may still turn up belonging to the Australians already identified.

When the DVI workers talk about the children who died in the crash, their voices drop and they tense up. Recalling a strange quietness descending on the Hilversum mortuary one afternoon, the Australian detective John Giles wondered what was happening: "I asked why and a Dutch colleague told me the remains of a child had just been taken from one of the coffins. After a moment like that, all you could do was dust yourself off and do what you had to do."

Some of the Australian cases touched members of the DVI team more deeply than others. There were specific mentions of the three Maslin children from Perth, who were being shepherded home from a European holiday by their grandfather. Dr Sarah Benson, who succeeded Walsh as DVI commander on this operation, recalls that she had had to walk away from a computer terminal in the investigation's Kiev office because its screen was filled with an image of a child victim from MH-17 – the same age as one of the two tots she had left behind in Canberra.

In the Netherlands, a distressed Silene Fredriksz, whose son Bryce perished along with his girlfriend Daisy Oehlers, complained she had been misinformed on the extent of the remains of the couple that had been recovered. When the authorities had handed over the remains, she had discovered they were significantly bigger than she had been led to believe only because she had insisted on switching them to a coffin of her choice.

None of the Australian victim families has aired such complaints, and Simon Walsh returned to Australia declaring the operation a seamless example of how a potential mishmash of culture and language, and legal, scientific and national sensibilities, became a "blue ribbon" success. Meanwhile, Donoghoe is circumspect on what constitutes success. "We still have nothing for two of the Dutch victims," he says.

Nonetheless, August 8, 2015, was a sad but satisfying day for the Australians at Hilversum. Donoghoe rounded up the team as the remains of the 41st Australian to be identified were prepared for repatriation. "It was the end of our DVI operation," he says. "We had a moment's silence, then walked in formation with the vehicle as it carried the remains from the mortuary. It left me thinking about how fleeting our grasp on life is."|||

With a report due next week into the cause of the MH-17 disaster, Paul McGeough looks at how an Australian forensic team set about identifying the bodies - and ...