Only the best get in. According to Sam Altman Y-Combinator has an acceptance rate somewhere around 3%. For comparison MIT’s Admission Statistics show it accepts around 8% of undergraduate applicants. Exact selection criteria is somewhat of a secret sauce and varies from fund to fund but a consensus could be drawn that founders should be driven, team-oriented, visionaries [proudly self-described hustlers] with some level of traction.

In the example of top accelerators, more than $100,000 worth of capital, office space and technology infrastructure.

In return accelerators recieve between 5% and 10% in the form direct equity or convertible notes in the company, sometimes with terms to purchase additional equity at a later date.

Would it surprise you to learn that the largest division within the company, by headcount, is Technology (ie. programmers)? Between a third and quarter of the workforce, depending on the health of the market and whether you count with one or both hands. According to their 2014 annual report, almost 800 million dollars is spent annually just on communication and technology expenses (not including compensation).

And there’s the secret proprietary programing language and risk modeling system. And the global infrastructure (68 data centers, 45,000 servers, 59,000 databases). And the custom modular data center designs. Even GS CEO Lloyd Blankfein has called it a “technology firm”.

The company actually has a special engineering career track for top coders that don’t want to follow the traditional management path, maybe because programmers don’t make good managers.

Right, so we have this multi-national company which, by several objective measures, has a top engineering pedigree and faces incredibly interesting technology problems of distributed computing, scale and performance. It processes and retains petabytes of value and risk metrics across both public and private markets. This means a lot of industry and technology knowledge.

Of course, Goldman’s day job is client facing. And by clients, I mean wealthy individuals, corporations, governments, other investment institutions and funds. What’s another word for that? Oh right, investors. Few companies have access to that breadth and depth of an investor pool. There are also the well publicized ex-GS alumni in politics and media. They provide credibility & access to the right people.

And they aren’t new to investing in technology startups, albeit at a later stage than many accelerators, and certainly incubators. According to Katrina Brooker in her article for Bloomberg Markets “Goldman in Ventureland” and Goldman Sach’s profile on the Angel investor website AngelList the firm seems to already be quite active in technology startup investing and limited mentorship and has particpated in over 100 fund-raising rounds in companies as prolific as Uber, Facebook and Square. This is on par with many top Silicon Valley venture firms. They are selective, and seem to be good at it.

I’m going to stroll right past point 4 about resources and money...

I’m singling out GS because I know them best. The truth is this could easily be written about any large successful financial institution. In fact, as much as I wish I could take full credit for this idea, in researching this post, I found many companies, including banks, who have established these kinds of company sponsored accelerators.

These accelerators provide founders and their early-stage startups with mentorship through a vast internal and external network of industry and product leaders. They provide access to investors, either at demo-day or throughout the program. They provide infrastructure in the form of office space (sometimes inside the companies themselves), technology, production lines, design teams and many provide funding as well.

What does the sponsoring company get? Besides the equity stake, of course, Coca-Cola, through it’s accelerator Coca-Cola Founders, says on its website it “gets early access to new, fast-growing markets and proven growth opportunities for our business”. They also get first crack at the next round of investment and build a positive relationship within the startup founder community. In a free market, business mantra is “innovate or die” but many established corporations are either too large, too complex or too regulated to afford to fund massive business experiments. This allows them to test innovations with limited investment and risk.

To date these accelerators have followed the traditional model of accepting applications from young outside companies. But after speaking with some former colleagues about this idea, a proposal was made:

Taking Goldman Sachs as an example again, imagine an employee who comes up with an idea for a FinTech (financial technology) innovation. He or she could propose it to their superiors where the merits would be debated but likely decided it’s either too costly or too risky to implement. The idea could also stray too far from the core business model. Where does that leave the inquisitive young worker bee? They could try to fight the urge to run with the idea and continue in their current role or they resign and venture off on their own. Both outcomes leave the company at somewhat of a loss. Off the top of my head I personally know of several GS colleagues who did exactly that: the popular OpenFolio; the acquired Junction Investments, and the new Frank.

But if an incubator program was available to internal employees to flesh out these ideas it could provide an effective outlet for staff that would have otherwise left, keep innovation from walking out the door, and providing future managers the harsh yet valuable entrepreneurial experience of trying to get a small company off the ground. It could be offered as an incentive to top performers or in lieu of the mythical bonus or a temporary salary reduction. Speaking specifically as a technologist, it would give the employee a greater exposure to programming techniques and languages that may not yet be fully accepted at the larger company. Senior programmers often get pigeon-holed into a narrow role which may lead to “grass is greener” feelings about other jobs or opportunities.|||

Let’s get this out of the way. I spent 8 turbulent years at my former Wall Street employer. A lifetime ago. I have nothing but fond memories of the friends with whom I worked and the work we did. A…