Researchers claim they have come up with an algorithm that can predict the sexual orientation of males with up to 70% accuracy.

The team behind the research, presented at the American Society of Human Genetics annual meeting in Baltimore on Thursday, believes they have come up with the first example of a predictive model for sexual orientation based on a molecular marker.

Scientists have long argued that genetic factors partly explain the differences in sexuality between people, and this algorithm is derived using the modification of the genetic information contained in DNA.

However, there was a sceptical response from many experts. Among the reservations expressed were that the findings, based on a study of 47 pairs of twins, and published only in abstract form – so yet to be peer-reviewed – might only point to an association rather than a predictive model and would also need replicating to be of significance.

The study is based on epigenetics, essentially additional information layered on top of the sequence of letters (strings of molecules called A, C, G and T) that makes up DNA.



The researchers examined patterns of DNA methylation – a molecular modification to DNA that affects when and how strongly a gene is expressed – across the genome in pairs of identical male twins. While identical twins have exactly the same genetic sequence, environmental factors – which can range from smoking to prenatal exposure to testosterone – lead to differences in how their DNA is methylated.

They looked at 37 pairs of twins in which one twin was homosexual and the other was heterosexual, and 10 pairs in which both twins were homosexual, examining hundreds of thousands of data points.

By studying twins, the researchers claim they could control for genetic differences and tease out the effect of methylation. They devised a machine learning algorithm which found that methylation patterns in nine small regions, scattered across the genome, could be used to predict study participants’ sexual orientation with 70% accuracy.

Tuck Ngun, first author on the study and a postdoctoral researcher at the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, said: “Previous studies had identified broader regions of chromosomes that were involved in sexual orientation, but we were able to define these areas down to the base pair level with our approach. Sexual attraction is such a fundamental part of life, but it’s not something we know a lot about at the genetic and molecular level. I hope that this research helps us understand ourselves better and why we are the way we are.

“The next steps are to explore how genetics and environmental factors interact to produce variations in sexual orientations over the life course.”



Among those who urged caution was Gil McVean, professor of statistical genetics at Oxford University. “The key issue here is that the authors have searched through the entire genome to identify some difference between discordant twins,” he said. “Given the number of tests, it is likely that some regions will show up as differentiated by chance. Without validation of the result in an independent data set, it is not really possible to know whether there is any substance in this claim.”

The researchers said they are currently testing the algorithm’s accuracy in a more general population of men.

Dr Qazi Rahman, of King’s College London and author of Born Gay: The Psychobiology of Sex Orientation, said: “This new study is not about a purely genetic link per se. What this suggests is that factors such as other important genes, or environmental factors, such as exposure to prenatal androgens, might affect brain development differently in twins who become straight or gay.”|||

New work is based on modification of genetic information in DNA but has also resulted in scepticism from some experts