SAN FRANCISCO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Thoma Bravo, a leading private equity investment firm, today announces the sale of Embarcadero Technologies, a leading provider of software solutions for application and database development, to Idera, Inc., an application and server management software provider. The exit represents the culmination of a long and successful partnership between Thoma Bravo and Embarcadero Technologies. The deal is expected to close in mid-October, subject to normal closing conditions and approvals.

Since Thoma Bravo’s acquisition, Embarcadero Technologies has built on its database development and application development tools with a number of acquisitions, including CodeGear from Borland Software, AnyDAC from DA-SOFT and Raize Components. Thoma Bravo supported management across all of Embarcadero Technologies’ functional groups to optimize operations, expand offerings into new markets and deliver consistent growth during the partnership.

“We’ve worked closely with Wayne and his executive team to drive substantial growth during our longstanding relationship, and it has led to Embarcadero’s established position as a leader in database and application development software,” said Orlando Bravo, a managing partner at Thoma Bravo. “Our partnership has been very valuable to our investors, and we’re excited to see Embarcadero continue on to its next stage of growth with Idera.”

“Embarcadero has matured a great deal since we began our relationship with Thoma Bravo,” said Wayne Williams, CEO of Embarcadero. “At the outset, our collaboration faced the challenges of the 2007-2008 crisis. The Thoma Bravo team showcased their faith in Embarcadero’s potential with a patient and deliberate plan to achieve organic growth in the face of difficult economic conditions. Our ability to navigate the global financial crisis, grow our business and have a very successful exit all serve as a testament to the strength of our organization and Thoma Bravo’s patient approach to investing.”

“Thoma Bravo made a commitment to further separate Embarcadero from its competitors in the database and application development space,” said Holden Spaht, a managing partner at Thoma Bravo. “Through acquisition and optimization we have achieved that; helping Embarcadero to add employees, grow into new markets, expand its customer base and position the company for long-term success going forward.”

“It was a pleasure to work with the leadership team to identify the operational efficiencies and transformative acquisitions that would help Embarcadero achieve its growth potential,” said Robert ‘Tre’ Sayle, a partner at Thoma Bravo. “We wish the entire team the best as they support Idera’s efforts to improve the health and performance of the world’s IT systems.”

Goodwin Procter LLP acted as legal advisor and Jefferies & Company, Inc. acted as financial advisor to Thoma Bravo. Kirkland & Ellis LLP and Horzepa Spiegel & Associates PC acted as legal advisors to Idera.

Thoma Bravo is a leading private equity investment firm building on a 30+ year history of providing equity and strategic support to experienced management teams and growing companies. The firm seeks to create value by collaborating with company management to improve business operations and provide capital to support growth initiatives. Thoma Bravo invests with a particular focus on application and infrastructure software and technology enabled services. The firm currently manages a series of private equity funds representing more than $8.5 billion of equity commitments. For more information, visit www.thomabravo.com.

Embarcadero Technologies, Inc. is a leading provider of award-winning tools for application developers and database professionals so they can design systems right, build them faster and run them better, regardless of their platform or programming language. Ninety of the Fortune 100 and an active community of more than three million users worldwide rely on Embarcadero products to increase productivity, reduce costs, simplify change management and compliance, and accelerate innovation. Founded in 1993, Embarcadero is headquartered in San Francisco, with offices located around the world. To learn more, please visit www.embarcadero.com.

IDERA is the market leader in Database-Intelligent Infrastructure Performance Management, empowering IT Ops professionals to monitor and manage data center environments with complete confidence. We know what clients want: uptime, data security and precise issue resolution. That’s why IDERA empowers IT Professionals to keep data centers up and running 24/7 with proactive notifications and updates. From broad dashboards to detailed drill-downs, we give IT a better view of their environment to enhance performance and resolve issues before they impact users. We put the power back into IT’s hands with the tools they need to optimize performance and ensure uptime. Manage your IT with confidence. Manage your IT with IDERA.|||

Thoma Bravo, a leading private equity investment firm, today announces the sale of Embarcadero Technologies to Idera, Inc.