Denver, CO – Oct. 6, 2015 (PRNewswire) For the seventh consecutive year, RE/MAX, LLC ranked as the leading real estate franchise in the 2015 Franchise Times Top 200. The annual survey includes franchisors from a variety of business sectors.

“We’ve seen great success because our business model is flexible enough to succeed in diverse business environments around the world,” said Chris Pflueger, CFE, Vice President, Business Development at RE/MAX, LLC. “Because RE/MAX holds enviable market share and attracts top producing agents, a franchise opens the door to many opportunities.”

RE/MAX is dedicated to constant improvement and keeping current with franchising innovations. In the last year, three RE/MAX, LLC leaders earned the Certified Franchise Executive (CFE) professional designation from the International Franchise Association (IFA). The very latest training provides a significant competitive edge to RE/MAX franchising efforts.

The 2015 Franchise Times Top 200 marks the 20th year producing one of the most respected rankings in franchising. The Top 200 is an annual ranking of the 200 largest franchise systems in the U.S.

In January, RE/MAX was the leading real estate franchise for the third consecutive year in another respected survey, Entrepreneur magazine’s Franchise 500, a position it has held for 12 of the last 16 years. In addition, RE/MAX was the only real estate franchise included among the 2014 50 Top Franchises for Minorities compiled by the World Franchising Network.

For information about RE/MAX franchising please visit www.remax-franchising.com.

About the RE/MAX Network:

 RE/MAX was founded in 1973 by Dave and Gail Liniger, with an innovative, entrepreneurial culture affording its agents and franchisees the flexibility to operate their businesses with great independence.

Over 100,000 agents provide RE/MAX a global reach of nearly 100 countries. When measured by residential transaction sides . . . Nobody sells more real estate than RE/MAX.

RE/MAX, LLC, one of the world’s leading franchisors of real estate brokerage services, is a subsidiary of RE/MAX Holdings, Inc. (NYSE: RMAX).

With a passion for the communities in which its agents live and work, RE/MAX is proud to have raised more than $150 million for Children’s Miracle Network Hospitals® and other charities.

For more information about RE/MAX, to search home listings or find an agent in your community, please visit www.remax.com.

For the latest news about RE/MAX, please visit www.remax.com/newsroom.|||

