For most  travellers, airports are usually viewed as sometimes boring and often stressful locations, that are necessary parts of a journey. There are many airports, however, where having time to kill isn’t such a bad thing. Places where you can catch a movie, take a swim, and even play a round of golf while waiting for your next flight. Airports with world-class shopping, art exhibitions and giant slides to take you back to your childhood.

In no particular order, here’s a look at the world’s best airports, ideal spots for your next long layover. If you have had an amazing experience in an airport, be sure to let me know in the comments!

Incheon Airport in South Korea is a one of the biggest, and cleanest, airports I have ever been to and is definitely one of the world’s best airports. With a whole array of activities to keep you busy including a golf course, a cinema and of course its world-famous indoor ice rink, you would be forgiven for never wanting to actually leave! If you are looking to get a few hours shut-eye before your flight, you can head to their ‘jimjilbang’ (the Korean word for a sauna or spa) and pay a minimal fee to get a soft mat, a blanket and a corner of their heated floor and cuddle up next to up to about 100 other weary passengers. You can also relax in their various hot tubs and have a power shower before you catch your early morning flight.

Another great feature within this airport is the laptop rental facility which will allow you to get work done while in the terminal along with free, and super fast, WiFi. (Korea has some of the fastest internet speeds in the world.)

Staying on the topic of luxury golf courses in airports, let me introduce you to the spectacular Hong Kong International Airport, home to a perfectly kept 9-hole golf course! I had a flying visit through here last May and am dying to go back again…to both Hong Kong AND the airport!

The airport itself plays host to a wide variety of unique amenities which include Hong Kong’s largest IMAX theatre, and the ‘Dream Come True Educational Park’, designed for children to experience real life working by role-playing in related uniform.

If you are looking to kill time within the airport itself, you will find a movie theatre, an arcade and many free Playstation stations for anyone to use!

If you’re making a stop over in this airport and have a few hours to burn then you’re in luck, because there is plenty to do at Athens International. For starters, there’s an authentic ancient museum called the Acropolis Museum with artefacts on display dating back to the Byzantium era.

The airport itself also consists of an ancient Greek design with elegant paintings and sculptures visible throughout the terminals to admire. It’s almost like getting a taste of Ancient Greece without ever leaving the terminal!

Next on the list is the enticing Samui Airport in Thailand which oozes tranquility and resembles that of a peaceful Buddhist temple. The open design allows for comfort and beautiful views of the surrounding island, known to be a top honeymoon destination and popular with travellers the world over.  Samui airport is an excellent spot to spend a few hours unwinding, relaxing and possibly meditating before your onward journey….just like the Samui island, you won’t want to leave!

A lot of long distance flights I take these days pass through Amsterdam and I’ve never had a complaint to date. One easy way to pass the time in any airport (for me anyway!) is reading a good book and Schiphol Airport has made this even easier for passengers with the introduction of an Airport Library. It’s the first permanent airport library in the world and has an extremely large selection of books to choose from. The airport has also has plenty of cosy spots to chill out and spend your layover in peace and quiet.|||

From airport libraries to museums and golf courses, here's a look at the world’s best airports, ideal spots for your next long layover!