I grew up in my career as an engineer. I hired and coached many engineers. I also helped run a recruiting marketplace (now acquired) that helped hundreds of companies hire engineers.

Finding good engineers isn’t hard. It seems hard, mainly because of the age old process used to recruit them. Engineers are actually way more approachable than most people think — if you use the right protocol and right language.

Engineers are also easy to get, if you present the opportunity well. They’re mission driven people who are excited about solving problems. They care about the product they work on, technology they build, people they work with, and culture of the company.

Most engineers don’t care about salaries and titles — they care about freedom, respect, and opportunities to solve meaningful problems. They can’t stand sloppy people and stupid interview questions. They can’t stand people managers who don’t understand technology or product.

I don’t think it would be an exaggeration to say that the inhuman recruiting process adversely turns off engineers more than anyone else. Here’s five simple tips that can significantly improve your chances:

The fundamental problem with recruiting is most job seekers don’t read job descriptions carefully and most recruiters don’t read resumes carefully. It’s probably one of the most expensive chicken and egg problems ever created, but in my mind, the root cause is: vague job descriptions.

Abstract statements like “You enjoy solving complex technical problems”, “You have a high attention to detail”, and “You believe in constantly learning new technologies” that don’t really state what the job is really about and what the expectations are are the number one reason why 90% of job applicants are unqualified.

One that clearly explains what your stack is, how clean it is (and why you care about it), what kind of problems they can expect to solve, what specifically they will do in the first 3, 6, 9 months and beyond; and what they will get out of it — growth, relationships, upside.

Engineers care about what environment they’ll work on, who they work with, what type of projects they’ll get to do, and how challenging they are.

A lot of engineers don’t have good LinkedIn profiles. The best engineers I know have profiles that aren’t searchable. Personally when I see engineering resumes that try to oversell themselves with too many buzz words, I almost always ignore them. So LinkedIn is not the only place to find good engineers.

You can search for users by language, repository, location, and more; and the search results show email addresses.

AngelList is also a great, free tool to attract engineers. Lots of startups I know found some great engineers there. Indeed Resume Search is great as well — you can reach out to candidates for $1 per message (after a few free messages).

HackerNews runs a “Who’s hiring” thread first day of every month. It’s free to post, and can yield great candidates.

An average SF engineer gets 5–6 recruiter emails per week. Make that 25–30 if they work for a hot company. The average response rates for cold recruiter emails is less than 3%.

Most recruiter emails have standard script that goes like:

In Silicon Valley who isn’t hot? who isn’t disrupting?

If this is the first time a candidate heard about your company, chances are they’ll not believe anything you say. And, if they’re not looking (like most engineers), they’ll simply ignore “me too” emails.

I’ve seen 10x better response rates with that one simple change. In the message, rather than talking about the job, send a simple “hey, let’s get acquainted” type message:

80% of the time I get a “sure”. Being on both sides, 80% of the time I respond as well, even if I’m not looking.

Everyone wants the “best of the best” — small, sought after pool of talent that is attractive. It’s easy to spot them, but hard to get them. Sometimes I’m blown away by the kind of offers companies make to get them, without a strong reason. The reality is: unless you have strong signals to be able to attract, grow, and retain them, going after them is not worth it.

Every hiring manager I’ve seen has a “bar” for candidates they want to hire. It’s not easy for them to come out of that comfort zone.

The best of the rest. They don’t have publicly attractive signals, but are very talented. Given the right opportunities, they can become better than the best of the best. They’re not so easy to spot — you have to get out of your comfort zone and look for other signals.

In my experience, these are the people that do wonders.

Medium has proven that creative content can get an audience with zero marketing.

It’s fairly easy to raid Quora for inspiring engineering answers, create a blog post around it, publish it on Medium, get it on HackerNews front page, and get lots of engineers to see it. Add a creative “join us” at the bottom and you’ll likely get a lot of leads if the post takes off.|||

I grew up in my career as an engineer. I hired and coached many engineers. I also helped run a recruiting marketplace (now acquired) that helped hundreds of companies hire engineers. Finding good…