3nder is a dating app that focuses on people that are looking to find multiple partners for a threesome. It is designed to allow singles to find couples looking for that extra person to spice up their love life, couples to find a third wheel (one they actually want), or for random singles to hookup in a no-strings 3-way melee. It is designed to offer complete privacy to its members, sort of like Ashley Madison, but without the data breaches and the stigma of cheating – instead you are looking for a +1 to a rather exclusive party. It uses Facebook login to avoid the scammers, but the app does not share anything through social media.

Dimo Trifonov, originally from Bulgaria, is currently based out of London, UK and is the founder of 3nder, an app designed to make discreet hookups for threesomes easier. 3nder was initially created as part of a hackathon and was basically born overnight by a team of four, led by Dimo. The idea was inspired by Ana Kirova and an undisclosed relationship partner because of a fantasy of having a threesome.

Ana, upon considering the matter further, was convinced that there should not be any more of a stigma to wanting a threesome than there should be towards wanting to visit New Zealand. A technological solution towards discreet hookups seemed like an excellent idea.

Dimo is a designer and entrepreneur and has long been interested in helping form social connections through technology. He co-founded a previous application, Pokke, an app designed to help newcomers to a given city find people of similar interests. When the idea of a dating app like Tinder, but for discreet, multiple-partner hookups came up, it was a natural fit.

Dimo thought that society should evolve and start accepting couples in open relationships and humans who don’t identify themselves as straight or gay. 3nder is on a mission to open up our society and embrace the kinky side in each one of us. The app offers a discreet, simple way to make connections with like-minded individuals or couples, much like the dating app the name is inspired by, Tinder. In this sense, it follows suit after Grindr, which took the conventional dating app concept and geared it towards gay, bi, or curious men.

A look at the 3nder Twitter feed shows an interest in differentiating itself from competitor sites like Adult Friend Finder or Ashley Madison by suggesting that couples share rather than cheat, and chastising Tinder for banning transgender members, insinuating that their app, while focused towards threesomes, is more inclusive and more socially progressive than some of their competitors.

As the 3nder team prepared to launch their app, they realized that they needed a major overhaul as they neared the latter half of the project. In particular, the initial back-end was not able to scale as needed in order to accommodate a large number of potential users.

Because of the small size of their team, testing the app was primarily a manual process. This allowed for intimate knowledge of the app’s flow and conceptual identity, but made testing on multiple devices or repeated regression tests a chore.

Besides manual testing, the team relied on Crashlytics, which is a great way to get crash reports when your app is in the field and already being used. But, as Dimo said:

Dimo was initially skeptical about introducing automation at this stage. However, testmunk convinced him it was worth trying something new. The testmunk team previously worked on consumer apps, so we understand the pressure on small startups to provide fast iterations and be agile. As Dimo outlined:

Upon running automated testing of the 3nder app, the team was surprised to learn that the core functionality was not working as expected. More surprising was that Crashlytics (Fabric) did not report the same error. The error discovered was essential to the user’s experience: the ability to seek out nearby individuals with the same application and view their profiles. As you can see in the image and video below, the test run failed at the point of displaying the image of a matching profile.

By receiving an image of each step of their app’s process, 3nder had nearly instant visual confirmation of the issue. This feature has also helped numerous companies discover UX issues that are less obvious, such as keyboard menus that obscure the button or icon.

One of the most-used features in our platform is the ability to access detailed logs whenever an issue is found, allowing developers to track and troubleshoot the issue. This is invaluable when troubleshooting such problems:

From the above logs, we can determine that the issue is due to a problem retrieving the current user ID, causing an exception. Through the use of both a visual-interface confirmation of an issue and quick access to error logs, 3nder was able to speed up testing through automation and diagnose and fix issues more quickly. In this case, it was a matter of improving how the app handles exceptions in that part of the code.

Automated testing is not just for regression testing and finding exceptions and crashes, it can also be very helpful in finding user interface issues. Because our test steps are written in Calabash, an intuitive, human-readable format, UI and UX issues can be modeled relatively easily.

One such UI issue discovered via Testmunk was a malfunctioning page indicator during the tutorial, which in turn prevented people from getting through the tutorial.

Another error discovered included an alert that appeared on the Profile Details page. The issue would occur if the user selected the Imaginary Name field and then skipped to the About Me section. In a sense the alert did belong and appear when it should, however, it failed to disappear once the Imaginary Name field was filled in. The only way to get rid of the alert was to go back to previous screen and open Profile Details again. This would have quickly grated on customer nerves.

Because of Testmunk’s intuitive and human-readable test step language and our library of over 50 pre-configured test cases, 3nder was able to cover much of their automated testing “out-of-the-box.” Test cases specific to their app were covered by collaboration with Testmunk’s QA engineers, ensuring as close to full test coverage as possible. Below you can see a few samples of our Calabash testing language, which has the added benefit of being cross-platform capable, for when 3nder is ready to test their Android version.

At the moment, Dimo and his team already have 10 automated test cases in place, however, their app has many more features that they’d like to cover and the extension of new testcases is on the todo. Also, up to this point the testing has mainly been executed on the production database, which has certain limitations, especially evolving around changing data. In order to have more reliable data and cover more testcases, 3nder is in the process of creating test profiles which will be linked to a staging database. Further down the road, 3nder may consider setting up a continuous integration server. We here at testmunk look forward to continue working with 3nder to spice up their mobile app testing.

Are you interested in finding bugs in your app like the ones we found here? Let us know!|||

