Hell hath no fury like a hacker scorned. That modified adage came into full bloom yesterday when convicted hacktivist Andrew "Weev" Auernheimer posted a letter on Twitter announcing his intention to dox (out) U.S. Department of Justice prosecutors whose names appear in the Ashley Madison leaked user data. This planned doxxing includes, as confirmed by Weev this morning by direct message, not only prosecutors directly involved in hacker prosecutions, but all federal prosecutors.

The scope and methodology of Weev’s doxxing attacks renew and expand concerns that Ashley Madison users will be outed. It renews public awareness of the ease with which the data can still be selectively searched and disclosed, despite some successes by plaintiffs in Ashley Madison related cases in pulling offline the most publicly available copies.

Weev’s planned scope of attack also demonstrates that the scope of doxing is now expanded. Ashley Madison users whose data was compromised could be caught in a broader exposure net if one of a worker's co-workers was also an Ashley Madison user and happened to anger someone. It may not matter that the first user had no involvement whatsoever in the cause of the revenge. That user could nonetheless be collateral damage.

Weev: US Attorneys shopping for prostitutes on taxpayer dime -- Leaks incoming

Weev is a hacktivist with a controversial background including his political leanings and his black hat hacking activities. He was convicted for hacking into AT&T’s computers and served time from March 2013 until April 2014, when his conviction was overturned based on grounds he was prosecuted in the wrong venue.

As Matthew Keys reports on Weev’s letter, Weev's intention is to out all DoJ prosecutors who accessed the Ashley Madison site with government equipment:

“In an e-mail sent to two federal prosecutors, Andrew Auernheimer — best known by his online aliases “weev” and “rabite” — said he would soon expose U.S. Department of Justice employees who misappropriated government computer networks to access the dating website Ashley Madison.”|||

The scope and method of hactivist's doxxing (outing) attacks and threats Thursday set a dangerous precedent for broader, louder outing of Ashley Madison users' breached data.