In friendship and romance, people are drawn to identifiable types. Some of us like larger-than-life figures, full of charisma, wild plans and fun. Some people favor quiet types, projecting wisdom, calm and a wry sense of humor. Still others prefer those who seem loyal and reliable, the kind you can trust in a crisis.

We are used to thinking of constitutional law in ways that have become predictable, even tiresome. Some Supreme Court justices are “liberals,” while others are “conservatives,” and so constitutional law is not so different from a presidential debate, but camouflaged in impenetrable legal jargon. (In the memorable words of Senator Ted Cruz, a nominee from a Democratic president “votes like a radical liberal nutcase.”) Alternatively, we might insist that some justices are “activists,” while others believe in “restraint.” It’s not always clear what these terms mean, but no matter who uses it, “activist” is almost always pejorative. Finally, we like to say—fairly, but not always informatively—that while some justices believe in “originalism,” interpreting the Constitution to mean what it meant when ratified, others believe in a “living document,” whose meaning evolves over time.

These distinctions capture some important differences in the ways that different Supreme Court justices think and act, but they also miss something fundamental about judicial inclinations and self-understanding. No less than in friendship and romance, constitutional law, it turns out, is dominated by specific types, or personae. Below the surface, they can be found in every era—and they will inevitably play a large role once again in the Supreme Court’s coming term.

A review of our history, and of the great battles that have defined our nation, reveals that if we want to understand our constitutional order, we need to focus on these personae. For all their differences, there are important commonalities between yesterday’s defining liberals, like Earl Warren and Thurgood Marshall, and today’s defining conservatives, like Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas. If we don’t understand the personae—and what draws different people to one type or the other—we will be trapped in categories and clichés that give us a hopelessly incomplete picture of constitutional law. We will fail to understand past cases, or appreciate the different possibilities in future ones.

There are just four personae, so let’s introduce them: heroes, soldiers, minimalists and mutes.

Heroes might be the most familiar. As believers in big, bold strokes, they do not hesitate to use the Constitution to strike down acts of Congress and state governments. They believe in big principles, and in big rulings in the service of those principles. Justice Anthony Kennedy often plays the hero. After writing several other opinions advancing gay rights over the years, he wrote the court’s opinion last term, Obergefell v. Hodges, striking down state bans against same-sex marriage. Brown v. Board of Education, invalidating racial segregation, was unquestionably heroic, as was its author, Chief Justice Warren, the iconic judicial hero.

While some justices, such as Kennedy and Warren, have strong heroic tendencies, no member of the court is consistently heroic. Justices tend to pick their spots, which means it is easiest to speak of heroic decisions—for instance, Roe v. Wade—rather than heroic individuals. Of course, conservative justices and rulings can be heroic, as well. Cruz and many other conservatives, alarmed by what they take as overreaching by the Obama administration, seem to want far more heroic justices, who will strike down various laws (including Obamacare) in order to restore what they see as the constitutional balance. Repeatedly voting to invalidate bans on commercial advertising and limit the power of the national government, Justice Thomas may be the most heroic member of the current court. My vote for the most consequential heroic ruling in recent decades would go to the 2010 Citizens United decision, invalidating restrictions on corporate contributions to campaigns in the name of free speech. The court’s majority has also embraced heroism in protecting the individual right to possess guns. The assault on affirmative action programs, undertaken in the name of color-blindness, is unquestionably heroic, too.

Soldiers are at the opposite pole from heroes. They do not want to invalidate the acts of democratically enacted branches. They believe in following orders. They want to defer to We the People. They agree with Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, history’s greatest soldier, who wrote, “If the people want to go to hell I’ll help them. It’s my job.”

Chief Justice John Roberts shows strong soldierly tendencies. In the opinion in favor of upholding Obamacare in 2012, Roberts emphasized the importance of judicial respect for other branches of government. Dissenting from the court’s same-sex marriage ruling earlier this year, Justice Antonin Scalia, too, spoke for the soldier, emphasizing what he saw as the court’s intrusion on the people’s “freedom to govern themselves.” Some people have defended affirmative action on the ground that judges should defer to the judgments of university administrators, who, in the view of many people, have the greatest expertise about educational needs.

Minimalists, meanwhile, insist on small steps and narrow, unambitious rulings. They want to resolve the specific problem at hand, but without pronouncing broadly on liberty or equality, or on the system of checks and balances. In American history, Justice Felix Frankfurter was a great defender of minimalism, especially in the area of presidential power, where he wanted the court to avoid sweeping rules. Justice Sandra Day O’Connor was also a great minimalist. Whether the issue involved abortion, free speech or affirmative action, she liked to focus on particular facts, not big ideas or abstract theories.



Mutes have not been major players on the constitutional scene, because the justices have to issue rulings and explain themselves in the process. But on important occasions, some justices have concluded that silence from the high court is a virtue, because it keeps judges out of intense controversies and allows the political process to play itself out. In the early 1960s, the court, fearful of a public backlash, refused to rule either way on the constitutionality of bans on racial intermarriage and instead chose to bide its time. For several years, every member of the court declined to say whether bans on same-sex marriage were constitutional, preferring to allow the democratic process to run its course. At the moment, the country is facing hard questions about the relationship between the Fourth Amendment and modern forms of surveillance. While we cannot know for sure on the basis of the public record, some justices, alert to the advantages of silence, probably want to hesitate before resolving those questions.

Much of our constitutional history has involved extended debates among the four personae, and any given judicial era is shaped by the outcome of those debates. If the court is under assault for its heroism, presidents might well seek more soldierly justices. That was true during the New Deal period, when Franklin D. Roosevelt wanted the justices to back off. Liberals were greatly troubled that the heroes on the court invoked what they saw as core constitutional principles to strike down progressive legislation such as minimum wage and maximum hour laws. Following Holmes, soldiers, in turn, called for deference to the political process.

But if the court seems too passive and too unwilling to protect important liberties, there might be a push in the direction of heroic judging. Under Warren’s leadership, the court of the 1950s and 1960s issued a whole slew of heroic decisions, protecting freedom of speech, vindicating the rights of criminal defendants and calling for a principle of one person, one vote. In response, Justices Frankfurter and John Marshall Harlan made pleas for minimalism—which the court’s majority frequently ignored. In this era, conservatives made a loud plea: Justices should be more like soldiers.

Recent years have seen pitched battles among the four personae, cutting across ideological divisions. Whether the issue involves campaign finance, Obamacare, affirmative action or same-sex marriage, heroes have argued that the court should not hesitate to enforce constitutional limits on government power. Soldiers respond that We the People should be allowed to govern ourselves—and that the court is inventing, rather than enforcing, those limits. Minimalists believe that heroes suffer from arrogance and hubris. In their view, judges should not invoke abstract theories to intrude into democratic processes; particular facts matter.

Heroes respond that minimalists are far too ad hoc, even unprincipled. Soldiers say the same thing. In their view, democratic self-government lies at the core of our system, and judges ought to be willing to say so. Mutes wish that both heroes and soldiers would shut up. In their view, it is good for the court to be quiet, at least on the largest questions—gun rights, the limits of surveillance, the precise power of the president.

Who’s right? The answer depends on your preferred theory of constitutional interpretation. Suppose you agree with Scalia and think that the Constitution should be understood to mean what it originally meant. If so, you’ll be a soldier on same-sex marriages, on the ground that no provision of the Constitution, when originally ratified, requires states to recognize such marriages. But if a state tries to lock people up without a hearing, you might be a hero, on the ground that when ratified, the Constitution’s due process clause required people to get hearings.

If you agree with Kennedy and think the Constitution is best understood to set out broad principles whose meaning evolves over time, you might feel licensed to be a hero. But if you think the Constitution allows judges to act only in particular cases, and should be understood to open up a lot of space for democratic governance, you will have a lot of sympathy for the minimalist, and you might even find yourself following the soldier.

In my view, the minimalist path is generally best. Judges should be keenly aware of what they do not know, and modesty usually argues against the hero. Humility is a virtue, especially for judges. The problem with soldiers is that if they are consistent, they would undo too much of our constitutional tradition, and refuse to recognize the freedoms that it safeguards. And obviously enough, public officials, including judges, cannot do their jobs if they are mutes.

Still, we must acknowledge that for many people, including judges, one or another persona has a kind of magnetic attraction, a feel of necessity—one that precedes substantive arguments and that, more than anything, helps to explain where they will end up. You usually can’t argue your way toward or against falling in love; either you feel it or you don’t, and the arguments might turn out to be background noise (“she’s so nice!” or “she’s not so nice!”). For many people, including lawyers and judges, the personae seem to be a bit like that.

However elaborate, the stated justifications put forth for a particular personae—whether democratic self-government or fundamental rights or something else entirely—may turn out to be mere afterthoughts. In politics and law, as in ordinary life, the rules of attraction often end up running the show.|||

How heroes, soldiers, minimalists and mutes explain America’s judicial system.