Digital marketing comes with a tremendous amount of rewards when it’s done right. That means there is a lot of work behind it because it’s our efforts that make it rewarding for us personally as bloggers and content marketers as well as financially rewarding for our businesses.

Today, I want to take a different angle to share how digital marketing can be rewarding when you create content that is dynamic, relevant, interesting and compelling for your audience.

At different times and for different reasons we all struggle for that one elusive opportunity that puts us over the top. Sometimes we are not struggling as much as it seems and we are putting the pressure on ourselves when it is not earned.

Content marketing and blogging is not about the one hit that makes us successful; it’s the consistent creation of dynamic content that keeps people coming back and as importantly inspires them to reference our work, share it and ultimately become our champions.

It’s our raving fans who make us great because we gave the necessary tools and resources to become those fans and when it happens the rewards are no accident.

The rewards are the recognition that one has and is doing the hard work of building their business for others; not for themselves.

Sometimes, we just need to let the work we’ve done in our marketing actually start working for us.

I share in virtually every article how vital it is to do two things:

Learn how this works on the “Begin Here” page

If I may, in the form of a roundup, I want to share with you how my efforts over the last 18 months have been rewarded of late (check out my last roundup post in August titled “How to Network Online and Efficiently Grow Your Business”).

Here is a list of articles below that I was either asked to contribute to or was mentioned by fellow business bloggers and colleagues in their articles (here is the cool part – some I had no idea they included me in their article because they didn’t tell me; I did a search and I found the articles – WAY COOL!).

Cumulatively, they added massive amounts of exposure to me in the tens of thousands and through their generosity earned me a ton of new business.

This is the most gratifying of all rewards!!!!

(note; over the summer I said no to many opportunities to contribute. However, if you would like me to write for you or contribute to your article please feel free to email me at don@unveiltheweb or share with me in the comments below):

19 Social Media Authorities Reveal the Risk Hidden in Your Profile – Andrea Hewett

117 Tips On How To Set Goals From Successful Entrepreneurs – Tor Refsland

Blogger Outreach: How To Get Influencers To Generate More Traffic – Tor Refsland on Twelveskip.com

How To Write For Your Target Audience – Adrienne Smith

Why You Need to Invest More in Content Marketing and Less in Advertising – Sylviane Nuccio

How do you Market a Southeastern Ohio Small Business? – Bradley Finnearty

How To Become An Influential Blogger And Crush It Online – Fabrizio Van Marciano

20 Top Bloggers & their blogs to follow in 2015! – Enstine Muki

I also love being mentioned in comments by others as Tor Refsland and Adrienne Smith did in this comment on one of Tor’s articles – thank you guys!:

In addition, my social networks have also seen a tremendous amount of growth:

My Facebook page has grown from 900 followers to 1,088 as of 10/8/15. But it’s my post rate I’m most pleased with at 391 for the last week – and that’s with zero paid advertising. Maybe for some that’s not good but to me that’s fantastic! I will admit, this is my slowest growing page but I think knowing Facebook we all know why… lol.

Finally on LinkedIn, my engagement in almost all my groups that I participate in has earned me the ability to be the top contributor or close to it every group. My network has expanded from 3,300 followers one month ago to 3,505 as of publishing this article and I’m in the top 16% of profiles views among my connection.

All my connections are in my target audience of business owners and entrepreneurs and new new leads and opportunities are coming in weekly just through LinkedIn.

In addition, I want to thank SEMrush.com for the opportunity to share my webinar with their audience back in July. It was a smashing success. Here is the video if anyone would like to watch.

I will be releasing a new blog article for them in the next week in anticipation of a new webinar I will first be presenting with them (in studio – how cool is that) titled “Blueprint of Successful Websites” on Thursday, October 15, 2015 at 2:00 PM ET.

If I can achieve massive growth in 18 months, you can as well! But, make no pretenses; I’ve been a business owner for over 10 years and I’ve learned more than most will ever forget. My success just like everyone else’s is no accident.

I share this roundup with you both as a way to say thank you for those who are an inspiration to me as well as celebrate my achievements and share with you some of the successful practical things that are happing.

There are many rewards to digital marketing and if you’re not getting at least half of these then you ought to contact me immediately to learn how you can rectify this problem:

If this roundup inspired you I want you to do one or more of the following things:|||

