Hello, welcome to Losing Weight With Pat. This is where you get the latest on exercise and Workouts.

Besides different ways of losing weight and the foods, you should eat to lose weight. I’ll also be writing about the different exercises and workouts you can do that can benefit you in your journey of losing weight and feeling good.

Now I know what you are saying, exercise/workout, who has time for that? Especially in the fast-paced world in which we live in. Well, let me say that you can find the time. Heck, with my job, I work anywhere from 10 to 15 hours a day and sometimes 4 hours on Saturdays.  I have time to fit it in. Even if it’s just for a short time.

Once you get to use it, it becomes a daily routine. I’ll admit it’s hard at first but, in the long run, you will not regret it. You will fill great all the time.

As far as Exercise goes, I’ll be researching the different kinds of exercises you can do and the benefits it will have on your body. From easy to hard exercise. But remember exercise is not going to help much if you don’t have a diet in place and eating right. Eating healthy should be your top priority.

There are all kinds of different exercises you can do such as push ups, pull ups, and sit ups. You can go to the park and if you are like me, I’m 6’3″ and love basketball. Shoot some hoop for about an hour. Your burn a lot of calories that way.

Also, get some friends together and play football or baseball. If you like golf goes shoot a couple of holes. There are so many ways to get exercise. But remember always stretch before you get into it. You don’t want to pull any muscles. That can be very painful.

If you like fitness,  go for a good workout. There are so many machines these days, you can work every part of your body. A lot of machines like a treadmill are not that expensive. Depending on your weight, you can burn up to 500 calories by just running on a treadmill for 30 minutes a day.

If you want to get a membership at a gym. That can be a great way to get into shape and lose weight. If anything, I suggest getting a membership at the YMCA. They have all kinds of programs you can get into and great workout programs.

I won’t get into that right now but will get into that in future posts, I’ll do a review on the YMCA and let you know why a membership is worth it. So go out start working out and enjoy life more. You will be amazed at how you fill.

Life is grand when you fill good, eating healthy, getting exercise and working out will do a body good. Thank you again for visiting me at Losing Weight With Pat.

So please leave a comment if you have any questions or if you would like me to help you get on a good program or find a gym for you I will be glad to.|||

Exercise and working out can go a long way when trying to lose weight. Get on a good diet and add some exercise and you will lose weight.