Theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking took to Reddit in July for his first-ever AMA (“Ask Me Anything”) session. His answers ranged from wealth inequality to his views on the greatest mystery (spoiler: women).

The session was unique -- while most AMAs on Reddit are hosted live, this one asked Reddit users to submit their questions back in July. Hawking’s answers were posted to Reddit Thursday. Here are some highlights, edited for length and clarity:

Question: Have you thought about the possibility of technological unemployment, where we develop automated processes that ultimately cause large unemployment by performing jobs faster and/or cheaper than people can perform them?

Hawking: If machines produce everything we need, the outcome will depend on how things are distributed. Everyone can enjoy a life of luxurious leisure if the machine-produced wealth is shared, or most people can end up miserably poor if the machine-owners successfully lobby against wealth redistribution. So far, the trend seems to be toward the second option, with technology driving ever-increasing inequality.

Question: Often the dangers from AI are overblown by media and non-understanding news, leading to “The Terminator Conversation.” How would you present your beliefs?

Hawking: You’re right: media often misrepresent what is actually said. The real risk with AI isn’t malice but competence. A superintelligent AI will be extremely good at accomplishing its goals, and if those goals aren’t aligned with ours, we’re in trouble. You’re probably not an evil ant-hater who steps on ants out of malice, but if you’re in charge of a hydroelectric green energy project and there’s an anthill in the region to be flooded, too bad for the ants. Let’s not place humanity in the position of those ants.

Question: One might think it impossible for a creature to ever acquire a higher intelligence than its creator. Do you agree?

Hawking: It’s clearly possible for a something to acquire higher intelligence than its ancestors: we evolved to be smarter than our ape-like ancestors, and Einstein was smarter than his parents. The line you ask about is where an AI becomes better than humans at AI design, so that it can recursively improve itself without human help. If this happens, we may face an intelligence explosion that ultimately results in machines whose intelligence exceeds ours by more than ours exceeds that of snails.

Question: What is your favorite song ever written?

Question: What is the one mystery that you find most intriguing, and why? Thank you.

Hawking: Women. My PA reminds me that although I have a Ph.D. in physics women should remain a mystery.|||

Stephen Hawking reveals insights on technological unemployment, artificial intelligence and women.