This is a guest blog by Katie Fritz of Trippeo.

Approaching business from the office just doesn’t cut it anymore. Today’s workforce dials in enroute to a conference, sends email from their home office, or draws up plans in a local coffeeshop. And we love that we’re allowed to. The flexibility is great, but with new territory comes new sets of distractions and productivity killers. So we wrote up a few of our favorite ways to fight inertia from the road.

Working in an isolated or unfamiliar environment makes it way harder for you to bounce ideas off of your colleagues. To get your brain in gear, write lists of tasks you need to accomplish, or use the notebook to attack an idea for an upcoming campaign by sketching flowcharts of possible approaches. Going analogue keeps you from getting distracted by your Facebook feed, and because it’s a new way for your brain to approach information, the notebook helps generate ideas that your project management template doesn’t suggest.

This is so obvious you’ve never tried it. Being away from the familiar social environment of your office makes you crave recognition. But flipping back and forth between your networks for a little fix of social connection derails your brain from the work track. And it’s hard to get back. If you can’t help yourself (because I often can’t), install a program like Anti-Social or Cold Turkey to disable your social media while you work.

A great tip when you have finished your research and all that’s left is to write, excel, or build a PowerPoint. Going offline inspires a little (or a lot) of nervosa in us, but it’s a great way to focus on a single task. When you can’t Slack or respond to emails, you’d be shocked at how fast you can write a blog post. There is likely a cafe in your area that doesn’t have WiFi. Make it your best friend.

I’m not one of those people who gets so absorbed in my work that I forget to eat lunch. I work best in short sprints, and then need a few minutes to people-watch and gather my energy for the next task. I’ve taken to setting my phone timer to 25 minutes, and really putting my head down for that chunk. When the timer dings, I set it for 5 minutes and buy myself a cup of coffee or read a favorite blog. The promise of a reward + the tension of actually earning it makes for some of my most productive periods.

I could write a thesis on noise-level preference as it relates to my working condition. 70% of the time, I like there to be background noise unrelated to my task at hand: a quiet conversation, a soundtrack, the whirr of a coffee machine, or all at once. Others listen to podcasts and some crank power metal. The constant? Selecting your sound gives you a sense of control over your environment. I love to be immersed but not involved in my surroundings. Podcasters like to be taken out. Metal listeners like to drown out. Finding an audioscape that helps you focus can make a huge difference in your productivity. Just don’t forget your headphones.

I’m awesome in the morning and useless past 6pm, which means I have to get up early. Am I awesome at getting up? No. But allowing myself to sleep in means I am going to have a CONSIDERABLY less productive day, and be really angry at myself at about 6:10pm. Choose the hours that work best for you, and then be faithful. That might mean 3am, and it might mean working through dinner, but your work will demonstrate the worth.

Working remotely isn’t going to be easier on your focus, but the benefits of flexibility, location, and atmosphere far outweigh the minor blockers. If you’re able, try sidling into the remote pattern so you can shock your system in small steps. Good luck!

If, like me, you’re a C student when it comes to actually getting up. Here are a few ideas that I’ve A/B tested on myself over the last few years. Also, spoiler alert: working IN bed is a terrible idea. It will give you nightmares and make you less functional. Don’t do it.

 Only Set One Alarm: this sounds crazy, but I found that I was treating the 5th alarm I had set as my actual get-up time. Why? Because it was the last call. It still made me late, but my bed-brain didn’t care. Setting one alarm gives you a single chance. You can’t blow it.

 Visualize the time you want to wake up as you are falling asleep. I know how this sounds, but this is how I got up during my year without a watch (a post on that another time), and it never once failed.

 Set up a wind-down routine: I actually learned this from my friends in Northern Canada, who deal with 24-hour days from June to September. To keep themselves sane and functional for the following workdays, they follow a prescribed bedtime routine that sends signals to their brains, notifying them that sleep was coming soon. This is great for maintaining a bedtime, and for general relaxation.

Trippeo is an expense tracking app designed for today’s mobile workforce. Trippeo tracks, submits, and reimburses your expenses quickly and painlessly. For more information please visit: http://trippeo.com/|||

Get stuff done at home, coffee shops, airport terminal, wherever. Stay focused out of the office with these helpful productivity hacks.