So a little background to start things off. This weekend I drove down to NY from Boston for the World Maker Faire mainly just to see the Glowforge in action. This is my review of what I saw, heard, and thought well at the Glowforge booth. And just so you can't claim after reading this that I just want them to fail or whatever, I drove down there with every want in the world to empty my wallet into theirs. I came so close more times than I can count to buying one all last week.

Also forgive me if this is a bit scattered as I took in a lot and am trying to organize it as I remember it and type it. Also spelling/grammar will suck but that's why I draw my idea's most the time, not write them.

So here it is. Got up nice and early Saturday morning, loaded up the car and picked up my business partners and made the drive down to Queen's just to go get sold on the Glowforge. I was wanting to come away from Saturday with the trust that this product will succeed. We all wanted this laser cutter to be the pure gold everything we read about it lead us to believe. For the company we are trying to start and as designers the Glowforge could be huge to us.

Now to start with, when I looked into the maker faire they posted that you would be able to draw on a small piece of acrylic and have the glowforge cut and etch it on the spot. Keep that in mind for later.

Once we got there we made our way right to the tent at around 11:30am. It was pretty busy and they had a bunch of staff, all seemed to be employees or family. I talked pretty much right away with one guy on the team, don't remember exact roll but I remember him saying he was employee 13 of 13. He knew what he was selling us and was good to talk with. Both me and my friends I came with had separate goals for what we wanted to take away from the day. Mine was more of the hardware/production end and my friend was more interest in their design catalog and plans for that. Both was important to get a good idea of where the company stood on everything. We made sure to ask almost everyone we talked with almost the same questions just to see how everything lined up. I'll come back to this too in a little. So at 11:30am nothing was going on with the 3 laser cutters they had on display. They had a long table with a bunch of laser cut products. Almost every one was probably the same that you can find in most their video's, from the quad copter to Dan's leather wallet. Employee 13 told me that they would be cutting later in the day and to stop by then. So that was our plan, we would spend most the day checking out the rest of the show and come back before the end to see where they were at the end of the day. Also at first I noticed that all the machines said don't touch. Not a big deal, I can understand that in a way. But there was something particularly hollow looking about the cutters, especially the one machine with the air filter. Like there was no guts. Again not a total deal breaker, wouldn't be the first time a company brought a display model to a show.

So skip ahead to about 4pm when we decided to go check out the booth again. Its a little bit busier now as two of the cutters are running. The two machines are cutting out the little snap together candle holders that's been in a few videos. I watch them run through a couple passes. The machine cuts great, nice clean lines and seems reliable. They cut out 2-3 boxes that all fit nicely. Then I notice that's all they are cutting, the same box over and over. The box also has no etching on it. Thought that was strange. So we hang out for a bit longer, chat with a couple of the employee's. The whole time though I am focusing on the employee's my friend is not talking to. Listening to what they are saying to eachother. Trying to pick up on things they might not be wanting to share.

First thing I get was kind of big. I hear Dan (the CEO) ask one of the other guys kind of quietly something along the lines of "Can we do etching" and the guy just kind of shakes his head no and says "Calibration still isn't working". I thought it was funny there was no etching going on but know I know for sure. So after that I'm still hanging around and eventually I think Dan noticed I had been hovering around for a little longer than most people and so he asked me if I had any question. I asked him about the etching issue. His response, and this was another milestone in the steep decline for me, was "We can't do etching today because of issues with the sun interfering with calibration". On the inside I was so at a loss of words. Where did this come from? Never has there been any mention of the sun stopping this machine. I mean on the homepage alone it shows it sitting in front of a huge window. Nevermind you need it near a window for ventilation. And he follows up with "It should be running tomorrow" and "We have been trying everything we can to fix it" and points to a piece of cardboard taped to a wall to block the sun from the cutters(photo below). I only got a 1 day ticket so I can't say if it was working on Sunday but I can say it sure was a lot sunnier on Sunday. So as of the time I left at 6pm they did not do one showcase of the camera tracing your sketch and cutting it.

The next thing I noticed that really bothered me was they kept loading up the same exact cut pattern on a macbook they kept the software almost hidden from the public. I wanted to see the software and with all the controversy over the cloud based program, you think they would have had it streaming to one of the two TV's they had hooked up. But nope, it was on a macbook they kept partially closed most the day. I managed to take a few good looks at it(photo below) and it seemed to be working pretty well. I could see them using the camera to drag and drop patterns onto the materials. That made me feel kind of good. At least one thing seemed to be working as well as they claimed. Still pretty sure the software is no where near what they claimed since they kept it so secretive 90% of the time. Can't make any actual claims but just going on my feeling after seeing how they treated it.

Third big thing I came across was the air filter. They had 3 machines total. Two of the regular models, those were the two they had running. Well really now that I think about it, two were hooked up to run, but only one was ever actually running. The third machine was supposed to be the Pro model with air filter. This one wasn't hooked up at all and was on the other side of the booth and was almost treated like the ugly duckling of the three. I'm pretty sure that's because the air filter was just the plastic shell. The machine might have been functional but kind of strange they wouldn't want to show the 20"x Unlimited feature right? But back to the air filter. I noticed they were using the hose line for filtration like they say to do on the standard with no filter and the hose was running under the table behind a curtain to what I'm pretty sure was your standard air system for any laser cutter. Why wouldn't they be showing off the air filter? Its the perfect environment to be using it in. Only thing I can think of is the air filter is in even worse shape than the actual laser cutter. That's why the closest we came to seeing the filter was the empty shell in the corner. Kind of concerning they are willing to take over $3mil in pre-sales but are not able to show a functional prototype 3 months before launch. Photo's of the air filter are below.

So the fourth issue me and my friends were able to compile is going back to what I said about asking all the employee's similar questions. My friends main goal, as an unemployed designer, was to see what the plan for the design catalog was and how to get in on that. Our responses were kind of all over the board and all lead to us believing that as of right now there is absolutely no real set up for this service. Which is huge because they are selling people on the idea of being able to download products at home and cut them out right away. Some people told us they would love to hear from us and that they were looking to start working with designers and get them going. Then we finally talked with Dan and asked him the same question. And, like almost everything you will find on this company, this is what he plans on doing. Everything was a plan it seemed like and that's concerning for a product launching in 3 months. His plan is to give people who buy the cutter early access to signing up for the design submissions and then eventually opening it up for any designer to submit and make royalties off of. It didn't sound like any of this had made it off of the drawing board though. Again, 3 months people. And we told him we were product designers with a background in using laser cutting for product manufacturing and he had nothing for us really except buy a machine to get in early. You think if a huge part of his company is going to be getting good design to the non-designers of the world he would have a little interest in trying to at least give interested designers more of an opportunity to get in on this. We even brought products we have been cutting and selling but we didn't feel he had any interest. I know he was probably a little overwhelmed between the show and the crazy launch success but still. And the fact all the employees had a different idea of how this was going to operate showed their was no semi-solid plan back in the office yet.

So I think that was kind of the four big issues. There's a lot more I could add but I am running out of my 15000 character limit. Now I am going to do some bullet points to throw anything I might have left out in here and highlight the details.

I think there's more but I need to do something else before I spend my entire night trying to recall everything.

The "Pro" model with the air filter. It says "Don't touch" but I might have poked it once or twice to test my hollow shell theory.

This is one of the two machines they had set up to run but I never actually saw running. On top of it is a lonely acrylic panel waiting so patiently to get scanned and etched.

Close up of the board with lots of plugs they have never even hinted at.

The elusive software when I managed to sneak a peak when someone left it unattended for a minute. Also can see the air hose hookup. You can also see the warping plastic they seem to have just kind of bolted on the back. It was also just a piece of cut polystyrene from what I could tell. Kind of like a last minute fix.

Under the table was pretty well covered but that's where the hose led and from what I could see was a air pump and system for the cutter. Not really an issues. Just would have liked to see the filter running too.

Top left corner is their ultra high tech attempt at blocking out that unexpected sun. Like who would have thought the sun would be out mid day? So rude of it.

I thought I had more photos but I seemed to have been too distracted listening. One nice photo I thought I took was the warped plastic around the case, the misaligned metal trim, and the LED lights falling off because the hot glue was giving out.

Feel free to comment and I'll answer what I can. I bet I thought of a lot more at the time and just cant think of it right now but your questions will probably bring it back. I assume /u/eva_k and the glowforge team will be spotted on here commenting too. Look forward to hearing their responses to this. Also check comments below, I ran out of space and will be posting more down there.

END NOTE: EVERYTHING I SAID IS ABOUT THE PRODUCTS THEY HAD ON DISPLAY THIS WEEKEND(9/26) AND IS IN NO WAY A GUARANTEE OF WHAT DECEMBER'S LAUNCH WILL LOOK LIKE. I HAVE ALMOST NO PROOF TO BACK UP MOST OF WHAT I SAID AND IS JUST MY OBSERVATIONS AND OPINIONS.

I JUST CAME ACROSS A COUPLE POSTS CONFIRMING A FEW THINGS I SAID AND THAT I FEEL ARE IMPORTANT TO ANY READER.

Also quick shout out to Full Spectrum. They really got shafted at the Maker Fair. They were the booth sharing a wall with Glowforge and definitely got a bit overlooked. They didn't really have any machines running so it wasn't that impressive but the guy they had working it was great to talk with. I can't remember his name but his business cards in my car, he was head of sales. That guy knew everything from lasers to 3d printers and talking with him was laid back. Chatted about everything from their new SLS to Printrbots and other companies. Will be in touch with him soon for getting a machine.|||

Hello, &nbsp; So a little background to start things off. This weekend I drove down to NY from Boston for the World Maker Faire mainly just to...