Are you looking for Fiverr alternatives? Are you a buyer and want to find more micro job workers? Are you a seller and want to expand to make more money? If the answer is yes, then my friend you are in the right place.

So below is my list of top sites like fiverr or you can say top micro job websites. Note: I have ignored all other alternatives with Alexa rank more than 15000.

PeoplePerHour is the best alternative to Fiverr. PeoplePerHour is a combination of Fiverr and oDesk. It’s allow freelancer to post their services which can be bought online just like Fiverr. They also have extensive project posting functionality which allow users to post their projects and get bidding from freelancers. All this for FREE. Here the hourlies (gigs) can go over $150. But unlike Fiverr you can expect some high-quality freelancers. If you can afford it then I would highly recommend you to check out peopleperhour.

SEOClerks is the best alternative for Fiverr (if you are looking for SEO services). It is one of the best micro job site for freelancer and outsourcers in SEO / Online Marketing domain. If you are in SEO/Internet Marketing/Social Media domain then this portal MUST be in your “to-use” resource list. SEOClerks out rank Fiverr in many things, like there is no limitation for pricing the gigs/service ($1 to more than $100) and an awesome community of SEO professionals ever ready to help you.

Microworkers is a platform that connects Employers and Micro Job Workers. Just as its name suggest the tasks assigned to these micro job workers and paid for by employers. These tasks are simple and quick, mostly completed in a few minutes, thus, are called “micro jobs”. These tasks can include simple sign-ups, social bookmarking tasks, forum participation, website visits, rating videos or articles, voting up contest entries, adding comments, suggesting leads, creating backlinks, writing reviews or articles, downloading applications and so much more.

In my experience, Microworkers is a good great tool to increase your social media impact. You can get likes, tweets, youtube views, comments and rating for very cheap. To learn more about Microworkers click here.

The Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) is a crowdsourcing Internet marketplace that enables individuals or businesses (known as Requesters) to co-ordinate the use of human intelligence to perform tasks that computers are currently unable to do. It is one of the sites of Amazon Web Services. The Requesters are able to post tasks known as HITs (Human Intelligence Tasks), such as choosing the best among several photographs of a store-front, writing product descriptions, or identifying performers on music CDs. Workers (called Providers in Mechanical Turk’s Terms of Service, or, more colloquially, Turkers) can then browse among existing tasks and complete them for a monetary payment set by the Requester. To place HITs, the requesting programs use an open Application Programming Interface, or the more limited MTurk Requester site. Requesters are restricted to US-based entities.

This is similar to Microworkers but have comparatively more and quality workers, as it is owned and run by Amazon. Also chekc our Amazon Mturk Review and Tips.

Gigbucks is basically a clone of Fiverr. It cannot be compared to Fiverr in terms of traffic or quality but it is the most successful clone out 100s of them. It is worth listing your gig their for seller. Buyer can also check gigs there. The major difference is that Gigbucks allow to price service from $5 to $50.

I had used Fiverr both as a seller (made more than $400) and buyer (some 10 gigs). In 2011, Fiverr was the best place for micro workers and for buyers too. But as it had grown huge (more than 2 million gigs now), the quality had gone down a lot.

For the seller, it is harder than ever to get decent sales. I remember when I created my first gigs (in SEO domain) I use to easily get 2-3 order per day with zero marketing efforts. And now it is not the case. As a buyer, I had seen that though Fiverr support helps buyers more than a seller, there are more junk gigs than ever.

So I started finding new alternative sites like fiverr. And after my detailed research I had created this dedicated website. You many ask why? Because it cost me only $9 for a domain name and hosting for a year and this website would be more effective than a single blog post at my blog.

So according to my research these are the best alternative sites like fiverr. Do you know any others that are reputable and trustworthy? If you come across any good alternative please do let us know (via contact).

I know that there are tons of Fiverr and Microworkers clones out there, but those are not worth listing here. As my goal is to share only quality, reputable and trustworthy sites,

If you find our list useful please consider sharing this on social media with your friends and followers. 🙂 – Thanks!|||

Are you looking for best alternative sites like Fiverr? Visit us now to know which are the best alternative sites like Fiverr. Click Here.