Board room meetings are mandatory events that corporates conduct to discuss future agendas and other action items for their business. However, at times they become boring and leave your employees frustrated. But if they are executed successfully, they can impact your productivity and helps in accomplishing your goals.

Read on further to discover some important basics in conducting productive meetings for your business.

A meeting relates to the get together of colleagues, staff members, and suppliers (service companies), who are part of your business. But, the key to a successful meeting is when someone puts serious efforts into its planning. Investing extra time in planning can avoid making it a total wastage of time.

To save time for both you and your team, consider the following:

If discussions can be accomplished through phone calls, memos, or even e-mails, then it would be beneficial. Meetings should generally be conducted in the following situations:

Before we go further into how you can churn up a productive meeting schedule, let’s look at the types of meetings defined by the Institute of Cultural Affairs (ICA):

Well-planned and organised meetings generate a sense of accomplishment among team members, and leaves them feeling comfortable and having a time well spent. Meetings that are effective, productive and successful are directly related to the amount of planning put into it.

Below are some key indicators for a successful meeting outcome:

Define clear agendas for meetings. How much time will it take? Who all need to be invited? Where should the location be and at what time? These questions should be answered at the planning stage. If possible, write down important points to be discussed in the meeting. Prioritise them as important things shouldn’t be left out. Estimate the meeting time accordingly considering all these aspects. Lastly, inform concerned parties in advance about date, time, location, time-span, purpose of meeting and ensure their availability.

Arrange a comfortable meeting space and time. Consider time zones if you plan for conference calls or video conferences. Do not choose time that is too early or too late. Make sure you reach early and go through arrangements for audio-visual equipment or other tools. Ensure you have a proper seating arrangement as people feel more involved and acknowledged if they sit facing each other rather than in rows.

If you have new attendees, make sure to introduce them to others so that each knows the other person well. Be clear and specific to goals. Discuss topic for gathering rather than juggling here and there. Once done, consider reviewing points discussed so that every person present is clear with the agenda.

Involve actively in discussions and motivate others to participate keenly. Listen carefully to each person’s suggestions and make note of the wise and important ones. If you can include humour, then better as it releases tension and can get people talking.

Lastly, do a follow-up on whether discussed things were put into action. Remind each person of his duties and responsibilities and how important it is to achieve the goal.

Remember, effective planning, processing and follow-ups on meeting agendas will lead your team to achieve the target and thereby accomplish future business objectives. Learn other essential tips on successful project management at Synquis. Our professional team is ready to help you 24/7 and answer your queries.|||

Read on further to discover some important basics in conducting successful boardroom meetings for your business.