In this post we will explore the concept of refresh tokens as defined by OAuth2. We will learn why they came to be and how they compare to other types of tokens. We will also learn how to use them with a simple example. Read on!

Update: at the moment this article was written Auth0 had not gone through OpenID Connect certification. Some of the terms used in this article such as do not conform to this spec but do conform to the OAuth2 specification. OpenID Connect establishes a clear distinction between (used to access the API of the authorization server) and the (used for client authentication against a resource server).

Modern authentication and/or authorization solutions have introduced the concept of tokens into their protocols. Tokens are specially crafted pieces of data that carry just enough information to either authorize the user to perform an action, or allow a client to get additional information about the authorization process (to then complete it). In other words, tokens are pieces of information that allow the authorization process to be performed. Whether this information is readable or parsable by the client (or any party other than the authorization server) is defined by the implementation. The important thing is: the client gets this information, and then uses it to get access to a resource. The JSON Web Token (JWT) spec defines a way in which common token information may be represented by an implementation.

JWT defines a way in which certain common information pertaining to the process of authentication/authorization may be represented. As the name implies, the data format is JSON. JWTs carry certain common fields such as subject, issuer, expiration time, etc. JWTs become really useful when combined with other specs such as JSON Web Signature (JWS) and JSON Web Encryption (JWE). Together these specs provide not only all the information usually needed for an authorization token, but also a means to validate the content of the token so that it cannot be tampered with (JWS) and a way to encrypt information so that it remains opaque to the client (JWE). The simplicity of the data format (and its other virtues) have helped JWTs become one of the most common types of tokens. If you are interested in learning how to implement JWTs in your web apps, check this excellent post by Ryan Chenkie.

For the purposes of this post, we will focus on the two most common types of tokens: access tokens and refresh tokens.

Whether tokens are opaque or not is usually defined by the implementation. Common implementations allow for direct authorization checks against an access token. That is, when an access token is passed to a server managing a resource, the server can read the information contained in the token and decide itself whether the user is authorized or not (no checks against an authorization server are needed). This is one of the reasons tokens must be signed (using JWS, for instance). On the other hand, refresh tokens usually require a check against the authorization server. This split way of handling authorization checks allows for three things:

Sliding-sessions are sessions that expire after a period of inactivity. As you can imagine, this is easily implemented using access tokens and refresh tokens. When a user performs an action, a new access token is issued. If the user uses an expired access token, the session is considered inactive and a new access token is required. Whether this token can be obtained with a refresh token or a new authentication round is required is defined by the requirements of the development team.

Refresh tokens are long-lived. This means when a client gets a refresh token from a server, this token must be stored securely to keep it from being used by potential attackers. If a refresh token is leaked, it may be used to obtain new access tokens (and access protected resources) until it is either blacklisted or it expires (which may take a long time). Refresh tokens must be issued to a single authenticated client to prevent use of leaked tokens by other parties. Access tokens must be kept secret, but as you may imagine, security considerations are less strict due to their shorter life.

For the purposes of this example we will use a simple server based on node-oauth2-server that will issue access and refresh tokens. Access tokens will be required to access a protected resource. The client will be a simple CURL command. The code from this example is based on the examples from node-oauth2-server. We have modified the base examples to use JWT for access tokens.

Node-oauth2-server uses a predefined API for the model. You can find the docs here. The following code shows how to implement the model for JWT access tokens.

DISCLAIMER: Please note the code in the following example is not production ready.

The OAuth2 token endpoint (/oauth/token) handles issuing of all types of grants (password and refresh tokens). All other endpoints are protected by the OAuth2 middleware that checks for the access token.

So, for instance, assuming there is a user 'test' with password 'test' and a client 'testclient' with a client secret 'secret', one could request a new access token/refresh token pair as follows:

The authorization header contains the client id and secret encoded as BASE64 (testclient:secret).

To access a protected resource with that access token:

Access to the "secret area" will not cause a database lookup to validate the access token thanks to JWT.

Once the token has expired:

Now we can use the refresh token to get a new access token by hitting the token endpoint like so:

DISCLAIMER: Please note the code in the previous example is not production ready.

See the full code here.

At Auth0 we do the hard part of authentication for you. Refresh tokens are not an exception. Once you have setup your app with us, follow the docs here to learn how to get a refresh token.

Refresh tokens improve security and allow for reduced latency and better access patterns to authorization servers. Implementations can be simple using tools such as JWT + JWS. If you are interested in learning more about tokens (and cookies), check our article here.|||

Learn about refresh tokens and how they fit in the modern web. Get a working sample of how to implement it with NodeJS