I'm sure it's just the sort of boilerplate that is in every lawsuit, but still this might be my favorite passage in Bill Gross's absurd lawsuit against Pimco:

What I like here is the image that Gross "is informed and believes" that 100 people whose "true names and capacities are unknown" to him conspired against him. Again, this passage is boilerplate, and doesn't literally mean that. But the rest of the lawsuit, in which Gross is suing Pimco for "hundreds of millions of dollars" for unfairly ousting him from his job as chief investment officer in September 2014, is not really inconsistent with that image. I mean, here is the non-boilerplate introduction to the complaint:

There are those who say that "the active voice is usually more direct and vigorous than the passive," but I think that underrates the vigor of the construction at the end there, call it the Passive Righteous. Their behavior "must now be exposed," and Bill Gross has no choice but to put himself forth as the instrument of that exposure.

That is obviously the point of the lawsuit: to expose the cabal that ousted Gross to public judgment. And why not? In his telling, the cabal spent a lot of time working to expose Gross to public ridicule. A long section of the complaint discusses the perfidy of Andrew Balls, a Pimco managing director and former journalist whom Pimco caught leaking information about the breach between Bill Gross and Mohamed El-Erian that led to El-Erian's resignation as chief executive officer of Pimco. (El-Erian is a Bloomberg View contributor.) The complaint discusses how Balls was caught -- "After a week spent checking the phone records of PIMCO land lines and cell phones turned up nothing, PIMCO's investigators then checked the records for a second, little-used cell phone issued to Balls" -- and complains that Gross wanted him fired but was overruled by other conspirators. But it also complains that the press coverage of his dispute with El-Erian was unfair:

It is hard to see how Pimco, or Balls, or Does 1 through 100 inclusive, could be responsible for the Financial Times failing to mention that Gross had beat his benchmark for three years.

Gross is right, though, that the coverage of El-Erian's departure tended to make Gross look bad. The story of Gross's own ouster from Pimco has of course been told before, and in that story he generally comes off as "a world-class jerk who’d lost his touch." So you can see why Gross wanted to tell his side of the story. And as a way of telling Gross's side of the story in as inflammatory way as possible, this lawsuit is ... effective? Effective-ish? An effort? Vigorous, anyway. I feel like he could have just written his side of the story and put it on Ello? Maybe leave out the Does?

His side of the story contains some juicy nuggets, basically along the lines that Bill Gross was not a difficult jerk, but rather the executives who ousted him were plotting jerks. More interesting perhaps are Gross's claims about philosophical differences in Pimco's management. In his telling:

This leads to a pretty amazing theory for why El-Erian left. Gross offered to focus on his own Total Return Fund and "step down from heading a portion of PIMCO's Investment Committee in favor of El-Erian," and El-Erian declined and quit instead because, Gross says, he "was angry and apprehensive at the idea that he would have to bear sole responsibility (and blame) for the high-risk, high-fee investments he had expanded PIMCO into while Mr. Gross would focus his own efforts on PIMCO's historical bond business."

Gross's theory of Ivascyn, on the other hand, is that he did want more responsibility, and money, for his risky investments. According to Gross, Ivascyn felt like he was being underpaid for his financial performance, and "that PIMCO was paying Mr. Gross tens of millions of dollars that should have instead gone to Ivascyn." And so:

This story of a struggle between the traditional, investor-friendly, long-term, risk-averse, "bonds and burgers" Gross and his high-fee, high-risk, flighty, short-term enemies is interesting enough, and provides a counter-narrative to the usual story of a struggle between the moody, eye-contact-averse, underperforming Gross and the long-suffering executives who finally rose up to get rid of him. It makes a kind of sense as a marketing document, or at least as a philosophical statement. Sure, Gross's new fund at Janus has underperformed his old fund at Pimco since he left. But performance isn't everything. Bill Gross is not driven by a lust for power or greed, does not take unreasonable risks, does not charge excessive fees. Gross is the champion of the investor, in this story, and he was pushed out by a new wave of managers who do not have investors' best interests at heart.

It's a theory. As a lawsuit, though, it is very silly indeed. Gross's claim is that he was pushed out of his job, and shouldn't have been pushed out. You can't really sue for that! For one thing, Gross wasn't technically fired: He quit, calling Pimco's offer of help starting a new fund, "a bone even a dog wouldn't pick." And even if you buy his theory that he was constructively fired,  Gross seems not to have had an employment contract, making him an at-will employee who could have been fired at any time for any reason. Or almost any reason: He couldn't be fired for an illegal reason, like racial discrimination, but he doesn't allege that. Instead he says that he was pushed out "to punish Plaintiff for protected conduct, including but not limited to the exercise of his First Amendment rights," which, good lord, is not how the First Amendment works.

He also argues that he did in fact have some sort of implied employment contract guaranteeing that he couldn't be fired until 2019, which cannot possibly be true, and, separately, that he had another implied employment contract guaranteeing that he couldn't be fired until the end of 2014, which also cannot be true.  And he argues that, since he was fired shortly before the end of the third quarter of 2014, he was entitled to a prorated share of his $80 million profit-sharing payment for that quarter. (Yes, for that quarter: Gross's quarterly bonus was supposed to be $80 million.) This argument strikes me as wrong, but less ludicrously wrong than the other ones. Still wrong though.

These are all sort of beside-the-point technicalities, though. Gross doesn't even want the money:

This lawsuit, which is barely a lawsuit, is not about winning the lawsuit. It's about telling Gross's side of the story in a way that will get maximum attention and be maximally embarrassing for Pimco. It's about replacing Gross's reputation as an erratic, vindictive manager who had lost his touch, with a new reputation as a selfless defender of investors from his enemies' greed. I'm just not sure how effective a revenge lawsuit for hundreds of millions of dollars will be at changing that reputation.

This column does not necessarily reflect the opinion of the editorial board or Bloomberg LP and its owners.

To contact the author of this story:

 Matt Levine at mlevine51@bloomberg.net

To contact the editor responsible for this story:

 Zara Kessler at zkessler@bloomberg.net|||

Anyone can sue anyone for anything. You barely even need a reason.