DUBLIN — Yay! Irish Facebook users are among the first to test out the new Facebook Reactions feature, a range of six emojis being rolled out by the social network.

I logged on to Facebook this morning to see how my friends were taking to this new world of instant simpatico.

It’s still quiet out there: I don’t think that many users realise that should they hover over (or long-tap) the "Like" button they will be greeted by an emotional Rolodex.

John Oliver seems to be popular with Ireland’s Facebook community — his latest report from Last Week Tonight had already notched up quite a few expressions of laughter, love and, for some reason, one angry face (someone obviously felt his attack on pumpkin spiced lattes was unwarranted).

There was an undeniable feeling of satisfaction when I received my first "yay" but I couldn’t return the favour in the comments. While you can "yay," you cannot "sub-yay," by which I mean there isn't an option to react to comments below your post other than simply like them as per usual.

This, however, doesn’t make me angry; I’m just mildly irritated.

Can we have an emoji for this, please, Mr. Zuckerberg?

The Irish (and British) aren’t all that comfortable expressing their emotions in public. Is there an emoji to express “strained politeness?"

While I had no qualms about slapping different emotions onto shared content like funny videos, thoughtful news stories and cute puppies doing head-over-heels it was a bit more difficult when it came to the personal.

A friend posted that his girlfriend had left him and I spent ten minutes agonizing over whether I should add a sad emoji (too pitying?), angry emoji (that might just rile him up!) or the "wow" one (this could have the subtext: wow, you’re bad at relationships). In the end, paralysed by my choice of emotional reactions, I ended up commenting (“Take it one day at a time, dude.”).

I can see why Facebook felt it necessary to give users something more expressive than the Like button, though. With the social networking platform increasingly becoming a place to share news, images of the refugee crisis and stories about police brutality cannot be acknowledged with a breezy thumbs-up; it seems more than a little insensitive.

The kind of news that goes viral is rarely upbeat. Scrolling through my timeline, I am seeing expressions of surprise, sadness and anger in reaction to world events and it already feels normal.

Will this set of six emojis become a core part of the Facebook experience? Let’s take it one day at a time, dude.|||

Facebook has rolled out its new Facebook Reactions feature to its users in Ireland and Spain for testing.