With today's release of three Linux-based, open architecture Power processor servers, IBM hopes to take away market share from the x86 servers many enterprises currently use for high performance computing, big data, and cloud.

Enterprises are willing to switch processor allegiance if the results pay off, wrote the Linley Group in a June 2015 report, "A Guide to Server Processors."

"Performance per watt and performance per watt per dollar are the new metrics driving purchasing decisions in large datacenters. Physical density is also growing in importance, driving greater scalability and new systems such as microservers that pack more nodes into precious rack space," the research firm said. "Although software compatibility remains important, datacenter customers are more willing than before to adopt new platforms if the cost savings and performance are compelling."

IBM anticipates its new Power Systems LC servers – based on technologies and development initiatives from OpenPOWER Foundation partners such as Canonical, Mellanox, Nvidia, Tyan, and Wistron – will entice organizations to switch to its open architecture. OpenPOWER's more than 150 members build solutions atop IBM's Power processor, using an open and collaborative approach designed to accelerate innovation and development. And when it comes to software, there are more than 1,900 apps available on Linux and the Power line, Sumit Gupta, vice president, HPC and OpenPOWER Operations at IBM, told EnterpriseTech.

"This is not a next generation of an existing lineup. This is a brand new addition to the product line," he said.

Expected to ship later this year, the Power Systems LC line comes in three flavors:

Although this is not IBM's first foray into Linux, the LC family marks the developer's first direct volley against Intel's high-end servers, a fast-growing area driven by HPC, cloud, big data, and Internet of Things.

"We've had a Linux offering in the past … but LC brings down the price point and the performance point so we can go after the entire x86 market and can have higher performance," said Gupta. "We are trying to give clients the high performance they need that is not met by the current infrastructure they have."

In addition to selling systems through business partners, IBM also offers enterprises the option of buying online, simply by clicking a button on its website.

"You start with the workloads, then you start with how does that client purchase systems today," Gupta said. "The market is such that every major systems manufacturer has an online presence. It enables clients to configure systems online. This is a new trend for Power Systems."

Another new trend for IBM: Its adoption and promotion of cognitive systems. Unveiled this week at the Gartner Symposium/ITXPO in Orlando, the initiative revolves around enterprises' expanding data – and their need to make sense of it all, said Doug Balog, general manager of IBM Power Systems in a statement.

Allegiant Air has been using Linux on Power Systems to immediately analyze customer behavior on its website, allowing the low-cost airline carrier to quickly adjust prices when it spots trends such as price-sensitivity, according to IBM.

"All enterprises are facing growing amounts of data," said Brian O’Neil, director of Data Architecture at Allegiant Travel, in a release. "It’s how you analyze – and what you do with – the results that allows you take the lead. Leveraging Linux on IBM Power Systems, we have been able to immediately glean valuable insights from a number of data sources, enabling us to take action quicker and more efficiently than ever before."|||

With today's release of three Linux-based, open architecture Power processor servers, IBM hopes to take away market share from the x86 servers many enterpr