There’s no sensation quite like the one that grips you as the words “Fuck it” fall out of your mouth. You could almost say there’s a high to be found in giving up. And I should know, I’ve done it countless times.

But of course, you have to know when to quit, and when to buck the fuck up.

Working for yourself means you’re allowed to get away with doing nothing for the longest periods of time. This, can have dire consequences.

After all, it’s not every day that you feel like creating that next client masterpiece, or even plugging in for the day. Sometimes quitting seems like a good option. The only option.

In a matter of days, Nusii will publicly celebrate its first birthday. However, privately I’ve been working on it since April 2013. That, is a long time to work on any project. Maintaining momentum and enthusiasm takes it’s toll.

But enthusiasm for the product isn’t a problem. I suffer from depressive tendencies, and this makes building anything a challenge. I need a win, each and every day to stay balanced. If I don’t get those wins, my mood takes a hit. And this can be exhausting for all concerned.

Right now I’m going through a bit of a low period. I know I need to write, to get back on podcasts, to start doing webinars and to kick off our outreach. There are so many things I know I need to do, but all I feel like doing is giving up and going back to bed.

This is a long way of saying that today was the first time I’d ever considered truly quitting Nusii. The first day I’d ever thought, ‘What else can I do other than this?’

Fortunately the alternatives that came to mind didn’t look great. I could:

When seen like this, my only option screamed back at me;

I love Nusii! I love what Michael and I have built. I love what it does for fellow creatives and I love the fact that it has the possibility to grow into something special…and not just for me.

People who say that quitting is easy, haven’t spent enough time doing it. It’s hard. You have to quit for the right reasons, and you have to know when those reasons are the right ones. Get it wrong and you risk losing everything.

For me, it’s too late to go back. I cannot and will not give up.  Today, it’s time to buck up.|||

People who say that quitting is easy haven’t spent enough time doing it. You have to quit for the right reasons. You have to know when those reasons...