We’d like to keep you in the loop about some goings-on here at Stumptown.

We want to be the first to tell you about some changes brewing around here. As of this week, we have been acquired by Peet’s Coffee & Tea. We’re excited about the opportunities this will provide for us as we continue to grow.

So what does this mean for us, and for you?

Peet’s and Stumptown will continue to operate as two completely independent companies. In the meantime, Stumptown will keep pushing towards the same goals we’ve always had – sourcing and roasting fresh coffee of the highest quality and taking care of each other and our customers. We’ve got something special going on here, and we don’t intend to change that.

In terms of quality, things will only get better. You don’t have to take our word – the proof will be in the cup. Peet’s is on board and in full support of what we do, as we do it. This will open up our opportunities to continue to responsibly source incredible coffee, build producer relationships, and support coffee farming as a viable economic option for communities around the world.

It also means you’ll probably see more of us as we open up new Stumptown cafes, starting with the one at the Ace Hotel New Orleans early next year.

For all of you folks around the country hollering for more Cold Brew and sending us listings of vacant cafe spaces in your neighborhood, this should help out with that, too.

We’ll continue to source and roast our own coffee, and brew our own Cold Brew. Our staff and cafes will remain our own. Duane will still be involved as our founder, friend, creative advisor and spirit guide.

Stumptown has always cared about taking care of the people who work here – and we’ll continue to provide top notch health care, along with new 401k’s and better employee benefits.

For all of you who have grown up with us these last 15 years, we can’t thank you enough. It’s an absolute honor to get to know you and share coffee with you everyday. Here’s to many, many more. The future is bright.|||

We’d like to keep you in the loop about some goings-on here at Stumptown.  - Stumptown Coffee Roasters