This signals yet another surprising find from NASA's groundbreaking New Horizons mission, which culminated in the closest-ever look at the distant dwarf planet in July.

A newly-released image taken by NASA's New Horizons spacecraft shows the dwarf planet's blue hazes shining against the blackness of space. According to NASA, the new photo was processed to closely resemble the colors a person would see if looking at Pluto from that same angle.

If you were to stand on Pluto during sunrise and sunset, you would probably see a blue sunrise or sunset from the surface, New Horizons scientist Carly Howett told Mashable via email, but it might not be quite so easy to see the blue tint during the day on Pluto.

"The hazes are quite thin, so you'd have a hard time seeing them from the surface of Pluto during the day," Howett said.

Scientists working with New Horizons are still looking into whether the blue can be seen at all times of day or not, New Horizons principal investigator Alan Stern told Mashable via email.

The blue coloration actually gives researchers on the ground a good idea of what the hazy particles are made of.

“A blue sky often results from scattering of sunlight by very small particles," Howett, said in a NASA statement. "On Earth, those particles are very tiny nitrogen molecules. On Pluto they appear to be larger — but still relatively small — soot-like particles we call tholins.”

These tholins — which are probably more red or gray in color — likely form in Pluto's upper atmosphere where methane and nitrogen are ionized, leading to those molecules recombine, grow and then eventually falling down to Pluto's surface, adding to the red coloration of the world, NASA said.

New Horizons took this photo as it passed Pluto — which is one of the many small bodies in an area of the solar system known as the Kuiper Belt — in July.

“Who would have expected a blue sky in the Kuiper Belt? It’s gorgeous,” Stern said in the statement.

NASA also announced Thursday that New Horizons has discovered patches of exposed water ice on Pluto. New Horizons found other ices likely masking water ice on Pluto's surface.

The new findings show that the exposed frozen water patches are actually bright red, a mystery that scientists are going to be trying to solve.

“I’m surprised that this water ice is so red,” Silvia Protopapa, a science team member, said in the statement. “We don’t yet understand the relationship between water ice and the reddish tholin colorants on Pluto's surface.”

New Horizons is now more than 3 billion miles from Earth, on its way deeper into the Kuiper Belt. The spacecraft, if approved for an extended mission by NASA, will fly past another mysterious object in Pluto's part of space in 2019, possibly revealing the surface features of yet another world on the outskirts of the solar system.|||

NASA's New Horizons spacecraft has found that Pluto's hazes are actually blue.