During Apple WWDC held in San Francisco, California on June 8, 2015, Apple senior vice president of Software Engineering, Craig Federighi speaks about iOS 9. At the annual developers’ conference that runs through June 12, Apple announced a new OS X, EI Capitan and iOS 9.

Looking at the number of hacking incidents that took place last year, it’s not surprising that the tech companies are shifting their concern more on making their devices un- hackable. For this, they are investing more on making their gadgets secured. Recently the jailbreaker Luca Todesco has broken into iOS 8.4.1, the International Business Times reported. With the introduction of iOS 9, there are not many using iOS 8.4.1 version.

The news: The introduction of a “rootless” technology by Apple for iOS 9, helps break access to the iOS root, might have proved challenging to Todesco and other hackers. It means no hacker will be able to jailbreak into the system anymore and it has been working so far too.

The popular hackers like TaiG, PanGu and others are facing difficulty in jailbreaking this new system, noted by IBT. As of now, there seems only one way to jailbreak the new system and that is Semi JB’s Partial jailbreak allowing installing Cydia with only limited functions.

About the iOS 9 jailbreak attempt, Tem PanGu noted, “the iOS 9 beta jailbreak has been released for public. A demonstration video for iOS 9 beta jailbreak is released by the famous jailbreak developer iH8sn0w. We can fairly expect the jailbreak method to work for iOS 9.1 beta 1 also. However, there is nothing officially announced about iOS9.1 beta jailbreak from any of the developers. ”

It has been established that it’s next to impossible to jailbreak into the iOS 9. The icing on the cake is, the security firm Zerodium has put a huge bounty for organizations and individuals who can jailbreak into the latest system. A total of $3 million has been offered by “The Million Dollar iOS 9 Bug Bounty” for those who can jailbreak into Apple’s iPhones and iPads.

The Million Dollar iOS 9 Bug Bounty comes into play in a notice put by the company which says, “Currently Apple’s iOS is the most secure mobile OS. But it would be wrong to say that it’s unbreakable rather it means that the iOS has currently the highest cost and complexity of getting exploited. ”

It doesn’t seem easy for anyone to get any of these millions. Yibada mentioned that developers are busy in jail breaking into the more stable 8.4.1 version whereas Apple is focusing on the new iOS9 in order to add more stringent security to help its users from any potential jailbreaks and hacks.|||

