Think you know all there is to know about London? Or maybe you are planning on travelling to the capital and are looking for something a bit different to do. If that’s the case then check out our pick of 5 of the weirdest things that you can do in the capital right now!

Rave your way into the day! This is the slogan for the new craze that is spreading across the world. Morning Gloryville holds morning raves across 3 different areas of London. They throw immersive morning dance parties to get you live and kicking for the day ahead. Starting at 6.30 they last for 4 hours and offer a smoothie bar, an organic coffee kiosk and a wake up massage station. They throw the ultimate party to get you energised for the day and have even had acts including Fatboy Slim and Basement Jaxx get involved.

Ever fancied your hand at some taxidermy? The Last Tuesday Society offer a range of classes depending on your skill and you get to stuff a number of different animals as you progress through the course. Prices are around £50 per person and they even allow you to take your artwork home and show it off to everyone.

Formerly a Victorian toilet, the Attendant has transformed this space into a cosy café. The urinals have become a seating area and a café bar has been put in. Apart from this much of the interior has been preserved and just updated to give the café a Victorian feel. Having won best London coffee shop in 2013 this place is well worth a look.

If you fancy spending your evening doing something truly different then look no further than the naked boys reading events that happen in different venues across London. It’s all in the name, at these events people sit around and listen as one by one naked men take it in turns to read sections from different books to the audience. Each evening has a different literary theme and tickets are usually around £5 in advance. Head over to their Facebook page for a list of upcoming events.

Yes that’s right, you can actually cage dive with sharks in London! If you don’t fancy travelling to do this experience then head over to the London Sealife Aquarium where for £25 you will be lowered into a tank of 15 sharks for 15 minutes. If you think that’s a bit steep then why not save some money with the family package and give the kids a truly terrifying experience that they will never forget!

Know someone who has a birthday coming up? Or are you looking to do something a bit different this year for your own birthday celebration? Shareagift provides an easy way to collect money online with friends for the ultimate day out, evening meal or birthday surprise. Show someone you really care by saving for a group gift that they will always remember or do something wacky to raise money for a worthy cause and use Shareagift to keep on top of all your donations.

Top 5 Incredibly Random Pubs You Must Try In London|||

Save With Shareagift Towards ... An Amazing Day Out Think you know all there is to know about London? Or maybe you are planning on travelling to the capital and are looking for something a bit different to do. If that’s the case then check out our pick of 5 of the weirdest things that…