Meet the future of design. Hint: it’s on your phone.

Project brief title: “High End Overlay App”

Goal: Create an app that allows users to make art while supporting and promoting graphic artists while having widespread appeal to both the mobile editing community and the general public.

Starting development on the High End Overlay App would eventually lead us to publish Assembly, our vector design app. At the time of the brief, Over and other apps were overlaying simple black and white designs on photos and doing well. So we thought, why not let our users overlay colorful, more sophisticated designs that were created by professional graphic artists? It seemed like a win-win situation — the app would let graphic artists get their work out to iPhone users, and the app users could place nice looking graphics on their photos like stickers.

We wanted a variety of overlay styles and ended up spending a small fortune getting the first round of overlays created. We decided to take a few of the designs and get initial feedback from our most trusted mobile artists that we work with. Below is the actual set of overlays we sent out.

Getting feedback from users is always tricky. People are likely to say nice things, but usually, it’s the negative comments like the ones below that are the most important.

“I personally don’t see many styles that resonate with me. Most of the images have too much of a button/badge/icon feel.”

“I’m still happier just making stuff I know I’ve done all the work on.”

“…an app for just overlays and masking is not so necessary.”

The response was more negative than what we expected. People felt the overlays were too finished and had difficulty adding them to photos. The overlays were so overpowering, they became the focus of the artwork.

We were back to square one. However, one piece of feedback got us heading in the right direction.

“An app that gives you the ability to make your own shapes and graphics is really what I think is missing.”

Earlier in the April as an exercise in market research, we invited some talented graphic designers to our office to see what their workflows were in Adobe Illustrator. Many of them created basic shapes, then combined, subtracted, and manipulated the shapes to form their final designs.

As we sat in that Monday morning meeting, it dawned on us that we had the pieces to our next app right in front of us.

The overlay designs that most appealed to us and our mobile artists consisted of basic geometric shapes. Adding finished designs to photos is challenging but adding basic geometric shapes isn’t. These shapes can be combined to create more elaborate designs. Given enough basic shapes and the right tools, our artists could make their own overlays, and even icons and logos if they wanted. This is how we stumbled upon the building block approach to graphic design.

We realized the best way to test the new building block concept was to try it on the iPhone. We immediately started work on the new app. “Assembly” was a name we had thrown around before. With the building block theme in mind, the name was perfect.

Instead of rasterized shapes, it made sense to build Assembly using vector shapes so that the artwork would scale to any size and keep the memory footprint as small as possible. Within a week we had wireframes and a basic working prototype in Xcode.

The first prototype had a handful of shapes, less than ten colors, and options to turn on/off outlines and shadows. It would place different shapes on the screen and auto-generate designs.

We thought auto-generation would play a big part in the app until we realized that the designs, even with a lot of tweaking to the algorithm, weren’t compelling. We also realized that what people wanted was more control over their artwork, not less. We needed to explore further.

We added a way to choose shapes and position the shapes on the artboard in the following iteration. That opened up a lot of possibilities and we started exploring the different things we can make with Assembly. We also started looking at Dribbble and other design resources to see what designers in the wild were making.

Now that we understood what was possible, we needed to figure out exactly what we wanted Assembly to do. We formed a vision statement for the app that would guide us to the final product.

“Building blocks for playful creations. Entry level vector design app. Legos for overlays, specifically for our artist community.”

The exploration also helped us organize and form the features and shape packs we needed for Assembly 1.0.

By August after multiple iterations and internal testing, we had the first beta version that we wanted to send to a small group of our best artists. Most of the main features including grid snapping, styles, undo/redo, exporting and saving were in place. At the same time, we started contracting graphic designers for the final shapes that would go into Assembly.

The feedback from the group was astounding. We could sense the excitement in each of the responses that came back.

Even more impressive was the work that the artists were sharing. Below are just few of the ones that people submitted the first 48-hours into beta testing.|||

Project brief title: “High End Overlay App”
Goal: Create an app that allows users to make art while supporting and promoting graphic artists while having widespread appeal to both the mobile editing…