Today social selling and using the power of social media is how sales people do their networking, information sharing and in many cases the initial customer interaction. For sales teams putting the social into selling is paying rich dividends. The internet and growth of social media channels are providing sales people with a multitude of new ways in lead generation, to identifying prospects and improving awareness to buyers. Social selling sounds simple but maybe it is time to ask yourself – are you using these new sales avenues as much as you should be?

First, let us look at some social selling statistics to help reinforce why this sales activity is proving so rewarding.

Social selling is about moving sales people from old world selling into the social selling world. To get sales team switch from the cold calling world to the world of LinkedIn, Twitter and Social Networks. Leaving behind “interruption sales” where sales people call prospects indiscriminately to a sales model where the sales people share and inform their prospects with relevant content to get there awareness.

Recent articles published in Forbes on social selling shows “78.6% of sales reps using social media as part of their professional outreach outperformed those that were not”. The same research shows how sales people using social media as a tool were also more successful at exceeding their sales targets. Sales teams using social media won more often, and lost less. The top 3 social selling platforms were LinkedIn, Twitter, and Facebook. However there are many more social networks and forums where lead generation can thrive.

I often hear the line that “social selling does not apply to our business” as the target segment does not use social media that much. The argument is that not all businesses put a lot of time or effort into social media marketing. They may not use social media but they DO consume it, from articles on forums or LinkedIn, to white papers published online or industry research shared. They read and are influenced by peer comments which by default raise the awareness levels for brands or companies. The above social selling statistics prove it. Business social networks like LinkedIn is just one avenue as there are many industry specific social platforms or forums that will work for most sales efforts regardless of industry.

Social selling is about subtly directing buyers or prospects to potential groups of interest to them, sharing quality and relevant, and helping them expand their own social network use for information. Putting the social into selling can go a long way in increasing awareness, driving up the consideration levels for your product, your company, and yourself as a valued connection.

Using the social networks to sell, requires sales people and content marketers to stand out from the noise and low quality social conversations. If your business segment is a vertical that is very social (gaming, clothes, marketing, health, and recruitment) and you are considering if it is worth trying to make an impression when there is so much noise already? Why not take a different social approach and go personal. Use a social media tool to find contacts and decision makers at target companies that have their own Twitter accounts or unique blog on Blogger, WordPress or Medium. Maybe they are active participants on certain business forums. Sharing relevant content, insights, useful information or replying to questions on Quora, can make any sales person stand out from other suppliers, and present you less as the “interruption” sales person of the old world and more of a quality connection for the future collaboration.

To wrap up, social network channels is THE way to start and build relationships with prospects away from bland sales emails and cold calls. When used effectively, social selling can help generate a warm sales lead, get invited to make a sales call, nurture relationship, and help acquire more customers.|||

Social selling is about moving sales people from old world selling into the social selling world.