Google on Wednesday unveiled a way to make web pages load much faster on mobile Web browsers, an open-source project it’s calling Accelerated Mobile Pages.

For Internet users, speedier load times are undoubtedly a good thing. But for ad-supported sites and services, questions remain about how they’ll be able to squeeze ads into AMP pages.

Here’s what we know so far:

Richard Gingras, Google’s senior director of news and social products, described AMP as a “deal-less environment,” meaning there are no commercial relationships between Google or any publishers involved in the project. Google may still take a cut of any advertising it helps to sell and serve into AMP pages, however.

Google is not yet sure exactly how advertising will work within AMP. Pages will load content before advertising, the company said, but other details around ad targeting and tracking capabilities still need to be addressed.

“There are a lot of details to work out here in terms of some of those capabilities,” Mr. Gingras told CMO Today. “We want to support existing business models, but it’s a work in progress. Today wasn’t the finish line; today was the starting line.”

According to Grant Whitmore, executive vice president of digital at New York newspaper Daily News, the publisher is confident its existing online ad infrastructure or “stack” will function within AMP pages in a similar way it does on its regular pages. Daily News is one of the publishers involved in the development and early testing of the AMP concept.

“There are going to be limits, but we are comfortable we will be able to do a lot of the things we already do on our own properties,” Mr. Whitmore said.

Although details related to advertising still need to be figured out, Google stressed that publishers using AMP will be free to use whichever tools they wish to sell advertising alongside their content. That means publishers can use Google’s ad tools, but also can use ad networks and technologies provided by third-party companies. In addition to ads, Google says it also plans for the project to offer support for subscriptions and paywalls. “Publishers control their business model and who they work with to sell ads, Mr. Gingras said.

The increase in consumer adoption of ad-blocking tools in recent years has been driven largely by the fact advertising slows down web pages loading times, at least according to some in the digital media industry. A more streamlined mobile web experience provided by AMP could therefore help prevent consumers from using such tools, media execs suggest.

“I don’t think Google was attempting to address ad blocking here, but it’s in-line with what ad blockers are capitalizing on,” Mr. Whitmore said. “Ad blocking gives you a better interface that’s faster. Google’s taking a more publisher-friendly approach that achieves the same thing.”

Publishers might be free to use third-party ad tools, but Google said it intends to help ensure only ad formats that “do not detract from the user experience” are used within AMP pages. Ultimately it’s up to the community to decide which ad types do and do not detract from the user experience, Mr. Gingras said, but Google plans to help “steer in a direction that’s more compelling for users.”

Daily News’ Mr. Whitmore said his company and other publishers are already in talks with Google around what those ad formats may or may not include, but described the discussions as “early.”

Publishers retain complete control of their AMP pages, Mr. Gingras said. “All the data coming from this is theirs,” he said.|||

The online ad giant wants to speed up Web content on mobile devices, while maintaining online publishers’ ad-supported business models.