UUID stands for universally unique identifiers as described in RFC-4122. An UUID is 128 bits value and "practically unique" (not guaranteed unique) across space and time. They are useful for identifiers for documents, hosts, application clients and other situation where a unique value is necessary. UUIDs are standardized by the Open Software Foundation (OSF) as part of the Distributed Computing Environment (DCE).

The chance of two randomly generated UUID to be duplicate is very low. only after generating 1 billion UUIDs every second for the next 100 years, the probability of creating just one duplicate would be about 50%. Which in the practical sense makes two UUIDs very unique but not theoretically.

Based on the layout specification, UUID has five versions:

UUID version 1 values are generated using the MAC address of the host ( the computer on which it was generated) and time-stamp.

UUID version 4 generates a "random" UUID from truly-random or pseudo random numbers. If you just need to generate a UUID then this is probably you want.

uuidgenerator.org is a free online UUID generator for version1 and 4. The bulk UUID generator, outputs UUID1 and UUID4 codes in bulk set. Just select the version in "Bulk UUID Generator", enter the number of value you want and hit on "Generate" button. That's it.

This website is provided “as is” without any representations or warranties, express or implied. The site provides UUID without any warranty of any kind, not even the warranty that the generated UUID is actually unique.The entire risk of using this UUID is upto you. Please do not use the UUID from cached version of this page. This website is not responsible for, and expressly disclaims all liability for, damages of any kind arising out of use, reference to, or reliance on any information contained within the site.By using this website you agree to those terms, if not then do not use this website.|||

Free online UUID generator. Universally unique identifier (UUID) Generator. Generate Version 1 and Version 4 UUID codes in bulk for free.