[Tweet “Tweet is 144 characters of excitement that anyone can share with ridiculous ease.”]

Twitter is the only platform in the world, where audience is very smart and genuine. So if you have really good content and you want to go viral with it, twitter is the destination. Users in twitter are always looking for great content. To reach a larger audience in twitter is not a magic but yes it is easy if you use this platform smartly. Here are ten ways to reach a large audience in twitter (Twitter Marketing Hacks):

Also Read: Top 10 Free Must Use WordPress Plugins for New Bloggers

While experienced and pro bloggers do it and write about it all the time, you will be amazed at how underrated this method is among relatively new bloggers. And it’s really simple. Just tag influencers whom your post may concern and if it really connects with them, they will favorite or retweet, driving thousands of their followers to your blog.

While, it may not be easy to interact with the pros, there are thousands of their followers, seasoned but not pro, bloggers and influencers like yourself that you can interact and network with. And we all know that networking creates opportunities.

Go For: Brand24 To Get Social Insights of Your Brand

Many times you find helpful content by other bloggers in your niche. Retweeting them not only is a way to express your opinions and open up to new networking opportunities, but also helps establish your credibility and knowledge in your niche among your followers.

People come across your tweets, content that’s really good and decide to give profile a look. After they land on your profile page, they decide whether to follow or leave in a split second. Therefore, what they see is very important. Thus your profile deserves your best shot.

A lot of your followers follow and like you because the kind of content you share. Because they find it useful, inspiring or exciting. And thus you can share anything you find interesting, anything your followers would like. And that doesn’t have to be your own content.

Putting your posts out there is good, but don’t forget to share other things that you like because that is also a way of expressing yourself and your personality.

Text is fine, but people are busier than ever and they just want to quickly scan through to find anything that’s interesting. Thus your best shot at getting the attention is by using provocative and curiosity arousing pictures and videos.

This is a very under-estimated, underrated hack. It’s like trying to ride a fast-moving wave, if you manage to somehow cling-on to the wave; the instantaneous speed and momentum that you will get is SIMPLY PHENOMENAL.

This is again, one of the most effective ways to establish your authority, express your opinions and get A LOT OF followers.

If you are not putting your content in-front of the right audience or if you are not creating the right content for your targeted audience, then get ready for your post to be lost into the eternal black hole of the internet.

Once you have useful information you wanna share, present it in such a way that retweeting your tweets make people feel about themselves, makes them look cool or knowledgeable to their viewers.

[Tweet “If you are not using twitter, or if you are not using it right for your blog. You are missing out.”]

Must Read: Top 10 Ways to Promote Your Blog Posts and Win

Over doing anything is dangerous. And especially twitter promotion and marketing. Keep it straight, simple and targeted. Look at the RIGHT audience and not the NUMBER of the audience. Finally focus  on conversion and not traffic.

Everyone loves twitter, so do we. Tweet, Retweet, Favorite this Post.|||

Best twitter promotion and marketing hacks that can help you get more traffic from Twitter and improve your visibility. Grow now with these Twitter hacks.