Sending your nonprofit organization’s Facebook traffic to an ImpactFlow landing page can expose you to potential new partners, give you tools to promote your causes, let you give donors updates on specific campaigns, and alleviate the stress of not having a website that accepts donations.

In it’s rawest form, the Facebook donate now button is a new call to action nonprofits can add to the top of their Facebook profiles. When a user clicks on the button they are directed to a URL of the nonprofits choosing where they should be prompted to donate to a cause.

For many nonprofits, this is a nice innovation that will allow them to drive more traffic to landing pages that are already optimized for this exact type of user flow. But for others, there may be a bit of confusion as to where to send users that click on Facebook’s new donate now button. We believe our solution provides a wealth of benefits to nonprofit organizations that choose to direct Facebook traffic to an ImpactFlow profile or campaign page.

First off, by joining ImpactFlow, nonprofits are joining a network of potential business and individual partners that are looking for opportunities to give back. Second, we provide tools that allow the organization to amplify their causes and campaign needs via social media with pre-populated or customized messaging. Third, we cater to donor’s number one need which is receiving updates on campaigns and causes they contribute to. ImpactFlow’s functionality will store the email address of a business or nonprofit that donates and will allow the nonprofit the ability to send direct updates to all donors so the money trail is tracked and transparent.

Did we mention that setting up a profile is the perfect way for nonprofits without a website to set up a donation hub with just a few minutes of work?

Who spends the most time on ImpactFlow? Our data tells us that more than half of the sessions conducted on ImpactFlow during our past two months of growth are individuals and businesses exploring the site. These are individuals and businesses that signed up to be a part of this network because of its ability to help them give back.

Right now, those users have access to a private marketplace that allows them to browse causes by category, location and more so they can find a cause that means something personal to them. And do you want to hear a secret? We are working on opening that marketplace up to the public so the visibility of nonprofit campaigns will be even higher.

We are the first to admit that this feature should exist on any landing page you build, but it is worth noting that when you direct traffic to an ImpactFlow profile or campaign page that social media amplification tools are instantly available and optimized for easy use. When a user comes to the page and wants to share the cause, they can click on a share button and either use a pre-populated message about the campaign or write one of their own. It’s as simple as 1,2,3 and can go to Facebook and/or Twitter.

According to our research (and the research of others) the primary thing donors want to know, whether it be an individual or business, is where their money is going. Using ImpactFlow’s tools, you will soon be able to send campaign and cause updates back to your donors directly through the platform. The messaging portion of this feature is still in development, but we are already gathering the email addresses of each donor so they are automatically added to a list. You can also upload your existing member list to give this upcoming feature even more oomph.

At ImpactFlow, we realize that nonprofit organizations come in all shapes and sizes, and that some rely on tools like Facebook as their primary online portal for gaining exposure. So what do you do if you don’t have a website, but you still want to take advantage of the donate now button?

Simply set up an ImpactFlow profile. Our easy to use wizard will guide you through the steps of setting up your profile, and in a short time you can have a clean, mobile-optimized landing page with a dedicated URL you can use to accept donations.

And don’t worry, if you have any issues getting set up our team is on standby to help make sure you have everything you need to get started.

We know that there are plenty of options for your nonprofit when selecting where to send your Facebook donate now traffic. We just happen to believe that our profile pages can provide a very viable solution for many of you, while giving you a great opportunity to be a part of a growing network that cares about giving back and giving nonprofit organizations the tools they need to succeed.

If you have any questions about how to get started, reach out to success@impactflow.com and we will be happy to help out. Have a great day!|||

Learn how using the Facebook Donate Now button to send traffic to your ImpactFlow profile can help grow your network while engaging and retaining donors.