Not long ago, the Pure Storage (PSTG) IPO would have likely fetched a juicy valuation – and garnered a nice pop.  But instead, the offering was priced at the mid-range and the stock dropped about 5% on the first day of trading.

Yet this should be no surprise.  With the market correction during the summer, there has been a shunning of risk assets.

As a result, the disconnect between the hyper optimism of Silicon Valley and the soberness of the public markets is even more stark nowadays.

“The momentum players in the private sector have been bidding up the same predictable opportunities, forcing large raises and the need to justify the spend,” said Kristen Koh Goldstein, who is the founder and CEO of Scalus. “This has created a ripple effect throughout the entire tech ecosystem.”

Now keep in mind that the tech IPO market had already been showing signs of weakness even before the onset of market volatility. According to Dealogic, only 20 tech companies have gone public this year, down from 62 in 2014.

So yes, the lackluster performance of Pure Storage is really no fluke. And interestingly enough, the IPO may wind up being the easy part. After all, as seen with other companies like Box, it can be tough to maintain the momentum.

“For companies wanting to IPO, we believe they will continue to be held to a high standard where predictable revenue growth, coupled with more expense discipline will be necessary components to attract investors,” said Ron Heinz, who is the founder and managing partner at Signal Peak Ventures. “Even in a hyper-growth state, we feel most companies will be better off staying private until they have a demonstrable path to profitability within a 12 - 18 month window. These dynamics will make subsequent late-stage private rounds more important, but will indeed put some downward pressure on prices.”|||

Not long ago, the Pure Storage (PSTG) IPO would have likely fetched a juicy valuation – and garnered a nice pop.  But instead, the offering was priced at the mid-range and the stock dropped about 5% on the first day of trading. Yet this should be no surprise.  With the market correction [...]