

 “Bzzzzzzz” The phone vibrates in Chloe’s pocket. She looks around the class and at Mr. Cunningham, who was faced towards the board solves a mathematical equation. Chloe takes her cell phone out and starts texting. As Mr. Cunningham turned, she quickly hid her cell phone in her jeans pocket, but as soon as he turned back towards the board, she pulled it out again and started texting. Later that evening, chole found it hard to complete her maths homework, because she was not attentive in class.

This is the story of every teen who owns a cell phone. Many schools across America have banned the use of cell phones during classrooms, but children always find their way to use them during class. As long as they are in their pockets, children will always be using them.

According to a recent research study, 90.3 percent of the English teens own cell phones. In addition, 73 percent of U.S. teens own cell phones.

Do you think that the children can focus on outdoor games, outdoor playground equipment or social settings if they have a constant buzzing cell phone? School going children needs to be spending more time with physical fitness activities and after school activities, not with cell phones.

A research by Louis-Philippe Beland and Richard Murphy (Sick Communication: The Impact of Mobile Phones on Student Performance) found that after schools banned cell phones, the test scores of understudies enhanced by 6.4%. The financial analysts figure that this is “what might as well be called adding five days to the school year”. Cell phones should be especially banned from school playgrounds, cafeterias and near commercial playground equipment, so that children can focus on the socializing and play activities.

There is no easy way to answer this question. In simple words, they are distracting children, and that is only one of the many side effects that are attached with the use of cell phones in early age. Many recent studies have highlighted the enormous dangers of cell phones that halt brain’s natural development. Children see cell phones as a recreational way to engage with their friends, which is why they use them constantly. Instead of having a good face to face talk, they prefer to text their friends. This creates social hindrance that impacts children’s future.

Examination demonstrates that youngsters are at more danger of creating different eye sicknesses, including vision disorder and perpetual a sleeping disorder than the grown-ups (kids are influenced twice as much as the grown-ups on the grounds that their physiological framework is as yet growing.) Long term presentation to the blue light transmitting gadgets prevents the improvement process, which can bring about extreme issues later on.

Cell phones should be only allowed after school. It is understandable that cell phones have become a necessity and they keep you connected with your children. However, keep in mind that they are also the greatest source of distraction for your children. So, if the school has not banned them yet, take away the cell phone for the school period.

What do you think? Should kids be allowed to use cell phones in school? In your opinion, what kind of impact cell phones can have on our youth? Share your opinion in the comment section below.|||

“Bzzzzzzz” The phone vibrates in Chloe’s pocket. She looks around the class and at Mr. Cunningham, who was faced towards the board solves a mathematical equation. Chloe takes her cell phone out and starts texting. As Mr. Cunningham turned, she quickly hid her cell phone in her jeans pocket, but as soon as he turned…