Talking to God...I met god the other day.I know what you’re thinking. How the hell did you know it was god?Well, I’ll explain as we go along, but basically he convinced me by having all, and I do mean ALL, the answers. Every question I flung at him he batted back with a plausible and satisfactory answer. In the end, it was easier to accept that he was god than otherwise.Which is odd, because I’m still an atheist and we even agree on that!It all started on the 8.20 back from Paddington. Got myself a nice window seat, no screaming brats or drunken hooligans within earshot. Not even a mobile phone in sight. Sat down, reading the paper and in he walks.What did he look like?Well not what you might have expected that’s for sure. He was about 30, wearing a pair of jeans and a "hobgoblin" tee shirt. Definitely casual. Looked like he could have been a social worker or perhaps a programmer like myself.’ he said.‘Help yourself’ I replied.Sits down, relaxes, I ignore and back to the correspondence on genetically modified crops entering the food chain…Train pulls out and a few minutes later he speaks.Fighting to restrain my left eyebrow I replied ‘Yes’ in a tone which was intended to convey that I might not mind one question, and possibly a supplementary, but I really wasn’t in the mood for a conversation. ..The Bastard!I love this kind of conversation and can rabbit on for hours about the nonsense of theist beliefs. But I have to be in the mood! It's like when a Jehova’s witness knocks on your door 20 minutes before you’re due to have a wisdom tooth pulled. Much as you'dlove to stay… You can’t even begin the fun. And I knew, if I gave my standard reply we’d still be arguing when we got to Cardiff. I just wasn’t in the mood. I needed to fend him off.But then I thought ‘Odd! How is this perfect stranger so obviously confident – and correct – about my atheism?’ If I’d been driving my car, it wouldn’t have been such a mystery. I’ve got the Darwin fish on the back of mine – the antidote to that twee christian fish you see all over. So anyone spotting that and understanding it would have been in a position to guess my beliefs. But I was on a train and not even wearing my Darwin "Evolve" tshirt that day. And ‘The Independent’ isn’t a registered flag for card carrying atheists, so what, I wondered, had given the game away.‘What makes you so certain that I don’t?’’, he said, ‘You’ll have to take my word for it of course, but there are ways you can deliver a line like that – most of which would render the speaker a candidate for an institution, or at least prozac. Some of which could be construed as mildly entertaining.Conveying it as "indifferent fact" is a difficult task but that’s exactly how it came across. Nothing in his tone or attitude struck me as even mildly out of place with that statement. He said it because he believed it and his rationality did not appear to be drug induced or the result of a mental breakdown.‘And why should I believe that?’’ he said, ‘This is going to be a short conversation after all, I thought.‘Who am I?’He paused'Do youmy permission?'Might as well play along I thought. 'OK - you have my permission. So convince me'A serious hacker might be able to obtain the password, but no one else and I meanNO ONEknows its association.He did.So how would you have played it?I threw a few more questions about relatively insignificant but unpublicised details of my life (like what my mother claims was the first word I ever spoke – apparently "armadillo"! (Don't ask…)) but I was already pretty convinced. I knew there were only three possible explanations at this point.Possibility One was that I was dreaming, hallucinating or hypnotised. Nobody’s figured out a test for that so, at the time I think that was my dominant feeling. It did not feel real at the time. More like I was in a play. Acting my lines. Since the event, however, continuing detailed memories of it, together with my contemporaneous notes, remain available, so unless the hallucination has continued to this day, I am now inclined to reject the hallucination hypothesis. Which leaves two others.He could have been a true telepath. No documented evidence exists of anyone ever having such profound abilities to date but it was a possibility. It would have explained how he could know my best-kept secrets. The problem with that is that it doesn’t explain anything else! In particular it doesn’t account for the answers he proceeded to give to my later questions.As Sherlock Holmes says, when you’ve eliminated the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.Good empiricist, Sherlock.I was forced to accept at least the possibility that this man was who he claimed to be.So now what do you do?Well, I’ve always known that if I met god I would have a million questions for him, so I thought, ‘why not?’ and proceeded with what follows. You’ll have to allow a bit of licence in the detail of the conversation. This was, shall we say, a somewhat unusual occurrence, not to mention just a BIT weird! And yes I was abit nervous! So if I don’t get it word perfect don’t whinge! You’ll get the gist I promise.‘Forgive me if it takes me a little time to get up to speed here, but it's not everyday I get to question a deity’’ he interrupted.!’ I thought.Nowtakes some getting used to!I tried to get a grip on my thoughts, with an internal command - ‘’ he said.Tell you! That’s the bit that made it feel unreal more than anything else - this guy sitting across the table and very obviously accurately reading my every thought. It's like finding someone else's hand inside your trouser pocket!Nevertheless, something (other than simply having given my "permission") made me inclined to accept the invasion, I had obviously begun to have some confidence in his perception or abilities, so I distinctly remember the effect of his words was that I suddenly felt deeply reassured and completely relaxed. As he had no doubt intended. Man must have an amazing seduction technique!So then we got down to business…‘Are you human?’‘Were you, ever?’‘Ah, so you are a produc.t of evolution?’‘and you evolved from a species like ours, dna based organisms or something equally viable?’so what, exactly, makes you god?’‘Why?’‘and your present powers, are they in any way similar to what the superstitious believers in my species attribute to you?’So you created all this, just for us?’‘But you did create the Universe?’‘But not your own?’‘You know what I mean!’‘So let me get this straight. You are an entirely natural phenomenon.’‘Arising from mechanisms which we ourselves will one day understand and possibly even master?’‘meaning that if the human race doesn’t come up to the mark, other species eventually will?’‘and how many other species are there already out there ahead of us?’‘FEW!?’‘Phew!’‘And how many at or about our level?’‘so our significance in the universe at present is roughly equivalent to the significance of the average Joe here on planet Earth in his relation to the human race?’‘Do you mean we will one day control our own Sun like Kardashev and Asimov talk about?’‘ all these evolving species; they are your "children"?’‘and the point?’‘so you created a Universe which is potentially capable of producing another god like yourself?’‘this being the moment when our new god merges with you and we become one again?’‘Yes, I think I can see the attractions of a hundred billion year long orgasm’‘So it's all about sex is it?’‘Sounds good to me!''How direct is your involvement in all this? Did you just light the fuse which set off the big bang and stand back and watch? Or did you have to plant the seeds on appropriately fertile planets?’‘So then what?’And if they’re not?’‘Usually?’‘Usually?’‘Let me guess. Dinosaurs on this planet are an example. Too successful. Suppressed the development of mammals and were showing no signs of developing intelligence. So you engineered a little corrective action in the form of a suitably selected asteroid’‘Regrettably?’‘But at that stage how could you know that a better prospect would arise from the ashes?’and since then, what other little tweaks have you been responsible for in our development?’'If the sign is "aerial activity", how do you identify technological bird species?''but why would a bird need a flying machine?'OK, so what about our more famous "prophets"; Jesus of Nazareth, Moses, Mohammed…’‘So, you’ve been taking more interest in us since the Montgolfiers, when was that? 1650s?’‘Well, if you’ve been watching us closely since then, what your average citizen is going to want to know is why you haven’t intervened more often. Why, if you have the  power and omniscience that goes with being a god, have you sat back and allowed us to endure such incredible suffering and human misery in the past few centuries?’‘NECESSARY??!!’‘And what of pity for those have to live through this torment?’'ah but I can't have an intelligent conversation with an ant'‘hmm… as you know, most humans won’t like even to attempt to grasp that perspective. How can you make it more palatable?’‘So what are we supposed to do in order to qualify for membership of the universal intelligentsia?’‘Yes, but how?’‘Is there worse to come?’‘Genetic warfare for instance?‘and the problem is… that we need to develop all these technologies, acquire all this dangerous knowledge in order to reach level two. But at any stage that knowledge could also cause our own destruction’’14 Million of them’'Will there be room for us?'‘and, for now, how should we mere mortals regard you then?’‘so we’re not obliged to "please" you or follow your alleged guidelines or anything like that?’‘Why me? Why pick on an atheist of all people? Why are you telling me all this? And why Now?’'Why can't there be a fourth option - selective research where we avoid investigating dangerous pathways?'‘I’m not sure I understand my part in this exercise. I just publish this conversation on the web and everything will be alright?’can I ask what those advances may be?'‘You say you avoid intervention. But doesn’t this conversation itself constitute intervention – even if people alive now completely ignore it?’'But why bother even with that much? Surely it's just another evolutionary hurdle. We're either fit enough or not…'‘Alright, so what if everyone suddenly took it seriously and believed every word I write? Wouldn’t that constitute a somewhat more drastic intervention?’and so it's still the case, that, should another asteroid happen to be heading our way, you will do nothing to impede it on our behalf?'He twinkled.‘Just one final, trivial question, why do you appear to me in the form of a thirty something white male?’‘No’‘er No!’Source:|||

