Amazon has come up with a new system for getting huge amounts of data from your computers to theirs: send it by post. As computer science pioneer Andy Tanenbaum wrote: “Never underestimate the bandwidth of a station wagon full of tapes hurtling down the highway.”

The company’s new Snowball hardware is aimed at developers who use Amazon Web Services, the increasingly-ubiquitous internet backend to websites as varied as Netflix and Ocado.

Once a company reaches a certain size, even the fastest dedicated internet connections can be a large bottleneck for transferring data. A T3 connection, once the gold-standard for corporate broadband, caps out at 45MB a second, and even dedicated fibre connections usually max out at 128MB a second.

In small areas, one solution to the problem is dubbed the “sneakernet”: literally loading files on to portable hard drives or USB sticks, and walking over to the computer they’re supposed to be on. And for six years, Amazon has offered its own version of the sneakernet, letting customers post hard drives to its data servers.

“Hard drives are getting bigger more rapidly than internet connections are getting faster,” explained the company’s Jeff Barr in 2009, and that trend has continued. But what hasn’t changed is that it’s still a bit of a faff to use the sneakernet (or its bigger sibling – call it the “trucknet”), and so Amazon has introduced a dedicated piece of hardware designed to make it easier.

The Snowball is a massive box with handles, ports, and a Kindle screen on the outside. Once a developer requests it, it gets posted to them, and they plug it in to the power and network connections, copy over up to 50TB of data (enough to store almost 150 days of 4K video) and post it back.

The device is resistant enough that it doesn’t need to be packed away before shipping out, and the e-ink screen on the front, used for configuration, doubles up as a postage label: when the user confirms that they’ve finished uploading the data to the device, Amazon automatically puts a shipping label on the screen. The service doesn’t come cheap, though, with each cycle costing $200 plus shipping.

Of course, if Amazon wants to get even more retro, there’s another possibility that ups the speed of the transfer: carrier pigeon. In 2009, an Australian TV show explored whether a pigeon with a USB stick strapped to its leg could be faster than the internet. The bird ended up transferring 700MB in an hour; the internet connection failed twice and the filmmakers had to give up. There’s even a 25-year-old standard for transferring data using birds: RFC 1149 describes “IP over avian carriers”. “This specification is primarily useful in metropolitan area networks,” it argues.|||

Company’s Snowball hardware lets developers use postal service to get higher bandwidth than their broadband service