Startup fundraising is a heavily regulated process. Entrepreneurs should understand the regulatory landscape before they start down the path to raise capital. There are currently two main regulations worth considering when raising capital--Regulation D and Regulation A. Both Regulation D and Regulation A are securities exemptions from registering as a public company (which clearly isn't cost effective for startups).

The vast majority of private companies (and venture capital funds) have relied on Regulation D historically because it has been the cheapest and most frictionless way to raise private capital. There are two primary options under Reg D:

The downside? Regulation D limits companies to raising money from only "accredited investors" which means people need to have either $200,000 worth of net income (or $300,000 jointly with their spouse) over the past two years, or have a net worth of $1 million excluding the value of their primary residence.

Regulation A was recently amended under the passage of Title IV of the JOBS Act and went into effect in June of 2015. Before the amendment, next to no one used Reg A because it was overly expensive, time consuming and you could only raise up to $5 million.

However, in June 2015 Reg A+ (amended Reg A) and made Regulation A much more entrepreneur friendly. Regulation A+ now allows private companies to publicly raise up to $50 million from all investors (not just accredited investors). Furthermore, there is a much more streamlined process for qualifying to raise capital than there was previously.

Under the new Reg A+ there are two tiers under which a company can raise capital:

For Tier I offerings subject to State review, the North American Securities Administrators Association (NASAA) has created a coordinated review process with the intention of streamlining the State review process. While coordinated review is still unproven, it has hopes of easing the burden on companies filing for Tier I by having one point of contact at NASAA, who will coordinate comments and feedback from the States through a single NASAA representative.

The preparation and qualification process can take 3-4 months once a company decides to proceed with a Reg A offering. A few key points on the process:

Regulation D and Regulation A may each be well suited to a particular company at different times during its maturity. While some of the legal nuances of startup capital raising may seem overly technical at first, the structure of an offering can make a significant difference to a business over time, so founders need to become familiar enough with their options to make an informed decision. The best CEOs ensure that they understand all of their capital raising options regardless of whether they ultimately chose to pursue them.|||

Comparing Regulation D and the new Regulation A rules for equity crowdfunding.