Hello, welcome to Blog Central. This is the day you learn a little about online marketing and where you can get great training.

If you read my last post about marketing being dead, it’s not true. You should read this post because here is what I will cover:

I will cover these 3 things to help you with learning more about what online marketing is and where to get great training.

As far as Online Marketing goes, I’m into the affiliate marketing ring. That is what the training I will go over that will help you a great deal.

Online Marketing is referred as a set of tools used for promoting products and services through the internet. This includes a wider range of marketing that is different than business marketing due to the extra channels and marketing mechanisms available.

These 6 things are some of the benefits that online marketing can deliver:

Online marketing can be known as internet marketing, web marketing, digital marketing and search engine marketing.

There are a few advantages to Online Marketing. Here are five of them:

Online Marketing has become a high-growth industry. It has outsold traditional advertising in recent years.

You can do this with the right training. I will briefly go over the 2 platform that I am using.

Briefly, I will go over this program. I did a review Jays BootCamp, you can check it out HERE. It goes into more detail of his offer.

I found his website before I discovered Wealthy Affiliate. I’m still a subscriber to his mailing list. He is honest and has offers that work. Most of them are the pretty good price for all the great information you get.

Also, Jay will give you free stuff all the time. Great stuff. Check his WEBSITE out. Remember the learning never stops.

You can get Jays BootCamp video course for less than $10. There are over 30 modules in this training course. The learning is unbelievable for the cheap price you will be paying. You will learn a lot from these videos.

Jays teach you about finding a niche to promoting products. He will give you resources on how to build traffic.

This is a must to anyone trying to build an affiliate website and wanting to promote other people products. So get this, it comes with a money back guarantee so you have nothing to lose.

Wealthy Affiliate. This is another great place to get the training on how to build a website around affiliate marketing. I have done several reviews and other articles on Wealthy Affiliate. Check this one out when you have time.

Wealthy Affiliate has all the tools and training that will get into started with building a website. They have an awesome BootCamp that will help you if your niche is in the making money industry.

Wealthy Affiliate has a lot of how-to videos that explain everything to you in an easy manner. Every question you have can be found at Wealthy Affiliate.

The good thing about Wealthy Affiliate is that it is free to join. You never have to go premium if you think you can handle it. You get 2 free websites to start you out with. You will learn enough here that can save you a lot of money in the long run.

So, come and join me at Wealthy Affiliate. My time is your time. Always.

This is online marketing made easy. Yes, the training, if you know where to look is cheap. Don’t pay those Gurus. They are out to get your money. They don’t care about you. I purchased and still have the Jays BootCamp and I have been with Wealthy Affiliate for almost 2 years.

Just these two training platforms will get you on the right track. Plus you won’t be spending a whole lot of money.

If you need help getting started or if I can answer any questions, please leave them for me at the bottom of this posts.

Thank again for visiting me here at Blog Central.|||

Learn from Jays Online BootCamp and Wealthy Affiliate on how to build an online business. They both have great training, especially for beginners.