I train almost every day. I call myself a street athlete. I am not in a competing team, I don’t do it because I want to win some national championship, and I don’t get any money or income for being a street athlete. When people ask me why I train, I answer “For my soul, it’s just who I am, and what I do.” My training sessions do not have any ordered workout list, or any special theory behind it, I try things, play with my body and mind, and examine how I feel, if something feels good to me, I try to take it to the next level and grow from one exercise to the next one. I am a big believer of slow and balanced progress. I don’t jump from level 3 of exercises to level 12. Because great progress takes time (I learned this from a great friend of mine, he knows who he is).

In addition to training every day, I do another thing. I am building a startup. I do it every day, and I don’t get a salary for this one as well (at least for now ☺), and my goal is not to win a startup contest or to become rich. And when people ask me why do I do this, I give the exact same answer “I do it for my soul, it’s just who I am, and what I do”. Being a street athlete and building a startup, has many things in common, and for me one nourishes the other.

In both you need to have a complete faith that you will succeed — to be an optimist. When I train, and try a new exercise, I believe that I can pull it off, same thing as with building a startup, if you don’t believe with all your heart that your product will succeed you won’t try it, or even if you started it, you will quit. This brings me to one of the most important characteristics of being a street athlete, and founding a company — Trying!

Try new things, and learn from them. In my workouts, I try new things all the time, new exercises, change running speeds, change my training locations. For example, I really love running in a fast pace. I love to feel how my body moves fast, my muscles work and feel the music beating and synchronised with every move. But, as a street athlete, I love to challenge myself with new things and test how my body and mind react. So, I do what I call a “turtle run”. I run in zero speed. Try it, and see how you find yourself run faster than you planned, and then you understand how you can train your mind to control your body to run slow, like a turtle. And then try to play with your mind by playing a very fast up-beat music, and still find the power to control your body and run slow. When building a company, we also try new things all the time. In order to understand what your users or customers want, you have to try one thing, and check what your users feel and say about this. At Mobifile, we had a completely different user interface design at first on which we worked for a long time. And then we gave it to people to play with, and saw their reaction, which was not so exciting. So, we tried a different one, and then checked the new UI with our users, this time the reaction was refreshing and motivating. And we keep on testing and trying new features, and ideas all the time. This is how our product grows, how we grow.

Use the resources that you have around you. Being a street athlete, I use the tools and stuff that I have around me to explore my exercises and new workouts. I use the floor, benches, garden facilities, grass, sand, stairs, and most importantly my body. And believe me the number of exercises you can create with those is endless. Building a startup is exactly the same. At first, and even later in a company’s life, you need to be creative and find the resources and use whatever is around you to succeed. You have your friends, to give you feedback, and sometimes professional advice, you have the internet to allow you to read and learn new tools to build your product on your own, even if it’s not perfect. If you are not a professional in Photoshop, use Power point to make your first UI, and if you want to make a promotional movie, you don’t have to be a professional video editor, use iMovie, or Video Maker.

Don’t give up! Even if it hurts get up and continue working. One of the things that let me progress and become a better street athlete is the notion, that even if something hurts, I don’t stop, I am not afraid to get up and train. If I feel my legs and muscles, I don’t say “my muscles hurt, so I will train when they stop hurting” I enjoy the feeling of my body working, and I get up and train, maybe focusing on different muscles, I will find creative ways to train even if it rains, and even if it hurts. And same things apply to building a startup, for me. Sometimes, it hurts, you will get a lot of “No’s” from investors, a lot of “it will never work” from your friends and users or face technical bugs that will challenge you for days and nights. But as I do with my training — I get up and work. If you have hardships, and obstacles, it just means you are doing something right, and that you try.

Give yourself a break. A big part of being a street athlete is also to know to listen to your body and take a break, and rest. This time is important for your muscles to be built up, and to regenerate themselves. For your mind to process your advance and think of new workouts for tomorrow. But can you rest from building a company? Yes — Allow yourself to rest. Take a break from coding, or from building new designs, and just rest, be with the people you love and do the things that you enjoy. The best ideas come when you are taking a break, and when you feel happy with your family and friends.

There is no such thing as a bad workout. When you train every day, you will feel awesome one day, like you can fly, and the next your body will be heavier. Don’t stop, do your thing and train. Whatever you do, is an awesome workout. And building your company, one day, will be perfect, and everything will work so smoothly and your code will run perfectly, and users will flow in like water, and the next one, you will be stuck with an annoying bug, drinking 10 cups of coffee. So don’t stop, do your thing and make your ideas happen.

Done coding? go for a workout, champ!|||

I train almost every day. I call myself a street athlete. I am not in a competing team, I don’t do it because I want to win some national championship, and I don’t get any money or income for being a…