For years the way we connect and interact with services on the internet has been through apps and websites.

What if every step between the time we need a service, and the time we access it on our smart screens, took only an instant? What if we didn’t need to download and set up apps just to be able to view a particular piece of information or interact with a service on our “smart” devices?

What if the entire process of discovering services and interacting with them was based on what we need and when we need them? What if the things we cared about didn’t require us to find them, rather they would find us? But most importantly, what if all of these great services on the internet could work together to provide us with a seamless and fluid experience regardless of the screen size or the device we’re using?

You see, when I think about the future of mobile and smart screens, I have a hard time accepting that we will always have to go through a grid of icons, and launch a bunch of apps, just to access what we want. Even typing in keywords to get a list of blue links which then require us to navigate through multiple web pages just to reach what we were looking for is cumbersome.

I mean, if I’m close to a restaurant at lunch time, I should be able to see their menu, today’s specials, customer reviews, and even ingredients and calories of each menu item at a glance. All without downloading/launching multiple apps or visiting a series of scattered websites.

Taking it further, I wanna be able to walk into a shopping mall and be greeted with a curated list of items that I might be interested in, on my smart screen. I wanna be able to browse through them, pick the ones I wanna try on and get the stores to put them in the dressing room for me — or even go ahead and purchase them; then simply grab them from the pick up desk at the store. Again, all from my smart screen without downloading apps or launching websites.

I see a future where we can simply take out our smart screens and every relevant thing we need appears right in front of us, automagically. All without requiring us to search, download, or set up new apps.

However, it is crazy to think that we can achieve such fluidity and seamless integration of multiple services within the current mobile paradigms — the SILOED apps and scattered websites. For starters, it makes no sense to launch an entire app in order to access a small piece of functionality or content inside the application.

Moreover, this paradigm entails the download and installation of a whole piece of software, just for the purpose of viewing one bit of information or tapping a button to request a service.

Achieving such user experience utopia requires a completely new way of thinking. A new medium/paradigm. A new method heavily structured around APIs and API integrations. A universal and adaptable presentation layer that displays information/data and also allows users to interact with the underlying service regardless of the device, screen-size or even the OS.

We call it the Card Paradigm.

We’ve already seen some implementations of cards in our favourite apps. Facebook uses cards. Twitter uses cards. Pinterest, Groupon, you name it. Even the entire Google search has now transitioned to cards.|||

For years the way we connect and interact with services on the internet has been through apps and websites. What if every step between the time we need a service, and the time we access it on our…