A big number of websites in Web are commercial. Most of the site owners, administrators and websmasters are focused on providing better user experience and fulltime website stability to their customers. Malicious code or a suspicious activity on a website may degenerate the flow of customers and buyers and lead to big problems with SEO results and website reputation. It's a very difficult task to detect and clean website from malware, even for a website security expert. And it may take them many hours or days. However, that is a problem that should be solved as quick as possible. Now we provide a built-in solution for automatic malware detection and automatic website cleanup based on Virusdie.Server to all our customers who use our Shared hosting service. This solution lets us detect infected websites and remove malware automatically and very accurately on our service. And it's a great benefit that websites are stable after automatic cleanup. So, our customers may use it and don't waste their time on scanning and cleaning their websites.

Thousands of website owners have already evaluated high-class malware protection provided by Virusdie. Until recently the convenient usage of the service through the GUI was available only to Virusdie's SaaS users. But now with the release of Virusdie integration with ISPmanager server control panel owners of VPS or Dedicated Servers also have such possibility. Virusdie’s philosophy fully coincides with ISPmanager’s: both website protection against viruses and overall server management should be easy and useful.

Mail.Ru Group has All-in-One website statistics service for webmasters with more than 1 million connected websites, called top.mail.ru. We use Virusdie's External Site Check API to check our top.mail.ru customer's websites for malware automatically. Virusdie's External Site Check API has enough performance for our project. It lets us provide a built-in website security to our customers daily and inform them about any malware or suspicious activity detected on their websites.

One day I got a letter from my web-hosting service, that had been hosting my WordPress blog for seven years already, and the letter said that there were viruses on my website and it was quarantined. So I wrote to hosting's tech support, and they answered me with a link to a four potentially affected files and they promised to cure it for more than $60. I was surprised by the high price and decided to find an alternative solution. I tried to look for suspicious files myself, but soon It became clear to me that I could easily miss something crucial, and all the time it took could be better spent. So I decided that I needed some kind of software. And I chose this service without further ado, because all the functionality was explained on the website clearly. I've registered and added my website to it. And virusdie soon found the problematic files. I was lucky the malicious code did not get to WordPress. It took no more than 20 minutes to fix everything. All in all I can say: “If you need to find and remove malware from your website without much hassle, there is no better solution than virusdie. It is intuitive, fast and worth every dollar spent.”

This is the first antivirus that is actually convenient for bloggers and webmasters. I was curious enough to find that virusdie saves me three hours per week on the average. That is 156 hours or 6,5 days per year. And if you convert it into workdays that’s 19 days! For me it became a decisive factor to choose virusdie, as I’m working on several projects. Clear recommendations from the service, fast tech support, clear UI - that’ll make their competitors quite nervous =)

I often work on the go, without the broadband internet at hand to download a whole website's files and clean them. Virusdie proved itself as an excellent antivirus and firewall solution for websites. Now I can go without downloading the whole website (that’s important for projects that use a lot of images and span to gigabytes). I can just find and remove the malicious code using the anti-malware network cloud technology. I like that with virusdie I can remove the malicious code manually, as well as just trust virusdie to remove it. Virusdie showed itself a great helper. It really works, it helps, it is convenient.

I’m glad this service exists. Half a year ago hackers began to hack our websites more frequently. To clean up one website I had to go through all of the files manually and search for the malicious includes into the code. It took me at least an hour each time. And if I did not fix the vulnerability - the site got hacked again. Sometimes it happened up to three times a day. In the end on the one side my customers called me asking: “Why is my website hacked?”, on the other I spent time on an unscheduled work to clean a website. The main job got delayed! That was horrible. Now I can just add my website to virusdie, scan it and remove malware. It's 5 minutes tops. We are already connecting our the most important customers to virusdie beforehand, so that there's less headache later.|||

Virusdie is the anti-malware network for websites that keeps your websites healthy. It cleans up and protects your websites.