If there's one CEO you can count on for consistently amusing outbursts and quotable sound bites, it's Tesla CEO Elon Musk. Today's EMOTD (Elon Musk of the Day) comes courtesy of German business newspaper Handelsblatt, where the outspoken CEO hopped aboard the banter bus and revealed that his cheeky employees often refer to Apple as the "Tesla Graveyard."

In response to claims that Apple is poaching key members of Tesla staff to work on its long-rumoured self-driving car project, Musk joked: "Important engineers? They have hired people we've fired. We always jokingly call Apple the Tesla Graveyard." But just to make sure that his comments weren't entirely dismissed as harmless CEO-style jostling, he added: "If you don’t make it at Tesla, you go work at Apple. I’m not kidding."

The sick burns continued when Musk was asked if he took Apple seriously as a competitor in the automotive market. "Did you ever take a look at the Apple Watch?" he laughed, as if the seamless stainless steel construction and hand-crafted leather bands of Apple's latest i-thing were nothing to him. "No, seriously: it’s good that Apple is moving and investing in this direction," he added. "But cars are very complex compared to phones or smart watches. You can’t just go to a supplier like Foxconn and say: 'Build me a car.'"

As if employee bashing and Apple Watch hating wasn't enough, Musk took one final swing at Apple and its latest creation, the iPad Pro: "But for Apple, the car is the next logical thing to finally offer a significant innovation. A new pencil or a bigger iPad alone were not relevant enough."

Musk is a one-man PR machine. Just recently, he garnered headlines after hinting at the existence of the Tesla Model Y, just hours after debuting the Model X—the Tesla SUV with falcon-wing rear doors. His ambitious—some might say too ambitious—Hyperloop mass transit project also continues to hit the front pages. Earlier this year, it was revealed that the Hyperloop might actually be built 2016.|||

Apple is apparently the "Tesla Graveyard."