After considering new opportunities, thinking through the vision and reviewing what the competition makes that addresses similar challenges, it’s time to bring it all together. Perhaps you’ll have an internal team ready to execute the project, but it’s more likely you’ll need to find a partner to help fulfil your vision. In order to find the right partner, we need to describe what we want, define our requirements and issue a request for proposals (RFP).

I’ve been on the client side writing requirements and on the agency side interpreting requirements and devising solutions. Each side of the relationship has pleasures and pains, but the task of thoroughly thinking through what one wants to achieve is common to both clients and agencies.

Requirements are not a detailed specification that one could throw at a vendor, partner or development team with a directive to “build it”. Instead, requirements are an explanation of :

Getting this right at the start of a product development cycle eliminates 99% of legal, commercial and technical friction. When writing a Request for Proposal (RFP), one should focus primarily on the commercial and user value, leaving the details of how a user interacts with the product at very high level.

Most Request for Proposals (RFP) documents make the mistake of diving deeply into how individual features work without explaining its contribution to the bottom line or why a user might find the feature of value. These kinds of RFPs usually come with pseudo specifications that only half-solve a problem.

For example, a marketing manager might devise an intricate set of instructions for a brand microsite, but forget to include the commercial goal, why a customer would ever engage with the app, leave out all the possible acquisition vectors – and provide wireframes for only a handset.

Why is this not ideal? Well, one typically hires an agency for the value they bring across all the domains of creating a product – user experience, design, development, delivery and project management. By over-specifying the “how” and skipping over the “why” the client leaves the agency with no rational basis upon which to build a solution.

Conversely, the purpose of an agency is to collect domain experts together into a team and provide coherent value – forcing your clients to provide UX or detailed product specifications turns the agency into little more than cheap (or, more usually overly expensive) brute force labour.

Like so much in business and life, it’s about knowing what one wants, knowing when it’s ok to not know and working collaboratively to devise solutions.

In digital there are many, many kinds of products and projects for which one might issue an RFP – everything from a marketing campaign with elements of social, mobile and web to large products and platforms. My sample RFP table of contents will be for a larger product or service, but can easily be scaled down (or up).

Inputs available at the start of the project

My secret weapon to power through RFPs is to break the document into an outline of requirements and ask the respondents to note their compliance and the page number upon which the requirement is detailed.

In a situation where one has to evaluate multiple submissions, it crushes all ambiguity and saves a massive amount of time and effort.|||

After considering new opportunities, thinking through the vision and reviewing what the competition makes that addresses similar challenges, it's time to bring it all together. Perhaps you'll have an internal team ready to execute the project, but it's more likely you'll need to find a partner to help fulfil your vision. In order to find…