The Better India is a digital media startup focusing on India’s most inspiring stories. We do not measure ourselves in terms of number of views. We measure ourselves with the impact we generate with every story.

What started as a personal blog has now become a vibrant and busy hub for people to learn about change-makers, for readers to collaborate and for ideas to flourish. While we’ve already witnessed the lives of 1200 farmers being impacted with just one story of ours, the last 2 months have been significant because of the unprecedented impact our stories have created! Here then is the list of change brought about by the stories of The Better India in the last 2 months — made possible by you, our reader.

This story of ours is about how one lady is working with special children in Mumbai’s slums and helping them get the education they deserve.

Volunteering & Donations: Many parents (including those of special children) showed their love and supported Urmi Foundation via donations and by sharing new methods in special education and therapy.

Spread Awareness: A lot of people stated that they were clueless about the conditions of the special children living in slums. Our article created enough awareness that Urmi Foundation got 3 dedicated volunteers to work with them on a regular basis!

Erin Zaikis is working on addressing sanitation and health issues in Mumbai’s slums in a very unique way (which involves usage of discarded bars of soap!)

The Impact of our story?

We let Erin say it in her own words:

Our stories are creating a global impact because good ideas are never restricted by boundaries.

Bakey’s is an edible cutlery initiative started by Narayana Peesapati.

Narayana got about 20 orders on the day the article was published. He also got orders from Japan and Germany, along with an interview call from the BBC.

Gaurang Damani adopted a railway station and transformed it in 4 months!

The Impact of our story?

Here’s an interesting story we wrote about the Feeding India team that takes excess food from events and feeds it to the poor.

Feeding India’s Facebook page likes increased in a week: 600+

Volunteer requests received in a week: 200+

Got approached by Livemint for a story

Approached by ShaadiMagic, an online wedding organizer website

Invited in a reality show in Mumbai and won a prize money of Rs. 1,21,000

We believe in the power of writing and we write to drive impact. These are only some of the things we managed to do by sharing hundreds of inspiring stories over the last 2 months. And we believe that the credit entirely goes to our readers who make this happen, our readers who have made a conscious choice to be a part of this movement that drives impact.

What news and information one consumes is now a choice. Make an impactful choice. Read us and follow us on Facebook and Twitter.|||

The Better India is a digital media startup focusing on India’s most inspiring stories. We do not measure ourselves in terms of number of views. We measure ourselves with the impact we generate with…