Olivier  Marie,  Ulf  Zölitz,  March 2015 

Paper No' CEPDP1340: | Save Reference as: BibTeX File | EndNote Import File Keywords: Cannabis, legalization, student performance 



 JEL Classification: I18; I20; K42 



 Is hard copy/paper copy available? YES - Paper Copy Still In Print. This Paper is published under the following series: CEP Discussion Papers Share this page: Google Bookmarks | Facebook | Twitter This paper investigates how legal cannabis access affects student performance. Identification comes from an exceptional policy introduced in the city of Maastricht which discriminated legal access based on individuals’ nationality. We apply a difference-in-difference approach using administrative panel data on over 54,000 course grades of local students enrolled at Maastricht University before and during the partial cannabis prohibition. We find that the academic performance of students who are no longer legally permitted to buy cannabis increases substantially. Grade improvements are driven by younger students, and the effects are stronger for women and low performers. In line with how THC consumption affects cognitive functioning, we find that performance gains are larger for courses that require more numerical/mathematical skills. We investigate the underlying channels using students’ course evaluations and present suggestive evidence that performance gains are driven by improved understanding of material rather than changes in students’ study effort. 



 Olivier  Marie,  Ulf  Zölitz,  March 2015Paper No' CEPDP1340: | Full paper Cannabis, legalization, student performanceI18; I20; K42YES - Paper Copy Still In Print.This Paper is published under the following series:This paper investigates how legal cannabis access affects student performance. Identification comes from an exceptional policy introduced in the city of Maastricht which discriminated legal access based on individuals’ nationality. We apply a difference-in-difference approach using administrative panel data on over 54,000 course grades of local students enrolled at Maastricht University before and during the partial cannabis prohibition. We find that the academic performance of students who are no longer legally permitted to buy cannabis increases substantially. Grade improvements are driven by younger students, and the effects are stronger for women and low performers. In line with how THC consumption affects cognitive functioning, we find that performance gains are larger for courses that require more numerical/mathematical skills. We investigate the underlying channels using students’ course evaluations and present suggestive evidence that performance gains are driven by improved understanding of material rather than changes in students’ study effort.|||

CEE, Contact Us, Maps