I HATE to write. This is not about how I hate to write, but what I learned at a writing workshop hosted by Medium and The Hustle. It made me like it more:

My first draft started out: “I love the Medium format and platform”. It was failing the first advice… I changed it to “I HATE to write”. And yes, I’m using all their advice in this post.

Just get the words out. That’s what I’m doing right now. I’ll just write and write and write. Not giving a shit about whether it’s good or bad. I’ll deal with that later. Because once I’ve got all my words down, not looking back, I …

This allows me to incubate what I’ve written. I’m told to wait for 24 hours until I touch my text again. That’s hard to do when on a deadline. With our posts on growth hacks in popular games, we wrote and published one post every day for a week. From now on we’ll try to plan a little further ahead.

The first 25% of the post needs to go. It’s just rambling anyways. Then cut 30% more of the text!

This is just like “killing your babies”. I’m constantly challenging myself to get my point across with fewer words.

Well, that helps. Originally I had 1056 words. Hard cutting definitely helped and now it’s down to 799 words (25% reduction).

Use it often. Break up your paragraphs and leave room to breathe. Make your stuff readable — like I’m trying now!

All the top Medium posts are using first person writing. This is challenging as the academic writing way is as far from personal as it gets.

We actually tried to avoid using first person writing when we wrote our Dissection of Games posts. And even worse: We published them from our Megacool account instead of our personal ones. #fail

Because using words like ‘but’ and ‘because’, are good hooks. But my teacher told me never to start a sentence with ‘but’! I guess I’ll have to practice this.

We were recommended reading a Medium post about a prostitute to learn the skill of hooking the reader. I recommend that you do not try to use Google to find it (like I did)…

Use simple, easy to read words, as if you’re in a casual conversation. I need to use active voice and avoid adverbs, words ending with -ly, really and very. Maaan, that’s all the words I usually use..!

That’s easier said than done! For some of us this comes natural while for others we need to get our 10,000 hours of practice in. Well, here’s to my first 5 hours.

I’m not dyslectic, but I still struggle with incorrect writing (doesn’t help to be foreign). I hope that my current storytelling level makes you accept my lacking grammar level. I use tools like Grammarly to fight this, but their integration is pretty bad when editing on Medium. I use the HemingwayApp to identify and clean up my long sentences and unclear language.

I need to create some sort of awe, excitement, and anger. This is like the word-of-mouth elements we used when I worked on the Fun Run games!

I started this post with the headline: “What I Learned at a Writing Workshop with Medium”. After reading the Buffers headline formula, and searching Google for “Emotional headlines”, I changed it to “The Secret: How to Write a Perfect Medium Post”.

It’s all about: “What do you have to do to get them in the door?”

You should use an image for every 4–500 words! Recommended free resources include Unsplash and Flicker.

Learn from the best. Find an article that you enjoy reading. Copy it word by word. Eventually, you’ll learn to write like that!

I hope you found this as actionable and valuable as I did. Check out The Hustle for their next workshop. I want to thank the staff from both The Hustle and Medium for putting this on!

This is my first published post after attending the workshop. I’d love to get your feedback on how I’m doing: Reach out on Twitter using @aurorakb or in the comments below.|||

I HATE to write. This is not about how I hate to write, but what I learned at a writing workshop hosted by Medium and The Hustle. It made me like it more: My first draft started out: “I love the…