That’s too bad. Of course, it shouldn’t be taboo for teachers (or anyone) to talk about intelligence. Some people learn to read and multiply at age 3. Some of the mentally retarded never manage to dress themselves, even as adults. Words like smart and dumb can be useful—if crude—catchall terms for the spectrum of human abilities. But intelligence consists of many cognitive skills, from spatial reasoning to word fluency. Slow refers to only one of these: processing speed.

But in practice, weak often carries a tone of resignation. “He’s a weak math student,” we sigh. “The sophomores are a weak group this year,” we mutter, shaking our heads. Such weakness lies beyond our control. It feels inevitable that the strong will thrive and the weak will flounder, no matter what we do. There’s Darwinian law at work, and even the most supportive teacher is powerless to resist. Sorry, kids; it’s survival of the fittest.

Monica was a student who struggled. Every night of ninth grade, she slaved over her homework, barely sleeping, fighting against the rapids, straining to tread water. I admired her tenacity, and did my best to throw her life preservers—test corrections, tutoring sessions, extra credit. In the end, though, it wasn’t enough. She failed my geometry class, and the rest of her subjects, too. (She passed freshman year the second time around.)

But some students just don’t care. Math strikes them as pointless, or impossible, and they’re perfectly content to surrender to the river without a fight. David, for example, didn’t struggle at all. He eyed trigonometry, decided it wasn’t for him, and promptly failed, my pep talks doing nothing to revive his interest. Jaime Escalante I apparently am not. I do all right with struggling students, but I don’t know how to persuade the unmotivated that the struggle is worth their effort.

In the spring, “She’s behind” means, “She’s missing key ideas or assignments from this year.” But in the autumn, when behind is most often heard, it means, “She entered my class unprepared. I’ll do my best, but it won’t be easy.” It means, “Her schools so far have failed to teach her.” It means, “I don’t know when—maybe last year, maybe the year before, maybe earlier—but she fell off track, and I’m not sure if I can bring her up to speed.”

In moments like that, I tell myself that high school is simply too late. By age 14, too many students have slipped through the cracks. Too many never properly learned to read. Too many suffer from misconceptions that would take years to unravel—never mind teaching them new content. By age 14, it’s too easy to be so far behind that you’ll never fully catch up.

Behind, in this sense, is a word of humility for teachers. (More darkly, you could call it defeatism.) It’s a confession that, for each student, I am only one teacher in a long lineage. You do your best with a kid like Jonathan, but even your best won’t heal him completely. And you learn not to blame his parents or past teachers, because next year’s teacher could just as easily blame you.|||

I know a teacher—a great one, actually—who, in private, refers to his students as “bricks.” As in, “dumb as a brick.” You almost never hear that level  ...