Spark Therapeutics Inc.’s treatment for a rare form of blindness improved patients’ sight in an advanced clinical test, suggesting it may become the first approved gene therapy in the U.S. The shares rose.

Spark’s medicine, called SPK-RPE65, improved vision among people with a form of blindness known as RPE65-mediated inherited retinal dystrophies, the Philadelphia-based company said in a statement Monday. Based on the results, Spark plans to submit the treatment to U.S. regulators for approval next year. The therapy is injected directly into patients’ eyes, where viruses insert a working gene into cells that are missing it.

"We saw substantial restoration of vision in patients who were progressing toward complete blindness,” said Albert Maguire, the clinical trial’s lead researcher and a professor of ophthalmology at the University of Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine.

Spark shares rose 59 percent to $70 in trading before the market opened in New York.

In a study of 31 people with the genetic form of blindness, the therapy allowed patients to better navigate a mobility course under a variety of lighting conditions, Spark said, without providing further detail on that result. Investors are watching both the power of the therapy as well as its durability -- the stock’s ticker symbol, ONCE, references the possibility of a cure from a single treatment.

The trial also showed that participants who received the treatment outperformed those in the control group on two secondary goals: improving light sensitivity of the eye and change in mobility test score for the first eye treated. For a third endpoint, ability to read a standard eye chart, the treatment didn’t result in a statistically significant benefit, Spark said.

The news will be good for Spark’s stock, since a successful trial shows that gene therapy can work not only for SPK-RPE65 but potentially for Spark’s other treatments in development, Phil Nadeau, an analyst at Cowen & Co., said before the data were released.

The company is considering selling the therapy in installment plans to make it easier for patients and health insurers to afford the high prices that gene therapies may command. At least two analysts are projecting sales of SPK-RPE65 based on a $1 million price, which would make it the first therapy in the U.S. with such a cost. A gene therapy approved in Europe, made by UniQure BV for an rare genetic disease, debuted in November with a price of as much as 1.1 million euros ($1.23 million) per patient.

Other gene therapy approaches to eye diseases have disappointed in trials. Two academic groups found in May that gene therapy improvements were often modest and short-lived, with the benefits waning after a few years or less. Avalanche Biotechnologies Inc. plummeted 56 percent in June after some patients on its gene-therapy treatment for age-related macular degeneration still required injections of another drug.|||

Spark Therapeutics Inc.’s treatment for a rare form of blindness improved patients’ sight in an advanced clinical test, suggesting it may become the first approved gene therapy in the U.S. The shares rose.