At GitHub we build the tools that make collaborating and writing software easier for everyone. We’ve built a company we truly love working for, and we think you will too.

At GitHub, we think that a diverse company is a strong company, and we work hard to foster a supportive and welcoming workplace. Learn more about our commitment to diversity and inclusion and see our current demographic data.

We encourage Hubbers to build amazing things with a high level of autonomy and self-direction. Work/life balance is important to us, which is why we offer flexible work schedules and unlimited PTO. We believe that if a job allows for it, people should work wherever they’re happiest.

Our office in SOMA is designed for everyone to work better and happier, and includes unique spaces like a DJ booth and game room. Some of our local GitHub activities include karaoke nights, an annual charitable dodgeball tournament, and various athletic groups.

All full time employees enjoy 100% coverage of health insurance premiums across our Medical, Dental and Vision plan offerings, including coverage for dependents. We also offer five months of paid family leave to all new parents with the flexibility of using it all at once, or throughout the baby’s first year.

We cover gym memberships and offer fitness classes in our onsite gym, the OctoDojo. In the Zen room, Hubbers can recharge through meditation or complimentary massage.

Every Hubber has a stake in the future success of GitHub with stock option grants. For full time employees we offer competitive 401k planning with a dollar-for-dollar company match of up to 4% of your year-to-date salary.

Everyone at GitHub receives an Amazon gift card to buy the books they need. We’ll also send you to one work-related conference per year of your choice, anywhere in the world. If you’re invited to speak at a conference, we’ll cover you to get there.

Please note that benefits vary by country, the ones shown above are for our US based employees. Benefit information for non-US based positions will be provided to individuals who interview for those roles.|||

