Almost mid-October (where does the time go?) and, for today’s Roundup post, we are again doing things a bit differently. Change is always good, although some of you might not agree with that. From an early age, I learned to embrace change more than seeking constancy. So, for every time we had to move, it was met with relish.

What is changing in our roundup post is, instead of looking at the top three most read posts of this past week, what follows are the most read and visited posts and pages of this blog since its move to WordPress in June up to the end of the last quarter (September 30).

These roundup posts are published every Friday for two reasons:

There might be some fancy term for it but keeping it simple, this week’s roundup post mirrors something that I do in my personal life. It is something that, if I might be so bold, you might want to consider for your life. It is something taught to me most clearly while in chaplaincy training. Self-assessment, self-examination and re-positioning based on my life’s intentions. Israelmore Avivor says it best:

Never be afraid to take apart your life, break down your job, look at your role in a relationship or within your family – not because it is necessarily spoilt but because you want to be better. That is what we aim to do on this blog – be better at what we do, the articles we write and the conversations we have with you. The weekly roundup posts is one way of us “breaking down” our systems and fixing what needs repair for the upcoming week.

What are the top three posts since we moved here?

Life lessons, embracing change and understanding the lives of others – these are the issues at the heart of the top posts since June to September. Along with these posts, you frequently visited our Subscribers’ Couch, with several choosing to sign up for our daily email updating you of our posts, as well as receive my monthly newsletter and affirmation poster. In the New Year, we have some changes planned for our subscription service so you are invited to sign-up today and be part of those exciting developments.

Many of you also wanted to know who we are and so the second most visited page was the showcase of our Contributors. We are an eclectic group of writers and bloggers here – women and men – who bring to this buffet a range of “food for thought.” Through our weekly roundup post, I highlight our writers and the work they presented for the week. You might have noticed Robert’s absence so far this month. He is away for a bit attending to urgent personal issues. We hope all continues to be well for him and that he will rejoin us at the soonest.

That is our roundup post for this week. Thank you all so much for continuing to visit, commenting and sharing your love. Yesterday, I introduced a new short story series covering another issue that we have received questions and requests for support about – How To Let Go. The first part of that series will be published tomorrow, so do sign up for our email list and get your update once it is available. It is my promise to you that your privacy is guaranteed and you will never be spammed.

Have a wonderful weekend! To my fellow Canadians, Happy Thanksgiving on Monday!|||

You and your life matter to us. That's why this roundup post highlights what you have searched for on my blog. Check out your top 3 in the Roundup post.