When planning my talk and book on REST/HTTP API development, I ended up mentioning documentation towards the end, and flippantly said "Oh and API Blueprint is pretty good probably just use that." This is something I'd love to fix with a time machine, as these days I spec out an API in API Blueprint before I get anywhere near the code.

Documentation-first gives you and the team a chance to play around with what fields are coming and going, and you can even dump this documentation file into a collaborative editing tool like Dropbox Notes or have a Google Hangouts with a tmate session. When the API team and the clients (web, iOS, Android, etc.) have reached a good level of agreement, the contracts can be "locked-down" and put into Git, meaning changes are tracked and blame can be used for anyone who f**ks up the contract.

If your API documentation is then tested with Dredd, you know your contracts are holding up as expected over time.

Getting Started with API Blueprint is fairly vague and open-ended. They teach you about Drafter which early on is totally irrelevant other than for syntax checking, which the Apiary live editor does a better job of doing. Getting Started is a lot different to what they have documented, so here is how I go about it.

We'll assume for now that you want to use their hosted Apiary platform, and I'll follow up with how to use alternatives in later articles.

Make a new directory to work in, and in that shove a new file. We'll put in the most basic API Blueprint syntax possible:

Note: Normally I would use to wrap the response body and only one level of indentation, but Markdown parsers freak out if you try to put fenced code blocks inside fenced code blocks. You can use 8 spaces, 2 tabs, or wrap it in yourself.

Now, to get this file to Apiary, we have to make a GitHub repo. If you're cool and use the hub CLI tool then just do this:

Now this API Blueprint is in a GitHub repo, we can set up Apiary.

Firstly, click the dropdown next to where it has the default "Notes API" and select "Create New API".

Click Settings and scroll down to the connect to GitHub option.

This will automatically set up a Service Hook on Github, so you don't have to.

Now, find the new repo we just made, and link it up by clicking Go.

If that works, you'll see a few options. If you can, click "Load blueprint from GitHub" to import, but you might have a bug - which I am not sure of the cause - so Overwrite first, then commit back over the top of it.

Now whenever we push a change to our file, it'll update Apiary. If we update Apiary, it'll save the change to via a new commit.

Having a Hello World is a nice start, but we will also need to learn how to work with data formats like JSON. The easiest way to output JSON in the response documentation is to change the response mime-type, and paste some example JSON in.

Take a look at that in API Blueprint. Go ahead and use their editor with the live preview as we go along to save you committing stuff. You should see it in their output:

Next, lets add another endpoint. We have , so lets add to get just a single place.

At a very simple level, this does work, but it is not very DRY. We are repeating the data in our examples over and over again, even though they share a really similar structure.

Let's leverage MSON ("Markdown Syntax for Object Notation") to make our lives easier:

This has got a little large, so let's take a look at this bit by bit.

Here we have our request. It's got a JSON response, with attributes. Those attributes contain a top-level array of places, which is an array of data structures.

Here we have defined the name of two fields, given them default values (an optional but wise move) then given them the type.

Because both and share this data structure (even though one is an array and the other is an object), we can expand on the fields and really improve the place documentation.

Now we've got descriptions on our fields, and added a bunch more fields. The coolest is the status field, setting a bunch of string values in an enum, with all the options explained.

You can learn more about the "Attributes" keyword in the API Blueprint Spec, and by reading more about the MSON syntax specifically.

APIs are more than just getting data, so time to look at a request.

I've made an updated full example, which uses Resource Groups to define a URL and then has h3's with the HTTP method to define what happens in the actions.

Looking good huh? We've got and in there too now, showing off a no less.

Well, one thing left: Using to create a resource on the collection.

The tough part here is that most requests involve sending partial representations, and letting the server fill in the gaps. To do that, our data structure falls over a little bit.

So, we can split them up a bit. Take a look at this full example to see what I changed:

We now have a object which has the fields required for creating, and the object, which includes for that full effect along with two extra fields that'll only show up afterwards.

There are a few options around, the most popular being Swagger and RAML. Nordic API compare these formats briefly, but it is a little vague.

I'll be honest, everything I've done with Swagger was awful. Swagger-PHP is based around an convoluted code-orientated approach, where it assumes your actual model classes are going to be how you represent your data and that's just not at all true. Maybe I could find a way to tie Swagger-PHP to the serializers instead, but even Swagger UI is terrible. Swagger just feels wrong to me.

RAML is powerful format. It has a lot of tooling for it, but tbh much of that tooling exists for API Blueprint too. The main drawback for me is that RAML is YAML, and I fucking hate YAML.

Most complaints about API Blueprint are that the getting started is bad (I fixed that ^) or that it's complex to write. Well, recent versions have made the syntax less verbose, MSON is excellent and you can get syntax checkers for many editors, including my new hero Atom.

Check them out and see which is best for you, but the idea is that you want to be specing your API and creating documentation before you build your API when possible.

There's a lot more to Apiary and MSON than this, and I want to show you how to use this for mock servers next, but having this stuff built out is a great way to get a team to agree on the contracts for requests and responses before people start messing around actually building stuff.

If you're into APIs, I've written a whole book called Build APIs You Won't Hate, and it's available in ebook or paperback form! If programming books normally bore the crap out of you, this book is for you.

I'm available for consulting if you want help making your APIs more gooder. Half of the money goes to the ACLU, and the other half goes towards my green card. Fuck Trump ✊.|||

Platform Engineer @ WeWork who talks about APIs a lot. Programming Polyglot, Pragmatist, Centerist and Sarcasist. The League of Extraordinary Packages, PHP The Right Way, Ex-PHP-FIG, Ex-CodeIgniter, Ex-FuelPHP, Ex-PyroCMS.