Amazon’s new “AWS IoT” cloud IoT platform offers Starter Kits built around Linux-ready SBCs like the BeagleBone Green, DragonBoard 410c, and Intel Edison.

 

 Amazon made its first big Internet of Things play by launching an IoT managed cloud platform for aggregating and processing IoT endpoint data, built around its Amazon Web Services (AWS) platform. Available now in beta form, AWS IoT, is being made available in the form of a series of AWS IoT Starter Kits, which bundle popular hacker boards with the AWS IoT Device SDK, and in some cases other hardware such as Grove sensors. Three of the 10 kits runs Linux, including kits for the DragonBoard 410c, BeagleBone Green, and Intel Edison (see farther below).



AWS IoT enables users to “store, process, analyze, and act on the volumes of data generated by connected devices on a global scale,” says Amazon. Devices connect to AWS IoT Device Gateway, using both HTTP and Message Queue Telemetry Transport (MQTT), secured with mutual authentication and encryption. The gateway integrates with AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) to let customers set granular permissions for individual devices, or fleets of devices, and manage them throughout their lifecycles.

With the AWS IoT Device Gateway, manufacturers can set rules for how AWS IoT handles and responds to data triggers from their devices. For example, they can script actions such as sending an alert when a motion detector is triggered, or when a pressure sensor reports an unusually high reading, says the company. You can create rules that apply to data from a single device, a group of devices such as a sensor array, or a mix of devices and data sources, such as data stored in Amazon DynamoDB. In addition to DynamoDB, AWS IoT provides integration with Lambda, Amazon Kinesis, Amazon S3, and Amazon Machine Learning.



In the case that devices lose access to power or the Internet, AWS IoT creates a virtual “shadow” profile of each connected device using REST APIs. The shadow includes all of the information about the device’s state, so applications can continue to check device status or take actions. These are automatically sent to the device once it reconnects.

An AWS IoT Management Console offers a web-based interface for managing these processes, including tasks like creating a “thing,” associating certificates, publishing messages, and defining actions, says Amazon. The console interacts with both the AWS IoT Device SDK, and the cloud-oriented AWS SDK, which provides APIs for applicable AWS services.

An AWS Partner Network (APN) program includes companies like Micrium and Canonical, whose Ubuntu Linux distribution, as well as Micrium’s μC/OS RTOS, were most prominently mentioned as OSes that support AWS IoT. Others include Ayla Networks, Cirrus Link, Thingworx, and Xively

According to a TechCrunch story that covered the announcement at Amazon’s re:Invent developer conference in Las Vegas, the technology is based on the company’s acquisition of IoT development firm 2lemetry earlier this year. AWS IoT will be sold as a pay-as-you-go service, with the first 250,000 512-byte message blocks per month free, and $5 per million message blocks after that, says the story.

The story notes that the platform will compete with other cloud-oriented IoT device gateway services such as Microsoft’s Azure IoT Suite. Other cloud-oriented gateway solutions include Intel Gateway Solutions for IoT.

Amazon announced 10 AWS IoT Starter Kits, three of which run Linux and in the case of the DragonBoard 410c, Android. The rest run Arduino or other microcontroller-based hacker boards.

The three Linux-ready kits all use the C and Node.js components in their integrated AWS IoT Device SDKs. Two of the kits — BeagleBone Green and Intel Edison — also include Grove sensors and actuators. Seedstudio, which manufactures the BeagleBone Green, is quickly turning its Grove product line into de facto standard for IoT hacker kit sensors and add-ons.

The other seven AWS IoT Starter Kits use boards that run various RTOSes instead of Linux. These include:

“Arrow is excited to collaborate with Qualcomm Technologies and Amazon on this IoT Starter Kit,” stated Jes Lefcourt, general manager of IoT adoption at Arrow, speaking of the DragonBoard 410c kit. “We wanted to provide developers and makers with a low-cost, high-performance way to build IoT solutions — I can’t wait to see what kinds of innovations and venture-ready prototypes this kit will enable.”

All three of the Linux-ready AWS IoT Starter Kits are available for pre-order now, with shipments due later this year. More information may be found at the AWS IoT Starter Kit page, which offers links to all products, as well as Amazon’s AWS IoT announcement and AWS IoT website.

|||

Amazon's new “AWS IoT” cloud IoT platform offers Starter Kits built around Linux-ready SBCs like the BeagleBone Green, DragonBoard 410c, and Intel Edison.