We live in an age where digital marketing is being embraced by everyone-whether its a billion dollar corporation or a "mom&pop store" or a home based business making a monthly revenue less than a $1000.

Why does it matter?

75% of consumers go online to research businesses if they are interested; four out of every ten will rely on social media or review sites to do their research. Even though you might successfully communicate to your prospects about the benefits of your company's solution, if your business is not visible to search engine results they might end up doing business with your competitors.



Digital marketing is very cost effective and can be extremely efficient.Expensive newspaper adverts and TV campaigns – are beyond the reach of several "mom&pop" stores. For a fraction of the price, digital marketing can enable you to reach customers who are already looking for your kinds of service.

Take advantage of the following tools to make your marketing sizzle.

You have exactly 5 seconds to grab your users attention on your website. Today's customer have a lot more choices and as a result are often confused on what and where to buy. Fundamentally, the very first thing the user must see is a landing page on your website.Some of the best features of Unbounce include the ability to quickly and easily setup a new landing page and test campaign . Great for beginners if you lack coding and design skills

I often like to test landing pages with my  8 year old brother. I would show him a glimpse of a few website's homepage simultaneously for exactly 5 seconds each and ask him:

1.What are they selling? (Unique Value Proposition)                                            2. What's in it for you?    (End-Benefits)                                                                    3. How do we buy it?        (Call to Action)

Shopify.com is one of the few great examples of an effective landing page. Communicating exactly what they do, whats in it for me, and Call to action button to capture my data to send me more information for next steps.

I can't describe how frustrated I get when my people with multiple websites tell me they have not heard of email automation services such as Infusion Soft and Mailchimp. And some even argue about wanting to send personalized emails to each of their clients rather than automated services. But little do they know about the features of segmenting the subscribers based on: Geography, Gender, age, behavior etc. That way they only receive what is relevant.

We all expect replies to our emails right away no matter if the comapany is located overseas; but while your're a sleep email marketing softwares can send auto replies to FAQs and welcome emails automatically. If you are just starting out with email marketing, Mail Chimp is as good a choice as any. In fact, this service is free if you are under 2000 subscribers and 12,000 emails. For a start up looking for a basic platform to manage your email marketing, I would recommend it; however, as your business grows, you are going to eventually run into some serious limitations.



 On the other hand InfusionSoft does not only do email marketing but it is a CRM system. Helping you track your leads to provide the best service to your clients based on their click rates and behavior.

Hootsuite is one of many tools referred to as a “Social Media Management System” or tool. It helps you keep track and manage your many social network channels. It can enable you to monitor what people are saying about your brand and help you respond instantly. You can view streams from multiple networks such as Facebook, Twitter and Google+ and post updates or reply directly.

If you solely or mainly use Hootsuite to manage your Social networks, then you will find the weekly analytics report very useful. Each week, Hootsuite sends you an email with a pdf attachment of your click summaries. Hootsuite gives you graphs showing:

Now if you really want to track what your competitors are upto or find out what is trending Topsy.com is the s#@!. You can also use Topsy’s free social analytics tools to track keyword popularity or mentions or compare two domains over time.

I have been working in the retail industry for 4+ years now. And one thing I have learned is that excellent customer service needs be at the heart of your business model if you wish to be successful. Now,some might argue that it is impossible to provide the same one-on-one customer service online. YOU ABSOLUTELY CAN! Whether you own an e-commerce site or want to provide IT solutions/support to your customers , Zendesk is the best choice, it is loved by support teams and their customers worldwide. You can access Zendesk anywhere, from any device.

Zopim is another great tool part of the Zendesk interface. Zopim’s live web chat software can give you a competitive advantage over competitors who don't offer live chat software. Zopim allows you to set up several agents to answer specific question about your company's products. Watch the video to learn more

I met the creators of EasyPromos personally a few years ago when I was attending one of Bassem Ghali's Donate&Learn workshops. They were demystifying advanced Facebook marketing strategies and engagement apps. I have become a huge fan of it ever since.

They were talking about gamifying to encourage engagement and building online presence. EasyPromos lets you create several different types of promotions -including sweepstakes, contests, quizzes, surveys, loyalty programs across all social media tools and devices.With the holiday season just around the corner I am sure this is the right tool you want to take advantage of.

Gone are the days of hard selling and embrace the concept of information architecture.The main purpose of digital marketing is to exchange information between the customer and the company. To be effective at digital marketing practice organizing and structuring great content for a better user experience.|||

