Two women who say they were victimized by their Uber drivers sued the company yesterday, claiming that it fails to sufficiently screen new drivers and doesn't do enough to ensure rider safety.

The lawsuit (PDF), filed by two Jane Doe plaintiffs in San Francisco federal court yesterday, describes an alleged sexual assault and a rape that happened earlier this year.

Jane Doe 1 lives in Boston, where she went to a party in February 2015, and her friend called an Uber around 2:30am. After dropping off her friends, the driver, Abderrahim Dakiri, sexually assaulted her. "When the vehicle was stopped at a red light, Dakiri began groping Ms. Doe 1 in the crotch, upper thigh, and top of her pants," the complaint states. "Ms. Doe 1 was shocked and terrified."

Doe 1 texted her friends saying a driver was trying to rape her, but got no response. After repeated assaults she managed to escape the car and run to a friend's house. A passerby assisted her to call 911. The driver was arrested, and the incident was covered in local media.

Jane Doe 2 is a Florida resident who was attending school in Charleston, South Carolina, where she took an Uber ride with friends after staying out late one night in August. After dropping off her friends, he drove her in the wrong direction, ultimately ending the ride in a parking lot. He took her phone, locked the doors to prevent her from leaving, and "proceeded to viciously rape her and threaten her with harm multiple times," according to the complaint.

After the attack, Doe 2 ran to the highway and waved her arms for help and was hit by a passing car in the arm. The police arrived and took her to the hospital. The lawsuit states she became suicidal in the hospital, and "was transferred to the psychiatric unit where she remained for three days." She continues to have suicidal ideation, the suit states.

The accused driver in the South Carolina incident was 39-year-old Patrick Aiello, who was charged by police with kidnapping and first-degree criminal sexual conduct, according to a report on the matter in The Post and Courier.

In the view of the plaintiffs, the attacks were "heinous" but also avoidable. The lawsuit cites various news reports of attacks against Uber users, stating they're an indication that the company has "systemic deficiencies" regarding safety measures.

Plaintiffs say the Uber background checks, performed by Hirease LLC, are not "stringent" enough. They don't include criminal background checks that include fingerprinting, nor will Uber get notified if a driver commits a crime after the Hirease check, they state.

The application process is "simple, fast" and designed for speedy hiring. "Such cost saving, however, is at the expense of riders, especially female riders," the Does' lawyers write.

Uber doesn't require proof of vehicle ownership, conduct in-person interviews, verify identifying information like social security numbers, or require written examinations beyond basic "city knowledge" tests.

The lawsuit accuses Uber of negligence in hiring and fraud; it also charges the company with assault, battery, and false imprisonment, saying that it's responsible for the actions of its drivers, whom the lawsuit calls employees. (Whether Uber drivers are contractors or employees is something that's being disputed in separate litigation.)

In addition to damages, the suit includes a request for an injunction that would impose 17 different changes to how Uber does business. Among other things, the complaint asks for a judge's order requiring Uber to open 24/7 customer support facilities in each city it operates in; disable child-lock features and install video cameras and GPS tracking in cars; perform annual criminal background checks of all drivers; and allow users to request a female Uber driver.

"These changes must be implemented without delay, so Plaintiffs' harrowing ordeals are never repeated," write the plaintiffs.

The lawsuit was filed by New York-based Wigdor LLP, the same law firm that filed a US lawsuit against Uber over a rape that occurred in India. That case was resolved last month on confidential terms.

"Our thoughts remain with the victims of these two terrible incidents," an Uber spokesperson said in a statement sent to Ars. "We proactively worked with law enforcement in Massachusetts and South Carolina at the time to share information and aid their investigations. Both drivers have been permanently removed from the platform."|||

Two "Jane Doe" plaintiffs say the company is responsible for drivers' actions.