After less than a week as new permanent CEO, Jack Dorsey already has plans for company-wide layoffs, according to a report in the tech blog Re/code.

Citing unnamed sources, Re/code said layoffs at the microblogging site are set for next week. Re/code did not say how many employees would lose their jobs but said the downsizing is expected to affect most, if not all, departments. Twitter most recently reported that it has 4,200 employees.

“We’re not commenting on rumor and speculation," a Twitter spokesperson told FORBES.

Dorsey told investors on a conference call on Monday that since he assumed the interim CEO position in July, he has been focused on building Twitter's product roadmap and making Twitter's internal work flow more disciplined. Dorsey led a reorganization of Twitter's product team in August.

“There’s a huge desire for more efficiency, and there’s an opportunity to really raise the bar on our execution," Dorsey said on Monday's call.

Dorsey, a Twitter cofounder, served as CEO of the site from 2007 to 2008. Now, he is tasked with reviving the product and reversing sagging user growth, following the departure of former Twitter CEO Dick Costolo. Costolo stepped down in July after months of investor discontent. Dorsey said he is working on a series of "bold" new tools to roll out this year and next with the goal of making Twitter a daily utility for the general population, not just for avid fans of the site and the rest of its 316 million monthly active users.

Earlier on Friday, one of Twitter's top advertising executives Glenn Otis Brown said he is leaving Twitter to join Betaworks, an Internet startup incubator. Brown discussed his departure in a post on Friday on publishing site Medium. Brown's resignation was first reported by tech blog Re/code.

Brown, who had been leading Twitter's video ad program, played a key role in the site's launch of Amplify, the ad product Twitter launched about two years ago to make it easier for brands and publishers to create campaigns together. Brown's move comes just one day after Twitter rolled out an update to Amplify to further automate the process through which marketers can buy video ad spots on the social network.

Follow me on Twitter @kchaykowski and e-mail me at kchaykowski@forbes.com.|||

After less than a week as Twitter's new permanent CEO, Jack Dorsey already has plans for company-wide layoffs, according to a report in the tech blog Re/code. Citing unnamed sources, Re/code said layoffs at the microblogging site are set for next week. Re/code did not say how many employees would lose their jobs but said the downsizing is expected to affect most, if not all, departments. Twitter most recently reported that it has 4,200 employees.