The frequency of use of the word “humans” increased almost exactly 10x from 1950 to 2000. See here.

The above link to the Google Ngram viewer observes the parallel rise in frequency of the word “computers” and the word “humans”, from the ’50s to the ’90s, followed by “humans” over taking “computers” in frequency of use.

In Udacity’s CS101 course we regularly run into the reason why we see the rise in the use of the word “humans”. In short, there are now relevant actors besides humans, so the word “humans” is required to distinguish the instances that it is a human (not a computer or some other actor) that is performing the task at hand. See a few examples from the first two units of an “Intro to Computer Science” course below:

The reason we have computers is to save humans from doing lots of tedious work A compiler is a program that takes as input a program in a programming language easy for humans to write and outputs a program in another language that is easier for computers to execute. A programming language is a language designed for producing computer programs. A good programming language makes it easy for humans to read and write programs that can be executed by a computer.

We create and use new terms when we need to describe the role of an actor in a relationship. Humans will increasingly be interacting with compilers, apps, APIs, and servers – as we do we should expect to see a rise in the use of these words, but also a continuing trend in the rise of the use of the word “humans”.

This increase in linguistic self-awareness of our own role in relationship to other entities should increase our ability to leverage our comparative advantage. Rather than assuming that we need to do everything (erroneously believing that we are the only option available to do a task), the more we use language to identify our role in the relationship with the tools available to us, the more efficient we will become.

This may feel like a marginal, or non-actionable trend, but it could easily be seen as the equivalent of developing a terminology for different roles within an organization or sports team. We are leaving the era where everyone is a “laborer” or a “footballer” and increasing our specialization as a species. We can have human “product managers” and API “quality assurance specialists”. We can have human “designers” and 3D printer “manufacturers”. The more we are willing to acknowledge and name the role of “humans” the more efficiently we will be able to extend and specialize the division of labor – not just amongst ourselves, but also among the tools that we create. This can (and should) lead to great gains in efficiency. Here’s to “humans”!|||

The frequency of use of the word "humans" increased almost exactly 10x from 1950 to 2000. See here. The above link to the Google Ngram viewer observes the parallel rise in frequency of the word "computers" and the word "humans", from the '50s to the '90s, followed by "humans" over taking "computers" in frequency of use. In…