As many of you know Gabe and I have been friends for years.  We grew up together, we went to college at the same school, both moved to Chicago after college, hell, he was the best man in my wedding.  We have nearly all facets of life in common.  That is except one thing.  Gabe is a Cubs fan and I am a Cardinals fan.  For years, we have been able to look past this difference in opinion.  That is until this weekend.  As the fans from the windy city start their ascension on the gateway to the midwest we have decided to take our witless banter from text message to social media.  So in the word of Big John McCarthey, “Lets get it on!”



I’m super-excited to see all of you looking forward to the upcoming series against the Chicago Cubs. I have seen your tweets, Facebook posts, and messages on how it’s going to be a “great” series. And how it’s so “nice” to play the Cubs in the playoffs. And may the “best team” win. Blah. Blah. Blah.  Give me a break.

Cardinals Fans. I’m not here to tell you good luck. I’m not here to say  “may the best team win.” I’m here to tell you that there’s a storm coming.

No. Not a storm. A tornado, or a monsoon. Maybe both.

Nope, not good enough. A Sharknado. You know, a shark throwing tornado. Just some sort of natural disaster—whatever—details.

Years and years of frustration and heartbreak are going to come to fruition.  The years of “maybe next year” are gone. Years of seeing the almighty Cardinals win, year after year, after year. Is going to come to an abrupt halt. This IS our year.

Chicago is coming  St. Louis. And we don’t wish you good luck. Luck is for losers. We don’t hope for a fantastic series. And quite frankly, I don’t care if your outfielders run into each other again.  Wow. That’s heartless. Don’t care. Cry me a river.

Chicago is coming to do one thing, and one thing only—whoop your ass. It isn’t going to be pretty. It’s not going to be anything nice. Take this beating like men. Take this beating, the beating that you have had coming to you for quite some time.

In the words of Mister C.M. Punk—Welcome to Chicago, Motherfucker.

I want to first continue to extend a friendly welcome to you on behalf of the Cardinals organization and the rest of the perennial playoff teams in Major League baseball.  It’s been a long time since we’ve seen you and we are happy that you have moved from the kiddy table to the adult seating area.  Now judging from the tone of your letter there seems to be a few things we need to discuss.  For starters we are excited to play you in this series.  I mean it is the first time you’ve been relevant in how long?  And of course we want the best team to win.  That’s because we know that it’s us.  We as Cardinals fans understand that you have a chip on your shoulder.  There are some teams out there we just can’t seem to beat either…..hold on no there isn’t.  But what we do understand is how it feels to go through such an awful drought between World Series wins.  Did you know that if you were a Cardinals fan born in 1983 you had to wait until you were 23 to see a championship?  So we are kind of one in the same right?

I see that you have predicted that you’re going to whoop our ass.  And like your baby bear mascot, your prediction is cute.  Through our long and storied playoff history we know that even the best teams can fall victim to a strong pitching and timely hitting.  I mean we’ve been doing that for years now. All banter aside I do want to wish you the best of luck and cordially invite you to Meet ME in St. Louis. (It’s a Judy Garland movie.)

Oh shoot I almost forget something……………….Kiss the Rings Bitch!!!!!!!

The Best Fans in Baseball|||

As many of you know Gabe and I have been friends for years.  We grew up together, we went to college at the same school, both moved to Chicago after college, hell, he was the best man in my wedding.  We have nearly all facets of life in common.  That is except one thing.  Gabe…