Smart home technologies are the new frontier of business – believe it or not. Owing to technological innovations in the sector of home automation, the modern home has been fitted with all the smart amenities and devices to make everyday life easier. From locking doors and climate control to appliances, it seems as though new smart technology is released each week. It’s the new frontier of how we live and do our daily tasks as humans – hell, they’ve even found out the smart way to ring a bell without any of those antiquated cords running in and through and around your house.

Most of the advancement is driven by startups that are transforming the way people do things with new products. As recent research reveals, younger companies are venturing into the field of artificial intelligence because there has been an increase in seed funding. As such, the future looks bright for start-ups in the technological arena.

With this in mind, here are 5 interesting startup companies operating in the field of smart home technologies.

This is one of the best startups in the area of automated door lock systems. The company offers stylish, high end and convenient door systems. The smart lock works alongside a deadbolt, and it can be controlled and monitored remotely via an app. It is flexible and can accommodate both Android and iPhone platforms.

Homeseer is a well-respected home automation system that is known for its innovation and quality. This system is extremely compatible with a range of other devices and works seamlessly alongside various media management solutions, browsers, apps, operating systems, as well as HVAC and surveillance units. It can be operated manually, automatically or through voice control based on the user’s preference. Homeseer also has a one-stop shop that caters to the needs of different customers. The startup understands that every individual’s security concerns are different, so it offers a range of choices to suit every customer.

TrackR is an Internet of Things accessory that prevents you from losing your keys. The device, known as Track Atlas automatically surveys your belongings as long as they are tagged with the TrackR technology or via Bluetooth. The tracker plugs into your home to map your living area, keeping a record of where all the tagged items are located.

Luxaflex is responsible for PowerView™ Motorisation, a device that allows people to control blinds and curtains remotely from a phone. It has features that enable people to customize the perfect light combination, warmth, and degree of privacy in their houses.

Netatmo is a smart thermostat system that allows individuals to control the temperature in their houses remotely. The smart thermostat is so energy efficient that it lets consumers to save about 37% of the energy they utilize for home heating, which effectively works to reduce costs.|||

Tech, Culture, Hustle