Marco Zappacosta was as surprised as anyone when one of Jeb Bush’s aides called his company, Thumbtack, to schedule a visit to its headquarters over the summer.

“At first, I was like, ‘What? He reached out to us for what?’” Zappacosta says.

After all, Thumbtack, which is an app that connects service people like tutors and painters to potential customers, is based in the liberal bastion of San Francisco. Of the 130 employees in the office, Zappacosta says, “How many would vote for Jeb Bush? Zero to one.”

At first, Zappacosta hesitated before agreeing to the visit. Thumbtack the company is apolitical, and he didn’t want to appear to be choosing sides, especially one that his employees might not support. At the same time, he also understood the inherent benefits. “Because we interface with hundreds of thousands of small businesses, we need to be a conduit for their needs and their questions to get in front of policymakers and be part of the debate,” he says. “And then the selfish motivation was just PR and exposure.”

So Zappacosta gave the Bush campaign the green light, and Bush—who took and Uber to Thumbtack’s headquarters and appeared in a YouTube video donning a Thumbtack hoodie—milked the visit for all it was worth.

But while Zappacosta may have initially found the campaign’s request unusual, in the context of this election season, it’s anything but. As the tech industry increasingly pervades every corner of the economy, tech startups are becoming a can’t-miss campaign stop, right alongside Midwest factories and mom-and-pop Main Street businesses. Already, we’ve seen Bush visit Thumbtack; Hillary Clinton host a roundtable with entrepreneurs at the food-delivery startup Munchery; and Marco Rubio speak at the Chicago tech incubator 1871. Just this week, he held another a town hall meeting at the New York City co-working space Civic Hall.

“It’s definitely a new part of the 2016 campaign season,” says Linda Moore, CEO of the tech advocacy group TechNet and the White House’s former deputy political director under President Clinton. “These companies are now viewed as the backbone of the American economy.”

And with good reason. The tech sector is now one of the fastest growing industries in terms of job creation, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The major manufacturers that have been perennial campaign stops, on the other hand, are experiencing rapid decline. And he tech sector, flush with young, idealistic billionaires, has become a formidable player in campaign finance.

All of it means candidates have extra incentive to trade in their hard hats for hoodies. It also means, however, being prepared to face an entirely new set of questions from a community that’s both younger and more liberal-leaning than the traditional small business set might be. “The brand of being a Republican in Silicon Valley is about as low as it’s ever going to get barring some parallel catastrophe,” says Chris Abrams, CTO of Lincoln Labs, a group that represents primarily conservative technologists. “Candidates know that. They’re aware of it. But the only way to do something about it is to do something about it.”

That means facing questions, as Bush did at Thumbtack, on social issues like gun control and gay marriage. It means confronting issues, like Rubio did at Civic Hall, about tailoring safety net benefits to the gig economy and illegal immigration. And it means doing it in front of an audience that may not share the same views.

Candidates must also be conversant in the tech sector’s pet issues, like increasing the number of visas for highly skilled foreign workers the US distributes, which Zappacosta lists as the most pressing issue for Thumbtack this election season. “It’s so obnoxiously stupid that our government keeps us from hiring smart, thoughtful people from around the world,” he says.

At Munchery, says co-founder Tri Tran, the core issue was worker classification in the on-demand economy, an issue about which Hillary Clinton has expressed mixed feelings about in the past. “All of us urged her to be a champion and be a leader and innovator in this whole sharing economy,” says Tran. “There’s no reason to be defensive.”

Dyn, a startup that helps companies improve the speed and safety of their websites, has received visits from the likes of Ohio Gov. John Kasich, Sen. Lyndsey Graham, Sen. Rand Paul, and former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley. They’ve discussed everything from net neutrality to cybersecurity to STEM education.

“It gives us a unique level of access and at least some level of influence,” says Kyle York, chief marketing officer at Dyn, which is based in New Hampshire, an added perk for candidates looking to court swing state voters. York says he’s been surprised to see just how much time candidates are willing to spend at the company, talking to employees, and trying out the foosball table.

“We monitor the infrastructure behind our customers’ websites, so we care about the overall Internet infrastructure ecosystem,” York says. “Being able to get our voice heard in the process is incredibly important.”

For candidates, it’s equally important, says Moore, even if it presents them with a new set of agendas to listen to and a new set of promises to keep. “What’s the choice? You can’t ignore such a huge sector of the US economy and US job growth and culture,” she says. “If these presidential candidates can’t speak to those people, that’s a whole other problem.”|||

As the tech sector thrives and manufacturing wanes, candidates looking to promote job growth are trading hard hats for hoodies.