We have confirmed that there has been unauthorized access to one of our AWS accounts and to our private, internal instance of FogBugz. After a thorough investigation, we are confident that no customer data or metadata was accessed.

We’ve made a number of changes to our systems aimed at preventing future incidents, and we’re releasing three new features that will give FogBugz customers better control over the security of the data stored in their instances. These features are two-factor authentication, session management, and True Delete. We strongly encourage all users to enable two-factor authentication.

We know that our hosted services, FogBugz and Kiln, contain critical information which many teams depend on, and they count on us to keep it secure. Although that data was not compromised, we take this intrusion very seriously and deeply regret that this has occurred. We’re sorry that this happened.

We have been assisting law enforcement agencies in this investigation and we are now able to share the key points of the intrusion with you:

To recap, what was compromised:

What was not compromised:

During and after the breach, there were a number of tools which were essential to us in recovering full control over our systems. In AWS, tighter IAM roles and mandatory two-factor authentication are among the tools that would have prevented that side of the intrusion, and we were immediately active on that front with a number of remediation steps. On the FogBugz side, some of steps to regain and enforce security were uniquely available to us because we have direct database and log access. Per our aspiration to give our customers access to the development tools that we rely on ourselves, we’re releasing three new features to make some of these powers available to all of our users:

FogBugz and Kiln now support two-factor authentication. It’s ready for you to turn on right now and we strongly recommend having everyone in your account enable 2FA.

During the intrusion it was important for us to inspect our active sessions and API tokens, note their activity and points of origin, and revoke suspicious items. Once we confirmed the intrusion, it was important to us to be able to invalidate every access point into and out of the system. The Session Management page provides you with these abilities, too.

You can now permanently delete case events, emails, and attachments from FogBugz. This isn’t a shallow deletion, as is very common in SaaS applications, but instead a deletion which will completely remove the data from our systems. This feature is especially useful when a password, credit card number, or sensitive personal information inadvertently gets into FogBugz.

These features are new and we wanted to get them to you as soon as we could trust in their functionality. We’re underway in making improvements to these features and would love to hear your feedback as you use them. You can read more about all of them here:

 https://blog.fogcreek.com/new-security-features-in-fogbugz-and-kiln/

If you’re interested in reading our security practices and policies, see https://www.fogcreek.com/security/

If you have any questions, concerns, or feedback for us, please contact us: https://www.fogcreek.com/contact/

We’re sorry for any trouble or concern that this is causing you.|||

We have confirmed that there has been unauthorized access to one of our AWS accounts and to our private, internal instance of FogBugz. After a thorough investigation, we are confident that no customer data or metadata was accessed. This post details the investigation of the incident and the new secu