Under the umbrella of behavior science sit multiple disciplines that contribute to our understanding of decision making.  In popular parlance, many of these insights get lumped together as "behavioral economics," but this is a muddled view of the complex interaction between many related but distinct disciplines.  (In fact, despite winning a Nobel Prize in Economics, Daniel Kahneman claimed that he is “innocent of economic knowledge” and used the words "economic" and "economics" fewer than five times in his entire Nobel Prize lecture.)

In theory and in practice, these disciplines use dissimilar methods to achieve their objectives.  The table below summarizes some of the key differences (in broad strokes) of each discipline as applied to decision making:

So, how do these differences play out when the professors from each of our disciplines order a drink?

The psychologist is interested in which mental processes are going to contribute to her decision.  As the experimental economist dashes into the bar after running straight from his lab, the psychologist wonders how his elevated heart rate will affect his preferences.  She's also thinking about how even her colleagues who don't really want to drink will still have one due to social norms, and she's wondering what it means to "feel like having a Cosmopolitan today."

The behavioral economist is focused on the multitude of factors that lead to the decisions made in the bar each day.  He recalls the psychologist's stringent diet, and wonders if her depleted willpower from eating salads all day might lead her to drink too much.  Looking at his watch, he cringes because when happy hour ends in three minutes, prospect theory tells him that people who miss it will be more upset than people who unexpectedly order during tomorrow's happy hour.

The marketing scientist pays attention to the immediate factors that lead his colleagues to purchase particular drinks.  He recognizes that the presence of expensive top-shelf liquor makes the cocktail specials feel slightly less pricey than they really are, and gnaws at whether the "50% off" happy hour special would be more successful if it were framed as "buy one, get one free." Needless to say, since the marketing scientist does the most work with industry, he pays for drinks.

The experimental economist wonders if this is a one-time interaction or if future gatherings will occur, because he knows that it will affect whether his colleagues pay back the marketing scientist as they promised.  Knowing that pure altruism does not exist, he questions the motives of the bartender who tells him "the next one's on me."

The neoclassical economist orders quickly, because she has a set of stable preferences.  As a perfectly rational utility maximizer, she will consume whatever product (beverage or otherwise) provides the highest utility, until the marginal utility of that option falls below the next best option.  At that point, she will depart from the bar to wherever her ordered preferences take her.|||

Under the umbrella of behavior science sit multiple disciplines that contribute to our understanding of decision making. In popular parlance, many of these