Perhaps nowhere is the phrase “one size fits all”  more misplaced than when talking about work environments and company culture. This is particularly true if, like me, you just happen to be something of an introvert.

At startups with aggressive growth and targets to hit, we try to foster a culture in which people have the opportunity to contribute their strengths and abilities, whilst creating an environment in which they want to spend a significant amount of their time. We also want to have some fun to offset all the hard work.

The creative options and flexibility for doing this at small startups simply can’t be matched in the wider corporate world, so it is no wonder that startups tend to have some of the most enviable work environments and cultures.

But getting it right involves a complex interplay of factors when catering for a diverse workforce, and talented people bring their whole personality to work. Tweak one environmental or cultural aspect to suit certain people or to get results, and you often find you’ve ruined another aspect for someone else. Worst of all, you may even hamper their ability to contribute.

There is perhaps no group that this applies to more than introverts, as many startup environments can be somewhat charged up and geared towards the high-energy needs of extroverts.

To my amusement, I find it easier to tell people that I’m gay than to admit being an introvert. The former rarely causes a ripple. But the latter is often the start of a grand inquisition: “What’s an introvert?” “Why do you say that?” “You don’t seem like one” “We don’t need introverts here” “You just need to come out of your shell and let your hair down”… All precisely the kinds of confrontation an introvert wants to avoid at any cost. It’s no wonder we usually try to fly under the radar.

It is said that people are hard-wired somewhere on the introversion / extroversion spectrum, or we learn it very early on in life and it can be incredibly hard to unlearn. This has certainly been my experience. But what we are rarely told are the upsides to being introverted, particularly in environments you might think it would be a weakness, such as at startups. Indeed, a mix of introverts and extroverts may be the ideal team configuration… but only if handled thoughtfully.

So what are some of the unexpected strengths of introverts?

But what do introverts find harder, and what might we need adjusting in work environments and culture so we can thrive?

So perhaps the strengths we’re recruiting for in fast-paced startup environments might occasionally come aligned with a personality trait we’ve usually considered to be a weakness: introversion.

Introverts comprise up to one-third of the total workforce, so getting things right for a mix of personality types could be a significant win for startups looking to build great teams and great places to work. And if startups can get this right, the wider corporate world might follow.|||

