The previous part was the first part in the current chapter that describes timers and time management related stuff in the Linux kernel. We got acquainted with two concepts in the previous part:

The first is the global variable that is defined in the include/linux/jiffies.h header file and represents the counter that is increased during each timer interrupt. So if we can access this global variable and we know the timer interrupt rate we can convert to the human time units. As we already know the timer interrupt rate represented by the compile-time constant that is called in the Linux kernel. The value of is equal to the value of the kernel configuration option and if we will look into the arch/x86/configs/x86_64_defconfig kernel configuration file, we will see that:

kernel configuration option is set. This means that value of will be by default for the x86_64 architecture. So, if we divide the value of by the value of :

we will get the amount of seconds that elapsed since the beginning of the moment the Linux kernel started to work or in other words we will get the system uptime. Since represents the amount of timer interrupts in a second, we can set a value for some time in the future. For example:

This is a very common practice in the Linux kernel. For example, if you will look into the arch/x86/kernel/smpboot.c source code file, you will find the function. This function boots all processors besides bootstrap processor. You can find a snippet that waits ten seconds for a response from the application processor:

We assign value to the variable here. As I think you already understood, this means a ten seconds timeout. After this we are entering a loop where we use the macro to compare the current value and our timeout.

Or for example if we look into the sound/isa/sscape.c source code file which represents the driver for the Ensoniq Soundscape Elite sound card, we will see the function that waits upto a given timeout for the On-Board Processor to return its start-up acknowledgement sequence:

As you can see, the variable is very widely used in the Linux kernel code. As I already wrote, we met yet another new time management related concept in the previous part - . We have only seen a short description of this concept and the API for a clock source registration. Let's take a closer look in this part.

The concept represents the generic API for clock sources management in the Linux kernel. Why do we need a separate framework for this? Let's go back to the beginning. The concept is the fundamental concept in the Linux kernel and other operating system kernels. And the timekeeping is one of the necessities to use this concept. For example Linux kernel must know and update the time elapsed since system startup, it must determine how long the current process has been running for every processor and many many more. Where the Linux kernel can get information about time? First of all it is Real Time Clock or RTC that represents by the a nonvolatile device. You can find a set of architecture-independent real time clock drivers in the Linux kernel in the drivers/rtc directory. Besides this, each architecture can provide a driver for the architecture-dependent real time clock, for example - - arch/x86/kernel/rtc.c for the x86 architecture. The second is system timer - timer that excites interrupts with a periodic rate. For example, for IBM PC compatibles it was - programmable interval timer.

We already know that for timekeeping purposes we can use in the Linux kernel. The can be considered as read only global variable which is updated with frequency. We know that the is a compile-time kernel parameter whose reasonable range is from to Hz. So, it is guaranteed to have an interface for time measurement with - milliseconds resolution. Besides standard , we saw the clock source in the previous part that is based on the programmable interval timer tick rate which is almost hertz. So we can get something about microsecond resolution with the . In this time, nanoseconds are the favorite choice for the time value units of the given clock source.

The availability of more precise techniques for time intervals measurement is hardware-dependent. We just knew a little about dependent timers hardware. But each architecture provides own timers hardware. Earlier each architecture had own implementation for this purpose. Solution of this problem is an abstraction layer and associated API in a common code framework for managing various clock sources and independent of the timer interrupt. This common code framework became - framework.

Generic timeofday and clock source management framework moved a lot of timekeeping code into the architecture independent portion of the code, with the architecture-dependent portion reduced to defining and managing low-level hardware pieces of clocksources. It takes a large amount of funds to measure the time interval on different architectures with different hardware, and it is very complex. Implementation of the each clock related service is strongly associated with an individual hardware device and as you can understand, it results in similar implementations for different architectures.

Within this framework, each clock source is required to maintain a representation of time as a monotonically increasing value. As we can see in the Linux kernel code, nanoseconds are the favorite choice for the time value units of a clock source in this time. One of the main point of the clock source framework is to allow an user to select clock source among a range of available hardware devices supporting clock functions when configuring the system and selecting, accessing and scaling different clock sources.

The fundamental of the framework is the structure that defined in the include/linux/clocksource.h header file. We already saw some fields that are provided by the structure in the previous part. Let's look on the full definition of this structure and try to describe all of its fields:

We already saw the first field of the structure in the previous part - it is pointer to the function that returns best counter selected by the clocksource framework. For example we use function to read value:

The next field is that allows to ensure that subtraction between counters values from non counters do not need special overflow logic. After the field, we can see two fields: and . These are the fields that are base of mathematical functions that are provide ability to convert time values specific to each clock source. In other words these two fields help us to convert an abstract machine time units of a counter to nanoseconds.

After these two fields we can see the bits field represents max idle time permitted by the clocksource in nanoseconds. We need in this field for the Linux kernel with enabled kernel configuration option. This kernel configuration option enables the Linux kernel to run without a regular timer tick (we will see full explanation of this in other part). The problem that dynamic tick allows the kernel to sleep for periods longer than a single tick, moreover sleep time could be unlimited. The field represents this sleeping limit.

The next field after the is the field which is the maximum adjustment value to . The main formula by which we convert cycles to the nanoseconds:

is not accurate. Instead the number is taken as close as possible to a nanosecond and helps to correct this and allows clocksource API to avoid values that might overflow when adjusted. The next four fields are pointers to the function:

The next field is the and as we can understand from its name, this field represents maximum cycle value before potential overflow. And the last field is represents reference to a kernel module that is owner of a clocksource. This is all. We just went through all the standard fields of the structure. But you can noted that we missed some fields of the structure. We can divide all of missed field on two types: Fields of the first type are already known for us. For example, they are field that represents name of a , the field that helps to the Linux kernel to select the best clocksource and etc. The second type, fields which are dependent from the different Linux kernel configuration options. Let's look on these fields.

The first field is the . This field has type and depends on the kernel configuration option. This field is actual only for the x86 and IA64 architectures for this moment. And again, as we can understand from the field's name, it represents architecture-specific data for a clock source. For example, it represents clock mode:

for the architectures. Where the clock mode can be one of the:

The last three fields are , and the depends on the kernel configuration option. First of all let's try to understand what is it . In a simple words, watchdog is a timer that is used for detection of the computer malfunctions and recovering from it. All of these three fields contain watchdog related data that is used by the framework. If we will grep the Linux kernel source code, we will see that only arch/x86/KConfig kernel configuration file contains the kernel configuration option. So, why do and need in watchdog? You already may know that all processors has special 64-bit register - time stamp counter. This register contains number of cycles since the reset. Sometimes the time stamp counter needs to be verified against another clock source. We will not see initialization of the timer in this part, before this we must learn more about timers.

That's all. From this moment we know all fields of the structure. This knowledge will help us to learn insides of the framework.

We saw only one function from the framework in the previous part. This function was - . This function defined in the include/linux/clocksource.h header file and as we can understand from the function's name, main point of this function is to register new clocksource. If we will look on the implementation of the function, we will see that it just makes call of the function and returns its result:

Before we will see implementation of the function, we can see that provides additional API for a new clock source registration:

And all of these functions do the same. They return value of the function but with different set of parameters. The function defined in the kernel/time/clocksource.c source code file. To understand difference between these functions, let's look on the parameters of the function. As we can see, this function takes three parameters:

Now let's look on the implementation of the function:

First of all we can see that the function starts from the call of the function that defined in the same source code file and updates given clock source with the new frequency. Let's look on the implementation of this function. In the first step we need to check given frequency and if it was not passed as , we need to calculate and parameters for the given clock source. Why do we need to check value of the ? Actually it can be zero. if you attentively looked on the implementation of the function, you may have noticed that we passed as . We will do it only for some clock sources that have self defined and parameters. Look in the previous part and you will see that we saw calculation of the and for . The function will do it for us for other clock sources.

So in the start of the function we check the value of the parameter and if is not zero we need to calculate and for the given clock source. Let's look on the and calculation:

Here we can see calculation of the maximum number of seconds which we can run before a clock source counter will overflow. First of all we fill the variable with the value of a clock source mask. Remember that a clock source's mask represents maximum amount of bits that are valid for the given clock source. After this, we can see two division operations. At first we divide our variable on a clock source frequency and then on scale factor. The parameter shows us how many timer interrupts will be occurred in one second. So, we divide value that represents maximum number of a counter (for example ) on the frequency of a timer and will get the maximum number of seconds for the certain clock source. The second division operation will give us maximum number of seconds for the certain clock source depends on its scale factor which can be hertz or kilohertz (10^3 Hz).

After we have got maximum number of seconds, we check this value and set it to or depends on the result at the next step. These values is maximum sleeping time for a clocksource in seconds. In the next step we can see call of the . Main point of this function is calculation of the and values for a given clock source. In the end of the function we check that just calculated value of a given clock source will not cause overflow after adjustment, update the and values of a given clock source with the maximum nanoseconds that can be converted to a clock source counter and print result to the kernel buffer:

that we can see in the dmesg output:

After the function will finish its work, we can return back to the function that will register new clock source. We can see the call of the following three functions:

Note that before the first will be called, we lock the mutex. The point of the mutex is to protect variable which represents currently selected and variable which represents list that contains registered . Now, let's look on these three functions.

The first function and other two defined in the same source code file. We go through all already registered or in other words we go through all elements of the and tries to find best place for a given :

In the end we just insert new clocksource to the . The second function - does almost the same that previous function, but it inserts new clock source to the depends on flags of a clock source and starts new watchdog timer. As I already wrote, we will not consider related stuff in this part but will do it in next parts.

The last function is the . As we can understand from the function's name, main point of this function - select the best from registered clocksources. This function consists only from the call of the function helper:

Note that the function takes one parameter ( in our case). This bool parameter shows how to traverse the . In our case we pass that is meant that we will go through all entries of the . We already know that with the best rating will the first in the after the call of the function, so we can easily get it from this list. After we found a clock source with the best rating, we switch to it:

The result of this operation we can see in the output:

Note that we can see two clock sources in the output ( and in our case). Yes, actually there can be many different clock sources on a particular hardware. So the Linux kernel knows about all registered clock sources and switches to a clock source with a better rating each time after registration of a new clock source.

If we will look on the bottom of the kernel/time/clocksource.c source code file, we will see that it has sysfs interface. Main initialization occurs in the function which will be called during device . Let's look on the implementation of the function:

First of all we can see that it registers a subsystem with the call of the function. In other words, after the call of this function, we will have following directory:

After this step, we can see registration of the device which is represented by the following structure:

and creation of three files:

These files will provide information about current clock source in the system, available clock sources in the system and interface which allows to unbind the clock source.

After the function will be executed, we will be able find some information about available clock sources in the:

Or for example information about current clock source in the system:

In the previous part, we saw API for the registration of the clock source, but didn't dive into details about the framework. In this part we did it and saw implementation of the new clock source registration and selection of a clock source with the best rating value in the system. Of course, this is not all API that framework provides. There a couple additional functions like for removing given clock source from the and etc. But I will not describe this functions in this part, because they are not important for us right now. Anyway if you are interesting in it, you can find it in the kernel/time/clocksource.c.

This is the end of the second part of the chapter that describes timers and timer management related stuff in the Linux kernel. In the previous part got acquainted with the following two concepts: and . In this part we saw some examples of the usage and knew more details about the concept.

If you have questions or suggestions, feel free to ping me in twitter 0xAX, drop me email or just create issue.

Please note that English is not my first language and I am really sorry for any inconvenience. If you found any mistakes please send me PR to linux-insides.|||

linux-insides - A little bit about a linux kernel