Before Uber was valued at $51 billion this July, they were considered another scrappy startup that might fail at any moment.

We have conflicting feelings about Uber. It wonderfully restructures the terrible taxi process, but it’s also a kind of evil unstoppable force that’s taking over the world. We know they don’t really support their drivers and they have a long history of shady business practices. But they’re so convenient! And cheap. And we can debate all this as they’re not going anywhere.

Flashback to their soft launch in 2009 and the world was trying to comprehend the concept of Uber, a.k.a UberCab (before their rebrand). Was it illegal? Would it work? Or was this some Tamagotchi trend that would die out in a year?

We know the answers to those questions, but back then we definitely didn’t.

Here’s what people said about Uber when it first started.

2 YEARS AFTER THE FIRST IPHONE RELEASE

The total, which included tip and an $8 base fare, came to $31.00, a much steeper fare than a standard cab service would have charged, but since I was rushing to the airport that day it was forgivable. The total, which included tip and an $8 base fare, came to $31.00, a much steeper fare than a standard cab service would have charged, but since I was rushing to the airport that day it was forgivable. In New York City, where there’s a $7 base fare for Uber, I found myself wishing I’d just hailed a taxi cab. The Uber app said the driver would arrive in nine minutes, but due to traffic and the fact that the car initially drove past me, it actually took half an hour.

The goal was to simply scratch an itch – Garrett wanted a private car and driver without actually keeping one full time. But calling a car service multiple times a day was a hassle. The goal was to simply scratch an itch – Garrett wanted a private car and driver without actually keeping one full time. But calling a car service multiple times a day was a hassle. [I’ve] become fascinated with the idea of anyone eventually being able to join the service as a driver, much as AirBnB has let anyone rent out rooms in their home. I also like that it’s easier to use than taxis, have much nicer cars, and costs only about 20% more.

The taxi industry hated it from day one

Uber, is now the lone “rogue” app operating in the city. Uber may well be the last such app to attempt to operate in Toronto in rogue fashion. Uber, is now the lone “rogue” app operating in the city. Uber may well be the last such app to attempt to operate in Toronto in rogue fashion. [Uber] maintains that it is simply a “technology company.” Its executives assert they have zero responsibility to passengers in terms of regulation and consumer protection. It is a “rogue” taxi and limousine app that should not be allowed in Toronto or any other city.

 * Opinion piece by Toronto Taxicab Brokerage Association

The app is incredibly simple. A map automatically pinpoints your location based on your smartphone’s GPS, or if you know you are moving, or that’s not 100 per cent correct you can define it yourself. We are thoroughly impressed with the Uber app, drive, and whole experience. The car was clean; it was a 2008 E-Class Mercedes, Francesk was friendly, and the price very reasonable considering what we did and asked for. A black cab would have cost a mortgage payment. The app is incredibly simple. A map automatically pinpoints your location based on your smartphone’s GPS, or if you know you are moving, or that’s not 100 per cent correct you can define it yourself. We are thoroughly impressed with the Uber app, drive, and whole experience. The car was clean; it was a 2008 E-Class Mercedes, Francesk was friendly, and the price very reasonable considering what we did and asked for. A black cab would have cost a mortgage payment.

Here are some early mentions

Now they own Microsoft’s BING mapping

Ice cream and kittens for everyone!|||

Before Uber was valued at $51 billion this July, they were considered another scrappy startup that might fail at any moment.