In the recent Reddit AMA with famous physicist Stephen Hawking there were many questions about whether robots will eventually kill humans off or merely take our jobs. Lately media have been shouting both, with smart and smart and famous people all agreeing on our imminent doom.

I think we can all disagree on the answers to two questions:

I have opinions on both, but what I find more interesting, is actually another thing:

I’m not a Luddite — I run a startup and am an angel investor for crying out loud — but both of the scenarios Hawking describes worry me.

When any skill or task becomes on-demand and allocation is dynamic there won’t be any “employment” maybe. In a gig economy, everyone becomes a “free agent” and a few corporations will get the lion’s share of the money and all the data. The demand economy might be great for some, but can be pretty nasty for the “supply side”.

We will be working with computers or for computers, but more and more skills will be for computers in the places we are cheaper (listen to linked podcast if you want to know more). Tasks will either be creative or mind numbing.

Hawking has a great comment about the consequences of machines serving us better and better:

The key to our future is wealth distribution — we need to discuss minimum or even base salaries and free education and healthcare more. At the same time belief and trust in governments is rapidly decreasing. Doesn’t bode well…

The most unequal countries have the highest rate of mental illness, homicide, and violence — they even are the ones with worst math scores and lowest trust between people. Problems that we find no correlation to GNP per capita but mainly inequality. (For more info look at this great talk by Wilkinson.)

And realize that every single data point in his talk is a human tragedy. Will the acceleration of the digital economy increase not only inequality but, eventually, crime, sadness, and insanity too?

Let’s say we instead decide that all this that all this innovation is good and will lead to Hawking’s existence of “luxurious leisure”. Reddit user BurkeyAcademy (a professor of economics according to Reddit) made the point in the AMA that wealth is not only money. The last hundred years of technological development has benefited us all though non-monetary distribution of resources:

But then he brings up my biggest concern: that some people will be “productive” while others are “entertained”.

I think this is the best case, and that scares me. The worst case is civil war, the mid case is feudalism where the uber drivers and “freelancers” are the serfs, and the best case is a The Matrix-meets-Ready Player One.

To hinder civil war humanity will go for option number three; legalize marijuana, create lots of amazing TV-series and computer games so immersive that they are better than reality, and... Hmmm… wait a second…|||

In the recent Reddit AMA with famous physicist Stephen Hawking there were many questions about whether robots will eventually kill humans off or merely take our jobs. Lately media have been shouting…