Tips No.10

 Give her a dogen roses with a creative twist.Give eleven white roses and one red rose.Attach a note that reads:”In every bunth there’s one who stands out and you are that one.”

Tips No.9

 Get her a wristwatch.Inscribe it with:”I always have time for you.”

Cook her favorite food and prepare a candlelight dinner with bottled wine at her home.Then gentiy kiss your sewwtheart on her neck whlie dancing to the soft slow music with her.

Tips No.7

 Take her to a small island.Sit side by side on a silent beach watching sunset,and whisper near her ear the song she loves best.Lie down on the roof of your car at midnigth while camping onto wild and watch the stars.

Tips No.6

 Rush back home and happily claim that you’ve got your bigggest award in your life!Show her the medal or the trophy that writes “The Lukiest Man in the World”from “Association of boyfriends”.The award words are:Congratulations!You’ve met and been loving your only sunlmate!

Tips No.5

 Take her to a shabby cinema and pretend to watch a boring movie.(She must begin to feel angry, or at least dissatisfied.)But in fact you have negotiated with her cinema to play the video you have made for her. If could be the words you want to say to her, or best wishes from her friends. So, our respected artist, go be the director!

Tips No.4 

 Mail her a book entitled your name as the author and the grateful words from you one the first page. In fact it’s a fictional story written by yourself about how you fell in love with her. Then read it to her before sleep every night.

Tips No.3

 Write to her a love letter or poem on one sheet of paper. Glue it to thin cradboard, cut it up into puggle-shaped pieces, and then mail all the pieces. Or, mall one puggle piece per day!

Tips No.2 

 Take a latex balloon(not inflated)and fill it with some confetti, a love note to her and a photo of yourself. Fill in with helium while the items are still in the balloon. Attach a pin and a note that says”please pop!”to the balloon string. Leave the balloon by her bedside before she wakes up in the morning.

What’s the most romantic tip?

 Perhaps, you have a better idea? Come and share with us your genius romantic idea or experience, or even experiment!|||

