The ESWC is a major venue for discussing the latest scientific results and technology innovations around semantic technologies. Building on its past success, ESWC is seeking to broaden its focus to span other relevant research areas in which Web semantics plays an important role.

The goal of the Semantic Web is to create a Web of knowledge and services in which the semantics of content is made explicit and content is linked to both other content and services novel applications allowing to combine content from heterogeneous sites in unforeseen ways and support enhanced matching between users needs and content. This network of knowledge-based functionality will weave together a large network of human knowledge, and make this knowledge machine-processable to support intelligent behaviour by machines. Creating such an interlinked Web of knowledge which spans unstructured, RDF as well as multimedia content and services requires the collaboration of many disciplines, including but not limited to: Artificial Intelligence, Natural Language Processing, Database and Information Systems, Information Retrieval, Machine Learning Multimedia, Distributed Systems, Social Networks, Web Engineering, and Web Science. These complementarities are reflected in the outline of the technical program of the ESWC 2015; in addition to the research and in-use tracks, we feature two special tracks putting particular emphasis on inter-disciplinary research topics and areas that show the potential of exciting synergies for the future, eGovernment and Digital Libraries. ESWC 2015 presents the latest results in research, technologies and applications in its field. Besides the technical program organized over twelve tracks, the conference features a workshop and tutorial program, system descriptions and demos, a posters exhibition and a doctoral symposium.

For more information about the event please visit the ESWC 2015 website.|||

The ESWC is a major venue for discussing the latest scientific results and technology innovations around semantic technologies. Building on its past success, ESWC is seeking to broaden its focus to span other relevant research areas in which Web semantics plays an important role. The goal of the Semantic Web is to create a Web of knowledge and services in which the semantics of content is made explicit and content is linked to both other content and services novel applications allowing to combine content from heterogeneous sites in unforeseen ways and support enhanced matching between users needs and content. This network of knowledge-based functionality will weave together a large network of human knowledge, and make this knowledge machine-processable to support intelligent behaviour by machines. Creating such an interlinked Web of knowledge which spans unstructured, RDF as well as multimedia content and services requires the collaboration of many disciplines, including but not limited to: Artificial Intelligence, Natural Language Processing, Database and Information Systems, Information Retrieval, Machine Learning Multimedia, Distributed Systems, Social Networks, Web Engineering, and Web Science. These complementarities are reflected in the outline of the technical program of the ESWC 2015; in addition to the research and in-use tracks, we feature two special tracks putting particular emphasis on inter-disciplinary research topics and areas that show the potential of exciting synergies for the future, eGovernment and Digital Libraries. ESWC 2015 presents the latest results in research, technologies and applications in its field. Besides the technical program organized over twelve tracks, the conference features a workshop and tutorial program, system descriptions and demos, a posters exhibition and a doctoral symposium. For more information about the event please visit the ESWC 2015 website.