Earlier this year, I spent about 2 months teaching web/mobile development in Nairobi, Kenya, at a startup called Moringa School. Moringa School is re-crafting the US coding bootcamp model to fit the Kenyan and East African market and produce smart, hirable, confident developers.

This is a boon for the growing Kenyan startup scene (dubbed the region's "Silicon Savannah"), where the selection of local tech talent has, in the past, largely consisted of ill-prepared college grads. Of course there is great tech talent latent in Kenya's students, but their tech education isn't strong enough to prepare the majority of them for employment.

To nurture this talent, Moringa School has its students building software from their first week onwards. Over the course of the 2 months I was there, I witnessed the students go from grasping basic CS concepts to building datastructres and algorithms to working with MVC frameworks. Like many of their counterparts at US bootcamps, the Moringa Scool students lived and breathed code, staying up late into the night tapping away at their keyboards. Their hard work paid off - they quickly knew enough to start building websites, web servers and Android apps.

And they knew enough to start working as effective software engineers - one of my favorite moments was watching Moringa School's first graduate get hired at a trust-based, tech-driven transportation startup called Maramoja. The student, an extremely bright high school graduate, had come in with almost no coding background. She came out ready to jump straight into a foreign code base and build features in an entirely new language.

There are many other young startups for graduates to choose from - Nairobi’s tech scene is fascinating and flourishing. For one, it’s almost entirely focused on mobile (and it’s exploding) - most Kenyans skipped desktops and laptops and jumped straight to smartphones (if that’s a fair lineage). Companies are working on tech solutions for a population that has been paying for everything with their phones since the late 2000s using services like MPESA (yes, the U.S. majorly lags behind on this).

Android is the major market, not iOS, and Python is more in demand than Ruby. Microsoft has a large presence with their .NET framework (there’s even a matatu (light bus) service that sports .NET’s brand (connection is not clear, but I doubt that people randomly go emblazoning ’DOT NET’ in big bright letters onto the front of the vehicle they make their livelihood with)).

As with many rapidly developing cities, the internet infrastructure can be quite good in Nairobi - with fast cell data connections and cable connections (indeed, sometimes my girlfriend’s FaceTime connection over Comcast in SF was worse than mine). The material and virtual resources are there - Kenya just needs to cultivate more tech talent through innovative educational efforts like Moringa School.

To service the local community and give participants a taste of what a coding bootcamp has to offer, Moringa School holds community workshops several times a month. I had the pleasure of teaching two such workshops, one on HTML/CSS and the other on Javascript. The students' learning pace was astounding - I managed to get from basic syntax all the way to manipulating DOM elements with jQuery.

I am excited to see where Moringa School goes and what amazing tech solutions its graduates will come up with to address local, regional and global issues. If you want to check out more about what they do, head to their website here: www.moringaschool.com

My time outside of teaching was great. I had the chance to visit some fascinating communities and startups like Nairobi Startup Garage, iHub, M-KOPA Solar and Sanivation. I rented a castle with 14 expats and Kenyans on the white sands of the Indian Ocean, saw hippos, giraffes, elephants, played ultimate frisbee with members of the Kenyan Ultimate team (injured myself the first game, then was on crutches), had amazing food, and met lovely people from around the block and around the globe. I generally felt safe (albeit as a tall white man), and people were extremely friendly (many strangers stopped and were genuinely concerned about my frisbee hobble).

I would highly recommend taking a sabbatical to go empower young minds around the globe. Skills like coding can change people’s lives.

Here’s a short list of schools worth considering - they'd all love your help:

Please ask questions or leave a message if you know of any more opportunities like these!

P.S. Big thanks to Hack Reactor for helping send me over to Kenya while I was working for them.|||

