On September 10, Julius Sweetland, 32, released a two-minute video demo of his new eye-tracking program OptiKey. Although the demo marked the culmination of almost four years of solitary effort—coding late into the night and squeezing in some morning programming before heading to his day job—it reached a global audience within a few hours.

OptiKey is a program that enables individuals with motor neuron diseases like ALS to type, click, and browse their computers using only the movements of their eyes. Although it requires a PC and an eye-tracking camera to work, the software itself is free to use—undercutting commercial systems by thousands of dollars.

Although Sweetland holds a computer science degree from the University of Bristol, his professional background is largely unrelated to his work around OptiKey.

“[My day job has] nothing to do with eye-tracking stuff,” he explains. “I’ve been writing financial software. I started at a hedge fund.”

But a little over four years ago, a loss in his family suddenly confronted Sweetland with the critical call for speech aids for those diagnosed with degenerative illnesses.

“My Aunt [Gill] died of Motor Neuron Disease [MND],” he says. “It was quite fast … and [it] took away her faculties and her ability to use her body and communicate.”

His aunt, a typist by trade, had a traditional keyboard she initially used to speak with her family.

“But when your fingers are failing you,” Sweetland explains, “these [keyboards] don’t really work. It’s just fiercely unfair.”

Although he knew “absolutely nothing” about eye-tracking at the time, Sweetland chose to channel his grief into both research and action: “That’s what sparked the whole thing. I just thought, ‘There’s technology that’s letting people down here. Maybe I can do something.'”

After discovering that there was, in fact, existing communication technology for people diagnosed with MNDs, Sweetland “nearly gave up.”

But that’s when he realized that most devices on the market were exorbitantly priced—he estimates at least $4,000 for a top-end system. And so he redoubled his efforts.

“One of my first drafts was an old plastic pair of glasses with no lenses,” he explains.

In this model, a converted PlayStation camera was affixed to a small spoke. Attached to its side was a battery pack with miniature LEDs welded into the frame.

“It’s quite amateurish,” he says now, laughing.

He went on to experiment with a number of DIY models, including the EyeWriter and ITU Gaze Tracker, which he rebuilt by pairing a “lab-quality camera” (150 frames per second) with “these big LED things stuck on a bracket that my dad helped me drill and stick together on bits of wood.”

This hands-on experimentation with eye-tracking technologies allowed Sweetland to design a software program that would work well with existing cameras. After researching how to make keyboard interfaces more user-friendly by avoiding common problems like the “Midas Touch” (pressing keys by accidentally looking at them), he formalized the first viable iteration of OptiKey.

Sweetland knew that coding was only half the battle. Next, he needed to test OptiKey on a real, living, breathing subject, so he reached out to the Putney Royal Hospital for Neuro-Disability. His first official tester was, fittingly, a former software developer.

“It was a bit of a baptism of fire to see if he liked the code, [but] his feedback was all very positive,” Sweetland says.

Expanding OptiKey to a larger audience tops Sweetland’s priority list. Encouraged by his first user, Sweetland began to reach out to more test subjects in England and around the world, even sharing a story about a German resident named Udo whose typing speed on Optikey is now even faster than Sweetland’s.

Sweetland says that he has “a ton of people” who have volunteered their time to localize OptiKey into 30 to 40 different languages, including developers willing to assist in converting the Windows-only program to a Mac-compatible version.

Despite the plans for expansion, Sweetland believes OptiKey is currently versatile enough for use now—with a mouse, a webcam, or an eye-tracking camera (which, he notes, costs between $100 and $140).

When asked if the program has a steep learning curve, Sweetland offers a swift rebuttal: “Let me put it this way—and she’s going to hate me for saying this: My mom can use it. And she messes up text messages.”

Sweetland also designed OptiKey to be compatible with voice banking programs, another form of adaptive tech close to his heart.

“Should you lose your voice through the progression of your disease,” he says,“…[Voice banking programs] allow you to install your own voice and sound a little bit like yourself.”

Though Sweetland still has “a few hundred emails to go through” from the members of Reddit’s programming and software communities, his video earned him an invitation to demo his software at a Motor Neurone Disease Association (MNDA) event on September 22 in Carshalton, Surrey, in southeast England, where he went “going face-to-face with a lot of the big commercial companies.”

In the meantime, many redditors have requested an AMA from Sweetland—answering questions on-camera using only an eye-tracker and OptiKey, of course.

His response to the challenge?

A version of this article first appeared in Reddit’s Upvoted community on September 15.|||

