closes behind us, we look into the digital crystal ball for a few of the changes we expect to see in the New Year. The Internet continues to grow and evolve. Predicting the future remains dicey at best. Anyway, here it goes: 1) Cost of access to full Internet access via ISPs (Internet Service Providers) will continue to drop. 

 Just recently, AOL changed its pricing structure to $19.95/mo for unlimited access. In an attempt to differentiate itself, AOL tries to buy content from WWW (World Wide Web) sites which is not available to regular web surfers. The I-Net has a culture of 'everything is free or very low cost.' AOL clearly attempts to buck the tide. My feeling: Good Luck! AT&T; recently dropped its price for unlimited (non-long distance accounts) from $24.95 to $19.95. The SNET benchmark of $17.95/month for unlimited service sets the pricing structure in Connecticut now. Freewwweb appears to thrive with its one-time fee and $0/mo. rate for unlimited use. We will see the I-Net becoming more and more like TV - free if you can stand the commercials. Most of us will go that route. On a slightly sour note, Netcom, a large national ISP, has announced that it will not be able to offer the $19.95/mo unlimited service for new accounts. This is a sure sign that the telcos (telephone companies) will dominate Internet access in the years ahead. 2) AOL will have another price reduction in late 1997, if not sooner. 

 Right now AOL is spending mega-dollars on TV advertising in an attempt to attract new users. They attempt to keep bringing new users into its ranks at a rate greater than the speed at which former AOLers are jumping to ISPs. It will boil down to economics. My guess: surfers will take the route of lowest cost - ISPs. JUNO (free e-mail) will continue to thrive in 1997. 3) High speed access to the Internet will not happen in 1997. 

 Currently, SNET controls the cost of high speed access to the Internet here in Connecticut. While cable TV (CATV) is making noises about providing Internet access, I don't see any serious movement in that direction in 1997. If CATV can ever get its act together (a big IF), cable access to the I-Net will be more expensive than an ISP connection. Somehow, I just don't trust the cable people. Do you know what I mean? Only if SNET feels threatening competition from cable, will they drop the price for high speed access to the I-Net. No changes in 1997. 4) E-mail will remain king of the net. While the WWW gets all in the press, the use of e-mail remains the most popular function performed on the I-Net. The explosive growth from zero to 850,000 JUNO users from April '96 until the end of the year (and growing like kudzu) demonstrates the viability of e-mail. JUNO remains the Energizer Bunny of the Net - it just keeps running and running. A movement now in vogue on the Net is called 'push' technology. This allows vendors to generate mailing lists that bring customized news content to people who visit websites. Imbedded in this user defined offering (weather, sports scores, stock prices) hides soft commercial messages. I think that this will stick. Beware, it will increase the flow to your e-mailbox. 5) 1997 will see a significant spurt in consumer purchases on the Internet. Wal-Mart plans to be THE CYBER-MALLER of Cyberspace. They have invested heavily in total integration of a electronic sales: - shipping/replenishment/accounting. Their current website, now, remains ho-hum. Just wait. Wal-Mart is one tough merchandiser. If they pass along their low-cost-to-make-a-sale savings to cyber-customers, this will raise plenty of eyebrows. Watch for this in 1997. Their plan: 80,000 items for sale on line. They are not there yet. Already, the word is leaking out that a new car buyer can save about $4,000 by shopping on the Internet. Many people are saving money buying airline tickets on the Web. Slowly, credit-card-phobia will subside on the I-Net. As greater use of encryption (this shields the information from no-goodnicks) becomes transparent to net-sters, commerce will rise. Should Wal-Mart lead the way, websters will not make a major purchase without checking prices on the I-Net. 6) The use of the Microsoft Internet Explorer browser will increase in popularity as Microsoft pounds away at Netscape's dominant market position. 

 Bill Gates, Commander-in-Chief at Microsoft, continues to improve the Explorer browser. He pours vast resources into Internet applications, and operating systems (Windows '95 and NT). Gates, the take-no-prisoners marketeer, remains driven. Look for more and more of everything from Microsoft in 1997. Even though Microsoft cannot rule the Internet, this doesn't stop them from trying. They got to the top because they make good products. Gates has made many people rich along the way. Well, that's it. Lots of things will happen in 1997. My predictions are not earth shattering. Bob Metcalfe, an I-Net pioneer and Ethernet inventor, predicted a meltdown of the Internet before the end of 1996. It didn't happen. In fact, the backbone capacity of the net keeps adding bandwidth. There are still many problems ahead, but there is great cause for optimism as well. Happy New Year one and all! 

 Note: This is the 31st of a series of elementary articles designed for surfing the Internet. Next, Client-Server is the subject on tap. Stay tuned.|||

