For the most part, bombs in video games are simple things to deal with. Maybe they're anthropomorphic, with smiley faces and feet, and they walk right up to you before they blow up. Or maybe your virtual character has been given a mission to defuse one, but after you hold down a single controller button for a few seconds, presto: you've disarmed it and saved the day.

Were things so straightforward in new game Keep Talking and Nobody Explodes, we'd have a real snoozer on our hands. The game fast-forwards through all other moments of action and espionage, taking you straight to the point where you sit down, examine an active, timer-loaded bomb, and stop it from blowing up. Not much stereotypical action-movie, "yippee-ki-yay" stuff.

We use that comparison because our sessions of KTANE were surprisingly loud, shout-loaded affairs with equal parts tension and payoff. Almost every time we've played, the festivities have started with gritted teeth, devolved into panicked conversations, and concluded with an entire crowd cheering for the heroes. This is one of the most intriguing "two-screen" games we've ever played, and while its potential to grow stale is worth exploring, that worry is easily eclipsed by the game's accessibility, flexibility, and party-friendly nature.

KTANE is a two-player game, but only one player does the stereotypical "gaming" stuff—meaning, looking at a screen and holding a controller (or using a mouse). That person is on bomb-defusal duty, and they're transported to a creepy-looking basement, where they sit at a table with a randomly generated, suitcase-sized bomb on top. Each session starts with a timer—usually around 3 to 5 minutes—to figure out and solve each of the bomb's "modules," which is done by using joysticks and a single button to look at and fiddle around with the bomb that they see.

None of these modules makes any sense at first glance. Wires here; weirdly shaped letters there; some sort of frequency-modulation doohickey on the other side. How the hell does this thing work?! That's where the second player comes in. The catch is, player two is not allowed to look at the screen, because they play the role of the action-movie "bomb expert"—the person that Bruce Willis or Mel Gibson would call up via walkie-talkie to get help at the scene of a crime.

Players cannot start the game without having a copy of the official, 23-page bomb manual, which includes a verification code to prove that players downloaded or printed it out. We had a much better time with a printed version to flip through, as opposed to trying to rapidly change pages on a laptop or tablet screen, so we strongly suggest finding a printer before giving this game a shot.

We also strongly suggest following the instructions that players buy in to the two-player, hidden-screen conceit. The idea of playing KTANE by yourself is as stupid as going to a golf course, picking up your ball, and walking it to the green.

The current version of the manual includes semi-convoluted instructions for 14 modules in all, and they're the heart of why the game is fun. For example, one module has anywhere from 3 to 6 colored wires (which, we remind you, are randomly generated), and the instructions for solving that one could have been as simple as "cut any red ones, leave any blue ones untouched." Instead, the instructions ask a lot of relational questions. How many white ones—and how close are they to other colors? Are there batteries attached to the bomb, and if so, what kind(s)? Do you see a serial number anywhere on the surface of the bomb, and if so, does it have any odd numbers in it?

Depending on these combined factors, the manual reader must figure out which wire to cut, or which buttons to press, or which action to take, and then he or she must shout that command to the person holding the bomb. Different bombs allow a different number of "strikes"—meaning, incorrect actions—before the bomb detonates, or players can lose by letting the timer run out.

By the way, that wire-cutting example is probably the easiest module. They all ultimately require the manual-reader to ask the bomb-defuser a lot of specific, weird questions in a particular order—and the symbols and data that pop up on the game screen are often tough to describe out loud.

Defusers might have to describe weird letter-like shapes ("a backwards letter K with a squiggly accent on its bottom"), read morse patterns out loud, or go back and forth about which letters and numbers appear in a particular module's multi-part sequence. Manual-readers, in kind, may want to have pen and paper handy to take notes, lest they drown under a flood of information—because often, the person looking at the screen will describe everything they see, since they don't know exactly what the manual-reader needs to know.

Some of these puzzles are real mind-benders, but not in gimmicky ways. Each module has been designed with clear and confusing aspects on both sides of the TV or VR screen, so players will find themselves relying on each other in refreshing ways. Certainly, we've griped about the really, really tough ones, particularly a crazy venn diagram for a harder wire-cutting module, but ultimately, the modules have all allowed us to find a groove of mastery with our bomb-defusing partners. KTANE is perhaps the ultimate digital trust-fall experience.

Every time we've seen or played KTANE at a public gaming event, it's been attached to a virtual reality headset like Samsung's GearVR, PlayStation VR, and the Oculus Rift. In very, very good news, the game in no way requires a headset. Should you have a Windows PC (OS X version "coming soon"), you can simply have the manual-reading player face the opposite direction, and we actually prefer playing this way, because it lets a crowd watch the action unfold. (We hooked a PC up to our living room TV for the sake of a crowd.)

We definitely think this is more fun to play with onlookers. For starters, it's a blast to watch two players struggle—and eventually succeed—with a tricky bomb, but having more people around also dilutes KTANE's tension. This game's challenge comes as much from its puzzles as it does in forcing two people to communicate effectively. Some modules hinge on similar-sounding words or specific geometry descriptions, so you'll want to find an agreeable way to understand each other. Other modules require frequent check-ins to make sure their own individual timers haven't gone off, so a duo will want to be careful not to get too naggy. Get any of that stuff wrong or take the game too seriously, and you'll be in trouble. Seriously, this game is divorce fuel.

Our biggest concern is with the game growing stale. While the game introduces inventive ways to ramp up challenge, including power outages (no lights!), distracting noises, "needy" modules that need repeated tending, and other surprises, a single pair of players will ultimately reach a point of mastery. You'll need to get the hang of certain modules to finish tougher bombs in their itsy-bitsy time limits, but once you and the same second person solve a bunch of, say, the 'big button" modules, you'll hit a chore-like rhythm when you see them again.

In good news, this means that every time you play with someone new, or swap roles, the challenge curve ramps back up. We also figure the game is ripe for eventual expansion packs, full of new modules, and we're already salivating at the thought of making our KTANE sessions even zanier as a result, but we've yet to hear any confirmation on whether to expect future DLC.

We like the fact that solo players can make the game work with a second player simply by calling them on the phone. Remember, only one player needs a screen; in fact, during our review period, we at Ars called each other via Skype to play across the country. Party play in our living room was clearly superior, but it was cool to have such a long-distance, single-copy option.

Multiple Ars staffers have already dragged printed manuals and Steam logins to friends' houses to show the game off, and we think that says more than any review possibly could. KTANE nails the sweet spot between wackiness, challenge, and simplicity that we crave in a good multiplayer video game, and it scales really well between introductory, first-time play and let's-jack-this-up insanity.|||

Find a friend, print a bomb defusal manual, and have a blast saving the world.