In Giuseppe Graziano’s newsletter earlier this week, he referred to a few of us domain industry bloggers who were up for an award as “legends.” I know Giuseppe meant this to be complementary, but I cringed when I read it. Since a newsletter isn’t something I can comment on, I thought I would take a moment to write about it here, especially in light of other industry discussions.

I am very fortunate to be in a position where I can write a blog that earns advertising revenue while running my business. It’s enjoyable to be able to communicate with people from around the world in the domain name space. I have learned a lot about investing in domain names, and I have been able to grow my business.

For whatever reason, some people put industry blog writers on a pedestal. I know that more people may know me because I write industry articles, but having a blog does not make me any better than anyone else. I spend my days trying to buy and sell domain names to grow my business just like most of the people reading my blog. The one thing that makes me different from many people is that I try to share parts of my journey here on my blog, along with some advice and news along the way.

When I was a finalist for THE Domain Conference “Domain Investor of the Year” award,  it made me even more uncomfortable than when I read Giuseppe’s newsletter. I can think of many people off the top of my head who are far more deserving of a nomination than me. In fact, I can’t really think of anything that I did publicly this past year that would make me deserving of an award like that. I suppose the blog exposure is what makes my name recognizable, but that shouldn’t be enough to be a finalist.

I sincerely appreciate that people visit my blog. Readers should always keep in mind that this blog is a business, especially because of the many conflicts that come up when writing about a business in which I am actively involved.

In closing, I agree with what Shane Cultra wrote this morning: “there is a lot more that goes into being someone to follow, an expert, or someone to give money to than writing a blog or being in the public eye.”|||

