Scientific language, like science itself, is usually pretty tentative. Scientists write cautiously, using words like “possible,” “probable,” and “might” to communicate that their work deals with evidence and suggestions, rather than certainty. Using stronger language in scientific writing is unusual, because it’s not often that evidence leads to absolute knowledge about a subject.

Of course, language itself is not an indication of the strength of the evidence; it can really only tell us how people are using that evidence to make an argument, and whether they’re doing so tentatively or forcefully. So, looking at how two opposing sides of a scientific argument use language to make their case can tell us something about their thinking.

It can be especially interesting to look at the use of tentative and forceful language in the case of climate change, where the language can be inflammatory. Scientists who describe the likely future path of our habitat often face the accusation of “alarmism.”

Srdan Medimorec and Gordon Pennycook, two graduate school researchers at the University of Waterloo, are interested in how people form beliefs on the basis of argument. They decided to look into the writing of opposing groups—climate scientists and people who refuse to accept the evidence on climate change—to see whether there was a consistent difference in language use.

They compared the language used in two recent reports, one written by climate scientists at the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), and the other put together by a think tank called the Heartland Institute—which called its report the Nongovernmental International Panel on Climate Change (NIPCC).

What’s particularly important about this pairing is that many of the NIPCC skeptics have scientific training, and the NIPCC report is long and technical. “It is very unlikely that non-experts would have the requisite knowledge to be able to distinguish the NIPCC and IPCC reports based on the validity of their scientific arguments,” write Medimorec and Pennycook.

They used computational text analysis to tease out how closely each report conformed to standards for formal, scientific writing. To do this, they looked at features of the texts like vocabulary use: as a proportion of the overall reports, how many tentative or emotional words were used?

They also looked for syntactic features that are characteristic of scientific writing. Scientists often convert complex ideas into noun phrases so that they can be built into larger sentences more easily. For instance, instead of having an entire sentence dedicated to saying “Temperature change was observed,” a scientific text might use the noun phrase “temperature change observations” in a larger sentence. Another common feature is use of the passive voice: “Temperature change was observed” rather than “We observed temperature change.”

They found that there were substantial differences between the two reports in the kinds of language used. Where the IPCC report used more tentative words, the NIPCC report used more emotional words. The IPCC report also showed more characteristic scientific style and syntax.

The subject matter of the two reports was evident in the language analysis: the NIPCC report referred to the IPCC report 515 times in 993 pages (and had a higher incidence of emotional words surrounding these mentions). According to Medimorec and Pennycook, this suggests that the NIPCC report was devoted to discrediting the IPCC report, rather than presenting its own evidence.

The text analysis suggests that the IPCC report is not using alarmist language and is delivered using standard scientific style, contrary to the NIPCC’s accusation of it being “alarmist and incompetent.” This matches other research suggesting that the IPCC’s predictions are conservative, rather than alarmist.

While a text analysis like this has no way of evaluating the quality of evidence used by each report, it can highlight the strategies each side is using to present its case. In this instance, the scientists are acting like, well, scientists, and using cautious, formal writing. The NIPCC is less tentative and more emotional.

An interesting next step might be to determine how the IPCC report’s style matches up with scientific writing in other areas. There’s a chance that the public conversation about climate change has made climate scientists even more cautious than usual, because they’re aware of how their work can be used and misused. Text analysis could tell us whether the IPCC hedges even more than the average paper and give us a view on whether scientists really are running scared from the politics.|||

Careful language contradicts accusations of alarmism in climate science.