Google Drive is back online following a disruption that caused the company's productivity apps went down for many users Friday afternoon.

Google Docs and Google Sheets, the company's spreadsheet creation tool, were unaccessible from Google's apps and websites for more than an hour Friday. The main website for Google Drive and Slides, the presentation counterpart to Docs and Sheets, at first appeared to be unaffected but later also went down. Classroom, which is used in schools, also went down, according to the company.

"Google Drive, Docs editors and Classroom have been restored for 99.5% of affected users as of 1:01 PM Pacific, and for the remaining 0.5% of users by 2:10 PM Pacific," Google said in a statement. "During the event, our top priority was to restore service."

During the disruption, users who tried to open documents, spreadsheets and presentations from Google Drive were greeted with error messages. Others were unable to load Google Drive's website at all.

Google confirmed the issue in a tweet but did not immediately reveal the source of the outage. The company said Friday that it was investigating the cause and would share its findings in an incident report.

"Our preliminary diagnosis is that this was caused by a code push which behaved differently in widespread use than it had during testing," a Google spokesperson told Mashable. " If you were affected, we apologize for the disruption this caused. We are calculating the impact to our business customers and will issue SLA credits as appropriate. Full details will follow in our incident report."

Naturally, the outage did not go unnoticed on Twitter, though many seemed to be taking the news much better than when Facebook went down recently.

Google Drive is used by many businesses, so others somplained about their sudden inability to get work done on a Friday afternoon.

Updated at 3:28 p.m. PT with a statement from Google.|||

Google Drive's productivity apps are back up after they went down for many users on Friday afternoon.