A new class of products is emerging — introducing Dexter.

As the number of products that expose APIs grows, the number of ways to combine them increases exponentially, and we’re just at the very beginning. As a result, a new class of product is emerging — API glue. These products allow users to combine existing services, often without much code. In five years, we could see as many flavors of API-connecting products as we do social networks today. Some will be really big, like Facebook. Others will be niche apps, like the small social networks people have built for their own communities today.

Workflow lets users build their own scripts on mobile devices that can incorporate both APIs and deeplinks from other mobile apps. If This Then That (IFTTT) lets users control one service with another and Zapier lets users tie multiple actions together. Stamplay lets designers create new complex websites using other APIs such as Stripe and Facebook login as building blocks.

Today, betaworks is launching Dexter, which lets developers create modules to abstract APIs, and lets non-developers get a simple UI to chain together these modules as if they were lego blocks, arranging them into service-based apps that may have no UI at all.

These products may all tie together APIs, but subtle differences actually make these products very distinct. Early on in social networks, there were relatively few, and they seemed similar — Facebook and Twitter looked alike, except for the bidirectional arrow. LinkedIn was a lot like Facebook, but for work. Tumblr and Twitter looked even more alike — both had follower models. But Tumbler’s focus on rich media versus Twitter’s emphasis on 140-character text turned them into very different products. Just like social networks, these new API-glue companies that enable users to bend the Internet to their will, will each have a set of unique use cases.

It seems like a new tech product or service is launched daily. If everything needs an API, and there are more things, then there will be more APIs. Why do new services all need APIs? Because of an increase in the number of places where users can input and output information or where actions take place.

At first you could only enter information onto a computer program you downloaded. Then to the web, then to mobile devices. In the Internet of Things, an input might be touching a panel on the wall and an output might be turning on a light. The Slack command line, SMS, and countless other products also serve as inputs and outputs. There are also new interfaces primarily for input, such as Amazon echo, and primarily outputs, such as Mailchimp sending an email, or an Uber being dispatched to pick you up.

Amazon seems to be making a bet on this by playing in multiple parts of the stack: Amazon Echo is an input layer, and the “Skills” you can teach alexa connect it with output layers. AWS Lambda lets developers host event-driven scripts, and are the default way to host these alexa “Skills.”

For many of the input layers, the input type is plain text or audio (which then gets converted to text). There aren’t any dropdowns or other standard UI elements, so AI/Machine Learning will become increasingly important to determine what the user is trying to do and the parameters they’re trying to pass in. Amazon also has Machine Learning as a service (although this is less directly tied to Alexa than Lambda is).

I’ve been really interested in UI-less interfaces (what some people are calling “invisible apps”). These are basically entirely API-driven and event driven. For example, I test out lots of mobile apps that I find on the web. So something that’s very useful for me is to quickly text myself a link I’m looking at. On Dexter, I connect the “bookmarklet” to the “SMS” module and the app is done. I did this in about 5 minutes:

Adding modules requires code (it’s NodeJS hosted on AWS Lambda), but connecting these building blocks together is quick and primarily visual. I’ve also seen people use Dexter to create simple Slackbots that send a new puzzle to the group channel every morning, that let you tell a bot to save the most recent article in a Slack channel to Instapaper.

Dexter is just one flavor of the many types of these API-glue products I believe will emerge. Right now, the only people who can create these types of intelligent but largely invisible services or apps have been developers. However products such as Dexter will lower the friction for regular people to be able to create these types of services, allowing them to bend the Internet to their will.|||

As the number of products that expose APIs grows, the number of ways to combine them increases exponentially, and we’re just at the very beginning. As a result, a new class of product is emerging …