I am fascinated. Maybe that should be enough, but I guess I have to write a bit more here, because we are not in twitter.

I spent a few days to get know Go language, and now I am more than satisfied. I mean, all the project ideas which are floating in my head should be written in Go.

First of all, I have rewritten Mambo-collector to go (https://github.com/banyek/mambo) because I have faced some serious errors when I used it on CentOS 7 – I blame systemd -: If the process was running as root then after a few days of data collecting, killing that process was lead to restart the entire system, which is not a bug, it is a catastrophe. I tried to debug it several ways, but I am not sure where the problem is, it could be at the ‘loghandler’ redirection, or any other place in python-daemon, or it is simply there is a buffer inside which overflows – I don’t really care, because mambo was just a proof of concept – what I used in production. I decided to abandon the project, and rewrite it in a language, what is designed for what mambo is: a system process with high amount of parallel data processing. In the original version I spawned an os thread for every query which will run (and we know that there is no real multithreading in python because of the global interpreter lock, at the end, building a multithreaded application in python is just an illusion. It is good for helping you to imagine what will happen inside your the computer, but you cannot expect real multithreading. It wasn’t a real problem, because I only ran/run a few queries  with mambo – replication lag, all processes inside mysql, active processes inside mysql –  but if there would be a need to increase the number of queries that could lead to trouble. And it’s needless to say, if you have a lot of time.sleep in your program, that is not the most wise use of your CPU resources: if a CPU is sleeping, then you waste resources.I have enough resources to let waste a bit, but it always disturbed me.

At the end I decided to rewrite mambo in go.

I won’t introduce Go, I recommend instead to read The Little Go Book, go through the Go tour, and at the end check the Go by Example page.

But here are some bullet points which I liked most in this project:

Well there are some stuff which I didn’t loved so far:

Anyways, my first project in go is almost done, and it was really a good experience by far. I guess I’ll spend more time around go projects and get more experience.|||

