

 MongoDB documentation has tended to be optimistic about the features provided by the software. I think this will be resolved as the community grows. There have been some interesting discoveries. Hopefully the gap between documented and actual behavior will be reduced over time.

The mmap engine releases the per-database or per-instance write lock before syncing the oplog even when durable writes are requested.  This is now described as read uncommitted, but read non-durable might be a better name because reads are still consistent but you can see changes from others before those changes are durable in the oplog. I wrote about this when reading code and the docs have been updated since then but I think their docs need more edits. This is only a problem for the mmap engine and multiple engines in MongoDB means they need to be clear about behavior for mmap versus WiredTiger.

There were too strong claims about the semantics of the majority write concern. It protects against the loss of an acknowledged commit but some docs suggested it protected against the loss of a visible commit. Aphyr, an expert in distributed systems testing, highlighted this problem in his Call Me Maybe series and a bug report . I wrote about part of the problem prior to that but I did not connect the problem with the too-strong claims in the documentation. Many years ago MySQL made a similar mistake when documenting semi-sync replication and fixed their docs after I filed a bug.Documentation claimed that 2-phase commit was used to keep config servers in sync. That makes it more likely that commit is all-or-nothing for the 3 or 5 config servers hosting the same data. Alas it can lead to read-only mode when a server goes away. I read the code and the two phases were 1) ping all config servers and then if all responded 2) send the change to all config servers. If all servers did not respond with OK then manual intervention was required. This isn't 2 phase commit. Fortunately, something much better will be done for the 3.2 release and the docs have been updated Finally, read the excellent series of posts from Tokutek on replica set failover including the overview and posts one three and four . There have been problems that haven't been widely known. Fortunately the 3.2 release of MongoDB should make things better.|||

