Munchery, Sprig, SpoonRocket, Caviar, Instacart — all food delievery services in the Bay area have a customer aquisition strategy of giving credits for inviting friends. Once your friend makes an order you both get a $10–20 credit.

First we considered an F Society / Anonymous approach — creating fake accounts using pre-paid credit cards, Twilio phone numbers and order lots of food. We could give it away to homeless people on the street or order it directly to homeless shelters addresses.

But after some discussions we decided to play it “fair” and make homeless people order the food by themselves.

Turns out that the homeless people we see on the streets and usually imagine when thinking about homelessness are just 15%. These 15% often have physical or mental issues and substance abuse problems. Unfortunately few of them have a proper access to banking, phone, computer, internet or smartphone.

This is a Adam, who was mugged, became homeless and lives on the streets of San Francisco for years and Carolina, who became homeless after her husband lost his job. 80% of homeless people look more like Carolina.

Most of “Transitional” homeless like Carolina and some of chronically homeless people (like Adam) do have an access to the tools needed to create an account on food delievery services and make an order.

People working with homeless and low-income population I talked with during my research were saying that food provided at soup kitchens and shelters, where homeless people often eat, is very low quality. But a bigger issue was psycological — in order to get meals there you have to openly classify yourself and identify as homeless, which is a barrier for some people that are in need. “Being able to purchase food like a “normal” person does so much for these people dignity” — they said.

So we had to find a way to make homeless people accept our help without making them feeling bad about themselves.

U.S. is a nation of coupon addicts. 48% of the U.S. consumers surveyed said they “use coupons proudly as a symbol of their savvy shopping skills”. It means that homeless people wouldn’t consider using coupons for a free food as something to be ashamed of.|||

I was eating a Munchery dinner with Ross and Andrew, two entrepreneurs, who I stayed with in one of the hacker houses in San Francisco this summer. Each of us came to the city from a different…