Bubbles are a great way to make money if you can get in as they're blowing up and get out before they burst.

I should know since I was lucky enough to make money investing in the dot-com bubble -- three companies in which I invested were sold for over $2 billion -- thanks to lucky timing. But I also lost money on three dot-com investments that ran out of money after the dot-com bubble burst.

That history makes me want to pay close attention to signs that the current tech bubble may be bursting. I see four weak signals that I think are going to become amplified over the next several months.

The good news about the bursting of the tech bubble in 2015 is that it will not hurt as many people as did the dot-com bust.

Here are the four signs that the current tech bubble is bursting.

Up until last week, 2015's IPO market had been a disappointment. According to Renaissance Capital, 60% of IPOs that went public in 2015 are trading below their IPO price; average IPO returns were down 4% from their IPO price in the third quarter, the first negative quarter since 2011; and the number of IPO deals was down 43%.

Then on October 7, Pure Storage -- a fast-growing, money-losing storage technology company -- went public. Valued in the private market at $3 billion in April 2014 -- the last time it raised capital, Pure was burning through cash and decided it had to raise more.

Rather than seek private financing -- which I am guessing would have forced Pure to cut its valuation, the company decided to take its chances with the IPO market. And the market's verdict was to cut 5.8% from its $17 a share offering price.

For the most part, a strong IPO market is critical for attracting capital into startups. And I think that the busting of Pure's IPO sends a chill through the hearts of other fast-growing, money-losing companies that wanted to line up for an IPO.

2. Tourists are taking the bus out of Silicon Valley.

One of the big reasons for the blowing up of the latest bubble has been big money "tourists" -- e.g., mutual funds, hedge funds and other institutions that are not experts in helping to grow technology startups.

These tourists know that is has been extremely difficult to beat the S&P 500 or to generate any yield for those who care about capital preservation.

But over the last few years, these tourists have gladly written checks for hundreds of millions of dollars to invest in startups that are poised for an IPO.

More money -- largely from mutual funds, private equity and corporate investors -- has been going into tech startups than going out in the form of IPOs. According to CB Insights, in the first three quarters of 2015, $42.5 billion was invested in startups and $26.3 billion came out through IPOs or acquisitions.|||

Bubbles are a great way to make money if you can get in as they're blowing up and get out before they burst. I should know since I was lucky enough to make money investing in the dot-com bubble -- three companies in which I invested were sold for over $2 [...]