OPSEC stands for “Operations security”. It is by definition the process of “safeguarding” critical data that could jeopardize your operation –whatever it is-.

OPSEC comes from the big family of SECs (excuse the pun).

We have COMSEC :Where we worry about the interception of data in transfer.

INFOSEC: Where we handle unauthorized access and integrity of data (and many other stuff).

PERSEC: Where we talk about personal information and social engineering.

Most of these are tightly coupled in many areas and probably to maintain a highly complex and sturdy operation you’ll need to address and think about all of these.

But in this article we’re just going to address OPSEC because it’s more about behavior and interactions than about technology and tools.

Ok so let’s get this party started.

When you think about it, OPSEC is really simple. Just don’t tell people what you’re doing!  Yes, you can skip the rest of the article this is it.

But you ask “What if my operation involves several actors –like an organization-“, well we just amend the previous statement to “Don’t tell people outside your organization what you’re doing”. This means you should always operate on a need-to-know bases.

Yes you can tell someone about your operations via secure communication channels, and encrypt or delete the logs and use VPNs and all. But what guarantee that the other person will not keep clear text logs, or that they are who they say they are.

Of course, when you have an organization some level of trust should be established prior to any sensitive exchange, we will talk about how the trust system works.

Every operation has its threat model, figuring out your OPSEC (and security in general) strategy depends on your adversaries and their level of access and influence.

For example if you’re a women’s rights group, dealing mostly with cyber-stalkers, angry exes and relatives. Your threat model will not be the same as for example an online dissident movement, hacktivist group, LGBTQIA rights movement, etc…

This brings us to our next point:

If you’re going to follow crypto-rock-stars and NSA/GCHQ capabilities you’d go crazy and distant from your more tangible adversaries. Yes NSA or FBI or any of those acronym agencies may be a threat to your operation but you should not forget about your local government agencies, ISPs, mobile providers, local authorities etc… These have you on a closer loop and avoiding raising flags might prove to be a more challenging task.

You should always assume you’re under surveillance. Don’t wait until you enter critical parts of your operation to start worrying about what you say and do, this does not work retroactively; logs of many years ago can harm you. So be paranoid watch what you say, even general discussions (about weather, clothing, a certain food…) can be harmful. And for god’s sake, don’t use codes! Codes only work in movies but in real life people will figure out what you’re saying, or just notice that you’re using codes and will just beat it out of you.

Whether your operation is legal or not, if someone wanted to go after you or your team they will probably try to find any excuse to get you to stop. Weed, hard-drugs, drunk driving (or even drinking in some countries) are tools that could be used to arrest and intimidate you and your organization. Don’t break –other- laws while operating because even if you get busted randomly, most likely your operation will suffer.

 I can’t stress this enough:  DON’T DO DRUGS!

Yes OPSEC might seem as too much work, but remember: “there are no second chances”. If your operation gets compromised this could be trouble to you, your team and your contacts.

Better safe than sorry.

This has to be done before starting any operation. You should always create a number of identities and pseudonyms to manage any operation.  Ideally you’d have many layers of fake identities to confuse anyone looking. Make your identities believable, give them a complex persona with different social network aliases etc…

If you can manage your operation alone don’t get other people involved.

But if you must you should make a strict vetting policy, because when one of you gets compromised and facing jail-time (or worst) they will eventually spill what they know.

Don’t get your personal world and your operation get mixed together. Use logical and physical barriers. For example, don’t ever manage your operation from your work computer or your travel laptop. Don’t manage your operation from your home’s Wi-Fi or even your work’s.

Don’t operate from your favorite coffee shop or anywhere that could compromise your real identity.

 Don’t mix your operation with your personal life, the people you’re operating with are not your friends and they should not be given information that could possibly harm you.

Doesn’t matter who your adversary is, the theft of your personal computer, phone, files is a 24/7 possibility. Therefore all your devices should be properly encrypted ALL THE TIME, just in case you can’t find your phone, you “forget” your laptop or your car/home gets broken-into. This means no automatic logins, no open-sessions and no unencrypted critical data.

If you’re reading about security and privacy and all that, it would have been mostly written by US based experts for US based readers. Most stuff like “plausible deniability” and “4th amendment” that the crypto-community counts on so very much don’t matter in most 3rd world countries. This means that if you’re counting only on passwords and passphrases for the safety of your operation, you’ll end-up revealing them under interrogation, all the crypto in the world won’t help you then. Sometimes something as simple as Tor from your home IP address would get you to raise flags, then it would be counterproductive. Know your country, know what is specific to your adversary.

When I started writing this article I didn’t expect it to be over a thousand words, so let’s call this part 1, I will publish part 2 soon.

Meanwhile you should practice your OPSEC, you will get it wrong the first few times for sure, and at least it should be in a test environment and not in an operational scenario.

Many parts of this article are inspired by the tweets of @thegrugq you should check his work.|||

