Clinical Trial Supplies Market worth 1.2 Billion USD by 2020 

The report “Clinical Trial Supplies Market by products & Services (Logistics & Distribution, Manufacturing, Packaging and Labeling), Phases (Phase I, Phase II, Phase III) & Therapeutic Areas (CNS & Mental Disorders, Cardiovascular, Oncology) - Global Forecast to 2020” provides a detailed overview of the major drivers, restraints, challenges, opportunities, current market trends, and strategies impacting the clinical trial supplies market along with the estimates and forecasts of the revenue and market share analysis.

Browse 74 tables and 36 figures spread through 129 pages and in-depth TOC on "Clinical Trial Supplies Market"

The global clinical trial supplies market is expected to reach USD 1,274.3 Million by 2020 from USD 904.3 Million in 2015, at a CAGR of 7.1% from 2015 to 2020.

The report segments this market based on products and services, phases, therapeutic areas, and regions. Among the various products and services, the logistics and distribution services segment is expected to account for the largest share of the market and is projected to grow at the highest CAGR from 2015 to 2020. The high growth in this segment can be attributed to the globalization of clinical trials and increasing outsourcing of services.

Based on regions, the global clinical trial supplies market is segmented into North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, and the Rest of the World (RoW). North America is expected to account for the largest share of the market during the forecast period. Growth in this regional segment is driven by factors such as rising prevalence of chronic diseases, growing number of clinical trials, and the increasing number of life sciences research activities in North America.

Key players in the clinical trial supplies market include Alamc Group LTD (U.K.), Biocair (U.K.), Catalent Pharma Solutions, Inc. (U.S.), KLIFO A/S (Denmark), Movianto (Germany), PCI Services (U.S.), Patheon, Inc. (U.S.), PAREXEL International Corporation (U.S.), Sharp Packaging Services (U.S.), and Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc. (U.S.)|||

[142 Pages Report] Clinical Trials Imaging Market categories the Global Market by Product (Services, software), Modality (CT, PET, Echocardiography, MRI,...