New York had more college students with Perkins loans — 55,963 — than any other state.

The future of a federal loan program is in doubt because Congress allowed it to lapse.

The Perkins Loan program currently is helping hundreds of college students in the mid-Hudson Valley. And though they likely are not in jeopardy, future college-bound students and families could have to recompute their fiscal plans, and 1,700 colleges and universities across the country could soon be required to return billions of dollars in federal grants they received more than a decade ago under the program.

More than 1,000 students currently use the loan program to keep themselves in mid-Hudson colleges, according to data gathered by Sen. Charles Schumer, D-NY, and Gannett News Service.

"It's at no cost to the federal government," Schumer of the program and its recent interruption, speaking at a news conference staged at SUNY New Paltz Monday, "but it's at high cost to the students."

The Senate allowed the program to lapse on Sept. 30. If lawmakers don't renew it, colleges eventually will have to return the money in the revolving loan funds to the federal government, according to Cyndy Littlefield, vice president for federal relations at the Association of Jesuit Colleges and Universities.

The House of Representatives has unanimously passed the Higher Education Extension Act of 2015, he said. But in the Senate, it has opponents with other plans.

"The people who are against it are against it for ideological reasons," Schumer said.

The program has been largely self-sustaining, with no new federal money appropriated since fiscal 2005 (except for reimbursements to schools when graduates qualify for loan forgiveness). The original federal investment was used to create revolving loan funds at each participating campus, and those have been replenished with money repaid by graduates each year.

Perkins loans carry an interest rate of 5 percent and repayment is delayed until nine months after a student leaves school. Graduates who choose public service careers such as law enforcement, teaching or as a public defender are eligible for loan forgiveness after 10 years on the job.

New York had more college students with Perkins loans — 55,963 — than any other state.

At New Paltz, college President Donald Christian told reporters, "Perkins loans can make a difference," especially for low-income families and for many of the students attending with Economic Opportunity Program help.

"The loss of this program will be devastating," he said, to those needy families who typically borrow the Perkins funds to "complete the package" of financial aid.

In 2013-14, the program provided 539,444 college students with $1.17 billion in aid, according to the U.S. Department of Education. The average award was $2,210. Undergraduate students are eligible for up to $5,550 annually, based on financial need. Graduate students are eligible for up to $8,000.

At Marist College in Poughkeepsie, 684 out of 4,500 full-time undergraduate students have Perkins loans averaging $1,800 per year, said Joe Weglarz, executive director of student financial services.

Schumer aides said 163 Bard College students are helped with Perkins loans; 161 at Vassar; 146 at the Culinary Institute of America; and four at Dutchess Community College. At SUNY New Paltz, 168 students get help.

"It's sort of a cushion for students who are running into financial challenges," Weglarz said. "We are awarding it to our more needy families."

Students with existing Perkins loans will be eligible for additional loans until they complete their degree, as long as they stay at the same school and do not change their major.

Schools offering the loans were required to contribute a one-third match for their Perkins grants in order to participate, Littlefield said, so they would be able to keep some money after the federal government recovers its share.

Many colleges and universities contend that eliminating Perkins and another federal student aid program — the federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant — will translate into a cut in federal student aid.

"We owe it to our students to not give up yet," Littlefield said. "We are going to take any opportunity we can legislatively."

U.S. Education Secretary Arne Duncan says it makes more sense to modernize and improve the program than to eliminate it.

"I would challenge Congress to redesign Perkins to make it larger, better targeted and more effective at helping students and families attend schools that offer a quality and affordable education, and I'd be enthusiastic about working with them to do that," he said in a statement.

Schumer thinks the best chance for renewal may be to include it in the next budget measure that will keep the federal government operating past Dec. 11.

The House agreed by voice vote last week to renew the Perkins program for a year. A one-year extension also was proposed in the Senate, but Republican Sen. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee objected to a floor vote last week

Alexander chairs the Senate Health Education Labor and Pensions Committee, which is working on an overhaul of the federal Higher Education Act. Alexander wants to limit federal college aid to one grant — the Pell grant — and one loan program.

"Reauthorizing the Perkins loan (program) will cost $5 billion over 10 years," Alexander said last week, explaining his objection to an extension. "Many witnesses before our committee have said that $5 billion would be better spent on more Pell grants, which is going to result from our (legislation)."

Unlike other federal loan programs, the Perkins program doesn't allow recipients to cap their monthly payments at 10 percent or 15 percent of their income, to lower their interest rate or to seek loan forgiveness after 20 years, Alexander said.

He says his committee can complete a bipartisan overhaul of federal college aid programs by the end of the year.

College students with Perkins loans in New York state

What it would cost to reauthorize the program|||

About 1,700 colleges may soon have to return billions in federal grants they received under the Perkins loan program .