Opinions differ as to whether the revolutions in Egypt precipitated a culture of entrepreneurship: some say that gives the revolutions too much credit over the already-growing sentiment among the youth; others believe it directly stimulated a new mentality. 



“January 25 [2011] was all about, we can change our destiny,” reflects Con O’ Donnell, angel investor, Sarmady co-founder, and Co-Founder and Business Development Lead at Rise Up. “It gave the youth an enormous amount of confidence to break out of a system that made them apathetic: there’s no point doing it, it won’t work. No point doing it because it’s too bureaucratic.”  



What is certain, however, is the startup scene in Egypt has grown substantially in the past five years. New institutions and players emerge onto the scene, including the Cairo Angels, Flat 6 Labs, and The Greek Campus (leased from the American University of Cairo), which houses many startups’ and mentors’ offices as well as entrepreneurship events. Of the nearly 50% growth in ecosystem stakeholders since 2010 across the Middle East, Egypt claims a quarter of these new institutions supporting entrepreneurship [1].

It used to be that “the idea of starting a business was alien to everyone,” says Con. “You couldn’t go and ask for someone’s daughter’s hand in marriage. [They’d ask] what do you do? I’m an entrepreneur. Are you a doctor or engineer? There’s even a government website where they ask for your profession and they only have five choices….” This burgeoning startup culture grows at speed to be proud of, argues Gamal Sadek, co-founder of Bey2ollak, an award-winning traffic information mobile app operating in Cairo and Alexandria. “I think it’s unusual for societies to adapt so quickly, as we have adapted.”  



While the startup ecosystem may be growing, starting a company in Egypt comes with its challenges. “Making business in Egypt is really tough,” remarks Mahmoud Abdelfattah, founder of bkam.com, a price comparison website featuring over 1 million products across four countries’ online retailers. “It’s really hard for small companies.” Challenges abound such as electricity shortages, congested traffic jams that slow your ability to manage multiple meetings a day, a close-knit monopolistic corporate culture in which established companies rarely engage with startups, or 90-day payment cycles that may be the death of a cash-strapped startup.|||

A Lebanese startup's journey through the nation's first accelerator and the 
Central Bank Circular 331 funds.