So let me break it down. The reason why awareness is without doubt, no question, undisputed heavy-weight champion of self-development, growth and finding your purpose... is because:

Without it, you are unaware.

Unaware of who you really are, unaware of what you really love. Unaware of why you keep on living.

You are like a boxer thrust into the ring, who is not aware that he is a boxer.

You can see how this is an sub-optimal way to live, I hope.

When you are unaware, you do not know what exists underneath the shell that has been formed through societal conditioning, and a culture that specialises in shell-building.

When you are unaware, you think  that you are this person who does this and that, and has a Linkedin profile that says "I do important stuff", 754 friends on Facebook, yet is scared of talking to strangers at parties.

This is not you, yet it is very hard not to become ATTACHED to the illusion of this person.

For a start, we have inherited in part the fears of our parents and our tribe. And from the moment we wake to the moment we sleep, we are barraged with messages to buy something or do something that will make us happier and less afraid.

By developing awareness, you gradually start to re-acquaint yourself with yourself. You begin to see and feel that there is a force within you that is quite separate from the image you have of you.

When my friends talk about their kids, they notice how in a child you can see something of the parents, but there is also something in each child that is completely unique and original. The child's spirit.

That kid's spirit is still in you. IT IS YOU!

When you become aware of this, you can start the real fun! The natural byproduct of YOU BEING YOU is that you begin to live your purpose. It is an unstoppable force. You can not do anything but live your purpose.

Perhaps your purpose is just to have fun? So keep jumping in puddles!

Perhaps your purpose is to help the world or its people in some way. Well, what sh*ts you? What inspires you? Your purpose is already in there. You know it already. It is just buried under unawareness. Not even fear can stop you when you are living from the real you.

Zen Monks ask themselves Koans, impossible riddles that the conscious mind can not answer. Seriously pondering the question, "What is the sound of one hand clapping" is a question that can lead to an instant breakthrough to the real you, because this is a question that can not be answered by rational thought.

However, for people who are not Monks, I believe the following questions will have a greater impact. (My suggestion is that you write these down in a journal.)

Write the answers down as if no one is ever going to read them. In doing so, you are watering your spirit/soul/self and you are on the path towards greater self-awareness.

2. SURROUND YOURSELF WITH AUTHENTICITY AND INSPIRATION

We are creatures of conditioning, and for better or worse, much of our thoughts, beliefs, values and opinions about us and the world, have been implanted in us by the world we live in. There is nothing wrong or strange about this.

When you start to become very deliberate about what you do with your time, and who you spend your time with, you can allow conscious choice to dictate your surroundings and influences. And this allows you to learn more about who you are.

3. GO ON A QUEST, OR MANY MICRO-QUESTS|||

I remember one day rushing between meetings, doing the "corporate power 
shuffle",  and I caught a reflection of myself in the window of HSBC bank. 
Something in that moment of time cut through the facade, and I saw quite 
clearly a reflection of a person who was not me. It stopped me dead in my 
tracks.

City-boy staring, agape at the window, in a moment of schizophrenic 
bafflement.