PM Modi’s Make in India vision received a major boost today, as Gionee has kick started domestic production of their handsets. At a function at Vishakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, CM Chandrababu Naidu launched their first Make in India phone: Gionee F 103.

Soon, Gionee will initiate domestic production of other handsets, as they have allocated a budget of $50 million, exclusively for Make in India campaign.

From Sri City Factory, Foxconn will assemble and manufacture Gionee phones, while Dixon will do the same  from Noida.

We had announced last month that Gionee has reconfirmed their pledge of manufacturing their phones locally, and today, the process has been given a go-ahead.

Powered with 1.3 ghz quad core processor and 12.7 cm HD 1280 * 720 IPS Dragontrail display, F 103 is their new handset in the exciting lifestyle F series. In order to make the finishing sleek, F 103 has been given an mirror glass finish look.

Arvind Vohra, Gionee Country Head CEO and MD announced that by end of year, all of their handsets would be domestically manufactured. As per William Lu, President of Gionee, F 103 is their first handset which has been manufactured outside China.

Congratulating Gionee, Andhra Pradesh CM Naidu said that he intends to make his state as the largest mobile manufacturing hub in the country. CM shared that Andhra Pradesh has several strategic advantages like location, policies, business environment and skill base, which makes it as one of the most favorable state for Make in India vision.

Andhra Pradesh is expected to manufacture 6 to 7 million handsets every month, by the end of this year. CM Naidu also said that by 2020, India will have a market of $400 billion for electronics products, out of which, 38-40% will be smartphones.

Vishakhapatnam has now become one of the most crucial mobile manufacturing hub in India, as Xiaomi had also announced their Make in India debut at the same location.

, out of based on ratings.|||

PM Modi’s Make in India vision received a major boost today, as Gionee has kick started domestic production of their handsets. At a function at Vishakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, CM Chandrababu Naidu launched their first Make in India phone: Gionee F 103.