It was once the only choice for schoolboys seeking titillation or perhaps more discerning older male subscribers who "read it for the articles".

For a generation of men growing up in America and the West, Playboy was almost a rite of passage. In the 1970s a quarter of all American male college students were reading it.

But now the very thing that built the Playboy global brand from its first edition that featured Marilyn Monroe as the centrefold to the present day is being discarded - naked women.

The radical move by the institution that was there at the start of the American sexual revolution in the early 1950s - and drove it wildly through the 1960s and 1970s spanning continents - has been triggered by the easy access to online pornography.

"You're now one click away from every sex act imaginable for free," Scott Flanders, Playboy's chief executive, told the New York Times. "It's just passé at this juncture."

It is a calculated risk for the magazine that, along with Monroe for that December 1953 debut cover has featured many of the world's most beautiful and high profile women across the past seven decades, such as Brigitte Bardot, Naomi Campbell, Kate Moss, Jayne Mansfield, Cindy Crawford, Kim Basinger and Charlize Theron.

Cory Jones, a senior editor at Playboy, took the idea of a no-nudity relaunch to Hugh Hefner, the 89-year-old legendary founder of the magazine who is still its editor-in-chief, who gave his blessing.

The magazine's circulation began to drop off in the early 1990s. It has fallen from a record high of 7.2 million for the November 1972 edition to around just 800,000 today. The US edition of the magazine is no longer profitable, but acts as a marketing tool for the international editions and plethora of related products and business ventures.

One of Playboy's main competitors in the 1970s and 1980s, Penthouse, decided to go the other way and become ever more explicit. The tactic failed and it was declared bankrupt in 2013.

While Playboy will continue to feature photo spreads of women in provocative poses, as of March 2016 there will be no nudity whatsoever - the magazine will truly rely on the strength of its writing - and in this regard it has a rich history.

The magazine, which is published in 35 countries and dozens of languages, has featured short stories from Saul Bellow, P. G. Wodehouse, John Updike, Haruki Murakami and Margaret Atwood.

Ray Bradbury’s classic novel Farenheit 451 was first published in serialised form in the March, April, and May 1954 issues.

It is renowned for its interviews, with Martin Luther King and Malcolm X among a sparkling list of greats from the arts, showbusiness, politics and sport from the second half of the 20th century.

John Lennon and Yoko Ono were interviewed for the January 1981 issue, which was on newsstands at the time of his murder.

In 1970, Playboy became the first men's magazine to publish in Braille. In 1986, the Library of Congress stopped making the Braille version, leading to a law suit and a judge ruling that denying blind people the chance to read Playboy violated their First Amendment rights.

The relaunched magazine will also feature a new "sex-positive female" columnist as Playboy targets the Vice market - young urban males. “The difference between us and Vice,” Mr Jones told the New York Times, “is that we’re going after the guy with a job.”

“Don’t get me wrong, 12-year-old me is very disappointed in current me," he said. "But it’s the right thing to do.”|||

If you really did 'read it for the articles' you're in luck - Playboy magazine 
  will no longer print pictures of fully naked women because of the rise of 
  internet pornography