Pilot is a way to model the Application State in a familiar ( decoupled) structure, and provides hooks for based UI Rendering to take place. This facilitates:

It can be beneficial to separate the Applications State from the rendering of the UI as really these are separate concerns.

The primary win when decoupling in this way is by seperating reponsilbilities testing and refactoring becomes much easier. A secondary advantage is that the Android rendering could be replaced with a terminal, or other type of client.

One design principle is that the Stack should not change regardless of the screen size or rotation. Any master/detail changes (or other size related rendering logic) should sit in the Rendering layer, which in Pilot is abstracted by the .

Another design priciple is that the Application State should be pure java, to facilitate JVM testing.

To make usage of this project as flexible as possible, the following decisions have been made:

At present Pilot is for use primarily with -only UI's. While this seems restrictive I feel adding support at this point would distract from the main aim of this project. Fragments are great as they are a wrapper for a sub-section of the UI, which have lifecycle callback support and backstack etc. I find when these concepts are pulled out (as they are in Pilot) UI components suddenly become simpler and less bothered about these concepts, and therefore humble becomes the obvious choice for how to render an applications state, as represented by .

You may end up with a single- application with nothing but simple !

Of course I am not the first to think in the way. The guys at Square were talking about very similar things (simple Views and abstract backstack management) years ago - this is a slightly different approach for how to realise those concepts.

Nor am I the last! Conductor is a very similar library which has appeared with the same concepts (and better documentation). Good to see others are thinking along the same lines. I will continue with Pilot however as sure we will have slightly differnt take on things.

EDIT: Moxy and Triad and Magellan and Flowless are similar recent repos

The rest of this README is split across a few doc files:

This is a WIP and is currently in development. Some of the supplementary docs also need updating as the project is still undergoing some conceptual refactoring. I am welcome to any input via the Issues page to guide its development. This library is not in use in production yet.|||

Pilot - An android.* decoupled application stack for Android