Now you've started implementing some of your marketing ideas, and are starting to see some growth. That's great, but as Nemo points out, you need to focus your resources where you're getting the best results before you can truly maximize those results. In the traction phase, you need to take a closer look at what's working and identify WHY it's working so that you can replicate it. Here's what you do:

FIRST: Make a list of assumptions. Why do you think your first marketing strategy worked? It’s possible that your ad design was outstanding, you had some really catchy marketing copy, or maybe you hit the right target audience at the right time.

THEN: Plan the quickest way to test each assumption you just wrote down and run A/B testing where possible. Make some different versions of your ads - change the text size or color, change up the marketing language - and do your best to evaluate the results. Nemo reminds us that accurately measuring effectiveness is no easy task, but keep yourself in the testing mindset: “Next time, let’s do the same thing, but just a little differently.” Once you’ve planned how to test these things quickly, try them out!

Moving on, you don't want to get too bogged down in vanity metrics like CTRs (click-through rates) and other data that "optimization" gurus like to focus on. “These can be a massive distraction,” says Nemo. Instead of optimization, what you're really after is maximization.

Regarding CTRs and even revenue, Nemo explains: “None of those metrics mean anything if they don’t make you money." By approaching each growth strategy with the goal of maximization of PROFIT, you focus not only on keeping your business alive, but also ensuring growth. Recognize patterns and be observant. In the beginning, your focus was probably just on making potential users aware of your product, but now you need to maximize your ability to turn them into paying customers. Again, the focus shouldn't just be on revenue here. How much is it costing you to acquire each customer? What can you do to lower that cost and thus raise profit?

Unfortunately, maximization can be more difficult to track than the surface metrics mentioned above. There are a lot of metrics to go through, and there might be something less obvious that's preventing you from maximizing. But stay in the testing mindset, Nemo reminds everyone, and take the process one step at a time.|||

Expecting growth to just happen naturally for your startup? Quit dreaming 
and get yourself a growth strategy that works! Before you start, let growth 
hacking extraordinaire Nemo Chu give you a little advice on how to maximize 
ideas to maximize profits.