I recently learned about the ESP8266, a $5 chip that includes WiFi and is Arduino compatible. This means that all your DIY projects can now be done for a fraction of the price.

For this tutorial, I’ll walk through how to get going with ESP8266, get the temperature and humidity and report it to MQTT where Home Asssistant can pick it up.

Picture of the final setup (+ 2 LED for decoration)

Home Assistant will keep track of historical values and allow you to integrate it into automation.

I’ve been using Adafruit for my shopping:

Besides this, you will need the usual hardware prototype equipment: a breadboard, some wires, soldering iron + wire, Serial USB cable.

Since this article has been published the HDC1008 has been discontinued. Updated sketches are available for the following alternatives:

On your breadboard, make the following connections from your ESP8266 to the HDC1008:

I picked and myself, you can configure them in the sketch.

Follow these instructions on how to install and prepare the Arduino IDE for ESP8266 development.

After you’re done installing, open the Arduino IDE, in the menu click on -> -> and install the following libraries:

If you have followed the previous steps, you’re all set.

This sketch will connect to your WiFi network and MQTT broker. It will read the temperature and humidity from the sensor every second. It will report it to the MQTT server if the difference is > 1 since last reported value. Reports to the MQTT broker are sent with retain set to . This means that anyone connecting to the MQTT topic will automatically be notified of the last reported value.

// We start by connecting to a WiFi network // If you do not want to use a username and password, change next line to " try again in 5 seconds"

The last step is to integrate the sensor values into Home Assistant. This can be done by setting up Home Assistant to connect to the MQTT broker and subscribe to the sensor topics.|||

Step by step tutorial to use ESP8266 and a HDC1008 to .