If you truly want to understand technology today, then you should at least be familiar with the philosophy of Gilles Deleuze. Unfortunately for technologists, Deleuze is rooted firmly in a philosophical tradition and a writing style that they probably find opaque. In this blog series, I plan on explaining Deleuze’s philosophy in terms that programmers can understand. This is the third in the series. You can find the first here. Enjoy.

Deleuze and Guattari employ the notion of ‘smooth space’ quite a bit in A Thousand Plateaus. I saw this quote about it the other day:

I’ve recently been giving a lot of thought to ‘cultural hegemony’

 and its applicability to the web, specifically along the lines of

 Google. Basically, cultural hegemony is the idea that you don’t just

 have dominance through laws or economics, but through culture. So, for

 example, Google submitted SPDY to become HTTP 2.0: it’s going through

 the standards process, it’s ‘open,’ but it also gives Google a lot of

 cultural leverage.

So there’s this connection there between smooth space and open source, and the battle between the Nomads and the State Apparatus. We’ll cover that second bit in a while, but for now: what is ‘smooth space’?

The first thing to understand about these concepts is that Deleuze and

 Guattari is (I think of them as a singular entity…) a big fan of

 spatial metaphors. Essentially, we can project our problem domain onto

 a 2 or 3 (or more) dimensional space, and then use tools to analyze

 that space. I was first introduced to this technique by Manuel de

 Landa, who has a great lecture called “Deleuze and the use of the

 genetic algorithm in archetecture” (video)(text). A quick rundown:

So, let’s talk about the N queens problem. We have a chess board

 with one space, and we place one queen on it:

This board is legal. It’s a solution to the ‘1 queen problem’: one

 queen, a 1x1 board. What about 2 queens? We have no solutions. (2 and

 3 don’t. :/ All other natural numbers do.) First we place a queen:

… but there’s no legal place for the second one. Bummer. We can

 determine that there’s no solution by using a simple brute force with

 backtracking: place the queen in the upper right, then try to place

 the second below it. That’s not legal, so we backtrack and place it on

 the right. That’s not legal, so we backtrack and put it in the bottom

 corner. Oh no! That didn’t work, so let’s move our first queen: now

 it’s in the bottom right, and we try to place the second in the upper

 right: fail! So we backtrack….

As you can see, this is a lot of steps for a small board. Once you get

 up to a ‘real’ chess board, there are 4,426,165,368 possible

 placements, but only 92 solutions. A needle in a haystack! And we’re

 using a lot of steps to determine if there’s even one possible

 placement. We need something better.

One answer is genetic algorithms. So we can take our board’s current

 state and assign it a score. When we place a new queen, if it makes

 our score better, we keep it, and if it doesn’t, we lose it. Now we’ve

 taken our 2x2 board and projected it onto a 2-axis linear space.

 Imagine a plot where queens are on the x axis and score is on the y

 axis:

So we want to keep going with our solution as long as it slopes up:

 we’ve found that our answers are at the maximum of each curve. Yay

 calculus! But here’s the thing: this curve only has two possible

 maxima: we will have more. And it might not be in 2-d space, it might

 be in 5-d space. And we can only ‘use math’ to find the maximum if we

 generate the entire curve, which seems computationally out of our

 reach. So how do we find the maximum without generating the whole

 curve? Genetic algorithms!

One such is ‘simulated annealing.’ Without getting too into it,

 let’s just say that there’s a ‘cooling factor’ that controls how

 tolerant we are of going back down a slope. So at first, we wildly go

 all over the search space, but then, as we progress, we tighten up our

 cooling factor, and we stop being so wild. Eventually, we’ll arrive at

 a solution that’s very likely to be the true global maxima/minima.

 Neat!

Another interesting feature of this particular projection is that it

 transforms our problem from a discrete problem into a continuous one.

 One great tactic for when you’re losing: change the battlefield. Our

 genetic algorithm tool needs a continuous space to operate, but our

 problem is that our chess board is discrete. What do I mean by this?

“discrete space” is one in which the points are separated from one

 another in some way. As an example, ‘integers’ form a discrete

 topology: there’s a ‘gap’ between 1, 2, 3, and 4. You can see this by

 drawing a number line:

The real numbers form a continuous topology rather than a discrete

 one, there is no space between them. A ‘real line’:

Our ‘scoring’ mechanism allows us to change the battlefield, it forms

 a function (isomorphism) to convert our discrete topology into a

 continuous one. We can now bring our continuous tooling to bear on a

 problem that was previously inaccessible.

Okay. NOW we’re ready to talk about smooth and striated space. They

 have a number of names for this concept, and the one that’s most

 direct from where we currently are is ‘Riemann space / Euclidean

 space’. Smooth -> Riemann, Euclidean -> Striated. Another isomorphism.

 ;)

Euclidean geometry is pretty much the foundation of a metric ton of

 our math. It’s what’s now known as algebra and geometry: lots of

 integers, discrete spaces. This cube starts at (1,2,4) and has a side

 length of 5. Cartesian coordinates.

Along comes Gauss, who was incredibly intelligent. He had this

 student named Riemann, who ran with the ideas Gauss had and

 started Riemannian Geometry. Riemann’s geometry is

 non-Euclidean: if Euclid described lines, Riemann described

 curves. Einstein would later base the theory of relativity on

 Riemannian geometry.

So, who cares? Well, think about it this way: You’re in a car, driving

 down a straight road. It goes for miles, with no turns or other

 streets. You’re operating in a smooth space: you can easily go from

 one place to another. Now, someone comes along and puts up stop signs

 every block. You must (for now) stop at these signs. Now you’re

 operating in a striated space: your movement is restricted. Now you’re

 moving from point to point on a line. It’s a very different

 experience, and you also didn’t have anything to do with the stop

 signs….

According to D&G, ‘the state machine’ (one instance of which is the

 State) attempts to take space that is smooth and striate it. This is

 often a means towards imperialism, as the striation happens through

 quantification. Take, for example, the sea: a smooth space, you can

 impose latitude and longitude on top of it, simultaneously quantifying

 and striating it. This allows you to navigate the waters, and conquer

 the sea.

This is also the position that many web startups take: ‘friendship’

 was a smooth space before social networks came along. They quantified

 and striated that space, turning “I have many friends” into “I have

 200 friends and you have 100 friends.” This quantification allows for

 commodification: now Facebook can sell ads. It’s also why startups

 don’t often have a ‘business model’ at first: they first need to

 conquer and striate their space before they find the commodity.

 Sometimes you just hit dirt and go bust, sometimes you find a more

 precious commodity, then refine and sell it.

‘nomads’ are entities which navigate and live in smooth spaces. Maybe

 my twitter bio makes a bit more sense now. ;)

You might remember Riemann from the ‘Riemann sum’ in Calc I. The

 brilliance of the Riemann sum is that it first striates, then

 re-smooths the space. You start off first with a curve, and then

 approximate the area under it by dividing it into a number of

 evenly-sized bits. This first bit was necessary in a world without

 calculus: we didn’t have the tooling or concepts to actually tackle

 the real area, so we mapped that problem to one we did know how to

 solve. As the number of bits goes up, and their width goes down, more

 and more of the space under the curve is captured by our algorithm.

 Finally, once we’re able to take that first step away from (striated)

 algebra and move into (smooth) calculus, we’re able to move about on

 the curve for reals. We’re back to smooth space again.

This interplay between smooth and striated spaces often happens, and

 there’s really no part of our world today that’s completely smooth or

 entirely striated. D&G posit that the left should be attempting to

 create as much smooth space as possible, and that capitalism is

 constantly attempting to striate space. That said, smooth space is

 necessary, but not sufficient: capitalism, in its hunger and lust for

 acquisition and totalitization, has managed to navigate some smooth

 spaces. I’ll just quote straight from ‘a thousand plateaus’, 492. It’s

 a little hard, but this is getting long enough as is. ;)

The first part about ‘users’ is very much drawing a parallel to “If

 you’re not paying for the product, you are the product.” When they

 talk about the ‘speed’ of capital, think of HFT. Multinational

 corporations have managed to overcome the striation that a State has

 imposed. McDonalds is only partially affected by US laws. They operate

 ‘outside’ of states.

In this way, simply being smooth will not suffice to save us.

If you liked this blog post, you may enjoy “Philosophy in a time of software, a moderated Google Group to discuss the intersection of philosophy and technology. This post started out as an email to that list.|||

If you truly want to understand technology today, then you should at least be familiar with the philosophy of Gilles Deleuze. Unfortunately for technologists, Deleuze is rooted firmly in a philosophical tradition and a writing style that they... | Steve Klabnik | &ldquo;The most violent element in society is ignorance.&rdquo; - Emma Goldman