Luxury real estate firm The Agency signs on as first broker member to the popular network of real estate professionals dedicated to creating social change

Manhattan Beach, CA – Oct. 7, 2015 (PRNewswire) Giveback Homes, a leading real estate social good platform, today announced a new broker-level membership package inviting brokerages across the country to join the Giveback Homes movement.

The new membership package offers brokerages interested in giving back to their communities a chance to join as leaders in corporate social responsibility. The packages also give brokerages the opportunity to boost company culture and help deepen relationships with clients who may want to learn more about the important work being done by Giveback Homes.

“Everyone deserves a safe place to call home. We have been so touched by how the real estate industry has embraced this concept of giving. Our partnership with The Agency has inspired brokerages to reach out and has given us the opportunity to expand the work we do,” said Blake Andrews, Founder, Giveback Homes, “The more brokerages that join, the more we can all accomplish together.”

As with the existing Giveback Homes membership model, 100% of all donations in the new broker-level package will go directly to a Giveback Homes Build Project of the donor’s choice. Currently there are 15 Build Projects in the U.S. and Nicaragua with several more planned for 2016.

“The Agency is honored to be a part of the Giveback Homes family and the incredible work the organization is doing in our community,” said Mauricio Umansky, Co-founder and CEO of The Agency, “On a recent build day, our agents had the pleasure of working with a family whose life was being forever changed by Giveback Homes. The experience was truly humbling and inspiring, and we look forward to many more just like it.”

In addition to being the first Giveback Homes Broker Partner, Umansky is also working closely with the Giveback Homes team and will be a member of their advisory board, to be announced in 2016.

“My vision is that all brokerages across the country will join Giveback Homes and be part of this social good movement directly related to the industry that is our passion as REALTORS®. I believe this is the next step in giving responsibly and turning our clients into humanitarians,” Umansky added.

Fueled by the passion of real estate professionals, Giveback Homes is in its second year of applying the ‘doing well by doing good’ business model to the real estate industry. To date, Giveback Homes Members have raised over $200,000, built 40 complete homes for families in Nicaragua, and helped build 9 homes in the United States.

About Giveback Homes

 Giveback Homes is dedicated to creating a sustainable relationship between real estate professionals, their clients, and communities in need throughout the world. Our goal is to create social change through the act of buying or selling a home.

About The Agency

 The Agency is a full-service, luxury real estate brokerage and lifestyle company that has redefined and modernized the real estate industry. To put it simply, we do things differently. The Agency set out to foster a culture of collaboration in which the collective talents, resources and networks of our world-class team would be behind each of our clients every step of the way. Our spirit of innovation has led the way in the advancement of our industry, and we offer a fresh forward-thinking approach that reaches all corners of the globe. The Agency represents clients worldwide in the residential, new development, resort and luxury leasing industries, with some of the most visible and high-end properties in the country among our vast portfolio. Walk into our world to learn how our strength together can best serve you.|||

