We all need some help with our genealogy research from time to time — especially when we hit one of those dreaded brick walls. Thankfully, there are many helpful genealogy resources online, including a slew of bloggers who readily offer up their inspiration and wisdom.

In addition to our Top 10 Genealogy Blogs You Need to Be Reading, we’ve compiled a list of some more up-and-coming, insightful, fun and unique genealogy blogs that will aid you in your family history research and inspire you to stay engaged in your genealogical journey.

Vera Marie Badertscher’s beautifully-written blog presents her “rambling thoughts” about ancestors who came before her in the kitchen and dining room. The blog features old recipes, family stories and research findings from not just her ancestors, but reader-submitted ancestry stories, as well.

Irish-born and Scottish-based professional family historian, author and tutor, Chris Paton, runs The British Genes Blog where he covers stories focused on British Isles ancestral research. He also just recently started a monthly podcast covering genealogy news and research topics.

Homeschooling mom, photo enthusiast and self-proclaimed obsessed genealogist, Jennifer, writes Climbing My Family Tree, a compelling blog that’s updated frequently with fun categories like “Wordless Wednesday,” “Treasure Chest Thursday,” and “Amanuensis Monday.”

Denise Levenick AKA The Family Curator is passionate about not only preserving her family’s keepsakes, but yours as well. Her blog offers up helpful ideas and tips for preserving and sharing your family treasures.

The Family Heirlooms blog documents the author’s search for questions and answers of her ancestors, and covers topics like bible records, lost family photos and interesting tombstones. The author hopes to inspire future generations to learn more about their family histories.

Lisa Louise Cook’s Genealogy Gems blog is for the savvy family history buff who wants to stay up-to-date on all the latest advances in online and tech-related genealogy research tools. Her site also hosts the popular Genealogy Gems Podcast featuring interviews with genealogy experts.

Genealogist, Michael John Neill’s Genealogy Tip of the Day is for those who don’t want to be bombarded with too many genealogy research tips all at once. The blog focuses on exactly what it says: one genealogy tip each day (spurred from Michael’s own current research) to help you along your own genealogy research journey.

The Genetic Genealogist author, Blaine Bettinger, has a Ph. D. in biochemistry with a concentration in genetics. Blaine’s unique, insightful blog examines where traditional genealogical techniques and modern genetic research meet.

Kitty Cooper blogs about her forays into genetic genealogy where she details her own findings and provides readers with DNA testing information, chromosome mappers and more tools for those who share her passion.

Nutfield Genealogy is an intelligent blog written by Heather Rojo, the secretary of the New Hampshire Mayflower Society and proud member of several New Hampshire and Massachusetts  genealogical societies. Heather knows her New England genealogy inside and out — and so will you if you decide to read her blog!

Laura Hedgecock’s grandmother, Hazel Crymes, passed on an old notebook filled with her life stories. Ever since then, Laura has been passionate about not only sharing her own family stories, but helping others do the same. Treasure Chest of Memories offers practical and creative ideas for all family story collectors and genealogy researchers.

Learn how to preserve genealogical records, find new genealogy resources, plus keep up with National Genealogical Society news, events and more with the organization’s UpFront with NGS blog.

The New England Historic Genealogical Society’s blog, Vita Brevis, offers short essays written by the society’s expert staffers detailing their own research strategies and findings, plus genealogy news and resources.

Young 23-year-old bloggers Heather and Caitlin are truly young (and savvy!) genealogists. Their engaging blog focuses on helping genealogy beginners get started, plus genealogy tips and tricks. They also share their own genealogy stories and research successes.

Have you stumbled upon any great genealogy blogs lately that have helped you with your family history research? Use these blogs as inspiration to start your free Crestleaf Family Tree!|||

Need genealogy research help? Check out our list of unique, fun and helpful genealogy blogs to help you bust out of your family history research rut!