I was fortunate to chat with the founder and main person working on API Garage. At first, API Garage might seem like Postman’s little brother but once you get to know the tool better you’ll understand there’s a very different approach being taken in its development. The idea behind APIGarage is to increase developer productivity by building a tool that integrates with developers’ workflows.

First and foremost, unlike Postman which is built and relies on the Chrome/Chromium ecosystem, this project has taken a diverse approach: Built on top of Electron and Angular.js, it is a multi-platform API console that doesn’t have to worry about the big (Google) brother doing its thing.

Postman is extremely rich of features, sometimes you might think there are too many. Today Postman is healthy but looking carefully ahead, it might not be a surprise that tomorrow Postman becomes too crowded: Prioritising is hard and sometimes when there are many features planned on the roadmap or implemented it gets hard to retain the king of the hill crown.

API Garage is aiming to take a different path and not make the same errors - it has been built for the developer that consumes APIs in mind just like Postman — but has a different roadmap in mind in the way it’ll approach the release of new features and how they’ll all fit in the product.

The roadmap is more developer focused: Feedback from the community of developers using this tool is taken into extremely serious consideration and is the primary source of inspiration that drives and leads the feature roadmap.

I forecast APIGarage to directly compete with Postman. Right now I use APIGarage for mostly keeping track of API calls that I need to run to achieve this or that in the apps I develop. I like the collection feature and the fact that it has a low footprint and a simple, to the point, UI.

The app is young and I was happy that I had been given access to the beta and fortunate enough to have had the time to discuss it personally with the mastermind that develops it.

Speaking with the developer/founder of this app it is clear that he’s going to make every moment matter. I had the luck of being revealed some of the details behind the roadmap of APIGarage that I have been asked not to reveal, that’s super fair-game because it’ll be exciting to watch.

Today the tool might feel young, and lacking all of the features that Postman has, but things will change: As I write this I have APIGarage running in my launch bar because I was exploring some APIs earlier, let’s see how things evolve !|||

Last year I wrote a review of API editors available on the market named “A review of all most common API editors”; this year however, I decided to concentrate on API-focused tools released in 2015. A…