Should there be a cap on bankers’ bonuses? Can archaeology prove or disprove the Bible? These are the types of topics that would-be Oxford students could find themselves pondering at an interview to study at the famous university. 



The questions are among a sample selection released annually by the university from tutors who conduct the interviews and decide the fate of thousands of anxious teenagers, ahead of Thursday’s deadline for applications to study at the university next year.

Samina Khan, director of admissions and outreach at Oxford, said the university was keen to reassure prospective applicants that tutors want to see how they think and respond to new ideas, rather than catch them out.



“Interviews are not about reciting what you already know – they are designed to give candidates a chance to show their real ability and potential, which means candidates will be encouraged to use their knowledge and apply their thinking to new problems in ways that will both challenge them and allow them to shine.

“They are an academic conversation in a subject area between tutors and candidate, similar to the undergraduate tutorials which current Oxford students attend every week. We know there are still lots of myths about the Oxford interview, so we put as much information as possible out there to allow students to see the reality of the process.”

The university conducts more than 24,000 interviews for 10,000 applicants over a two-week interview period in December and it’s just one element in the selection process – tutors also consider exam results, predicted grades, admissions test results, academic references and personal statements.



Not only is Oxford revealing the questions, it is also providing the answers. On the question of bankers’ pay, and whether the government should do something to limit how much they get, interviewer Brian Bell of Lady Margaret Hall said: “This is a very topical question in light of the recent financial crisis.



“A simple answer might be that since banks are generally private firms and workers are free to work where they wish, then the pay they receive is just the outcome of a competitive labour market. In this story, bankers earn a lot because they are very skilled and have rare talents. It is hard to see a reason for government intervention in this case – though on equity grounds one may want to have a progressive income tax system that redistributes some of this income.

“A good candidate would wonder why it is that seemingly equivalently talented people can get paid so much more in banking than in other occupations. Do we really believe that bankers are so much better than other workers in terms of skill?

“An alternative story is that the banking industry is not competitive and generates profits above what a competitive market would produce. This would then allow workers in that industry to share some of those profits and so earn much more. In this case, there is a role for government intervention – making the market more competitive. The key point about this question is trying to get candidates to think about the economics of pay rather than just whether they think it is fair or not.”

Exploring possible responses to the oriental studies question about whether archeology can prove or disprove the Bible, interviewer Alison Salvesen, of Mansfield College, said candidates should show they appreciate the Bible is a collection of documents written over several centuries, and that academic study of the Bible means it has to be examined to see when and where these traditions came from and for what purpose they were written.

“Whereas they should recognise that archaeology relies on non-literary sources preserved from ancient periods such as the remains of buildings and tools. These can often be dated by scientific means (and so appear more objective than literature), but we still frequently need additional information such as inscriptions or evidence from other similar sites in order to make sense of the ancient remains.

“In the end I would hope the candidate would work towards a realisation of the very different nature of these types of evidence, which sometimes gives a complementary picture, while in others it may be contradictory.“

Another sample question for candidates for philosophy, politics and economics (PPE) asked why income per head is between 50 and 100 times larger in the United States than in Burundi or Malawi.



For this question, admissions tutor Brian Bell says candidates need to think about why such income gaps exist. “A good starting point is to think about whether the amount of capital and technology available to workers in different countries is the same and if not why not?

“US workers are much more productive because they have access to the best technology – the US is at the technological frontier. But why do poor countries not just buy the same technology and be as productive? Possibly, the education levels are too low to allow for the use of such technology or perhaps there are insufficient savings to purchase the technology or the infrastructure might not exist. The trick is to think widely and not try and fit the answer to some lesson that has been learned in school.”

And then, applicants to study experimental psychology might be asked to imagine that 100 people all put £1 into a pot for a prize that will go to the winner of a simple game. Each person has to choose a number between 0 and 100 and the prize goes to the person whose number is closest to two thirds of the average of all of the numbers chosen. What number will you choose, and why?

Interviewer Nick Yeung, of University College, said: “I like this as a question for experimental psychology because answering it brings in a range of skills relevant to the subject. Partly it involves numerical and analytical skills: the question implies that the answer will be two-thirds of some other number, but which one?



“The question also has a psychological angle in thinking about reasons for people’s behaviour and choices. Will everyone put in the same effort? Will everyone be motivated to win?”|||

University releases selection of questions from tutors who decide fate of thousands of would-be students as deadline for applications looms