Mayor Ed Lee checks out the inside of a new Muni bus. He has beefed...

When the Board of Supervisors appointed Ed Lee the city’s interim mayor in January 2011, they characterized him as a caretaker who would diligently keep city government chugging along until voters picked their real leader.

Not only did Lee, who had been city administrator, surprise the supervisors by running for and winning his own four-year term, but he has proved to be far more than a mere minder of the store. Instead, the bureaucrat-turned-politician’s policies have helped dramatically reshape San Francisco.

Five years ago, the city was known mostly for its out-there liberal politics, its tourist-friendly attractions, and its diverse and eclectic neighborhoods. If it made the national press, it was usually for a cutting-edge policy like issuing same-sex marriage licenses or banning plastic bags.

Half a decade later, San Francisco is the center of the world’s technology boom. Construction cranes are only half-jokingly called the city’s new mascot, the median house price has risen a remarkable $560,000 to $1.16 million, unemployment is virtually nonexistent, and the city’s annual budget has swelled by more than $2 billion.

The Economist recently likened working in tech in San Francisco circa 2015 to living in Florence during the Renaissance.

“When you consider how vibrant the economy is and how tough it is to get things done in San Francisco, I think he’s done a really incredible job,” political consultant Sam Lauter said of Lee’s tenure. Lauter helped discourage his longtime client, state Sen. Mark Leno, from entering the Nov. 3 race for mayor because he believed — still believes — Lee is unbeatable.

But plenty of Lee’s critics wish somebody with name recognition was challenging the man who has so drastically altered their city. They see the affordability crisis, rash of evictions, grimy streets and worsening homeless problem as not so much like the Renaissance, but the French Revolution.

“It’s a tale of two cities when it comes to the mayor’s performance,” said Supervisor David Campos, who represents the Mission District, the center of attention for gentrification and evictions. “We’re the wealthiest city in the country, but many people are being left out of that prosperity.”

Corey Cook, a former political science professor at the University of San Francisco, said both viewpoints are valid.

“The city has a booming economic engine and yet people earning a significant salary are feeling unprecedented economic pressures and housing insecurity,” he said. “What drew people to San Francisco in the first place — the cultural diversity and the feel of San Francisco — has undoubtedly changed.”

Less than a month from the election, here is a look at Lee’s five years in office and how they have affected the city in the areas that matter most to its residents.

When Lee took office, the city was just beginning to emerge from a crippling recession. His predecessor, Gavin Newsom, who left office a year early after being elected lieutenant governor, had projected a $380 million deficit in the city’s $6.8 billion budget.

Lee’s first budget, which went into effect that July, included across-the-board cuts. Now, thanks to huge increases in tax revenue, the city’s budget stands at $8.6 billion and next year is projected to hit $9 billion — more than at least 10 states. The current budget includes money to hire 1,178 new city employees and funding increases for every department.

The seeds of all that growth were planted under Newsom and sprouted under Lee in the form of the Twitter tax break, which persuaded Twitter and other tech companies to move into Mid-Market. The long-derelict stretch of the city’s main thoroughfare has gradually improved.

Twitter’s move to San Francisco helped persuade more tech companies to follow. Countless start-ups have set up shop in San Francisco — and Uber, Airbnb, Pinterest and Dropbox alone are valued at about $100 billion combined. A.T. Kearney, the global management consulting firm, rates San Francisco as the city with the most potential worldwide to be booming in 2024.

Lee’s mantra when he took office was “jobs, jobs, jobs” — and he says 101,451 jobs have been created during his tenure. He frequently says that not just the tech sector is growing, but that the tourism, construction and health care sectors are all booming, too. In 2011, the city’s unemployment rate stood at 9.4 percent. It is now a minuscule 3.6 percent, the third lowest of California’s 58 counties behind Marin and San Mateo.

Lee’s consensus-building style helped pass not only the Twitter tax break, but also pension reform and a shift in the way business taxes are levied away from a company’s payroll to its gross receipts. The latter was heavily pushed by Lee supporter and angel investor Ron Conway.

All this economic success, though, certainly isn’t being enjoyed universally, and Lee’s detractors say his devotion to tech companies and developers has had some terrible side effects.

“He has fulfilled quite fully the saying, ‘You gotta dance with them that brung ya,’” said former state Assemblyman and Supervisor Tom Ammiano. “I think we’re paying for that.”

San Francisco has the fastest growing income inequality gap of any major city in the country, according to the Brookings Institution.

That income disparity is particularly notable for San Franciscans when race is considered. Recently released census data shows that the median household income for whites has climbed 14 percent to $104,300 since 2011. The median household income for African Americans has dropped 5 percent in that same time to a meager $29,500.

Board of Supervisors President London Breed, who grew up in public housing and represents the Western Addition, said many of her constituents feel untouched by the economic boom — and that City Hall needs to be more creative in helping them.

“They still have a lot of challenges paying their PG&E bill and paying for groceries,” she said. “I still get calls from people who need help, asking, ‘Do you know where the closest food program is?’ or ‘What can I do to get through to the end of the month?’”

Supervisor Jane Kim said that these economic developments — the good and the bad — are not attributable just to Lee but are part of a larger global trend. Still, she said, it’s up to the mayor and the board to do a better job of addressing them locally.

“Income inequality, I think, is clearly one of the most pressing issues, and we as a city need to address it if we want to be strong, healthy and diverse,” she said.

Lee pushed successfully for a higher minimum wage, which will hit $15 an hour in 2018. But small businesses and restaurants report having a hard time finding people to work minimum wage jobs because they don’t pay enough to afford housing. Countless old-line businesses — the Lexington Club, Esta Noche and the Empress of China among them — have closed for economic reasons.

John Sheridan, owner of the San Francisco WoodShop on Third Street, has grown tired of seeing all the appliance repair, hardware and packaging shops he frequented close up shop. After 41 years in the city, he’s moving to Portland, Ore.

“I’ve seen, all over the city, the less affluent businesses disappear,” Sheridan said, adding he’s written to Lee’s office numerous times about the problem but never gets an answer. “The property taxes go up, the buildings get built, but it’s very one-sided.”

Asked during a recent Chronicle editorial board meeting whether he thinks any of his economic policies were too successful, or whether he would do anything differently if he could go back to 2011, Lee bristled.

“To this day, I truly believe that those things that we did and started 41/2 years ago have become central to why we’re such a strong economic city,” he said. Addressing affordability will be a priority in his second term, he said.

And the mayor is especially proud of the changes to Mid-Market.

“I am not apologetic,” he said. “I am quite enthusiastic about what has occurred.”

The surging economy has jolted the city’s real estate market. Since 2011, the median sales price for homes and condos combined has climbed from $660,000 to $1.16 million — an 81 percent increase, according to Paragon Real Estate. In the historically Latino Mission District, home prices have appreciated 143 percent. In the Bayview, a historically black neighborhood, they’ve appreciated 117 percent.

The real estate site Zumper reports the city’s median asking rent for a one-bedroom apartment is $3,530, highest in the country. Those with children will be paying a lot more: the median for a two-bedroom apartment is $4,900.

Evictions, too, are climbing. From March 2010 through February 2011, the San Francisco Rent Board reported 1,370 eviction notices. From March 2014 through February 2015, there were 2,120 eviction notices. From March through June of this year — the most recent data available — there have been 803 eviction notices.

“Over the last five years, San Francisco has become the most unaffordable city in the United States,” said Erin McElroy, founder of the Anti-Eviction Mapping Project. “The mayor is very influenced by development and tech money, and that seems to speak louder to him than the voices of the thousands of people being evicted left and right.”

Lee has said repeatedly in recent months that building more affordable housing is a top priority. “I know we have a crisis — I feel that,” he said.

He has a plan to build or rehabilitate 30,000 housing units by 2020 — more than half of which will be affordable to the middle class — and is backing a $310 million housing bond on next month’s ballot to help pay for it.

Gabriel Metcalf, president and CEO of the urban think tank SPUR, said the economic forces creating the housing shortage are long-standing and much bigger than one mayor — but that Lee is on the right track.

“He’s basically trying to do the right thing on housing, which is what I would characterize as more of everything, more of all kinds of housing,” Metcalf said.

Lee has also supported changing the state Ellis Act, which allows evictions if a landlord takes the property off the rental market, but he has gotten nowhere in Sacramento. The city is providing money to pay for attorneys to represent tenants facing evictions. He is also remaking the long-decrepit public housing stock in the city by turning it over to nonprofits in exchange for them rehabbing the buildings.

Lee has not supported more controversial proposals from the city’s progressive camp. He opposes the housing moratorium proposed for the Mission on the Nov. 3 ballot and took no stand on the unsuccessful anti-speculation tax on last year’s ballot. He and the supervisors have struggled to find the right regulations for Airbnb’s short-term rentals, and Lee opposes the more stringent regulations included in Proposition F on next month’s ballot.

But in a city where rent-controlled apartments are being taken off the market almost as fast as new units are being built, critics say Lee is just playing in the margins — meanwhile, artists, nonprofit workers, teachers, families, minorities and others are being permanently priced out.

“He’s not a Republican — he could be worse,” said Sara Shortt, director of the Housing Rights Committee, which offers counseling to tenants. “But in terms of serving the real needs of the majority of the city’s residents who are in dire crisis right now, I think he’s really failed.”

After the affordability crisis and lack of housing, homelessness is a top concern of city residents. The recent homeless count showed 6,686 homeless people living in San Francisco — a 4 percent increase since 2013.

The count also showed the population is older and struggling more with mental health issues and drug and alcohol addiction than in previous years. They’re also more visible in more neighborhoods than before, pushed out of their hideaways in the Mission and South of Market because of development there.

Glenn Waters, a musician who owns a condominium at Eighth and Folsom streets, said more and more homeless people have moved onto the sidewalks around his building — pitching tents, strewing trash and defecating in the open.

“I have to call 311 pretty much on a daily basis to get poop cleaned up,” Waters said.

He thinks Lee ignored homelessness to concentrate on creating jobs and improving the economy until recently. “He has higher priorities. Now that a lot of pressure’s been put on him, I think this is becoming one of his priorities.”

Lee says it is — and that along with affordable housing, homelessness will be a top priority in his second term. He got a lot of press for saying recently he will move homeless people off the streets for the Super Bowl in February, but now says he’ll actually work to move them off the streets permanently and that he’s tired of hearing that’s not compassionate.

“We shouldn’t allow people to live on the streets,” he said. “It’s dangerous to themselves, it’s dangerous to each other. ... It’s a health hazard to be on the streets. That’s the real compassion.”

His primary answer is the Navigation Center that opened last spring in the Mission and allows entire encampments of people, along with their partners, animals and belongings, to move in under one roof until case managers can help them find more permanent housing. Lee recently announced he is trying to open another one, although he admitted he needs four or five to really make a difference.

Along with more people living on the streets comes dirtier streets, and residents have been complaining loudly about the trash, needles, tents, urine and human feces that are common on San Francisco’s sidewalks.

The Department of Public Works is trying a number of methods to keep the streets cleaner, including paying “potty-sitters” to ensure those big, green JCDecaux toilets are kept clean and not used for drugs or prostitution, providing Pit Stop portable toilets around the city, and covering walls with paint that repels urine back onto the pants and shoes of anybody who uses the surfaces as a toilet.

Lee sees homelessness, mental illness and public defecation as all linked, and vowed to come up with “a compassionate, long-term, disciplined city answer.”

About a decade ago, San Francisco had an average homicide rate of nearly 100 a year. Those figures have since dropped significantly: There were 50 killings in 2011 and 45 last year.

But while violent crime is down, the city has experienced a surge in property crimes, particularly car break-ins. Theft from a vehicle is up 47 percent from 2010 — that puddle of tiny chunks of window glass is an all too familiar sight.

After Lee made a major misstep early in his tenure by calling for a “stop-and-frisk” policy — critics say it amounts to racial profiling — he has stayed mostly quiet on law enforcement issues.

But that doesn’t mean all is rosy in the public safety world. His handpicked police chief, Greg Suhr, has dealt with a number of scandals in recent months, including officers exchanging racist text messages and major problems in his crime lab.

Sheriff Ross Mirkarimi remains an outcast at City Hall after Lee tried and failed to oust him from his job over a domestic violence scandal. The two have recently been locked in a war of words over the July shooting death of Kathryn Steinle on Pier 14, allegedly by an undocumented felon released by Mirkarimi. The incident gained national attention and has raised questions about the city’s sanctuary city policy toward immigrants.

Lee maintains nothing in the city’s sanctuary policy prohibited Mirkarimi from contacting federal immigration officials upon the alleged assailant’s release. “Nothing in the sanctuary city (policy) prohibits communication,” he said.

Drivers are irate over increased traffic and parking difficulties thanks to more people working in San Francisco and more construction projects around the city. Lee has also been criticized for giving on-call ride service companies, including Uber, too wide a berth, damaging the taxi industry. And the mayor’s initial willingness to allow the corporate shuttles commonly known as Google buses — at one point a symbol of the new tech world — to use Muni bus stops for free was slammed until the city started charging them a small fee.

But in other areas of transportation, Lee gets fairly strong marks. After a spate of pedestrian deaths, he has implemented a Vision Zero policy that aims to eliminate traffic deaths by 2024.

Lee successfully pushed the passage of a $500 million transportation bond last year to help pay for street improvements for pedestrians and bicyclists and to improve Muni. In January, he announced the purchase of 40 new light rail vehicles for Muni and he’s working to expand the free Muni program to low-income seniors and the disabled.

“I had some disagreements with the mayor early on, but the mayor has really stepped up recently around transportation investment,” Supervisor Scott Wiener said.

Of course, appreciating that when you’re stuck on a crowded, smelly Muni bus during rush hour is another story.

“When you have a system that was neglected and driven into the ground for 30 years, you’re not going to fix it overnight,” Wiener said. “Of course there are days that are frustrating, but there are fewer days that are frustrating than there were a year ago.”

Here are some changes in San Francisco between when Mayor Ed Lee took office in January 2011 and now.

Median price of houses and condominiums: $660,000 in 2011, $1.16 million in 2015

Median rent for apartments of all sizes: $2,595 in 2011, $4,225 in 2015|||

When the Board of Supervisors appointed Ed Lee the city’s interim mayor in January 2011, they characterized him as a caretaker who would diligently keep city government chugging along until voters picked their real leader.  Not only did Lee, who had been city administrator, surprise the supervisors by running for and winning his own four-year term, but he has proved to be far more than a mere minder of the store.  Five years ago, the city was known mostly for its out-there liberal politics, its tourist-friendly attractions, and its diverse and eclectic neighborhoods.  If it made the national press, it was usually for a cutting-edge policy like issuing same-sex marriage licenses or banning plastic bags.  Construction cranes are only half-jokingly called the city’s new mascot, the median house price has risen a remarkable $560,000 to $1.16 million, unemployment is virtually nonexistent, and the city’s annual budget has swelled by more than $2 billion.  “The city has a booming economic engine and yet people earning a significant salary are feeling unprecedented economic pressures and housing insecurity,” he said.  The current budget includes money to hire 1,178 new city employees and funding increases for every department.  The seeds of all that growth were planted under Newsom and sprouted under Lee in the form of the Twitter tax break, which persuaded Twitter and other tech companies to move into Mid-Market.  Lee’s consensus-building style helped pass not only the Twitter tax break, but also pension reform and a shift in the way business taxes are levied away from a company’s payroll to its gross receipts.  All this economic success, though, certainly isn’t being enjoyed universally, and Lee’s detractors say his devotion to tech companies and developers has had some terrible side effects.  Recently released census data shows that the median household income for whites has climbed 14 percent to $104,300 since 2011.  The median household income for African Americans has dropped 5 percent in that same time to a meager $29,500.  Board of Supervisors President London Breed, who grew up in public housing and represents the Western Addition, said many of her constituents feel untouched by the economic boom — and that City Hall needs to be more creative in helping them.  [...] small businesses and restaurants report having a hard time finding people to work minimum wage jobs because they don’t pay enough to afford housing.  John Sheridan, owner of the San Francisco WoodShop on Third Street, has grown tired of seeing all the appliance repair, hardware and packaging shops he frequented close up shop.  The surging economy has jolted the city’s real estate market.  Since 2011, the median sales price for homes and condos combined has climbed from $660,000 to $1.16 million — an 81 percent increase, according to Paragon Real Estate.  The real estate site Zumper reports the city’s median asking rent for a one-bedroom apartment is $3,530, highest in the country.  Gabriel Metcalf, president and CEO of the urban think tank SPUR, said the economic forces creating the housing shortage are long-standing and much bigger than one mayor — but that Lee is on the right track.  [...] in a city where rent-controlled apartments are being taken off the market almost as fast as new units are being built, critics say Lee is just playing in the margins — meanwhile, artists, nonprofit workers, teachers, families, minorities and others are being permanently priced out.  The count also showed the population is older and struggling more with mental health issues and drug and alcohol addiction than in previous years.  Glenn Waters, a musician who owns a condominium at Eighth and Folsom streets, said more and more homeless people have moved onto the sidewalks around his building — pitching tents, strewing trash and defecating in the open.  Lee says it is — and that along with affordable housing, homelessness will be a top priority in his second term.  Along with more people living on the streets comes dirtier streets, and residents have been complaining loudly about the trash, needles, tents, urine and human feces that are common on San Francisco’s sidewalks.  The Department of Public Works is trying a number of methods to keep the streets cleaner, including paying “potty-sitters” to ensure those big, green JCDecaux toilets are kept clean and not used for drugs or prostitution, providing Pit Stop portable toilets around the city, and covering walls with paint that repels urine back onto the pants and shoes of anybody who uses the surfaces as a toilet.  Lee sees homelessness, mental illness and public defecation as all linked, and vowed to come up with “a compassionate, long-term, disciplined city answer.”  [...] while violent crime is down, the city has experienced a surge in property crimes, particularly car break-ins.  Theft from a vehicle is up 47 percent from 2010 — that puddle of tiny chunks of window glass is an all too familiar sight.  After Lee made a major misstep early in his tenure by calling for a “stop-and-frisk” policy — critics say it amounts to racial profiling — he has stayed mostly quiet on law enforcement issues.  Sheriff Ross Mirkarimi remains an outcast at City Hall after Lee tried and failed to oust him from his job over a domestic violence scandal.  The two have recently been locked in a war of words over the July shooting death of Kathryn Steinle on Pier 14, allegedly by an undocumented felon released by Mirkarimi.  Lee maintains nothing in the city’s sanctuary policy prohibited Mirkarimi from contacting federal immigration officials upon the alleged assailant’s release.  Drivers are irate over increased traffic and parking difficulties thanks to more people working in San Francisco and more construction projects around the city.  Lee has also been criticized for giving on-call ride service companies, including Uber, too wide a berth, damaging the taxi industry.  [...] the mayor’s initial willingness to allow the corporate shuttles commonly known as Google buses — at one point a symbol of the new tech world — to use Muni bus stops for free was slammed until the city started charging them a small fee.  After a spate of pedestrian deaths, he has implemented a Vision Zero policy that aims to eliminate traffic deaths by 2024.  Lee successfully pushed the passage of a $500 million transportation bond last year to help pay for street improvements for pedestrians and bicyclists and to improve Muni.  In January, he announced the purchase of 40 new light rail vehicles for Muni and he’s working to expand the free Muni program to low-income seniors and the disabled.