Have you ever experienced one of those sucky mornings?

But you still want to find peace... and you can.

Forget walking the dog, eating a healthy breakfast, and easing into your day. There isn't enough time.

Sure, you could focus on the positive, be happy to be alive, and be thankful to have a job that pays for the roof over your head.

But, sometimes a positive mindset, gratitude, and a smile just doesn’t cut it.

I had one of those mornings. And it only seemed to get worse. Fortunately, I knew just how to keep from spiraling into panic-mode.

However, I found a few tweaks (some only take 30-90 seconds) that allowed me to be less affected by it all.

Scream. Kick. Yell, “IT’S NOT FAIR!” You know you want to, so do it. However, set a timer for 90 seconds to five minutes, and do so away from others (even if that means hiding inside your closet and screaming into a pillow). Denying our true emotions only prolongs them.

Pausing during a hectic morning may seem counter productive

. However, releasing emotions in a healthy way will restore your focus. Taking this brief moment amid the chaos will set you up for a more productive day.

As you rush to get yourself or your family out the door, feel your feet. This is a physical way to ground you in the reality of what is. It quiets the chaotic story playing in your mind. It brings in acceptance and opens space for a calmer response to your frantic morning.

If you live with other people, you may sense they are demanding you to take on the job of fixing their morning. Don’t take it. Allow them to feel their own discomfort.

You will take their actions less personally and be more open to offer some positivity to the situation (even if they don’t immediately notice your contribution).

Instead of wishing you could take away all the failed situations of the morning, think of what you can add.

Shifting your mindset to what you can do rather than what’s wrong helps you focus on solutions rather than dwell on problems.

During frantic mornings, sometimes all we see is how much things suck. We hate that we’re so affected by the chaos and often feel like there is no way out.

Without awareness, nothing can change. Now that you are aware that you want things to be different, you have a choice. Choose to be gentle on yourself.

Take a few deep breaths. Say to yourself, “Okay. This sucks. Things didn't go as planned. But now I am aware. Now I can choose. I choose to accept my imperfections. I choose to create a day more aligned with the intentions of treating myself and others with kindness and compassion.”

You have the choice of how long you wish to hold onto the stress of a frantic morning. You can dwell on your failures and mishaps for the rest of the day, or you can dust yourself off in the middle of it all and choose something different.

Take time to acknowledge your frustrations, stress, and anger. Get grounded in this moment. Look at what you can positively add to your current situation.

Take a few moments to regain balance in this moment. It will set you up for a day that focuses on solutions rather than problems.

Sure, you'd love to rise with the sun every morning, quietly sip herbal tea, and read inspirational quotes after your morning yoga practice.

But life happens. It can get messy and not go as you planned. Don't let that stop you from regaining peace.|||

We all have mornings which we started off on the left foot. This article offers 5 tips to always have your mornings go your way! Click to read now.