This post explains how you can obfuscate your meta data to afford you a degree of privacy under the Telecommunications (Intercept and Access) Amendment (Data Retention) Act 2015. This is not a “How-To” for online privacy or information security. I’ll cover those topics in another post. The measures below are specifically directed at the Act.

This post is directed at the low-tech law abiding, but privacy conscious, citizen that has “nothing to hide” but feels uncomfortable with the idea that their personal information is being stored and potentially accessed without their knowledge. The tools in this post will not guarantee your privacy or anonymity but it will obfuscate some of your metadata, some of the time. The aim is to prevent any organisation having access to a virtual map of your entire life.

This post does not go into technical topics and I assume that most low-tech users don’t want a list of options to choose from.  I assume that users want one option for each device that is easy to install and use with little interruption to their normal usage habits.

There are plenty of alternatives to the applications below. I have no commercial or personal connections to any of the providers below other than as a current or sometime user.

F-Secure is a European company that specialises in online security tools. Freedome provides a reliable VPN connection that encrypts your internet traffic when you are online. You can purchase a packaged deal to use across all your devices; Mac, PC, iphone, Android.

If it’s good enough for the Australian Prime Minister then it’s good enough.  Malcolm Turnbull made Wickr a household name when it was revealed in early 2015 that the then Communications Minister was a user of the anonymous messaging app.

You can connect Jitsi to Facebook Messenger and import your contacts from your address book. Jitsi encrypts voice calls and chat over the net. It is a more secure alternative to Skype and Facetime.

Signal – Private Messenger  allows you to make encrypted phone calls from your iPhone.

Redphone  allows you to make encrypted phone calls from your Android powered device.|||

Data retention laws