Aspose.Cells for Java API has been upgraded to 8.6.0, and we are pleased to announce, this month’s release contains many useful features and improvements along with some critical bug fixes. Please refer to the release notes of Aspose.Cells for Java 8.6.0 for a full list of enhancements. If you are planning to upgrade the API from any previous version, we strongly suggest you to check the Public API Changes section to know what has been changed since your current revision of the API.

While you are downloading the latest build, here is a look at the biggest features in this release.

Aspose.Cells for Java API has exposed the class that is light weight as compared to class and allows to load the spreadsheet in order to manipulate the document properties in a simpler & more efficient way. In addition to the aforesaid class, the Aspose.Cells for Java 8.6.0 has also exposed the class and enumeration that can be used to specify the type of properties to be updated.

Following code snippet demonstrates how to use the newly exposed & classes to add a custom property to the spreadsheet while using Aspose.Cells for Java API.

Aspose.Cells for Java now provides the property to assign the macros to any control in the spreadsheet. This property is useful in scenarios where application requirement is to add modules and assign them to the controls for user interaction.

The following sample code explains the usage of property to assign a simple newly added module to button click event.

Aspose.Cells for Java 8.6.0 has exposed the property that can be used to control the generation of scripts such as Frames & Document Properties while exporting the spreadsheets in HTML format. The aforesaid type property has the default value of , that means; the resultant HTML will contain the scripts related to the frames as per standards of Excel application. Moreover, the resultant HTML code will contain the conditional comments that detects the browser type and adjusts the layout accordingly. Setting this property to will direct the Aspose.Cells APIs not to generate the frame scripts and conditional comments. In this case the resultant HTML can be viewed in any browser but it cannot be imported back while using Aspose.Cells APIs.

The most notable enhancements in this release are as follow:

The resources, you may need to accomplish your tasks:|||

Aspose.Cells APIs now support the manipulation of spreadsheet's metadata in a simple & efficient manner without creating an instance of Workbook and without loading the complete structure and data. WorkbookMetadata class along with other supporting classes and enumerations have been exposed to accomplish this task.