Note: After refusing to comment, denying it, accusing it of being disinfo, accusing me of stealing data, accusing me of advertising for a spy job, declaring that it was "a campaign" against them, accusing me of faking data, declaring that all logs leak and they pay for the internet, and deleting my post to the Cryptome mailing list alerting them to the leak, Cryptome has acknowledged that the leaked logs I found were legitimate.

If you haven't read why the alleged GCHQ slide showing spying on Cryptome.org's users could have been made by anyone, I recommend you do so before reading this. In summary, I showed that the information on the slide could have been mocked up, depsite matching the logs for Cryptome.org. Cryptome has denied the accuracy of my data, while oddly accusing me of stealing the data, and leaves me with no alternatives to posting the data online for others to review and verify.

The data came from Cryptome itself, on a pair of USBs they mailed to me. Within those USBs were server logs that include user IPs (spanning several months), .htaccess files, and a pwd file. After finding the data in the USB Cryptome had just sent me, I sent an email attempting to verify it hadn't been included as something extra that was not for public distrubition:

Since John made a point out of the USBs being generated from scratch every time, I couldn't be sure how long the data had been available. After some digging, I found a copy of Cryptome's archive apparently uploaded by coderman@xxxxxxxxx and re-uploaded to The Pirate Bay by bandmon. You can find that torrent here. I downloaded the torrent to a remote server, unzipped the files and confirmed there were log files there as well.

It was my strong preference not to post this, but since Cryptome has refused to validate the data, there is no other way to authenticate it than to release it to the public along with how to find that information in the Cryptome USBs/CDs and their various mirrors. It was not my intention to humiliate Cryptome or expose their users, only to demonstrate that the slide allegedly proving the GCHQ has spied on Cryptome.org could have come from anywhere. Despite being accurate, the information is not proof of surveillance or anything nefarious. In short, the alleged GCHQ could have been produced by GCHQ as an internal mockup, or forged by anyone with access to an internet connection.

In addition to the links below, you can also download a complete copy of the dataset from Cryptome as well as download a .zip of all of the leaked logs [removed following admission from John Young/Cryptome that the logs are legitimate] and peruse them in your own time.

If the information is a mockup as Cryptome alleges, then it was created and distributed by them as part of an insane piece of disinformation designed to implicate users who are innocent of even visiting Cryptome.org. Far more likely is that Cryptome has been unaware of these ongoing leaks, refused to discuss them with me and then attempted to deny their reality.|||

