ALL THOSE WHICH ARE MOST IMPORTANT IN DYNAMICS, HYDRAULICS, HYDROSTATICS, PNEUMATICS, STEAM ENGINES, MILL AND OTHER GEARING, PRESSES, HOROLOGY, AND MISCELLANEOUS MACHINERY; MANY MOVEMENTS NEVER BEFORE PUBLISHED SEVERAL WHICH HAVE ONLY RECENTLY COME INTO USE.

This is an online edition of the classic technical reference Five Hundred and Seven Mechanical Movements by Henry T. Brown.

This site contains the original illustrations and text from the 21st edition of the book, published in 1908. It also includes animated versions of the illustrations, and occasional notes by the webmaster.

The animated versions are not yet complete. They are identified by color images in the thumbnail pages. To keep up with developments on this site, use the Twitter Follow or Facebook Subscribe links below.

The animations are implemented with a custom JavaScript library, which uses an HTML 5 Canvas element. You must have an up-to-date web browser to view them.

The JavaScript library is highly experimental and is proprietary for now. We may polish and release it as open-source at some point, but at present it’s far too specialized to be generally useful.

The owners of 507movements.com hold the copyright to the layout and animated illustrations on this site. The animations may not be reproduced without permission. This includes conversions of the animations to other formats. Permission will not be given to reproduce the animations on other websites.

The static images and text on this site are taken directly from the book Five Hundred and Seven Mechanical Movements, which is long out of copyright. You may freely use them, as we have, subject to the copyright laws in your country.

We ask, however, that you respect the enormous amount of work that has brought you this site. The images were all individually scanned and lovingly retouched. Please do not simply copy or “mirror” this content to your site. If you do use an image to enhance your original content, please tell your visitors about 507movements.com. By doing so, you’ll support ongoing work and help us recover operating costs. Thank you for understanding.

This website does not collect your personal information.

However, we do use Google’s advertising system, which makes use of a cookie. The DoubleClick cookie enables Google and its partners to serve ads based on your visits to this site and/or other sites on the Internet.

You may opt out of the use of the DoubleClick cookie for interest-based advertising by visiting either Google’s ads preference manager or the Network Advertising Initiative’s opt-out page.|||

About 507 Mechanical Movements