The tortuous hunt for a prime parking spot in the city could be accelerated by an app launching Monday.

The app, called SpotPog, will let drivers send a notification that they are ready to leave a space, allowing someone to swoop in and snatch it up. In exchange, the parked car’s driver gets a credit to pick up a spot another time.

Homeowners with a driveway can rent their space to drivers who are on the prowl for parking and willing to pay.

“Brooklyn has a serious parking problem — and we need a real solution,” Borough President Eric Adams said in support of the app.

SpotPog’s team ran an outreach campaign to elected officials, community groups and residents in Brooklyn’s Park Slope, Boerum Hill and Fort Greene neighborhoods.

The app maker had wanted to avoid the controversies around other “sharing economy” services like Uber, peer-to-peer car provider Lyft and Airbnb, which lets people rent out apartments to travelers. City regulators have scrambled to pass rules tailored to these services, while lawmakers consider legislation to tamp down their controversial features.

“We see the parking problem as a civic challenge that must have a community-based solution,” Jacques Blinbaum, SpotPog’s founder, said in a statement. “That is why we engaged community leaders and residents early on as we built the app.”

The company reached out to Queens Councilman Donovan Richards, chairman of the Environmental Protection Committee, who said SpotPog was “a neat idea” that could cut down on fumes from idling cars.

But that is not the only green benefit he found with the app. Visitors coming to his Rockaways district for sun and surf may want to pay for an available driveway.

“Putting money into people’s pockets doesn’t hurt,” he said.

What it does: Lets drivers put out a notification that they’re leaving a space, allowing someone to take it. The parked car’s driver then gets a credit to pick up a spot another time.

 

 How to use it: Using credits called “Pogs” or cash, you can secure a spot where offered and allowed.

 

 Other benefits: The app allows you to list your driveway on SpotPog to earn money.|||

The tortuous hunt for a prime parking spot in the city could be accelerated by an app launching Monday.