Berkshire Hathaway, Inc. (NYSE: BRK.A) (NYSE: BRK.B) is a holding company started by billionaire Warren Buffett. The company owns some of the best businesses in the world. Berkshire Hathaway is headquartered in Omaha, Nebraska, Buffett's birthplace. As of September 2015, the company has averaged an annual growth in book value of 19.7% to its shareholders over the last 49 years, compared to 9.8% from the S&P 500 over the same period. Berkshire Hathaway is extremely profitable for its owners and stakeholders. The following is a list of its four most profitable and most important lines of business.

In 1972, See's Candies generated sales of $30 million with pretax profits of $5 million, and it did it all with only $8 million in assets. That year, Buffett acquired the company for $25 million, a $17 million premium for See's Candies assets. This marked the first time Warren Buffett purchased a business based on long-term profitability and not current net worth.

From 1972 to 2007, the company produced $1.35 billion in pretax profits, which is 54 times the initial purchase price. In the 25 years from 1972 to 2007, Berkshire Hathaway invested only $32 million to grow See's Candies, and in 2007, the company earned $82 million in pretax profit with a total of $40 million invested by Buffett. Since 2007, See's Candies has yielded Berkshire Hathaway at least $2 for every $1 invested.

Warren Buffett sees insurance companies as great investments. In 1951, at the age of 21, 75% of Buffett's net worth was invested in GEICO. That same year, GEICO traded at only eight times its earnings even though the company grew written premiums by 400% from 1945 to 1950.

GEICO made Berkshire Hathaway very successful from 1951 to 1994, and in 1995, Warren Buffett acquired the remaining portion of the company. What makes GEICO such a high performer for Berkshire Hathaway is the company's operating performance; it always posts massive profits on insurance policies, spending less on claims and other costs than it makes on premiums. This generates a float that Buffett can use for investing. GEICO is continuing to grow; in 1996, it was the seventh biggest auto insurance company, and as of 2015, it is the second largest auto insurance company.

Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance Group is one of Buffett's most profitable lines of business, run by Ajit Jain. According to Buffett, Jain joined Berkshire Hathaway in 1985 and has made more money for the company than Buffett himself. Berkshire Reinsurance gives Berkshire Hathaway a float of $37 billion.

While most insurance companies, such as GEICO, make their float with low pricing and by foregoing underwriting profits, Berkshire Reinsurance does it differently by creating float while also increasing its underwriting profits. Over the past 10 years, Jain has been able to increase the company's float and profitability. Berkshire Reinsurance has generated roughly $5 billion in profits for Berkshire Hathaway while generating an additional $22 billion in no-cost float, which Buffett can then invest in other ventures.

Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) is not as large a cash cow as See's Candies or GEICO, but it is a billion-dollar, bottom-line driver for Berkshire Hathaway. The company is one of the largest freight railroad networks in North America with 48,000 employees, 32,500 miles of track in 28 states and over 8,000 trains. The railroad hauls enough coal per year to generate 10% of the electricity produced in the U.S.

Additionally, the company acts as a sponge for the float Berkshire Hathaway generates from its insurance subsidiaries. Buffett uses BNSF as a place to store this money, especially when returns on alternative insurance are low. Essentially, Buffett can invest his additional capital in BNSF while he looks to deploy it elsewhere and generate a higher return than even the highest-rated bonds.|||

Learn about Warren Buffett and his company Berkshire Hathaway. Understand why the four companies listed are his most important and profitable lines of business.