It’s crunch time at work. You have five projects all due within the next few days, your big holiday campaign is only a few weeks away, you’re monitoring Facebook, Twitter and Instagram on the go and you have two co-workers out with the flu. You need to be at your best, and can use all the help you can get.

In situations like these, technology is your best friend. There are a multitude of apps and tools that will help you save valuable seconds and minutes at work and at home. Since you’re supposed to get eight hours of sleep every day, here are 16 free productivity apps for the hours you’re actually awake.

You wake up in the morning and you check your phone. It’s instinct. You know you have a few minutes to kill before you actually have to get up, so you might as well be productive. The first thing you open? Mailbox.

Email is one of the biggest time sucks for almost every human being with a computer. That might be an exaggeration, but only just. The Mailbox app helps you save time on email and be more productive by streamlining all the interactions you undertake with every message. You can quickly swipe emails to archive or trash them. You can also “put off emails” to a later time. You might not want to deal with that 5 paragraph email regarding Facebook cover photos while you’re laying in bed, so in a few taps you put it off until later this afternoon. Mailbox also learns from you, so if every message from a determined PR person (This is the next big thing, I swear!) has gone into your archives, it will prompt you to automatically archive all future emails from that sender. Time saved, productivity increased, all in your first 5 minutes of the day.

Traffic is brutal this morning so you decide to take public transit into work. Unfortunately this adds an extra 30 minutes to your commute and you’re supposed to be on an 8:30 call. Not to worry, this is the exact reason you have the UberConference app on your phone.

UberConference lets you start conference calls instantly on your phone. Once the call has started, you can see everyone in the meeting and get additional information about them through their social profiles. You can be sure you’re referring to that new client by his actual job title of “Part-Time Happiness Director,” since you can see his LinkedIn summary from within the app during your call. You can also record the call, saving valuable information you might be able to use in future calls or campaigns with this client.

By the time you get to work, you’ve already sat in on an important call and have a recording you can use for notes when you’re not so busy.

You’re a social media manager, so the first thing you do when you get to work should probably involve social media. Where do you start? On Twitter? Or Facebook? Maybe LinkedIn?

Why choose? Hootsuite gathers all of your social media profiles into a single dashboard so you can easily monitor and update all of them quickly and easily. Yes, we’re biased, but Hootsuite was built for social media managers, and it was built for productivity.

When you get into work, you open Hootsuite and check your streams to see who has mentioned you on social media and start responding. If there are any customer service issues, you assign those messages to your support team if you can’t address them yourself. Then, you pop into your analytics reports to see how your pre-scheduled social media messaging from last night and this morning are performing. Now you know which posts you should focus on for tomorrow’s social messaging.

Take your social media to the next level with Hootsuite Pro

Be more productive with social media

With almost an entire day ahead of you, it’s time to map out your to-do-list. Knowing what tasks you have to accomplish and for when is essential to staying productive. For this purpose, you turn to Trello.

Trello helps you keep tabs on both individual and team projects. You can use it to manage projects on several levels, by dividing the work into boards (projects), lists (lists of tasks), and cards (individual tasks). With Trello, you can assign tasks and organize projects in various stages of completion with simple drag-and-drop actions. You can also create brainstorm sessions in order to get that creativity ball rolling.

Check off your “make today’s to-do-list” task and move onto bigger projects.

Your boss asks you how blog traffic is doing today. Your Google Analytics takes 24 hours to record that information and checking click-through on Tweets doesn’t necessarily tell the whole story. You want to answer her question quickly, so you open up Chartbeat.

Chartbeat provides real-time site data that’s easy to consume and digest. The app provides you with the information you need to act quickly and promote the content that’s already striking a chord on social media: How many people are on your blog, which post is leading the way, what social networks are driving the most views to these posts and more. Since the Chartbeat App in Hootsuite sits right alongside your social networks, you can react and respond to traffic insight within seconds.

You let your boss know that traffic is slightly higher than usual thanks to your particularly insightful piece on social advertising, which is performing really well on Facebook. You schedule a few more Posts about that blog for the next few hours and keep that buzz going.

Stay on top of your traffic in real-time

You head out for a quick lunch at Starbucks with a friend who works at a partnering agency. He mentions that the agency has rebranded, and all of the employees have new email addresses and Twitter handles as a result. Dang… that means an hour of updating your contact list. Except the updates have already been done automatically, thanks to a little app called Brewster.

Brewster is the contact management app you don’t just need, you deserve. It gathers people’s phone numbers, email addresses and all of their social media profiles into one place. Then, when someone updates their information on brewster, it will automatically updates it for all of their contacts. No more slowly typing in phone numbers or misspelling Twitter handles. Brewster saves you from wasted time and mistakes, and is a huge boost for productivity.

As you push away the remnants of your lunch, you want to make sure you didn’t miss any news while you were working this morning. You consider opening up your favorites list of a dozen news websites. Too long. You open up Twitter but everyone is live-tweeting some Kardashian scandal. Too tedious. Then, like Goldilocks finding the right bed, you realize that UpContent, available in the Hootsuite App Directory, is the perfect tool for this.

UpContent’s unique algorithm helps you find the content that matters—not just what’s viral—from the influencers that know your industry best.|||

A day in apps: The social media manager’s edition