The starter kit is a good model for approaching technology platforms, which require users to develop new behaviors. It’s no surprise that the platform winners introduce themselves as self-contained packages designed to quickly reward without much user investment.

Since AOL and Prodigy, we’ve encountered other sucessful digital starter kits.

iTunes and Facebook acted as starter kits, eased learning curves, and successfully taught us new behaviors. They took promising but complex fields and packaged them in an approachable way. But with this success they created a new problem: users outgrowing the components of their kits.

iTunes created and ignored this problem. Its users became digital music natives and started to share songs and playlists on Muxtape and Turntable. They began creating and self-publishing on Soundcloud and YouTube. They started exploring and streaming with on Rdio and Spotify.

Apple responded slowly and badly with Ping, Match, and Music. Each was too little, too late. iTunes was the starter kit that trained a generation, but didn’t grow up with its users.

Facebook hasn’t made the same mistakes. As users grew savvy with social they graduated to more specific, focused tools — just as those with knife sets might swap out a cheap chef’s knife for something with more balance and heft. Users embraced specialized networks focused on subcultures; networks better suited to emerging media (like Instagram or FourSquare); lightweight chat apps; and apps whose initial use cases don’t align with Facebook’s business requirements (Snapchat).

Unlike Apple, Facebook has embraced the developments of users. To meet user’s maturing tastes, They buy specialized tools (Instagram, WhatsApp) and experiment with building their own (Messanger, Rooms). They’ve evolved with their users, not only protecting their network but growing it as well.|||

Metaphors matter. We reduce complex ideas into little, packaged parables for ease of communication. But this gift isn’t free. Metaphors ignore details and carry unintended meanings. Be thoughtful…