Facebook is this morning under fire once again in Britain for paying just £4,327 in corporation tax last year, less tax than the average Brit pays annually, despite generating £105m in UK sales.

The shocking figures are the latest in a long line of stories surrounding US firms, like Google, Apple and Amazon, who have been criticised for moving profits to countries with more favourable taxes, like Ireland, Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands.

This comes despite Brits being some of the most coveted consumers for these companies. British commuters spend a whopping £9.3bn shopping online on their smartphones alone, and this is rising rapidly.

Facebook payed its UK workers an average of more than £210,000 in pay and bonuses last year, and its £105m in reported sales are thought to be just a percentage of the total revenue that Facebook generates from Britain.

Its huge salary bill, including a £35m staff share scheme, mean that Facebook officially made an accounting loss of £28.5m in Britain and therefore sidestepped paying much corporation tax.

“The Government isn’t powerless, but it is harder to deal with companies behaving this way under the current rules,” MP Meg Hillier, chair of Parliament’s public accounts committee responsible for numerous inquiries into tax avoidance, told The Memo.

A Facebook spokesperson said on the social network’s UK tax affairs: “We are compliant with UK tax law, and in fact in all countries where we have operations and offices. We continue to grow our business activities in the UK”.

But the days of these big multinationals skimping on their UK tax bill could be coming to an end.

“Companies must be held to account through public scrutiny and we’ve got to remind people it’s not just about the letter of the law, but the spirit too,” added Hillier. “Everyone should pay their fair share to the exchequer, especially as the nation is tightening its belt.”

Last week 34 of the world’s most developed nations, including the UK and US, came together to announce new rules that will make it harder for tech giants to move intellectual property to tax havens and force them to disclose how much revenue they generate in each country.

“No one should be in any doubt that we will take new steps at future fiscal events to introduce these new international rules to our own domestic tax laws,” said Chancellor George Osborne, following the announcement on Friday. “These taxes must be paid.”

The Memo has reached out to Meg Hillier MP, chair of the Public Accounts Committee which explores tax avoidance in the UK, for comment.|||

The social network actually made a loss in Britain, despite worldwide profits of £1.9bn, letting it sidestep paying much corporation tax.