In video production there are typically two players that come together with the objective of creating videos. You’ve got the creatives (i.e. script writers, storyboard artists, illustrators, animators, etc), and the clients.

What this relationship looks like can vary based on the type of video being worked on (i.e. animation, live footage), the size of the team, the structure of the team (e.g. freelancers, in-house, etc.), and the complexity of the content.

Since video production is a creative discipline, what this working dynamic really looks like “under the hood” from project to project is for the most part unpredictable. Let me share my thoughts on why that is and what we’ve done to make things more predictable.

What’s the deal with collaboration? Isn’t it a really “hot” space right now? Just look at what these companies are doing:

They’re transforming the way teams work together including video production teams. It seems that everyone has figured out their own way to collaborate using their own unique mix of tools. So I assume that the whole world is now a more efficient place right? Not really. At one point, our production agency (explainer videos) used 7 different tools (read the blog post) to manage video projects. Was it efficient? Not at all! But it was all we knew at the time.

Productivity tools, collaboration tools, task management tools, etc. are all great, but they all share one common problem: they don’t account for context and accountability.

Let me clarify. We learned the hard way that the best approach to “kicking ass” at projects has to be within a very clearly defined context. A project from start to end should be set up as follows:

This approach “moves the needle” efficiently, and it’s how we built Metaphorio; where the main features are built around two main components:

Great! So that covers “collaboration. Is there anything else?

In video production (traditionally), there’s nothing that really enables creatives and clients to work together easily aside from a general process. They may be using the latest and coolest collaboration tools, but they don’t really have any “rules of engagement” to work with while moving through this process. Everyone “plays the game” the way they want to.

If we were playing an actual sport, it would be out of the question to just make up random rules right? Football has very specific rules; world football (no not soccer) has specific rules, as do tennis, basketball, etc.  There are no exceptions to these rules, and every player abides by them. Period!

So what we’ve done by integrating “context” and “accountability” into the Metaphorio structure is put clear rules of engagement in place so that people know exactly how to “work together” within video production projects.

This becomes extremely important when you look at the process of video production which looks something like this:

Straight-forward right? Maybe for the usual players (i.e project managers and creatives), but not for clients since in many cases, they’re “new to the team” and haven’t ever “played” before.

All that clients know is that they want a video. But what’s not clear to them is what happens inside each stage of the process, and how things move from one stage to the next. Who does what, when, and how? They don’t know the rules.

So what happens in a “rule-less” video production world where clients (to no fault of their own) are lost? Things like these happen:

It’s on us (creatives) to put some standards in place that will fix these problems and keep us from drowning. Granted, most clients probably don’t care about the details of how their videos are made, but it’s precisely for that very reason that it’s our responsibility to create the simplest structure possible and teach them the rules. This is what we did with Metaphorio. We created one central place where the “rules of the game” are clear, everyone saves time, and where clients don’t feel lost.

NOW we can start collaborating!

Leaving you with a Challenge

 To our fellow creatives: next time you start a project, try tracking every non-creative minute you put into the project. You know, email follow ups, client phone calls, reminders, feedback requests, etc. When you’re done, think about what would happen if that same time could be cut by 50% or more.

Metaphorio aims to change the way teams work on video projects, for more information contact khaled@metaphorio.com or sign up today for early access.|||

Why can't we collaborate