Elise Andrew, the woman credited with making science sexy and interesting for millions around the world, says she was offered $40.1 million to sell her runaway success Facebook page and websites.

But her achievement appears to have come at huge personal cost.

Andrew launched the I F----- Love Science website and Facebook page in 2012, posting news and Internet memes, jokes, pictures and factoids about popular science and nature.

It's easier to see why she attracted such a mega offer.

On Sunday, more than 22 million around the world were following IFL Science on Facebook.

News of the multi-million dollar offer came on Sunday when Andrew posted on Twitter that s﻿he had mental health issues since a very young age and daily struggled with them.

"I have trichotillomania​, a disorder that makes me compulsively pull my hair out. I've done this since I was two years old," she tweeted.

"When I was a teenager, I was diagnosed with depression. As I got older, the diagnoses changed.

"I've since been offered diagnoses of bipolar disorder and borderline personality disorder. I struggle with thoughts of self-harm & suicide."

Andrew also posted Internet attacks on her integrity in which she was accused of riding on the coat tails of scientists without giving them due credit:

"Everything gets so f...... personal on the internet. I try so, so hard not to appear weak, not to let it all get to me.

"I was offered $US30 million for IFL Science last year. And it was so, so tempting. Not because of the money.

"Although hey, $US30 million ($40 million). But the thought of being a private person again. Of no one caring who I am. Of everyone just leaving me alone."

The 26-year old British blogger who now lives and works in Canada, created the IFL Science page  while still at university.

Examples of Andrew making science sexy and fun include: "This fungus can give a woman an instant orgasm"; "Why do old people smell funny?";  and "Sharks are attracted to blood in the water because they mistake it for ketchup".

Andrew also launched a YouTube channel and has plans for a dedicated website and television show.

She made Cosmopolitan's list of "Girls making geeky stuff cool" and Forbes magazine named her as one of its "30 to watch under 30" in its media category.

Andrew co-hosted an event at Sydney's Powerhouse Museum as part of Science Week in 2013 that sold out in minutes.|||

Elise Andrew, the woman credited with making science sexy and interesting for millions around the world, says she was offered $40.1 million to sell her runaway ...