Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg changed his Facebook profile picture to support the Digital India initiative. Several people followed his action by changing their profile pictures. But how many of them know “what is Digital India initiative?”. This article, about “Digital India”, will give you complete insights about this initiative.

“Digital India” was launched on 1st July 2015 by India’s Prime Minister Mr. Narendra Modi but it came in limelight on 27th September 2015, when CEO Mark Zuckerberg changed his Facebook DP to add the Indian tricolour tint.

The objective of this initiative is to provide government services by improving online infrastructure and by increasing internet connectivity. Indira Gandhi Stadium, the venue of the event, was packed by nearly 10,000 guests including top business leaders – RIL chairman Mukesh Ambani, Tata Group CEO Cyrus Mistry, Wipro chief Azim Premji among others.

All universities and higher education institutes across the country observed the Digital India Week from July 1-7. Following are the 13 launches made at Digital India Week:

There are nine pillars of Digital India Programme.

Top CEOs from India and abroad announced a total investment of Rs 4.5 lakh crore towards various projects which their companies would be undertaking in the next few years.

Reliance Industries’s chairman Mukesh Ambani announced investments of Rs 2.5 lakh crore across different Digital India heads to create employment for over 5 lakh people. Also announced ‘Jio Digital India Start Up Fund’ to encourage young entrepreneurs.

Bharti group Chief Sunil Mittal announced investments of Rs 1 lakh crore to create deeper infrastructure in rural and urban India, and in areas of e-health and e-education. Also promised to create electronic manufacturing to reduce the burden of imports into the country.

Aditya Birla Group‘s chairman Kumar Mangalam Birla announced an Rs 42,000 crore in the field of network roll out, building broadband network, investments in WiFi, mobile wallets, in areas of mobile-based education and healthcare, and in creating a digitally enabled township in the suburbs of Mumbai.

Vedanta Group‘s chairman Anil Agarwal announced investments of Rs 40,000 crore to set up a LCD panel fab unit to employ 50,000 people and reduce India’s electronic imports by 20%.

ADAG’s Anil Ambani announced Rs 10,000 crore in areas of cloud infrastructure and telecom.

Nidec’s Katayama announced Rs 6,000 crore to set up factories over the next 10 years.

Google committed to provide broadband connectivity on 500 railway stations in India.

Microsoft agreed to provide broadband connectivity to 5 lakh villages in India and make India its cloud hub through Indian data centres.

Qualcomm announced an investment of $150 million in Indian startups.

On 27 September 2015, Mark Zuckerberg had changed his profile picture with Facebook’s Digital India support tool. But Someone noticed that source code showed that Facebook had classified these pictures in the class tag “internetOrgprofilepicture”. This led to allegation that there is connection between Facebook tool and internet.org. By changing facebook profile picture to indian tri-color tint, facebook users are indirectly supporting Facebook’s Internet.org programme.

However Facebook denied the controversy over the source code of the Digital India profile picture. A Facebook spokesperson issued this statement, “There is absolutely no connection between updating your profile picture for digital India and Internet.org. An engineer mistakenly used the words “Internet.org profile picture” as a shorthand name he chose for part of the code. But this product in no way connects to or registers support for Internet.org. We are changing the code today to eliminate any confusion.”

Ankit Fadia posted on Facebook that he had been appointed ambassador for Digital India but government denied about this move of his appointment. Even the post on government’s publicity website was removed within an hour. But within few hours they confirmed the names of four brand ambassadors including Ankit Fadia.

Many called Ankit Fadia is a self-proclaimed ethical hacker whose claims had been exposed many times over the years. He has also faced allegations of plagiarism.|||

Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg changed his Facebook profile picture to support the Digital India initiative. Several people changed their profile pictures without knowing "what Digital India initiative is". This article, about "Digital India", will give you complete insights about this initiative.