Playgrounds have been known to have a great deal of impact on children’s physical well being. But did you know that the playgrounds can also impact children’s psychological well being? Cognitive and physical development are only two of the most primary parts of a child’s well being that need consideration. Apart from that, children need to stable psychologically. This post will explore the myriad benefits that the playgrounds have on the psychological well being of kids.

Many parents take the idea of letting kids out in the playgrounds (to play with the community outdoor playground equipment) risky due to several factors. First, there is the risk of damaged play equipment that may hurt children. Most children are not vigilant enough to understand the perils of playing outside and therefore are at more risk of getting hurt.

Secondly, there’s the problem of supervision and lack of hygiene on the playgrounds. Children, especially toddlers put anything and everything in their mouth, which is a strong warning alarm for parents. However, this should not mean that we should just tuck our kids in the warmth of our overprotective arms and never let them leave.

“Should I let my child be alone with the commercial playground equipment?” Yes, why not? In fact, this should not be the question on your mind, the thing you should be asking is: “how can I make playgrounds more safe and clean for my children?”

If the playgrounds have a favorable environment for children, you will feel fine with the idea of letting kids outside. And plus, your kids will feel great outside in a healthy, clean environment where they can let their inner ‘Max’ grow.

The simple answer is (a resounding) YES! Many research studies highlight that children need a way to let go, and playgrounds offer them a healthy channel to let out their emotions. How, you may ask? Playground equipment, especially the modern designs, is more than just a play system. They engage children, both physically and psychologically. For example, the most common emotional state associated with play and playgrounds is self esteem, self reliance, and the feeling of achievement that the children get after accomplishing little tasks on the playground.

Where does childhood depression come from? It arises when children feel low in the spirits; it comes when children feel they have been let down; it comes when children fail to communicate their emotions properly; and most importantly, it arises when children feel abandoned. Playgrounds can help relieve most (if not all) of the symptoms of childhood depression. A simple playground game can help child forget about the everyday worries that bother him. Remember that children do not communicate about everything, so just let them deal with some of their issues on their own. At the end of the day, a healthy child will successfully cope with day-to-day worries.

Does your child suffer from childhood depression? What do you do to help him? How do you think playground affected your child’s mood? Share your opinion with through our comment section below and let us know what you think.|||

