Just a few months ago, Google surprised everyone when they announced the formation of Alphabet, a holding venture where Google is just one of the companies under it. Co-founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page will serve as President and CEO respectively, giving the way for Sundar Pichai to be appointed as Google CEO. Now, Pichai makes his first major round of promotions and appointments as CEO. These changes mostly concert the ads and Android units, which Google hopes will bring in more of the profits to the company.

Neal Mohan is currently the vice president of display and advertising, but will now be promoted to Senior Vice President. He has been a powerful figure in Silicon Valley and such major players as Twitter and Dropbox have attempted to lure them over to their side, only for Mohan to stay at the tech giant. The display ad and video businesses of Google will be a huge force in Google, despite the fact that the company reorganization means search and related products will be the main focus of the company. Mohan is heavily involved in display ads and YouTube business, so this will be a challenge for him.

Another major promotion is for Hiroshi Lockheimer, who is a VP for the Android team. He will now assume the responsibility for SVP for Android, Chrome OS, and Chomecast. He has been a mainstay at Google since 2006 and is in fact, one of the closest people to Pichai, back when he was handling Android and Chrome only. Now he will continue to take on more responsibilities for Android, which he has been doing anyways since the reorganization.

Philip Schindler is now the SVP of Global Sales and Operations, after being an ads VP for some time now. There are also other slew of Google promotions to VP titles, as Pichai attempts to stave off competition, particularly from digital rivals like Facebook, Twitter who are also focusing on ads and commerce.|||

Just a few months ago, Google surprised everyone when they announced the formation of Alphabet, a holding venture where Google is just one of the companies