Early in the new movie "Steve Jobs," the title character absorbs a verbal sting from fellow Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak, who accuses Jobs of being a glorified marketer.

"I read 'Steve Jobs is a genius.' What do you do?" Wozniak says to him angrily. The sight of one of the world's most famous men taking a hit from his longtime partner is dramatic and electric. But it never happened.

SIGN UP for the free Indie Focus movies newsletter >>

Like many moments in the movie, which hit theaters in Los Angeles and New York on Friday, the scene was invented by Hollywood screenwriter Aaron Sorkin. Sorkin wished to paint a more rococo portrait of the Apple pioneer. So he gleaned emotions and events from Walter Isaacson's bestseller and imagined how they might have played out behind the scenes.

"'Steve Jobs' doesn't fall into the same genre" as other fact-based films, Sorkin told The Times. "It's not meant to be a dramatic re-creation of actual events."

Instead, the movie is part of a new cinematic breed that has emerged in recent years, one that might be called the impressionistic biopic. And like other new forms, it raises both additional creative possibilities and fresh ethical questions, in this case about the intersection of Hollywood and history.

The movie business has long embraced biographical films, with works such as "Pride of the Yankees" and "Patton" emerging from previous eras, and interest in famous people swelling in this one. Films including "The King's Speech" (England's King George VI), "Selma" (Martin Luther King Jr.), "The Imitation Game" (scientist Alan Turing) and "Lincoln" (the 16th president) have all been showered with awards and audience attention in the last few years.

But even though those movies featured plenty of imagined dialogue, most presented themselves as straightforward, if glossy, accounts of their subjects' lives. The new brand of biopic tries for something more creative.

In a postmodern storytelling universe that has long left literalism behind — and in a Web climate that jumps on the slightest inaccuracy — these movies sidestep the issue of whether an event really happened. Accuracy is defined not as literal fact but spiritual truth; if a movie conveys the essence of a person, that is enough.

New films about Steve Jobs, jazz great Miles Davis and wire-walker Philippe Petit — and slightly older ones about musician Brian Wilson and the FBI's infamous Abscam sting — implicitly offer themselves up as real without adhering to a strict version of reality.

Yet with these films the default way many Americans understand a subject, they present a question: Are they a more narratively ambitious way to tell a story or simply a convenient excuse to falsify history?

In "Miles Ahead," which makes its world premiere at the New York Film Festival on Saturday, Miles Davis holes himself up in an apartment during a creative and financial rut, conspiring with a reporter to steal back his music. Davis is known to have hit some rough spots in his life, of course. But many of the specific machinations of the movie, which includes a car-chase shootout, were admittedly invented by star and filmmaker Don Cheadle.

Even "The Walk," seemingly a more faithful rendering of Petit, the World Trade Center wire-walker, veers away from a traditional biopic in showing Petit's daredevil performance in 1974. That event did happen, but a number of others, such as his mentorship by an older wire-walker and a celebratory dinner that caps the movie, were either embellished or manufactured.

There has been little fuss over those liberties, perhaps because director Robert Zemeckis makes clear that his goal was as much a whimsical ode to the powers of dreams as it was to present a historical account.

"I think audiences are more able to handle these changes than they used to be," said Kent Jones, director of the New York Film Festival, who put "Jobs," "The Walk" and "Miles Ahead" on the bill. Given that the medium is inherently an interpretation, he added, "I don't really know how fiction movies could 'stick to the facts.'"

Still, other veterans say that cloaking oneself under the banner of moviedom may not be enough.

Alex Gibney, the Oscar-winning filmmaker who made a well-regarded documentary about Steve Jobs that came out last month, said scripted movies need to be upfront about their intentions.

"'Zero Dark Thirty' pretended it was truth when it was fiction," he said of the 2012 hit about the CIA agent who helped capture Osama bin Laden, which included the disputed implication that the torture of a terror suspect produced crucial intelligence.

Gibney added that he was OK with more whimsical portrayals, but only "so long as the rules are clear and the filmmakers live by them." (The director said that he has read the "Jobs" script but not seen the film. He said he was fine with the imagined conversations of the Sorkin film "in principle.")

For years, biopics have been subject to intense scrutiny by a loose network of professional experts and amateur scolds, a process informally known as truth-squadding.

Three years ago, Steven Spielberg's "Lincoln" was combed over closely by historians and politicians who questioned details in the film, including Connecticut voting against an anti-slavery amendment the state in fact supported. With these watchdogs out in force, film's impressionist movement may be a clever sidestep — a way to avoid haggling over individual questions by seeking a blank check for the whole enterprise.|||

