As Paul noted, it’s an interesting time for acts of journalism. Is looking at leaked data the same as endorsing the leak? That’s a personal call in many cases. The difficulties of judgement aren’t restricted even to leaked data, given how much personal data is publicly available. If you can find someone’s home address in a public database, should you put it in an article? It’s almost a silly question, the answer is so obviously no. But shy of home addresses, things get murky fast. Data, leaked or not, needs to be assessed with a journalistic discretion. Our social contract as journalists has a measure of quality to it: we don’t write stories merely to be clicked on. The difference is a conception of information integrity and public interest, which is decided, piece by piece, on a landscape of subtle grays. There are few hard and fast and universally agreeable lines on what data serves the public interest, but we can converge on some ethics.

Call it a Do Less Harm approach to information. Emphasizing abuses of power over abuses by small actors, balancing between the harm to the subjects with the needs of an informed public. Redaction gets involved here: we don’t need to know the name of individual agents to know the NSA is being abusive and make a call for accountability, but the names of Michael Haden and Keith Alexander belong in the news as leadership of the abusive agency. Source protection is often a matter of the threats to sources. If my source is somewhere where laws are sane and followed, I don’t feel as strong a need to protect, redact, and monitor as I might if someone was at risk of American or Saudi Arabian forms of punishment.

The ethics of information in the public interest has never been easy, and always been contextual. An affair by a political enemy is always more relevant than an affair by your guy. I think personal lives are only relevant insofar as they describe some kind of secondary secret social system. A legislator doing a thing that is, or that she wishes to make, illegal under the presumption that the law about that thing should not be applied to a law maker is a clear case of public interest. Universality of the rule of law requires we all be under the same law, but I literally repeat myself.

That people will read about or want to know something isn’t a case of public interest, and even the people who want to read about something know that. When you’re clicking on the celebrity gossip link, it’s a guilty pleasure, because you know this whole thing is stupid and shouldn’t be happening.

Examining leaked data such as the Snowden files, Hacking Team, and HBGary was clearly in the public interest — all disclosed powerful entities and governments lying and abusing their power. The places where those leaks exposed the idiosyncrasies of the people doing the lying and abuse are harder.

Ashley Madison is more clear cut to me as a journalist: as no one serious is trying to make adultery illegal, I don’t need to know if anyone is cheating on their spouse. Whether their spouse should be able to search a database for their partner’s name is harder to nail down. No one needs a media org to host this data any more to expose it to the public, mooting our power as amplifiers to a degree. There’s no good answer to public access to leaked data. Making searching a public database illegal on the internet is as impracticable as turning jaywalking into a felony. On the other hand, in the words of the illimitable Stewart Brand, “we are as gods and might as well get good at it.” Perhaps we don’t search the database for our beloved not because we can’t, but because we shouldn’t. Maybe if I have to be an ethical and careful journalist, you have to be an ethical and careful spouse. With great power, etc. etc. etc..

So that leaves the sorry state of security, about which I am as much a broken record as anyone else. But I see it as a frustrated process of birthing an amazing new world and new humanity, linked together and wise in ways never possible before — that whole as gods thing. To have this amazing world of soft & hardware miracles that rewire societies and make us ever more knowledgeable and powerful creatures, we’re going to need to be able to count on our devices and our internet. Until then, we are building our cathedrals out of Jenga bricks. On a network as social as ours, security is a piece of reliability.

In a way, as a security journalist interested in government and corporate accountability, I have reasons to be conflicted about better security. People like Hacking Team’s customers lose from better security if Hacking Team can’t compromise their customer’s targets. I am pretty ok with, given how often HT targets journalists, activists, and people who really shouldn’t be getting hacked by their governments. But we also lose the chance to catch them at it when they do. It’s as hard for governments to hide corruption these days as hiding cell phone nudes is for a teenager, which is giving us a rare window into the inner workings of power that usually takes decades after the fact to get. It’s a disruptive and unstable time for the autocrats and oligarchs who have flown under history’s radar, and we’re only beginning to suss out what that means. To maximize the effectiveness of this window into the inner workings of power, we must educate ourselves and each other as to how power gets abused. But to do anything about it, we need to be able to build things ourselves. If we are to build lasting institutions in a networked world, reliability must eventually trump being able to compromise bad actors.

So: Back to the Sisyphean Security Discussion|||

Boy-o, is all of this embarrassing. People having affairs, databases getting pwned, governments griping, and also getting pwned, and a blame game that looks like the gun stand-off at the end of a…