Secular stagnation is a term coined to describe a prolonged period of lower economic growth. Economists, such as Larry Summers have written on secular stagnation arguing the world has entered a period of substantially lower economic growth. He points to factors, such as ineffective monetary policy and weak demand for explaining the lower rates of economic growth. Other factors that may explain lower economic growth include a hangover from the credit crisis, but also supply side and demographic factors.

Secular stagnation is related to the concept of a liquidity trap. The idea that in certain circumstances low interest rates are insufficient to boost demand because of structural issues.

An important debate is the extent to which this period of lower economic growth is due to temporary demand side factors – or whether this period of lower growth is due to underlying structural issues and is therefore likely to last for a considerable time.

Primarily secular stagnation refers to lower rates of economic growth. In the past 50 years, we can see a downward trend in rates of economic growth in major economic blocks.

The linear trend line shows the statistical average trend rate of growth. In particular, the Eurozone has struggled to recover from the recession of 2008/09.

Japan has seen the biggest drop in rates of economic growth – from the boom years of the 1960s, 70s and 80s, the economy has struggled with very low rates of growth since the mid 1990s.

The downward trend is smallest for the US economy. The US economic recovery, post 2008, has been stronger than many other developed economies. But, still there is strong indication of lower long-run trend of growth in US.

Another feature of secular stagnation has been disinflation – a falling rate of inflation – getting close to deflation.  Deflation creates many problems, such as making monetary policy ineffective and increasing real interest rates.

1. Financial crisis. The credit bubble and bust of 2008 was a big factor in precipitating a fall in economic growth. The bank losses have led to lower bank lending and lower investment. The financial crisis has also undermined business and consumer confidence making a normal recovery much weaker.

2. Lower capital investment. In recent years, we have seen lower levels of capital investment around the world. This fall in capital investment has been aggravated by:

In the post-war period, Europe experienced rapid rates of economic growth. But, in recent years, the Eurozone has slowed down considerably aggravated by the global downturn but also aspects of the Euro single currency.

Many developed countries are seeing a fall in the birth rate. Leading to an ageing population and a declining population. For example, the population of Japan is forecast  to fall 25% from 127.8 million in 2005, to 95.2 million by 2050. This leads to a smaller workforce and lower potential productive capacity. An ageing population also increases the dependency rate and may require higher taxes to meet pension and health care commitments. European countries, such as Italy and France are facing similar demographic changes. For example:

Some argue that we may be entering a period of limited technological advances which will limit the growth of productive capacity and potential GDP growth. This is controversial as others argue that people often underestimate potential technological improvements.

The experience of Japan in the 19990s and 00s suggests that once low inflation / deflation gets established in the economy, it can be difficult to budge. There is a concern that the Eurozone is likely to get stuck in a low inflation environment and this will curtail growth  – especially since the ECB have proved to be very conservative in aiming for higher inflation / nominal GDP.

Hysteresis is a theory that what happens in the past has a strong influence over the future. In other words a cycle of low growth and low investment creates an environment where low growth and low investment persists. For example, eight years after the start of the credit crunch, we should have escaped the financial crisis and temporary problems. But, the low growth and period of low interest rates has persisted much longer than many expected. Hysteresis may be a factor in making the stagnation last longer.

Others place the low growth on supply side factors. For example, heavily regulated labour markets and high taxes. However, although there may be scope for supply side improvements, it doesn’t explain the sharp drop in economic growth post 2008, given that hasn’t been a corresponding increase in taxes and regulation during this period.

I will save this for a future post. But, in brief, possible policies include:|||

