SoftwareSuggest is an online platform providing free consultation to find the right software for your enterprise. As a part of our work, we gather customers requirement, we analyse them and serve the industry with deep insights on software buyer under our initiative – SoftwareSuggest Insights.

In this report, our team has profiled the buying behaviour of Human Resource Management Software buyer. We have tried to answer the following questions, on the basis of the requirement gathered by our team, from active HRMS software buyers.

Human Resource Software is one of the most in-demand software today.

Delhi (+NCR) has 24% buyers for HRM software, which makes it a leading city looking for good HR software. Other cities like Mumbai (21%), Bangalore (14%), and Chennai (11%) also have numerous software buyers.

These cities have the more number of industries and offices then other, which take them to the top of list. In this era of technology, top management of most companies are becoming more tech savvy, to optimize their efforts & focus more on their core business. Buying Human Resource Management Software is the first step toward automation and optimization.

With the advent of information processing and the wide spread usage of personal computing & Software as a Service (SaaS) have made HRMS systems easy to be implemented.

As per the data collected by SoftwareSuggest,  almost 64% users prefer Web based HR software, 15% users go with installation based whereas as 21% are indifferent to any particular deployment method.

Buying a software is very critical decision with notable investment involved in it.. The decision making process for the purchase of HR software is spread across 3 groups.

Most of the purchase decision are influenced by  HR Managers of the company. (Around 80%). The top management is involved in only 5% of the decision making. The remaining 15% purchase decisions are influenced by IT manager of the company.

There are several features that buyers looks most before taking a decision. Here are some of the top features / Modules that people look for in HRM Software before purchasing it.(In order from most to least important – Top to bottom)

What is the budget that software buyers have in their back of the mind? We have studied the budget based on different software deployment methods followed by software vendors.

The chart represent that buyers are almost equally distributed over the price range of Rs 10000 to Rs 5 lac budget. The buyer looking to spend more than 5 lac on installation based software are very low in number.

SaaS based HRM Software buyers can be analysed in better way by amount they are looking to spend per user per month. 48% of organizations allocates INR 100 to INR 150 per employee per month for an good HR software. There are about 28 percent organizations ready to spend INR 50-100 per employee.

Due to the highly growing trend of incorporating technology in your business, we also found that there are about 36% users who have no budgetary constraints and are ready to pay higher for good service quality and higher level of automation.

Above chart clearly represents that the purchase of HRIS software is at its peak during the month of June. This graph also shows the decline in purchase after the month of July. During October-November-December, number of software buyer tend to be lesser. This is the trend with software buyer in most categories.

Below mentioned are the factors / Features that users would look into while buying HRM software. The list is in the ascending order from the most to the least important influencer.



 In the era of UI/UX, it is anyways certain that user friendliness of software get most importance while selecting the software. Even if software comes with full functionalities, it’s of no use if it is not supported with great user experience. Hence, any HR software vendor must have hands on guidelines and manual to make it easy for a user to interpret and implement.

The report has been generated from the data collected by our team, do write your comments below or email us with suggestions & your views on the report.

Explore the list of top human resource management software along with software demo video, comparison reports, screenshots, features and many more to help you in selecting the right software.|||

A research report initiating customer purchasing insights for human resource software.It is result of a detailed analysis of more than 500 HRM Software buyers.