Recently I’ve present you a collection of the best web development blogs and podcasts available.

If you’re like me and more like an inbox guy spending a ton of time in your inbox, newsletter are your way to go in order to consume new content.

However, it seems like there’s more great stuff to read today than ever before. And still, finding those great stuff takes more and more time. Because of this, I’m a huge fan of newsletters, especially if they contain some awesomely curated content.

Here’s a list of 20+ great newsletter every developer & designer should subscribe to.

JavaScript Weekly is a weekly email round-up of interesting JavaScript articles and news. It’s definitely a super-interesting resource, even if you’re not a JavaScript expert.

Similar to the JavaScript Weekly newsletter, the HTML5 newsletter is sent weekly, curating the most important and interesting news in the field of HTML5. Definitely a super-interesting read for staying up-to-date with the latest HTML developments.

As a web developer or designer you probably know SitePoint’s blog, where they do publish interesting articles, tutorials and resources regularly. If you prefer those content delivered to your inbox, you should give SitePoint’s newsletter a try.

You can choose between different topics, such as Design, PHP, Ruby, JavaScript and more.

The great things about round-ups is that those newsletters won’t flood your inbox, rather than deliver great content once a week/month/etc. The Responsive Design newsletter is definitely your go-to resource if you’re looking for responsive design tips and tools in a nice weekly overview.

Code Project is a weekly newsletter made for developers and engineers. The newsletter is clustered in various topics (such as QA & Testing or reviews) and libraries & programming languages (such as C++, PHP, JavaScript,..).

If you’ve read our post on the top web development blogs, this one should sound familiar to you. Webdesignerdepot.com is a great web development & web design blog with some awesome articles on various topics. It’s packed with quick bits of news, as well as inspirational long reads and cool new services & tools.

Similar to the webdesigner depot blog, tuts+ provides some awesome content on interesting tutorials and reviews on web development related topics.

By subscribing to their newsletter, you’ll receive weekly updates on new code courses and web development tutorials.

If you enjoy hacker news, the hackernewsletter is your go-to newsletter. Basically, it’s a weekly round-up on the best articles on tech, programming and startups. All links are curated posts from hacker news.

If you’re interested in latest WordPress developments, you should check out wpmail.me, which is a weekly newsletter with the best WordPress resources, news and articles.

If you’re developing for WordPress, you probably stumbled upon some Yoast plugins for WordPress already. Especially the Yoast SEO plugin is probably the standard of WordPress plugins. The great thing? Yoast also provides a weekly, sometimes bi-weekly newsletter, including some great WordPress tips.

The developerWorks newsletter is curated by IBM engineers and offer you some great content in large number of categories — such as cloud computing, Linux, Java, and a lot more. You’ll also find ebooks, studies and other great content in their monthly newsletter.

Weekly newsletters are quite prominent in the web development and software field. The Ruby Weekly newsletter brings you the latest Ruby articles and news directly in your inbox.

With the DEVOPS WEEKLY newsletter you’ll get a weekly slice of devops news delivered to your mailbox. This newsletter features some great great tools and articles that every developer might enjoy.

Smashing Magazine is an awesomly great news site offering some high quality content on a broad variety of web development and web design related topics.

By subscribing to their bi-weekly newsletter, you’ll get the best articles direclty sent to your mailbox.

If you prefer smaller bits of interesting content, I’d definitely recommend to give Dev Tips Daily from Umar Hansa a try. You’ll receive a developer tip, mostly in form of a gif 5 days a week.

Ever been interested in what other people are reading? Then the Foundcy newsletter is your newsletter. This great newsletter by Fernando Martinez provides an insight what other founders are reading.

Since subscribing for the weekly newsletter, I don’t want to miss them in my inbox anymore.|||

If you’re like me and more like an inbox guy spending a ton of time in your inbox, newsletter are your way to go in order to consume new content. However, it seems like there’s more great stuff to…