Back in June, I received an email from Cody Voellinger, CEO and founder of RockIT Recruiting. Cody had heard about my strategic storytelling workshops and he wanted one for his team — of 20 technical recruiters.

While my workshops are usually designed for leadership, sales, and marketing teams, Cody felt that storytelling skills could help his recruiters connect employers and candidates. So a couple of weeks ago, I led a strategic storytelling workshop for Cody and his team.

Afterwards, we compared notes on the top takeaways:

To my surprise, recruiters on Cody’s team unanimously agreed that their number-one challenge is explaining to candidates — in a compelling way — what hiring companies do. As one of Cody’s recruiters put it, “How do you get past all the buzzwords and gobbledygook?” So I introduced the team to the same narrative techniques I use with CEOs: Who’s the main character (customer)? What does his/her future look like thanks to us? We practiced telling the stories of several RockIT clients using this structure, transforming the “gobbledygook” into easier-to-understand narratives.

Counterintuitively, the most effective trust-building stories are about how you acted in way that was not trustworthy — and learned from the experience. One RockIT recruiter, Max, shared the time he failed to check in with a candidate before his client made an offer; turned out the candidate had accepted elsewhere, which was hugely embarrassing for Max and the client. Now, if I’m an employer and Max tells me this story (along with appropriate reflection on why he needed to change), I’m far more likely to trust him than if he simply says, “I’m trustworthy.”

Whether they’re employees or outside contractors, recruiters face competition. When I asked Cody’s team how they were different from other recruiters, they said (practically in unison), “We save clients time by delivering quality results instead of focusing on quantity.” Cool that they all knew it, could they back it up with a story? As it turned out, Cody himself had one:

As with the previous example, I’m more likely to believe RockIT’s “quality over quantity” mantra after hearing Cody’s story.

After the recruiters drafted and told stories in the two-hour workshop, the team asked if we could meet again for a practice session so they could rehearse and refine their stories. That made a lot of sense: great storytellers practice telling the same story over and over, editing it as they learn what connects with audiences. So Cody and I will hold a follow-up session to do just that in the coming weeks.

Recruiters can help hiring managers, along with everyone on the hiring team, by harvesting effective stories. Hunt for chestnuts like:

Basically, when a hiring manager says, “We’re different because ___,” the recruiter should make sure everyone on the team can tell a (true) story backing that up. Toward that end, Cody and I are now offering storytelling workshops to employers that are RockIT’s clients, and I’ll report back on how they go.|||

Back in June, I received an email from Cody Voellinger, CEO and founder of RockIT Recruiting. Cody had heard about my strategic storytelling workshops and he wanted one for his team — of 20 technical…