Careering along a French motorway, Greg Ip caught sight of a thought-provoking sign: “La vitesse aggrave tout” – “speed makes everything worse”. The faster we drive, the more extensive the damage when something goes wrong. He had already had good reason to ponder the nature of risk as a journalist and economic commentator covering the catastrophic financial crisis that swept through markets from 2007. In the run-up to the crash, consumers and even policymakers had come to believe that smart regulators and forward-thinking bankers had made the world of money a much safer place.

The fundamental insight of Ip’s new book, Foolproof, is that this very belief was a key factor in the lead up to the crash. When people believe they are safe, they take more risks – they drive faster, in motoring terms – and “speed makes everything worse”. Or as the economist Hyman Minsky, whose work Ip revisits, put it: “Stability is destabilising.”

The financial equivalent of driving faster was consumers taking on bigger mortgages or hefty payday loans they may never be able to repay; or banks loading up on complex financial instruments packed with US sub-prime home loans that would eventually blow up in their faces.

Foolproof examines this phenomenon through a range of telling examples. Constructing giant levees to contain mighty rivers makes people feel safe enough to build on the floodplain, making the consequences of future floods far worse. Introducing helmets and face masks in American football has increased some kinds of injury, because players can use their heads as a battering ram. Risk-taking is natural behaviour, “inherent to the human condition”, says Ip as we discuss his thesis; and he doesn’t have a neat, catchy solution to the challenge of reducing the dangers of modern life. But he does argue that we need to take a more grown-up approach, accepting that some risks are worth taking, even if that means the occasional disaster occurs. “We have to be realistic about what we can achieve: taking risks is fundamental to economic progress,” Ip explains.

And while some policymakers would like to regulate away risks altogether in the financial world, he says: “I can’t think of a way to have a crisis-free economy that wasn’t a risk-free economy, and I don’t think we want that world.” There are some sensible maxims that can help us to be “foolproofers”, as Ip calls it – most notably, that “space makes us safer”. For town planners, that might mean designating parks and farmland for flood waters to flow into, for example, instead of allowing intensive housebuilding on the flood plain. In finance, it means one thing: forcing banks to hold more capital – the money invested by shareholders, which acts as a shock absorber when things go wrong.

But perhaps the greatest revelationfrom Ip’s exploration of the world of risk is that we should accept that sometimes, disasters happen; and policymakers’ job is to minimise their impact, not to engineer them out of existence. As he puts it: “A world with no car crashes or plane crashes would have to be a world with no cars or planes.”

Foolproof by Greg Ip is published in hardback by Headline, priced £20.|||

The economic commentator examines how our attitude to risk eventually leads to disaster