I've been working for CodePicnic for the past 5 months and it goes without saying that it has been one of my best decisions ( I'll tell you about another in a moment ). It made me realize that I wanted to do more, and thus I embark myself to the wild, the path of becoming a full-stack developer. All perfect right?

But there's was something missing

It turns out that I have another passion: teaching. About one month ago, I started to work part-time at Laboratoria, a place that helps women by giving them access to education and work in the technology industry. Joining them was the other best decision ever made (talk about a great year!)

And then again… I wanted to do more.

So I started a little experiment: I decided to teach the girls a little basics in HTML and CSS with the help of the CodePicnic consoles.

At first, they weren't quite sure why I was doing the classes this way but I told them to trust me on this, we were gonna try something that’s recently possible and totally awesome. As it turns out, this is a profession where you must try new things everyday, so why not a different approach to how they were learning?

The minute they saw how easy I could bring my code to life they got really excited and started playing around with them.

After that day, I decided to use the CodePicnic platform every time I had a new trick or demo I wanted to show them. It didn’t matter the language it was written, once they saw they could work in teams on the same project at the same time and even run one NodeJS server ( or a lot, this girls are tireless ), they were ecstatic.

Even though most of them didn't know what the code said or how exactly it was built, they loved the fact that whenever they wanted to try something new they saw in some post or tutorial, all they had to do is moved that code to a console (or drag and drop their local files, they were really into that).

Without realizing it I had created a monster, but the good, inspiring kind.

After merging (pun intended!) my two amazing jobs, I don't see myself giving up either of them, because if these are the best decisions I made this year, working at both reminds me as well the best decision in life: Learning how to program.

Below you will find 3 demos that I thought would be cool to show the girls. The first one is about Sass and the advantages of using a CSS Preprocessor ( since they already learn about HTML and CSS I wanted to take them one step further )

In this demo I wanted to show them how you can make your life easier as a developer by using a tool that makes some tasks automatic, like Gulp.

Finally I couldn't just not talk about Polymer and the concept of web components to the girls. As you can see two out of three demos have been running in a server with Nodejs. This one was their favourite.

One of the things they like about these 3 demos is the fact that they could play with the code while I was teaching them how it woks. Now, most of them are using these tools in their everyday exercises and exams we come up. Talk about a nice change of pace!|||

I&#39;ve been working for CodePicnic for the past 5 months and it goes without saying that it has been one of my best decisions ( I&#39;ll tell you about another in a moment ). It made me realize that I wa...