The following content was provided by Rachael D. Seidler, Ph.D., and is maintained in a database by the ISS Program Science Office.



Spaceflight Effects on Neurocognitive Performance: Extent, Longevity, and Neural Bases (NeuroMapping) studies whether long-duration spaceflight causes any changes to the brain, including brain structure and function, motor control, and multi-tasking abilities. It also measures how long it would take for the brain and body to recover from possible changes. Previous research and anecdotal evidence from astronauts suggests movement control and cognition can be affected in microgravity. The NeuroMapping investigation performs structural and functional magnetic resonance brain imaging (MRI and fMRI) to assess any changes that occur after spending months on the International Space Station.Information Pending

Principal Investigator(s)

 Rachael D. Seidler, Ph.D., University of Michigan, Ann Arbor , MI, United States

 

 Co-Investigator(s)/Collaborator(s)

 Patricia Reuter-Lorenz, Ph.D., University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States

Ajitkumar P. Mulavara, Ph.D., Universities Space Research Association, Houston, TX, United States

Jacob J. Bloomberg, Ph.D., Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, United States

Scott J. Wood, Ph.D., Azusa Pacific University, Azusa, CA, United States

 

 Developer(s) 

NASA Johnson Space Center, Human Research Program, Houston, TX, United States 



 Sponsoring Space Agency

 National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 

 

 Sponsoring Organization

 NASA Research Office - Human Research Program (NASA Research-HRP) 

 

 Research Benefits

 Earth Benefits, Scientific Discovery, Space Exploration 

 

 ISS Expedition Duration

 September 2014 - March 2016; March 2016 - September 2017; September 2017 - February 2018 

 

 Expeditions Assigned

 41/42,43/44,45/46,47/48,49/50,51/52,53/54 

 

 Previous Missions

 Information Pending

During spaceflight, the control of movement is altered to account for the fundamental change in gravity. This can lead to motion disturbances and difficulty controlling motion following transitions in gravity levels (e.g., transition to Earth, lunar or Martian surfaces). Spaceflight has also been anecdotally reported to affect cognition. This investigation proposes to perform structural and functional magnetic resonance brain imaging (MRI and fMRI) to identify the relationship between changes in crewmember neurocognitive function, and neural structural alterations, following a six month International Space Station (ISS) mission. The interdisciplinary approach utilizes cutting-edge neuroimaging techniques and a broad ranging battery of sensory, motor, and cognitive assessments that are conducted pre-flight, during flight, and post-flight to investigate neuroplastic and maladaptive brain changes in crewmembers following long-duration spaceflight. Success in this endeavor may result in identification of the underlying neural mechanisms and operational risks of spaceflight-induced changes in behavior, and also identify whether a return to normative behavioral function following re-adaptation to Earth's gravitational environment is associated with a restitution of brain structure and function or instead is supported by substitution with compensatory brain processes.

Each BDC session (pre- and post-flight) consists of non-invasive brain structural and functional imaging tests in a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner (neuroimaging assessment), as well as several laboratory tests of sensory, motor, and cognitive function (behavioral assessment). The details of the tests are listed below.

Space Applications

 Changes in brain structure and function may be related to reduced sensorimotor and cognitive abilities during spaceflight. Along with affecting performance in orbit, these changes may impact the long-term health of astronauts, especially if the brain changes substantially during a long-duration mission. Identifying which changes occur, and whether they remain after astronauts return to Earth, can help scientists and physicians develop effective countermeasures. The investigation addresses key questions posed by the Human Spaceflight Program, including whether structural changes in the brain can be predicted and mitigated, and which methods can effectively monitor cognitive performance during and after a mission.

Earth Applications

 Brain plasticity, defined as the ability of the brain to adapt to new circumstances and physical changes, is a key research topic for neuroscientists. Results from the NeuroMapping investigation provide information on the brain's ability to rewire and remodel in response to new stimuli. This may offer additional insight into research on the neural mechanisms associated with behavioral and physiological changes, as well as brain rehabilitation.

In-flight, a subset of behavioral assessment tests is performed to complement the pre- and post-flight testing, including a mental rotation test (once while tethered and once while free-floating), a dual task test, and a joystick-based sensorimotor adaptation test. Three (3) in-flight sessions (on FDs 30, 90, and 150) are required for a mission duration of six months. Six in-flight sessions (on FDs 30, 90, 150, 210, 270, and 330) are required for a mission duration of one year. All sessions have a flexibility of +/- 10 days. Each in-flight session requires 50 minutes of crew time (an additional 10 minutes is required on FD30 for camera set-up). In-flight sessions utilize the existing HRF PCs and the ESA Control Pad. Data should be downlinked to the ground and delivered to the principal investigator (PI) prior to next scheduled session. Cabin video should be downlinked within 7 days after the first session. Real-time downlink of data/video is not required for this study.|||

