If you’re using Windows 7, you should upgrade to Internet Explorer 11 to continue receiving security updates and technical support. Learn about the end of support, benefits of upgrading to Internet Explorer 11 — such as easing your Windows 10 migration — and resources available to help you upgrade successfully.

Internet Explorer 11 is a consistent, reliable browser platform for enterprise web apps. Most large organizations have a wide variety of web apps that have evolved over the past 20 years. Only Internet Explorer 11 offers the manageability and backward compatibility that older web app portfolios need.

What about the costs? A March 2015 Forrester Consulting study found that nearly half of IT pros surveyed found the upgrade to Internet Explorer 11 was easier than previous browser upgrades. With great benefits and easier upgrades, migrating to Internet Explorer 11 makes sense.

Microsoft Edge is the faster, safer browser designed for Windows 10. We suggest using Microsoft Edge as your default browser. Organizations can configure Microsoft Edge to fall back to Internet Explorer 11 automatically using the Enterprise Mode Site List. Starting with Windows 10, version 1607 (also known as Windows 10 Anniversary Update), you can even limit the use of Internet Explorer 11 just to approved sites. Learn more at Microsoft Edge.

As an end user, you most likely have Automatic Updates turned on, and have already upgraded to Internet Explorer 11 without having to do anything. If you haven't turned on Automatic Updates yet, do so now by clicking the Check for Updates button on the Windows Update portion of Control Panel to get started.



If you manage computers on behalf of your organization, there are several resources that can help IT professionals upgrade those computers to Internet Explorer 11:

If your organization needs hands-on guidance, Microsoft has a number of deployment and compatibility services available to assist with migrations. These services include:|||

Learn about end of support for older versions of Internet Explorer, the business benefits of upgrading to IE11, and resources to support your upgrade.