This last week I had the frustrating experience of watching one of the three other women in my upper level math course (stochastic processes) withdraw, for entirely avoidable reasons. There were two sections of the course, the professor had gone over four example problems in the other, but not in ours.

My problemset partner and I found ourselves still completely (and equally) confused about the math of infinite state space Markov processes 24 hours before the exam. I stuck with it; she withdrew. I know that if we had done just one or two examples in class, she would have had the resources to learn the material, and the confidence to do so. She was a fourth year math major — she had the background and the inclination for the material, so raw ability was not the limiting factor.

It broke my heart to see another woman leave a math class for such avoidable reasons, and it makes me wonder how many times a similar situation has caused other women to leave a STEM course.

Why were there only three other women in my course (out of about 22 students) to begin with? As I have taken increasingly advanced math and statistics courses in my time at the University of Virginia the percentage of women among my colleagues has steadily decreased. Was my friend just another casualty in this war of attrition?

In the comment section on Eileen Pollack’s What Really Keeps Women Out of Tech, one man offered his hypothesis for the paucity of women in STEM fields: “Maybe they are just less interested? Aren’t people permitted to follow their interests, even if they aren’t what the op-ed writer wishes they were?” I understand where this argument is coming from. If at each step women made the choice themselves to take Global Ethics over Linear Algebra or Calc 3, where is the wrong? The problem is that these choices might not be genuinely free. Given the degree of disparity between the numbers of men and women and the chorus of women sharing difficult experiences in STEM, the weight of proof lies on those who would argue as this commenter does. And I doubt that anyone could prove that there are no systemic barriers to women in STEM: as children my generation were given Barbies that said “Uggh, math class is hard.”

In her article in the NYTimes, Ms. Pollack contends that the problem lies in women feeling out of place in the boy’s club, and self-selecting out. I think this is a significant part of it. I am a fourth year statistics and economics double major at the University of Virginia, and until this semester I have never had a female professor or TA in any of my mathematics, statistics, economics, or computer science courses. Now that I have one in my stochastic processes course, I appreciate it even more than I expected to. She’s wonderful, and out of my respect and love for her, I find myself extra motivated to excel in her class.

I can point to the moment I first started paying attention to the dynamics of women in math and stopped thinking this issue was a made-up phenomenon to give academics something to talk about. It was during MATH 3100 (Probability). I went to office hours: it was my male professor, four male classmates, and myself. I asked a question, and was told by five men at once that the answer was obvious, in a “Why are you wasting our time with this question” tone. I left soon afterwards, surprised at how much it affected me.

Feeling a bit out of place in my math courses might not be a deterrent to me, but what about others? A couple days ago one of my housemates told me that coming in as a first year to the University she signed up for Calc 3 — she loved math in high school — but an older student convinced her to drop it before classes even started. I love math even when it steals my nights and weekends, even when I do badly on an exam, even when professors won’t answer my questions. It shouldn’t be that the only people who continue in math must be as fanatical as I am. Even I was not a fan of Calc 2 as a first year, and would never have ever taken another math class unless my economics major required me to, years later. Going into my semester of econometrics I expected it to be terrible because I “wasn’t a math person” and it is a generally hated class. It ended up being my favorite I have taken at the University, and I switched my art double major for statistics soon thereafter.

Universities — or at least mine — don’t recognize the power they wield in influencing women (and people in general) towards or away from math. One example: the older student who convinced my friend to drop Calc 3 was a Resident Advisor, someone given extensive training by the University in how to guide first years. If universities admitted they had such power, they would have to take responsibility for the ways they have failed to use it well. But this power can be used to encourage people towards math, as well as away from it. It could be used to make women feel welcome and wanted in math, and that would be an improvement.

The future is bright: sometimes all you need is one strong advocate and source of encouragement. I’ve had a few; that’s why I’m still here. My tenth grade sisters think that if their big sis says math is the coolest thing in the world, then it must be true, and as my first female math professor said to me recently, “I’m glad I could be here for you.”|||

This last week I had the frustrating experience of watching one of the three other women in my upper level math course (stochastic processes) withdraw, for entirely avoidable reasons. There were two…