Another charity store chain has been hacked: America’s Thrift Stores, an organization that operates donations-based thrift stores throughout the southeast United States, said this week that it recently learned it was the victim of a malware-driven security breach that targeted software used by a third-party service provider.

“This breach allowed criminals from Eastern Europe unauthorized access to some payment card numbers,” the company’s CEO said in a statement. “This virus/malware, is one of several infecting retailers across North America.”

“The U.S. Secret Service tells us that only card numbers and expiration dates were stolen. They do not believe any customer names, phone numbers, addresses or email addresses were compromised. This breach may have affected sales transactions between September 1, 2015 and September 27, 2015. If you used your credit or debit card during this time to purchase an item at any America’s Thrift Store location, the payment card number information on your card may have been compromised.”

Nevertheless, several banking sources say they have seen a pattern of fraud on cards all used at America’s Thrift Stores locations indicating that thieves have been able to use the data stolen from the compromised point-of-sale devices to counterfeit new cards.

Founded in 1984, America’s Thrift Stores is a for-profit thrift store and operates in the southeastern United States. The company is headquartered in Birmingham, Alabama and operates stores in Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, Mississippi and Louisiana. According to the company’s site, the organization employs over 1,000 employees and pays over $4 million to its non- profit partners annually, as it turns donated items into revenue for their missions.

The breach involving America’s Thrift Stores comes on the heels of a similar incident at Goodwill last year. That incident was tied back to security weaknesses at third-party payment vendor C&K Systems, although there is no indication yet which third-party service provider may be at fault in the America’s Thrift Stores breach.

This entry was posted on Monday, October 12th, 2015 at 12:56 pm and is filed under Data Breaches. You can follow any comments to this entry through the RSS 2.0 feed. Both comments and pings are currently closed.|||

