Microservers and the motivations for microservers have been around for years. I first blogged about them back in 2008 (Cooperative, Expendable, Microslice, Servers: Low-Cost, Low-Power Servers for Internet-Scale Services) and even Intel has entered the market with Atom but it’s the ARM instruction set architecture that has had the majority of server world attention.

There have been some large data center deployments done on ARM servers and the ARM server market entrants have been many. At one point, I knew of nine semiconductor companies that were either in market or going to enter the market.  Currently the biggest players in this nascent server market are AppliedMicro and Cavium. The most recent AppliedMicro part targets higher clock rates but with lower core count whereas the Cavium Thunder delivers a somewhat less powerful core part with 48 on die. AMD is also targeting the ARM server market.

Over the last 2 years, the ARM Server group of companies targeting ARM Servers has thinned somewhat with Calxeda going out of business and Samsung electing to leave the market. But Cavium, AppliedMicro, and AMD are still committed and Qualcomm recently did a press event essentially saying “this time we really are serious”.  Qualcomm is particularly interesting in that they produce some of the best and most used mobile systems. And, for those that know them well, they have hired a good server team and there is no question that the team is capable of delivery, the company can fund a successful market participant, and they have a long history of proven custom CPU designs based upon the ARM architecture. But considerable time has passed and, although Qualcomm continued to talk about ARM Servers and continued to work on ARM Server designs through this period, they never really seemed any closer to delivery.

The press event last week is the public signal that Qualcomm really are serious about this market and they made the commitment real by announcing an initial 24 core server. This new 24-core server CPU is already sampling.  I’m personally not super excited about this initial Qualcomm offering but I am excited to see them now in market and committed to server-side success. They have a high quality, dedicated team focused on producing compelling server chips and they plan to do a custom ARM design. They report the next version is well along, and from all I have seen so far, it’s real and will be a performer.

In the past, I’ve been quoted as disappointed in the pace of ARM server innovation (e.g. Amazon Engineering Says ARM Chips Lag Intel in Innovation). To a large extent, that remains true today but here are several important factors emerging that together stand a good chance of making an ARM server a real market competitor:

Clearly Intel still makes the CPU behind more than 90% of the world’s servers (even when taking a very generous interpretation of server). And, just as clear, Intel is a very competent company that has in the past responded quickly to competitive pressure.  Intel has also gotten very good at working closely with its major customers and, unlike the bad old days, is actually very good to work with. I’m more impressed with what they have been bringing to market than ever. Nonetheless, there are factors that make it very likely that we are going to see some very good server parts based upon ARM in market in the near future.  It’s hard to predict the pace of execution of any of the participants nor where this will end up but, generally, change and competition is good for the industry and great for customers.

I’m glad to see Qualcomm serious about the server CPU market, it’s good to see their first market entrant already sampling, I’m excited by what the next version might deliver, and it’s good to see the ARM-based server parts out there and the investment ramping up. Remember when server-side computing was boring? :-)

More on the Qualcomm server project:|||

