VMware VMW -0.31% will move to new ownership digs if Michael Dell’s plan to purchase EMC goes through. But VMware investors aren’t thrilled by the idea. Perhaps that is because it leaves them in something of a halfway house.

VMware is a major part of Dell’s plan announced Monday to acquire EMC in a deal valued at $67 billion. If completed, it would be the largest tech merger on record and would create a privately held giant with more than $80 billion in annual revenue—roughly on par with IBM .

Dell isn’t coughing up all of that itself, however. Nearly one-third of the stated value is riding on a plan to create a tracking stock for VMware. This company specializes in virtualization software that allows servers and other technology equipment to run more efficiently. It is 81% owned by EMC with the remainder trading publicly.

As part of the Dell deal, EMC shareholders will receive 0.111 shares of VMware tracking stock for each EMC share they hold. This is in addition to the $24.05 in cash per share they will receive from Dell.

That prospect isn’t exactly exciting VMware holders. The company’s market value has slid by 15% since deal reports began circulating last week, erasing more than $5 billion.

Part of that is due to disappointment that EMC or Dell didn’t move to buy out VMware altogether. And some concern comes from the idea that the tracking stock could lead to selling from EMC investors who don’t want to maintain ownership of VMware.

The deal creates a complicated investment case for VMware. Dell will retain operational control of the company even though it will retain only a 28% economic interest. This is because the tracking stock won’t have voting rights.

More important, an investment case for VMware now rests on the idea it will fare better under Dell’s corporate umbrella than it has under EMC’s. In a conference call Monday, EMC chief Joe Tucci said Dell and VMware see more than $1 billion in “revenue synergies” over the next few years.

But such synergies were also a key selling point for keeping VMware with EMC. And that hasn’t stopped VMware’s growth from slowing. Wall Street expects VMware’s licensing revenue to grow only 6% this year compared with 14% last year.

Slowing growth and uncertainty about its future ownership had already crimped VMware’s valuation. Prior to Monday, the stock’s price as a multiple of forward earnings was at a 3% discount to that of the Nasdaq Composite Index for the year. That compares with an average premium of 26% over 2014, according to FactSet.

Having a new owner in the house won’t change that anytime soon.|||

Dell’s deal for EMC has rightly unsettled holders of stock in VMware.