Some people are simply a joy to be around. The conversation flows effortlessly. You laugh. You feel genuinely interested. You find yourself looking forward to seeing them, and you leave them feeling like their company was a valuable use of your time.

Obviously, this connection has something to do with how much you have in common, but I think there’s more to it than just that. I think they have a secret ingredient.

According to psychologist Carol Dweck, a person’s mindset can come in two flavours: fixed and growth. I believe that by understanding this difference, we can shed light on how some people are better than others at showing us a good time.

In a nutshell, someone with a fixed mindset believes that we are what we are, and that things don’t really change. This applies to both ourselves and other people; and it applies to personality traits, capabilities, self-beliefs... the works. So, with a fixed mindset, if I’m bad at maths I’ll always be bad at maths. There’s really no point in trying. If I think of myself as an unfunny person, then that’s my destiny… etc.

The growth mindset individual, on the other hand, believes in constant evolution. I am what I am now, but that’s different from what I was before and what I will be in the future. If I’m bad at maths now, I can work at it and potentially become a maths genius (given the motivation). If I’m not very funny now, I can practice my joke telling skills and have them rolling in the aisles one day. It’s just a matter of effort.

Some people tend towards a fixed mindset, and others towards growth, but of course it’s not entirely binary. Many of us will shift between the two outlooks depending on our situation.

The way we evaluate our sense of worth, success and ability differs depending on our mindset. The fixed mindset person judges himself against others. In order to feel good at something, he has to be better than everyone else around him (or at least somewhere near the top). When this is the case, fear of failure ramps right up. He’ll be likely to shy away from challenge, even (in fact especially) in the things he considers himself good at. This is because failure threatens to jeopardise his ‘talented’ status. One slip up and he’s not the genius he thought he was. Better not risk it.

Furthermore, this mindset breeds arrogance because from his fiercely protected spot at the top, a fixed person genuinely feels superior to the people he surrounds himself with. He needs to think in this way in order to feel OK about himself.

The growth mindset individual though, she’ll feel successful, worthy, purposeful (or whatever) when she’s learning. What this essentially means is that there is no failure because the harder something is, the more she stands to grow as a result of doing it. With a growth mindset, we welcome challenge because it doesn’t matter if we’re not an instant success.

Needless to say, in the long run growth minded people will tend to go furthest.

[N.B. My choice of male and female examples here is not intended to imply that either sex has the monopoly on growth mindedness (or fixed mindedness). I have mixed the references purely in the interest of writing in a way which feels inclusive to everyone]|||

Some people are simply a joy to be around. The conversation flows effortlessly. You laugh. You feel genuinely interested. You find yourself looking forward to seeing them, and you leave them feeling…