To celebrate the end of the year and the first 6 months of Swift, we asked ten of our Swift-est friends for their favorite Swift tips & tricks of 2014. Thanks to everyone for sharing!

Creator of objc.io and Functional Programming in Swift Functional Quicksort — the following variant of Quicksort will definitely not win any speed prize. Most real implementations of Quicksort will use constant memory. This snippet, however, is one of the shortest and clearest ways to write Quicksort: It builds on the decompose snippet: if the array is not empty, it uses the first element as the pivot, and seperates the array into two new arrays: the first containing only smaller elements, and the second containing only larger (or equal) elements. Then it sorts the smaller elements, appends the pivot element, and finally appends the sorted larger elements.

A nifty (if rather useless) Swift trick that I like is the fact that you can set a delegate to an instance of an anonymous class by creating a closure that defines a conforming class, having that closure return a new instance of that class, and running the closure. That sounds complicated, and so I have a bit of sample code here. You can watch Austin’s videos: Swift: Enums, Pattern Matching & Generics & Lessons Learned Building “2048” in Swift, or check out his blog.

Favorite bit of trivia would probably be that String does not conform to Printable, so there’s technically not a guarantee that string interpolation works with a String. I think it only works because String is bridged to NSString, which does have a -description method. You can watch Michael’s 12 Apps of Swiftmas presentation, or check out his blog.

My favorite piece of Swift trivia, trick, resource, or anything? My two favorite tricks of the moment: On the REPL, the handy function can be used to get the static type of an expression without evaluating the expression. And the undocumented private function can be used to get the type name of any instance value. You can watch Alexis’ 12 Apps of Swiftmas presentation, or follow him on Twitter @alexisgallagher.

You can get all the private Swift standard library functions by digging through using the tool like this: Which reveals some very useful functions like , and among a few others. You can watch JP’s videos: Swift for JavaScript Developers & Swift for Rubyists.

Author of Metal By Example This is kind of a hack, but it turns out that Swift allows you to treat a homogeneous array of structs as a pointer to the member type of the struct, when all the members of the struct are of the same type (e.g., Float). I use this to succinctly create Metal buffers of vertex data without a lot of unsightly casting.|||

Favorite Swift Tips & Tricks of 2014