A Comprehensive Guide to Test-First Development with Redux, React, and Immutable

Redux is one of the most exciting things happening in JavaScript at the moment. It stands out from the landscape of libraries and frameworks by getting so many things absolutely right: A simple, predictable state model. An emphasis on functional programming and immutable data. A tiny, focused API... What's not to like?

Redux is a very small library and learning all of its APIs is not very difficult. But for many people, it creates a paradigm shift: The tiny amount of building blocks and the self-imposed limitations of pure functions and immutable data may make one feel constrained. How exactly do you get things done?

This tutorial will guide you through building a full-stack Redux and Immutable-js application from scratch. We'll go through all the steps of constructing a Node+Redux backend and a React+Redux frontend for a real-world application, using test-first development. In our toolbox will also be ES6, Babel, Socket.io, Webpack, and Mocha. It's an intriguing stack, and you'll be up to speed with it in no time!

This tutorial is going to be most useful for developers who know how to write JavaScript aplications. We'll be using Node, ES6, React, Webpack, and Babel, so if you have some familiarity with these tools, you'll have no trouble following along. Even if you don't, you should be able to pick up the basics as we go.

In terms of tools, you'll need to have Node with NPM installed and your favourite text editor ready to go, but that's pretty much it.

We'll be developing an application for organizing live votes for parties, conferences, meetings, and other gatherings of people.

The idea is that we'll have a collection of things to vote from: Movies, songs, programming languages, Horse JS quotes, anything. The app will put them against each other in pairs, so that on each round people can vote for their favorite of the pair. When there's just one thing left, that's the winner.

For example, here's how a vote on the best Danny Boyle film could go:

The app will have two separate user interfaces: The voting UI can be used on a mobile device, or anything else that has a web browser. The results UI is designed to be beamed on a projector or some other large screen. It'll show the results of the running vote in real time.

The system will technically consist of two applications: There's a browser app we'll make with React that provides both the user interfaces, and a server app we'll make for Node that handles the voting logic. Communication between the two will be done using WebSockets.

We're going to use Redux to organize the application code both on the client and on the server. For holding the state we'll use Immutable data structures.

We're going to write the Node application first and the React application after that. This will let us concentrate on the core logic before we start thinking about the UI.

As we create the server app, we'll get acquainted with Redux and Immutable, and will see how an application built with them holds together. Redux is most often associated with React applications, but it really isn't limited to that use case. Part of what we're going to learn is how useful Redux can be in other contexts as well!

I recommend following the tutorial by writing the app from scratch, but if you prefer you can grab the code from GitHub instead.

Designing a Redux app often begins by thinking about the application state data structure. This is what describes what's going on in your application at any given time.

All kinds of frameworks and architectures have state. In Ember apps and Backbone apps, state is in Models. In Angular apps, state is often in Factories and Services. In most Flux implementations, it is in Stores. How does Redux differ from these?

The main difference is that in Redux, the application state is all stored in one single tree structure. In other words, everything there is to know about your application's state is stored in one data structure formed out of maps and arrays.

This has many consequences, as we will soon begin to see. One of the most important ones is how this lets you think about the application state in isolation from the application's behavior. The state is pure data. It doesn't have methods or functions. And it isn't tucked away inside objects. It's all in one place.

This may sound like a limitation, especially if you're coming to Redux from an object-oriented background. But it actually feels kind of liberating because of the way it lets you concentrate on the data and nothing but the data. And if you spend a little bit of time designing the application state, pretty much everything else will follow.

This is not to say that you always design your entire state tree first and then the rest of the app. Usually you end up evolving both in parallel. However, I find it quite helpful to have an initial idea of what the state tree should look like in different situations before I start coding.

So, let's look at what the state tree of our voting app might be. The purpose of the app is to vote on a number of items (movies, bands, etc.). A reasonable initial state for the app might be just the collection of items that will be voted on. We'll call this collection entries:

Once the first vote has begun, there should be some way to distinguish what is currently being voted on. In this state, there might be a vote entry in the state, which holds the pair of items currently under vote. The pair should probably also be taken out of the entries collection:

After the votes have started coming in, the tally of votes should be stored as well. We can do that with another data structure inside the vote:

Once a vote is done, the losing entry is thrown away and the winning entry is back in entries, as the last item. It will later be voted against something else. The next two entries will then also have been taken under vote:

We can imagine these states cycling as long as there are entries left to vote on. At some point there's going to be just one entry left though. At that point, it can be declared as the winner and the vote will be over:

This seems like a reasonable design to get started with. There are many different ways to design the state for these requirements, and this might not be the optimal one. But that doesn't really matter. It just needs to be good enough to get started. The important thing is that we have formed a concrete idea of how the application will carry out its duties. That's before we've even thought about any of the code!

It's time to get our hands dirty. Before we do anything else, we need to create a project directory and initialize it as an NPM project:

This results in a directory with the single file in it.

We're going to be writing our code in ES6. Altough Node supports many ES6 features starting at version 4.0.0, it still doesn't support modules, which we want to use. We'll need to add Babel to the project, so that we can use all the ES6 features we want and transpile the code to ES5:

Since we'll be writing a bunch of unit tests, we'll also need some libraries to write them with:

Mocha is the test framework we'll be using and Chai is an assertion/expectation library we'll use inside our tests to specify what we expect to happen.

We'll be able to run tests with the command that we have under :

This command tells Mocha to recursively find all tests from the project and run them. It uses Babel to transpile ES6 code before running it.

It'll be easier in the long run to store this command in our :

Another thing we need to do is enable Babel's ES6/ES2015 language support. It's done by activating the package that we already installed. We just need to add a section to :

Now we can just run the tests with the command:

Another command called will be useful for launching a process that watches for changes in our code and runs the tests after each change:

One of the first libraries we're going to be using is Facebook's Immutable, which provides a number of data structures for us to use. We're going to start discussing Immutable in the next section, but for now let's just add it to the project, along with the chai-immutable library that extends Chai to add support for comparing Immutable data structures:

We need to let plug in chai-immutable before any tests are run. That we can do in a little test helper file, which should create next:

Then we need to have Mocha require this file before it starts running tests:

That gives us everything we need to get started.

The second important point about the Redux architecture is that the state is not just a tree, but it is in fact an immutable tree.

Looking at the trees in the previous section, it might at first seem like a reasonable idea to have code that changes the state of the application by just making updates in the tree: Replacing things in maps, removing things from arrays, etc. However, this is not how things are done in Redux.

A Redux application's state tree is an immutable data structure. That means that once you have a state tree, it will never change as long as it exists. It will keep holding the same state forever. How you then go to the next state is by producing another state tree that reflects the changes you wanted to make.

This means any two successive states of the application are stored in two separate and independent trees. How you get from one to the next is by applying a function that takes the current state and returns a new state.

And why is this a good idea? Well, the first thing that people usually mention is that if you have all your state in one tree and you do these kinds of non-destructive updates, you can hold on to the history of your application state without doing much extra work: Just keep a collection of the previous state trees around. You can then do things like undo/redo for "free" - just set the current application state to the previous or next tree in the history. You can also serialize the history and save it for later, or send it to some storage so that you can replay it later, which can be hugely helpful when debugging.

However, I'd say that even beyond these extra features, the most important thing about immutable data is how it simplifies your code. You get to program with pure functions: Functions that take data and return data and do nothing else. These are functions that you can trust to behave predictably. You can call them as many times as you like and their behavior won't change. Give them the same arguments, and they'll return the same results. They're not going to change the state of the world. Testing becomes trivial, as you don't need to set up stubs or other fakes to "prepare the universe" before you call something. It's just data in, data out.

Immutable data structures are the material we'll build our application's state from, so let's spend some time getting comfortable with it by writing some unit tests that illustrate how it all works.

To get acquainted with the idea of immutability, it may be helpful to first talk about the simplest possible data structure: What if you had a "counter" application whose state was nothing but a single number? The state would go from 0 to 1 to 2 to 3, etc.

We are already used to thinking of numbers as immutable data. When the counter increments, we don't mutate a number. It would in fact be impossible as there are no "setters" on numbers. You can't say .

What happens instead is we get another number, which is the result of adding 1 to the previous number. That we can do with a pure function. Its argument is the current state and its return value will be used as the next state. When it is called, it does not change the current state. Here is such a function and a unit test for it:

The fact that doesn't change when is called should be obvious. How could it? Numbers are immutable!

What we're going to do next is extend this same idea of immutability to all kinds of data structures, not just numbers.

With Immutable's Lists, we can, for example, have an application whose state is a list of movies. An operation that adds a movie produces a new list that is the old list and the new movie combined. Crucially, the old state remains unchanged after the operation:

The old state would not have remained unchanged if we'd pushed into a regular array! Since we're using an Immutable List instead, we have the same semantics as we had with the number example.

The idea extends to full state trees as well. A state tree is just a nested data structure of Lists, Maps, and possibly other kinds of collections. Applying an operation to it involves producing a new state tree, leaving the previous one untouched. If the state tree is a Map with a key that contains a List of movies, adding a movie means we need to create a new Map, where the key points to a new List:

This is exactly the same behavior as before, just extended to show that it works with nested data structures too. The same idea holds to all shapes and sizes of data.

For operations on nested data structures such as this one, Immutable provides several helper functions that make it easier to "reach into" the nested data to produce an updated value. We can use one called update in this case to make the code more concise:

This gives us an understanding of how immutable data feels like. It is what we'll be using for our application state. There's a lot of functionality packed into the Immutable API though, and we've only just scratched the surface.

Armed with an understanding of immutable state trees and the functions that operate on them, we can turn our attention to the logic of our voting application itself. The core of the app will be formed from the pieces that we have been discussing: A tree structure and a set of functions that produce new versions of that tree structure.

First of all, as we discussed earlier, the application allows "loading in" a collection of entries that will be voted on. We could have a function called that takes a previous state and a collection of entries and produces a state where the entries are included. Here's a test for that:

Our initial implementation of can just do the simplest thing possible: It can set an key in the state Map, and set the value as the given List of entries. That produces the first of the state trees we designed earlier.

For convenience, we'll allow the input entries to be a regular JavaScript array (or actually anything iterable). It should still be an Immutable List by the time it's in the state tree:

In the implementation we should pass the given entries into the List constructor to satisfy this requirement:

We can begin the voting by calling a function called on a state that already has entries set. That means, going from the first to the second of the state trees we designed.

The function takes no additional arguments. It should create a Map on the state, where the two first entries are included under the key . The entries under vote should no longer be in the List:

The implementation for this will merge an update into the old state, where the first two entries are put in one List, and the rest in the new version of :

When a vote is ongoing, it should be possible for people to vote on entries. When a new vote is cast for an entry, a "tally" for it should appear in the vote. If there already is a tally for the entry, it should be incremented:

We can make these tests pass with the following:

Using updateIn makes this pleasingly succinct. What the code expresses is "reach into the nested data structure path , and apply this function there. If there are keys missing along the path, create new Maps in their place. If the value at the end is missing, initialize it with ".

It packs a lot of punch, but this is exactly the kind of code that makes working with immutable data structures pleasant, so it's worth spending a bit of time getting comfortable with it.

Once the vote for a given pair is over, we should proceed to the next one. The winning entry from the current vote should be kept, and added back to the end of the entries, so that it will later be paired with something else. The losing entry is thrown away. If there is a tie, both entries are kept.

We'll add this logic to the existing implementation of :

In the implementation we'll just concatenate the "winners" of the current vote to the entries. We can find those winners with a new function called :

At some point there's just going to be one entry left when a vote ends. At that point we have a winning entry. What we should do is, instead of trying to form a next vote, just set the winner in the state explicitly. The vote is over.

In the implementation of we should have a special case for the situation where the entries has a size of 1 after we've processed the current vote:

We could have just returned here. But instead we still take the old state as the starting point and explicitly remove and keys from it. The reason for this is future-proofing: At some point we might have some unrelated data in the state, and it should pass through this function unchanged. It is generally a good idea in these state transformation functions to always morph the old state into the new one instead of building the new state completely from scratch.

Here we have an acceptable version of the core logic of our app, expressed as a few functions. We also have unit tests for them, and writing those tests has been relatively easy: No setup, no mocks, no stubs. That's the beauty of pure functions. We can just call them and inspect the return values.

Note that we haven't even installed Redux yet. We've been able to focus totally on the logic of the app itself, without bringing the "framework" in. There's something very pleasing about that.

We have the core functions of our app, but in Redux you don't actually call those functions directly. There is a layer of indirection between the functions and the outside world: Actions.

An action is a simple data structure that describes a change that should occur in your app state. It's basically a description of a function call packaged into a little object. By convention, every action has a attribute that describes which operation the action is for. Each action may also carry additional attributes. Here are a few example actions that match the core functions we have just written:

If actions are expressed like this, we also need a way to turn them into the actual core function calls. For example, given the action, the following call should be made:

What we're going to write is a generic function that takes any kind of action - along with the current state - and invokes the core function that matches the action. This function is called a reducer:

We should test that the reducer can indeed handle each of our three actions:

Our reducer should delegate to one of the core functions based on the type of the action. It also knows how to unpack the additional arguments of each function from the action object:

Note that if the reducer doesn't recognize the action, it just returns the current state.

An important additional requirement of reducers is that if they are called with an undefined state, they know how to initialize it to a meaningful value. In our case, the initial value is a Map. So, giving an state should work as if an empty Map had been given:

Since our application's logic is in , it makes sense to introduce the initial state there:

In the reducer we'll import it and use it as the default value of the state argument:

What is interesting about the way this reducer works is how it can be generically used to take the application from one state to the next, given any type of action. Actually, given a collection of past actions, you can actually just reduce that collection into the current state. That's why the function is called a reducer: It fulfills the contract of a reduce callback function.

This ability to batch and/or replay a collection of actions is a major benefit of the action/reducer model of state transitions, when compared to calling the core functions directly. For example, given that actions are just objects that you can also serialize to JSON, you could easily send them over to a Web Worker and run your reducer logic there. Or you can even send them over the network, as we're going to do later!

Our core functionality is currently defined so that each function takes the whole state of the application and returns the whole, next state of the application.

It is easy to see how keeping to this pattern may not be a good idea in large applications. If each and every operation in the application needs to be aware of the structure of the whole state, things can easily get brittle. If you wanted to change the shape of the state, it would require a whole lot of changes.

It is a much better idea to, whenever you can, make operations work on the smallest piece (or subtree) of the state possible. What we're talking about is modularization: Have the functionality that deals with a given piece of data deal with only that part of the data, as if the rest didn't exist.

Our application is so tiny that we don't have a problem of this kind yet, but we do already have one opportunity to improve on this: There is no reason for the function to receive the whole app state, since it only works on the part of it. That's the only thing it should know about. We can modify the existing unit tests for to reflect this idea:

As we see, this also simplifies the test code, which is usually a good sign!

The implementation should now just take the vote part of the state, and update its tally:

Now it becomes the job of our reducer to pick apart the state so that it gives only the relevant part to the function:

This is a small example of the kind of pattern that becomes much more important the larger an application gets: The main reducer function only hands parts of the state to lower-level reducer functions. We separate the job of finding the right location in the state tree from applying the update to that location.

The Redux documentation for reducers goes into these patterns of reducer composition in a lot more detail, and also describes some helper functions that makes reducer composition easier in many cases.

Now that we have a reducer, we can start looking at how this all plugs into Redux itself.

As we just saw, if you had a collection of all the actions that are ever going to occur in your application, you could just call . Out pops the final state of your app. Of course, you usually don't have a collection of all those actions. They will arrive spread out over time, as things happen in the world: When users interact with the app, when data is received from networks, or when timeouts trigger.

To deal with this reality, we can use a Redux Store. It is an object that, as the name implies, stores the state of your application over time.

A Redux Store is initialized with a reducer function, such as the one we have just implemented:

What you can then do is dispatch actions to that Store. The Store will internally use your reducer to apply the actions to the current state, and store the resulting, next state:

At any point in time, you can obtain the current state from inside the Store:

We're going to set up and export a Redux Store in a file called . Let's test it first. We should be able to make a store, read its initial state, dispatch action, and witness the changed state:

Before we can create the Store, we need to add Redux into the project:

Then we can create , where we simply call with our reducer:

So, the Redux store ties things together into something we'll be able to use as the central point of our application: It holds the current state, and over time can receive actions that evolve the state from one version to the next, using the core application logic we have written and exposed through the reducer.

It is quite remarkable just how small the integration surface area between our application code and Redux actually is. Because we have a generic reducer function, that's the only thing we need to let Redux know about. The rest is all in our own, non-framework-specific, highly portable and purely functional code!

If we now create the entry point for the application, we can have it create and export a store:

Since we also export the store, you could now fire up a Node REPL (with e.g. ), require the file and interact with the application using the store.

Our application is going to act as a server for a separate browser application that provides the UIs for voting and viewing results. For that purpose, we need a way for the clients to communicate with the server, and vice versa.

This is an app that benefits from real-time communication, since it's fun for voters to see their own actions and those of others immediately when they occur. For that reason, we're going to use WebSockets to communicate. More specifically, we're going to use the Socket.io library that provides a nice abstraction for WebSockets that works across browsers. It also has a number of fallback mechanisms for clients that don't support WebSockets.

Then, let's create a file called which exports a function that creates a Socket.io server:

This creates a Socket.io server, as well as a regular HTTP server bound to port 8090. The choice of port is arbitrary, but it needs to match the port we'll later use to connect from clients.

We can then have call this function, so that a server is started when the app starts:

If we now add a command to our , we'll make startup a bit simpler:

Now we can simply start the server (and create the Redux store) by typing:

We have a Socket.io server and we have a Redux state container but they aren't yet integrated in any way. The next thing we'll do is change that.

Our server should be able to let clients know about the current state of the application (i.e. "what is being voted on?", "What is the current tally of votes?", "Is there a winner yet?"). It can do so by emitting a Socket.io event to all connected clients whenever something changes.

And how can we know when something has changed? Well, Redux provides something for exactly this purpose: You can subscribe to a Redux store. You do that by providing a function that the store will call after every action it applies, when the state has potentially changed. It is essentially a callback to state changes within the store.

We'll do this in , so let's give it the Redux store first:

What we'll do is subscribe a listener to the store that reads the current state, turns it into a plain JavaScript object, and emits it as a event on the Socket.io server. The result will be that a JSON-serialized snapshot of the state is sent over all active Socket.io connections.

In addition to sending a state snapshot whenever state changes, it will be useful for clients to immediately receive the current state when they connect to the application. That lets them sync their client-side state to the latest server state right away.

We can listen to events on our Socket.io server. We get one each time a client connects. In the event listener we can emit the current state right away:

In addition to emitting the application state out to clients, we should also be able to receive updates from them: Voters will be assigning votes, and the vote organizer will be moving the contest forward using the action.

The solution we'll use for this is actually quite simple. What we can do is simply have our clients emit events that we feed directly into our Redux store:

This is where we start to go beyond "regular Redux", since we are now essentially accepting remote actions into our store. However, the Redux architecture makes it remarkably easy to do: Since actions are just JavaScript objects, and JavaScript objects can easily be sent over the network, we immediately got a system with which any number of clients can participate in voting. That's no small feat!

Our server now operates essentially like this:

Before we're done with the server, let's have it load up a set of test entries for us to play with, so that we have something to look at once we have the whole system going. We can add an file that lists the contest entries. For example, the list of Danny Boyle's feature films to date - feel free to substitute your favorite subject matter though!

We can just load this in into and then kick off the vote by dispatching a action:

And with that, we're ready to switch our focus to the client application.

During the remainder of this tutorial we'll be writing a React application that connects to the server we now have and makes the voting system come alive to users.

We're going to use Redux again on the client. This is arguably the most common use case for Redux: As the underlying engine of a React application. We've already seen how Redux itself works, and soon we'll learn exactly how it fits together with React and how using it influences the design of React apps.

I recommend following the steps and writing the app from scratch, but if you prefer you can get the code from GitHub.

The very first thing we're going to do is start a fresh NPM project, just like we did with the server.

We're going to need an HTML host page for the app. Let's put that in :

This document just contains a with id , into which we'll put our application. It expects there to be a JavaScript file called in the same directory.

Let's also create the first JavaScript file for this app. This will be the application's entry point file. For now we can just put a simple logging statement in it:

To ease our client development workflow, we're going to use Webpack along with its development server, so let's add both to the project:

Next, let's add a Webpack configuration file at the root of the project, that matches the files and directories we've created:

This will find our entrypoint, and build everything into the bundle. It'll also use the directory as the base of the development server.

You should now be able to run Webpack to produce :

You should also be able to start the dev server, after which the test page (including the logging statement from ) should be accessible in localhost:8080.

Since we're going to use both ES6 and React's JSX syntax in the client code, we need some tooling for those. Babel knows how to process both, so let's plug it in. We need both Babel itself and its Webpack loader:

In we need to enable Babel support for both ES6/ES2015 and React JSX, by activating the presets we have just installed:

In the Webpack config file we can now change things so that Webpack will find files along with files, and process both through Babel:

We'll be writing some unit tests for the client code too. We can use the same unit test libraries that we used on the server - Mocha and Chai - to test it:

We're going to test our React components as well, and that's going to require a DOM. One alternative would be to run tests in an actual web browser with a library like Karma. However, we don't actually need to do that because we can get away with using jsdom, a pure JavaScript DOM implementation that runs in Node:

We also need a bit of setup code for jsdom before it's ready for React to use. We essentially need to create jsdom versions of the and objects that would normally be provided by the web browser. Then we need to put them on the global object, so that they will be discovered by React when it accesses or . We can set up a test helper file for this kind of setup code:

Additionally, we need to take all the properties that the jsdom object contains, such as , and hoist them on to the Node.js object. This is done so that properties provided by can be used without the prefix, which is what would happen in a browser environment. Some of the code inside React relies on this:

We're also going to be using Immutable collections, so we need to repeat the same trick we applied on the server to add Chai expectation support for them. We should install both the immutable and the chai-immutable package:

Then we should enable it in the test helper file:

The final step before we can run tests is to come up with the command that will run them, and put it in our . Here it is:

This is almost the same command that we used in the server's . There only difference is in the test file specification: On the server we just used , but that option won't find files. We need to use a glob that will find all and test files.

It will be useful to continuously run tests whenever code changes occur. We can add a command for this. It is identical to the one for the server:

With the Webpack and Babel infrastructure in place, let's talk about React!

What's really cool about the way React applications get built with Redux and Immutable is that we can write everything as so-called Pure Components (also sometimes called "Dumb Components"). As a concept, this is similar to pure functions, in that there are a couple of rules to follow:

This has a similar simplifying effect as using pure functions does: We can figure out what a component does by looking at what it receives as inputs and what it renders. There's nothing else we need to know about the component. We can also test it really easily - almost as easily as we were able to test our pure application logic.

If components can't have state, where will the state be? In an immutable data structure inside a Redux store! We've already seen how that works. The big idea is to separate the state from the user interface code. The React components are just a stateless projection of the state at a given point in time.

But, first things first, let's go ahead and add React to the project:

We should also set up react-hot-loader. It will make our development workflow much faster by reloading code for us without losing the current state of the app.

We need to make several updates to to enable the hot loader. Here's the updated version:

In the section we include two new things to our app's entry points: The client-side library of the Webpack dev server and the Webpack hot module loader. These provide the Webpack infrastructure for hot module replacement. The hot module replacement support isn't loaded by default, so we also need to load its plugin in the section and enable it in the section.

In the section we configure the loader to be used with our .js and .jsx files, in addition to Babel.

If you now start or restart the development server, you should see a message about Hot Module Replacement being enabled in the console. We're good to go ahead with writing our first component.

The voting screen of the application will be quite simple: While voting is ongoing, it'll always display two buttons - one for each of the entries being voted on. When the vote is over, it'll display the winner.

We've been mainly doing test-first development so far, but for the React components we'll switch our workflow around: We'll write the components first and the tests second. This is because Webpack and react-hot-loader provide an even tighter feedback loop for development than unit tests do. Also, there's no better feedback when writing a UI than to actually see it in action!

Let's just assume we're going to have a component and render it in the application entry point. We can mount it into the div that we added to earlier. We should also rename to since it'll now contain some JSX markup:

The component takes the current pair of entries as props. For now we can just hardcode that pair, and later we'll substitute it with real data. The component itself is pure and doesn't care where the data comes from.

The entrypoint filename must also be changed in :

If you start (or restart) webpack-dev-server now, you'll see it complain about the missing Voting component. Let's fix that by writing our first version of it:

This renders the pair of entries as buttons. You should be able to see them in your web browser. Try making some changes to the component code and see how they're immediately applied in the browser. No restarts, no page reloads. Talk about fast feedback!

Now we can add our first unit test as well, for the functionality that we've got. It'll go in a file called :

To test that the component renders those buttons based on the prop, we should render it and see what the output was. To render a component in a unit test, we can use a helper function called renderIntoDocument, which will be in the React test utilities package that we first need to install:

Once the component is rendered, we can use another React helper function called scryRenderedDOMComponentsWithTag to find the elements we expect there to be. We expect two of them, and we expect their text contents to be the two entries, respectively:

If you run the test now, you should see it pass:

When one of those voting buttons is clicked, the component should invoke a callback function. Like the entry pair, the callback function should also be given to the component as a prop.

Let's go ahead and add a unit test for this too. We can test this by simulating a click using the Simulate object from React's test utilities:

Getting this test to pass is simple enough. We just need an handler on the buttons that invokes with the correct entry:

This is generally how we'll manage user input and actions with pure components: The components don't try to do much about those actions themselves. They merely invoke callback props.

Once the user has already voted for a pair, we probably shouldn't let them vote again. While we could handle this internally in the component state, we're really trying to keep our components pure, so we should try to externalize that logic. The component could just take a prop, for which we'll just hardcode a value for now:

We can make this work quite easily:

Let's also add a little label to the button that the user has voted on, so that it is clear to them what has happened. The label should become visible for the button whose entry matches the prop. We can make a new helper method to decide whether to render the label or not:

The final requirement for the voting screen is that once there is a winner, it will show just that, instead of trying to render any voting buttons. There might another prop for the winner. Again, we can simply hardcode a value for it temporarily until we have real data to plug in:

We could handle this in the component by conditionally rendering a winner div or the buttons:

This is the functionality that we need, but the rendering code is now slightly messy. It might be better if we extract some separate components from this, so that the Voting screen component renders either a Winner component or a Vote component. Starting with the Winner component, it can just render a div:

The Vote component will be pretty much exactly like the Voting component was before - just concerned with the voting buttons:

The Voting component itself now merely makes a decision about which of these two components to render:

Notice that we added a ref for the Winner component. It's something we'll use in unit tests to grab the corresponding DOM node.

That's our pure Voting component! Notice how we haven't really implemented any logic yet: There are buttons but we haven't specified what they do, except invoke a callback. Our components are concerned with rendering the UI and only that. The application logic will come in later, when we connect the UI to a Redux store.

Before we move on though, time to writes some more unit tests for the new features we've added. Firstly, the presence of the props should cause the voting buttons to become disabled:

A label should be present on the button whose entry matches the value of :

When there's a winner, there should be no buttons, but instead an element with the winner ref:

We have discussed the virtues of using immutable data, but there's one additional, very practical benefit that we get when using it together with React: If we only use immutable data in component props, and write the component as a pure component, we can have React use a more efficient strategy for detecting changes in the props.

This is done by applying the PureRenderMixin that is available as an add-on package. When this mixin is added to a component, it changes the way React checks for changes in the component's props (and state). Instead of a deep compare it does a shallow compare, which is much, much faster.

The reason we can do this is that by definition, there can never be changes within immutable data structures. If the props of a component are all immutable values, and the props keep pointing to the same values between renders, there can be no reason to re-render the component, and it can be skipped completely!

We can concretely see what this is about by writing some unit tests. Our component is supposed to be pure, so if we did give it a mutable array, and then caused a mutation inside the array, it should not be re-rendered:

We should have to explicitly set a new immutable list in the props to have the change reflected in the UI:

Running the tests at this point will show how the component is not currently behaving as we expect: It'll update the UI in both cases, which means it is doing deep checks within the props, which is what we wanted to avoid since we're going to be using immutable data.

Everything falls into place when we enable the pure render mixin in our components. We need to install its package first:

If we now mix it into our components, tests start passing and we're done:

With that Voting screen all done, let's move on to the other main screen of the app: The one where results will be shown.

The data displayed here is the same pair of entries as in the voting screen, and the tally of votes for each. Additionally, there's a little button on the bottom with which the person managing the vote can move on to the next pair.

What we have here are two separate screens, exactly one of which should be shown at any given time. To choose between the two, using URL paths might be a good idea: We could set the root path to show the voting screen, and a path to show the results screen.

That kind of thing can easily be done with the react-router library, with which we can associate different components to different paths. Let's add it to the project:

We can now configure our route paths. The Router comes with a React component called , which can be used to declaratively define a routing table. For now, we'll have just one route:

We have a single route that we have configured to point to the Voting component. The other thing we've done here is define a component for the root Route in the configuration, which will be shared for all the concrete routes within. It's pointing to an component, which we'll soon create.

The purpose of the root route component is to render all the markup that is common across all routes. Here's what our root component should look like:

This component does nothing except render its child components, expected to be given in as the prop. This is something that the react-router package does for us. It plugs in the component(s) defined for whatever the current route happens to be. Since we currently just have the one route for , at the moment this component always renders .

Notice that we've moved the placeholder data from to . We use React's cloneElement API to create a clone of the original components with our custom prop attached. This is just a temporary measure, and we'll be able to remove the cloning call later.

We can now switch back to where we can kickstart the Router itself, and have it initialize our application:

We now supply the component from the react-router package as the root component of our application, instructing it to use the based history mechanism (as opposed to the HTML5 history API). We plug our route table into it by passing it in as a child component.

With this, we've restored the previous functionality of our app: It just renders the component. But this time it is done with the React router baked in, which means we can now easily add more routes. Let's do that for our results screen, which will be served by a new component called :

Here we use the component again to specify that for a path named , the component should be used. Everything else will still be handled by .

Let's make a simple implementation of so that we can see how the routing works:

If you now point your browser to http://localhost:8080/#/results, you should see the little message from the Results component. The root path, on the other hand, should show the voting buttons. You can also use the back and forward buttons to switch between the routes, and the visible component is switched while the application remains alive. That's the router in action!

Now that we have a placeholder Results component, let's go right ahead and make it do something useful. It should display the same two entries currently being voted on that the Voting component does:

Since this is the results screen, it should also actually show the tally of votes. That's what people want to see when they're on this screen. Let's pass in a placeholder tally Map to the component from our root App component first:

Now we can tweak the Results component to show those numbers:

At this point, let's switch gears and add a unit test for the current behavior of the Results component to make sure we won't break it later.

We expect the component to render a div for each entry, and display both the entry name and the number of votes within that div. For entries that have no votes, a vote count of zero should be shown:

Next, let's talk about the "Next" button, which is used to move the voting to the next entry.

From the component's point of view, there should just be a callback function in the props. The component should invoke that callback when the "Next" button inside it is clicked. We can formulate a unit test for this, which is quite similar to the ones we made for the voting buttons:

The implementation is also similar to the voting buttons. It is just slightly simpler, as there are no arguments to pass:

Finally, just like the Voting screen, the Results screen should display the winner once we have one:

We can implement this by simply reusing the Winner component we already developed for the Voting screen. If there's a winner, we render it instead of the regular Results screen:

And that's pretty much what our simple application will need in terms of UI! The components we've written don't yet do anything because they're not connected to any real data or actions. It is remarkable, however, just how far we're able to get without needing any of that. We have been able to just inject some simple placeholder data to these components and concentrate on the structure of the UI.

Now that we do have the UI though, let's talk about how to make it come alive by connecting its inputs and outputs to a Redux store.

Redux is really designed to be used as the state container for UI applications, exactly like the one we are in the process of building. We've only used Redux on the server so far though, and discovered it's actually pretty useful there too! Now we're ready to look at how Redux works with a React application, which is arguably where it's most commonly used.

Just like on the server, we'll begin by thinking about the state of the application. That state is going to be quite similar to the one on the server, which is not by accident.

We have a UI with two screens. On both of them we display the pair of entries that's being voted on. It would make sense to have a state which included a vote entry with such a pair:

In addition to this, the results screen displays the current tally of votes. That should also be in the vote state:

The Voting component renders differently when the user has already voted in the current pair. This is something that the state also needs to track:

When there is a winner, we need that and only that in the state:

Notice that everything in here is a subset of the server state, except for the entry.

This brings us to the implementation of the core logic and the actions and reducers that our Redux Store will use. What should they be?

We can think about this in terms of what can happen while the application is running that could cause the state to change. One source of state changes are the user's actions. We currently have two possible user interactions built into the UI:

Additionally, we know that our server is set up to send us its current state. We will soon be writing the code for receiving it. That is a third source of state change.

We can begin with the server state update, since that is going to be the most straightforward one to do. Earlier we set the server up to emit a event, whose payload is almost exactly the shape of the client-side state trees that we have drawn. This is no coincidence since that's how we designed it. From the point of view of our client's reducer, it would make sense to have an action that receives the state snapshot from the server and just merges it into the client state. The action would look something like this:

Let's add some unit tests to see how this might work out. We're expecting to have a reducer that, given an action like the one above, merges its payload into the current state:

The reducers should be able to receive plain JavaScript data structure, as opposed to an Immutable data structure, since that's what actually get from the socket. It should still be turned into an immutable data structure by the time it is returned as the next value:

As part of the reducer contract, an initial state should also be correctly initialized into an Immutable data structure by the reducer:

That's our spec. Let's see how to fulfill it. We should have a reducer function exported by the reducer module:

The reducer should handle the action. In its handler function we can actually just merge the given new state to the old state, using the merge function from Map. That makes our tests pass!

The two remaining causes for state change are the user actions: Voting and clicking "Next". Since these are both actions that involve server interaction, we'll return to them a bit later, after we've got the architecture for server communication in place.

Now that we have a reducer though, we can spin up a Redux Store from it. Time to add Redux to the project:

The entry point is a good place to set up the Store. Let's also kick it off with some state by dispatching the action on it (this is only temporary until we get real data in):

There's our Store. Now, how do we get the data from the Store into the React components?

We have a Redux Store that holds our immutable application state. We have stateless React components that take immutable data as inputs. The two would be a great fit: If we can figure out a way to always get the latest data from the Store to the components, that would be perfect. React would re-render when the state changes, and the pure render mixin would make sure that the parts of the UI that have no need to re-render won't be.

Rather than writing such synchronization code ourselves, we can make use of the Redux React bindings that are available in the react-redux package:

The big idea of react-redux is to take our pure components and wire them up into a Redux Store by doing two things:

Before any of this is possible, we need to wrap our top-level application component inside a react-redux Provider component. This connects our component tree to a Redux store, enabling us to make the mappings for individual components later.

We'll put in the Provider around the Router component. That'll cause the Provider to be an ancestor to all of our application components:

Next, we should think about which of our components need to be "wired up" so that all the data will come from the Store. We have five component, which we can divide in three categories:

Let's begin with the component. With react-redux we get a function called connect that can do the wiring-up of a component. It takes a mapping function as an argument and returns another function that takes a React component class:

The role of the mapping function is to map the state from the Redux Store into an object of props. Those props will then be merged into the props of the component that's being connected. In the case of Voting, we just need to map the and from the state:

This isn't quite right though. True to functional style, the function doesn't actually go and mutate the component. remains a pure, unconnected component. Instead, returns a connected version of . That means our current code isn't really doing anything. We need to grab that return value, which we'll call :

The module now exports two components: The pure component and the connected component . The react-redux documentation calls the former a "dumb" component and the latter a "smart" component. I prefer "pure" and "connected". Call them what you will, understanding the difference is key:

We should update our routing table, so that it uses instead of . Once we've done that, the voting screen will come alive with the data we've put in the Redux store:

In the unit tests for we need to change the way the import is done, as we no longer have Voting as the default export:

No other changes are needed for tests. They are written for the pure Voting component, and it isn't changed in any way. We've just added a wrapper for it that connects it to a Redux store.

Now we should just apply the same trick for the Results screen. It also needs the and attributes of the state. Additionally it needs , in order to show the vote counts:

In we should change the results route to then use instead of :

Finally, in the Results test we should update the import statement to use the named export for :

And that's how you can connect pure React components to a Redux store, so that they get their data in from the store.

For very small apps that just have a single root component and no routing, connecting the root component will be enough in most cases. The root can then just propagate the data to its children as props. For apps with routing, such as the one we're making, connecting each of the router's components is usually a good idea. But any component can be separately connected, so different strategies can be used for different app architectures. I think it's a good idea to use plain props whenever you can, because with props it is easy to see what data is going in and it is also less work since you don't need to manage the "wiring" code.

Now that we've got the Redux data in our UI, we no longer need the hardcoded props in , so it becomes even simpler than before:

Now that we have a Redux app going in the client, we can talk about how we can connect it to the other Redux app we have running on the server. The two currently reside in their own universes, with no connection between them whatsoever.

The server is already prepared to take incoming socket connections and emit the voting state to them. The client, on the other hand, has a Redux store into which we could easily dispatch incoming data. All we need to do is to draw the connection.

This begins by getting the infrastructure in place. We need a way to make a Socket.io connection from the browser to the server. For that purpose we can use the socket.io-client library, which is the client-side equivalent to the socket.io library that we used on the server:

Importing this library gives us an function that can be used to connect to a Socket.io server. Let's connect to one that we assume to be on the same host as our client, in port 8090 (matching the port we used on the server):

If you now make sure you have the server running, open the client app in a browser and inspect the network traffic, you should see it make a WebSocket connection and start transmitting Socket.io heartbeats on it.

Given that we now have a Socket.io connection, there's actually not much we need to do to get data in from it. The server is sending us events - once when we connect and then every time something changes. We just need to listen to those events. When we get one, we can simply dispatch a action to our Store. We already have a reducer that will handle it:

Note that we've removed the hardcoded dispatch. We no longer need it because the server will give us the real state.

Looking at the UI - either the voting or the results one - will now show the first pair of entries, as defined by the server. Our server and client are connected!

We know how to get data in from the Redux Store to the UI. Let's discuss how we can get actions out from the UI.

The best place for us to start thinking about this is the voting buttons. When we were building the UI, we assumed that the component will receive a prop whose value is a callback function. The component invokes that function when the user clicks on one of the buttons. But we haven't actually supplied the callback yet - except in unit tests.

What should actually happen when a user votes on something? Well, the vote should probably be sent to the server, and that's something we'll discuss a bit later, but there's also client-side logic involved: The prop should be set on the component, so that the user can't vote for the same pair again.

This will be the second client-side Redux action we have, after . We can call it . It should populate a entry in the state Map:

It might also be a good idea to not set that entry if, for any reason, a VOTE action is coming in for an entry that's not under vote at the moment:

Here's the reducer extension that'll do the trick:

The entry should not remain in the state forever. It should be re-set when the vote moves on to the next pair, so that the user can vote on that one. We should handle this in , where we can check if the pair in the new state contains the entry the user has voted on. If it doesn't, we should erase the entry:

We can implement this by composing another function, called on the action handler:

We aren't yet connecting the entry to the props on , so we should do that too:

Now we still need a way to give a callback to , which will cause this new action to be dispatched. We should keep itself pure and unaware of actions or Redux. Instead, this is another job for the function from react-redux.

In addition to wiring up input props, react-redux can be used to wire up output actions. Before we can do that though, we need to introduce another core Redux concept: Action creators.

As we have seen, Redux actions are just simple objects that (by convention) have a attribute and other, action-specific data. We have been creating these actions whenever needed by simply using object literals. It is preferable, however, to use little factory functions for making actions instead. Functions such as this one:

These functions are called action creators. There's really not much to them - they are pure functions that just return action objects - but what they do is encapsulate the internal structure of the action objects so that the rest of your codebase doesn't need to be concerned with that. Actions creators also conveniently document all the actions that can be dispatched in a given application. That information would be more difficult to gather if it was sprinkled all over the codebase in object literals.

Let's create a new file that defines the action creators for our two existing client-side actions:

In we can now use the action creator in the Socket.io event handler:

A really neat thing about action creators is the way react-redux can connect them to React components: We have a callback prop on , and a action creator. Both have the same name and the same function signature: A single argument, which is the entry being voted. What we can do is simply give our action creators to the react-redux function as the second argument, and the connection will be made:

The effect of this is that a prop will be given to . That prop is a function that creates an action using the action creator, and also dispatches that action to the Redux Store. Thus, clicking a vote button now dispatches an action! You should be able to see the effects in the browser immediately: When you vote on something, the buttons will become disabled.

The final aspect of our application that we need to address is getting the results of the user's actions to the server. This should happen when the user votes on something, as well as when the vote manager hits the Next button on the result screen.

Let's begin by discussing Voting. Here's an inventory of what we already have in place:

It would seem like we actually have almost everything we need! All that is missing is the actual sending of the client-side action to the server, so that it would be dispatched to both of the Redux stores. That's what we'll do next.

How should we approach this? There's nothing built into Redux for this purpose, since supporting a distributed system like ours isn't really part of its core functionality. It is left to us to decide where and how we send client-side actions to the server.

What Redux does provide is a generic way to tap into actions that are being dispatched to Redux stores: Middleware.

A Redux middleware is a function that gets invoked when an action is dispatched, before the action hits the reducer and the store itself. Middleware can be used for all kinds of things, from logging and exception handling to modifying actions, caching results, or even changing how or when the action will reach the store. What we are going to use them for is sending client-side actions to the server.

What we're going to do is create a "remote action middleware" that causes an action to be dispatched not only to the original store, but also to a remote store using a Socket.io connection.

Let's set up the skeleton for this middleware. It is a function that takes a Redux store, and returns another function that takes a "next" callback. That function returns a third function that takes a Redux action. The innermost function is where the middleware implementation will actually go:

The code above may look a bit foreign but it's really just a more concise way of expressing this:

This style of nesting single-argument functions is called currying. In this case it's used so that the Middleware is easily configurable: If we had all the arguments in just one function ( ) we'd also have to supply all the arguments every time the middleware is used. With the curried version we can call the outermost function once, and get a return value that "remembers" which store to use. The same goes for the argument.

The argument is a callback that the middleware should call when it has done its work and the action should be sent to the store (or the next middleware):

Let's just log something in this middleware so that we'll be able to see when it's called:

If we now plug in this middleware to our Redux store, we should see all actions being logged. The middleware can be activated using an function that Redux ships with. It takes the middleware we want to register, and returns a function that takes the function. That second function will then create a store for us that has the middleware included in it:

If you now reload the app, you'll see the middleware logging the actions that occur: Once for the initial , and again for the action from voting.

What this middleware should actually do is send a given action to a Socket.io connection, in addition to giving it to the next middleware. Before it can do that, it needs the connection to send it to. We already have a connection in - we just need the middleware to have access to it too. That's easily accomplished by using currying once more in the middleware definition. The outermost function should take a Socket.io socket:

Now we can pass in the socket from :

Note that we need to flip around the initialization of the socket and the store, so that the socket is created first. We need it during store initialization.

All that remains to be done now is to actually emit an event from the middleware:

And that's it! If you now click on one of the voting buttons, you'll also see the tally numbers update, both within the same browser window and any other ones that you run the app in. The vote is being registered!

There is one major problem we have with this though: When we get the state update from the server and dispatch the action, it also goes right back to the server. Although the server does nothing with that action, its listener is still triggered, causing a new . We have created an infinite loop! That's certainly not good.

It is not appropriate for the remote action middleware to send each and every action to the server. Some actions, such as , should just be handled locally in the client. We can extend the middleware to only send certain actions to the server. Concretely, we should only send out actions that have a property attached:

The action creator for should now set this property, where as the one for should not:

To complete our application, we just need to make the Next button work as well. Just like with voting, the server has the appropriate logic already. We just need to connect things up.

The action creator for needs to create a remote action of the correct type:

The ResultsContainer component should connect the action creators in as props:

And... that's it! We now have a complete, functioning application. Try opening the results screen on your computer and the voting screen on a mobile device. You'll see the actions applied on one device immediately taking effect on another - which always feel magical: Vote on one screen, see the results view update on another screen. Click "Next" on the results screen and see the vote proceed on your voting device. To make it even more fun, arrange a vote with some friends the next time you get together!

If you want to develop this application a bit further, while at the same time getting more comfortable with a Redux architecture, here are a few exercises. I have attached a link to one possible solution for each one.

The server should not allow entries to be voted if they are not included in the current pair. Add a failing unit test to illustrate the problem and then fix the logic.

The client currently resets the state when the new voted pair does not include the entry that was voted. This has one major problem: If two consecutive pairs include the same entry, which will always happen during the last rounds of the vote, the state is not reset. The user can't vote on the last round because their buttons are disabled!

Modify the system so that it creates a unique identifier for each round of votes instead, and the voted state is tracked based on this round id.

Hint: Track a running counter of rounds on the server. When a user votes, save the current round number in the client state. When the state updates, reset the voted state if the round number has changed.

See my solution on the server and the client.

A user can still vote several times during the same round, if they just refresh the page, because their voted state is lost. Fix this.

Hint: Generate unique identifiers for each user and keep track of who has voted what on the server, so that if a user votes again, their previous vote for the round is nullified. If you do this, you can also skip the disabling of the voting buttons, since it is possible for the user to change their mind during the round.

See my solution on the server and the client.

Implement a button to the results screen that allows the user to start the voting from the beginning.

Hint: You need to keep track of the original entries in the state, and reset back to them.

See my solution on the server and the client.

When connectivity is poor, Socket.io may not be immediately and always connected. Add a visual indicator that tells the user when they're not connected.

Hint: Listen to connection events from Socket.io and dispatch actions that put the connection state in the Redux store.

I haven't actually tried this, but it's an interesting path to explore if you're feeling adventurous:

Modify the logic of the system so that instead of having separate implementations of reducers on the client and server, the full voting logic reducer runs on each client. Dispatch all actions to everyone, so that everyone sees the same thing.

How do you make sure everyone receives all actions and receives them in the correct order?

In this architecture, is there necessarily a need for a server at all? Could you go fully P2P using WebRTC? (With Socket.io P2P perhaps)|||

Tero Parviainen