Teraki, a Spanish-German big-data reduction startup was founded in 2014 by Daniel Richart, Markus Kopt and Edouard Rozan. The team, who were one of the 10 startups selected to be part of the first Startupbootcamp’s IoT and Data program in Barcelona, have had a busy 10 month since the graduating from the program in April 2015.

Last week, Deutsche Telekom – one of Startupbootcamp’s corporate partners – announced investing in the team through their startup investment arm, hub:raum. We caught up with Edouard Rozan, to update us on their exciting new development and how their big-data reduction software is solving the irrelevant data overload often associated with IoT applications…

What is Teraki all about?

Our vision is that some intelligence must be applied in order to send only relevant data from the source, and allow customers to build valuable applications in the IoT markets. IoT is not about things, it’s about data and to enable to performance actions based on that Data. Current infrastructures (sensor battery, networks and Datacenters) are not designed to handle the incoming huge amount of data from the billions of things to be connected.

So we provide software solutions that reduce and optimize Big Data from Internet of Things (IoT) sensors in an efficient way to enable intelligent actions. Data can be reduced by a factor 10 at the sensor level without additional computation resources. Battery life is improved; data transmission and storage requirements are reduced. And the latency time to process and analyse the data is strongly optimized. On the top, privacy is strongly enhanced since only partial data are sent. Our value proposition is to enable new revenues models based on the Data:

At Teraki, we are making big Data Small.

About 90% the data that is collected for Internet of Things is irrelevant. To make sense of this massive irrelevant data, we have developed a data-reduction software that optimizes IoT applications by removing the so-called irrelevant data from large quantities of data.

How do you achieve this reduction in data?

The product is a two-part software. At the sensor side, an adaptive selection encoder is deployed and decides intelligently how to collect the data. Only a fraction of the data is acquired and transmitted. On the platform side, a decoder receives this information to re-build the full dataset for visualization and analysis.

After finishing Startupbootcamp IoT & Data Program, what have Teraki been up to since the program ended?

After completing the program, we moved to back to Berlin – although we still have a base in Barcelona too. We joined the program to accelerate our business development while at the same time solidifying our technology.

What has been your most recent milestone?

Last week, we became the 11th startup to be accepted into Deutsche Telecoms startup investment program, Hub:Raum based in Berlin.

Furthermore, we have implemented our solutions for different IoT verticals including , Smart cities, Transportations and Logistics and a connected car-case with an important car market in Germany.

What has been the biggest lesson you’ve learned working with big corporates?

Working with big corporates can be challenging for a startup as it requires a longer sales cycle. But on the other hand, it heps the startup to move its proposal to a high-class standard level while giving a stronger reference to gain credibility and scale your business among the rest of the market.

For a startup, it’s important to research and understand at a very early stage the sales process in a big corporation, to have a clear vision of your value proposition and clearly demonstrate the value of your solution and how it fits with their bottom line.

And finally, what’s next for Teraki?

We recently finished our first software product and are currently running several show-cases with different partners. We are now looking for companies planning to enter the Internet of Things and are willing to courageously conquer new markets.

Think You or Someone You Know Have An Innovative IoT & Data Business? Applications For Startupbootcamp IoT & Data Program Close 16th October 2015.|||

Teraki, a Spanish-German big-data reduction startup was founded in 2014 by Daniel Richart, Markus Kopt and Edouard Rozan. The team, who were one of the 10