UPDATE: Some interesting discussion on HackerNews regarding the technical limitations of this.

Be honest, the page you visit most on Linkedin is the ‘Who's viewed your profile’ page. It’s ok, it’s the page we all visit most. And I would not be surprised if it’s one of the biggest drivers of upgrades for Linkedin. It was on one of these visits where I started wishing I could get the same information for our website at work. Google analytics is great but the data is all anonymous. Well I figured out you can.

The solution is actually amazingly simple and low tech. I took my ‘Who's viewed your profile’ page and embedded it on my webpage using a 1x1 pixel iframe. So at the bottom of every page on the website is a little window that also loads my linkedin profile page. If a visitor views a page on my website, linkedin also thinks they viewed my profile. If they have logged in to linkedin recently, they will be recorded on the ‘Who's viewed your profile’ page. The code looks like this:

That’s the hack at its most basic. Now it’s not perfect. Linkedin is obviously doing some filtering of this so you get a load more users set as anonymous and profiles where you just get Job title or Company. But even this data is very valuable.

Google Chrome have a great scraper extension. Visit ‘Who's viewed your profile’, select the information you want to export on one profile.

 Right click and select ‘Scrape similar…’

 You can then export all the profiles to a spreadsheet.

When sales see a suitable company in the list, they search for the most suitable manager over that department. They then reach out with a message along these lines (taken from Hubspot guide):

I get to see the type of people my marketing is attracting. Companies and Job titles. Over a few months I built up a great profile of the job titles visiting our website and the company type, size and industry they are coming from. If this is not the target customer we want we need to change our marketing.

I suggest trying this soon before Linkedin put a stop to it.|||

Add an iFrame to your webpage to see what Linkedin profiles visited your website.