Camille Ricketts is a powerful role model of mine. She has curated some of the most valuable writing on how to improve the way you can run an organization. More importantly, she has consistently generated content that takes clear, concise, immediately implementable recommendations as a pre-requisite for writing anything at all.

Take for example First Round Review’s piece on Angie Chang. Here are two brief excerpts of actionable advice from the article:

Count conversations if it’s hard to start them. For more nervous or introverted meetup attendees, go into a networking situation with a quantitative goal. It might be staying an hour or meeting three people. Don’t let yourself leave before you hit that number. When in doubt, approach groups of two. If you have to take the daunting step of joining a conversation of strangers, always pick a duo. “It’s the right size to allow for easy conversation and contribution from each member of the gathering,” says Chang.

The ease with which these can be implemented, and the strength of the difference they can make is surprising. Quantifying goals makes them easier to achieve. We do this all the time with workouts and diets, but we rarely think to quantify the seconds of our conversation. It’s brilliant. It’s counter-intuitive, sensible, and easily acted upon.

The “groups of two” point is similar in how it is a non-traditional way of breaking down people into data-driven trends in a manner that gives a tangible path to improving behavior.

Though it may seem a subtle difference in style, First Round Review is ushering in a new era of writing that makes behavior change for entrepreneurship quantifiable and actionable. This is a new way of thinking about the power and purpose of writing that will be echoed and modified by the next generation of content creators on Medium and elsewhere. It is a highly welcome evolution.|||

Camille Ricketts is a powerful role model of mine. She has curated some of the most valuable writing on how to improve the way you can run an organization. More importantly, she has consistently generated content that takes clear, concise, immediately implementable recommendations as a pre-requisite for writing anything at all. This is a stunning…