But it was worth it. In one memorable scene, we meet the future Nobel Prize-winning economist Leonid Kantorovich in 1938, his mind set spinning by a request from the Plywood Trust of Leningrad to optimize production. What if, he daydreams, “in the face of the patched and mended cosmos, always crumbling of its own accord, always trying to fall down, it built; it gained 3 percent more of what humanity wanted, free and clear, just as a reward for thought”? And here is Spufford’s young believer, Volodya, late of Moscow State University, when a price hike on meat yielded the Soviet Union’s most violent postwar strike, in Novocherkassk in 1962. Volodya watches in horror as his bright shining future begins to bleed: “These bullets were not disappearing into the blue, they were being drilled deliberately into the flesh of the crowd — which shook, which fissured, which fell apart and revealed that it was made only of the single bodies of men and women and children. A man of 60-­something, gray beard, drinker’s cheeks, was turning baffled on the spot just where Volodya was looking, everyone around him lurching into motion. Just where one of his neighbors with the guns was looking too, evidently: the near side of the old man’s head caved in, the far side blew out in a geyser of red and gray. A woman holding a baby got the spray in her face and began to scream.”

The endnotes reveal the fault line between fact and fiction. “The gray-bearded drinker shot in the head is imaginary,” Spufford writes, but “the nursing mother sprayed with blood and brains is not.” The greater point, though, is hit: Who remembers, if they ever knew, about the massacre? Who understood it not as a rare uprising, but as a landmark in the devolution of the dream of plenty?

Throughout, Spufford weaves a command of Soviet science, or pseudoscience, with an understanding of the grease within the machine. A chapter on the travails of an early-1960s tolkach — the Soviet fixer who, with flowers, perfumes and Black Sea holiday vouchers, matched suppliers and buyers to tally out quotas — may be his best. “I make what’s supposed to happen, happen,” Spufford’s ace, Chekuskin, says. “You can call me a purchasing agent, you can call me an expediter, you can be crude and call me a pusher. It’s all the same thing. I help things along in the direction the Plan says they should be going. I don’t steal. I don’t give bribes or take bribes. I persuade the wheels to go round. That’s all. Here, have a glass of wine, it’s not bad, it’s Azerbaijani.”

Beyond the pitch-perfect sales patter lies an unlovely truth that ruined the gleaming Soviet ideal. Even when it functioned — in the 1950s the U.S.S.R. grew faster, Spufford reminds us, than any other nation in the world, except Japan — the empire survived on a simple rule: “Everything Is Personal.” Chekuskin, who came up peddling pickled herring a century before Facebook, recites the gospel of the Social Network. The system, he says, works only “because friends look after friends; and when you’re with me, you aren’t just friends with the people you do business with direct, you’re friends with everyone I’m friends with. And that’s enough people, I promise you, to solve virtually any problem you may have.”

There are excesses. The dialogue at times sounds wooden, as if cranked through Google Translate. Fusty Sovietologists (yes, the dinosaurs stalk the ether) will doubtless deplore the rare slip. “Red Plenty,” too, risks becoming a novel in which ideas are animated and people reduced to abstractions, as Marx would understand. But its author knows better. Emil Shaidullin, a stand-in for Abel Aganbegyan, the reforming economist who rose under Gorbachev, tells himself: “Just you remember that the world is really sweat and dirt.” Spufford knows that humanity, even with “an average degree of duplicity and self-interest,” will trump any idea, no matter how beautiful.

That truth becomes most evident in the finale. Spufford gives us Khrushchev in retirement, alone at the dacha: “ ‘Paradise,’ he told the wheat field in baffled fury, ‘is a place where people want to end up, not a place they run from. What kind of socialism is that? . . . when you have to keep people in chains?’ ” The febrile imaginings of a fantasist? No. The words, though excised from the first editions of his memoirs, of Khrushchev himself. Yes, “Red Plenty” is a literary/historical seesaw, a work sure to have even the most bilious Kindle-haters tapping for hyperlinks. But it is a work, by turns learned and lyrical, that grows by degree, accreting into something lasting: a replica in miniature of a world of ideas never visible to most, and now gone.|||

Francis Spufford’s genre-bending look at Soviet Russia’s planned economy is part old-style Russian fairy tale and part deeply researched history.