Hidden Gems: After suffering the Soviets, the Taliban, and the War on Terror, Afghanistan has had its share of turmoil; but can 1,000 billion dollars worth of emeralds lift Afghanistan out of poverty? Subscribe to Journeyman for daily uploads: http://www.youtube.com/subscription_c...



For similar stories see:

Exposing The Inhumane Conditions Of Burkina Faso's Gold Mines 

https://youtu.be/c7iv1fef6qo

Zimbabwe's Blood Diamond Killing Fields 

https://youtu.be/k9Bk5VIhjiY

The Children Risking Their Lives In Underwater Gold Mines 

https://youtu.be/P1L_pxYZVwE



"We have a lot of requests from Europe because the Emeralds from Afghanistan are the best in the world", Raphael says. He's a Frenchman who first came to Afghanistan to train Afghan security services before venturing into the emerald trade. He sees a huge chance here to exploit a market that could easily increase in value twenty or thirty-fold, but the obstacles are not inconsiderable. Just to get to the mines Raphael has to travel the 150 Kilometres from Kabul to Panjshir, right through Taliban kidnap country. When he gets there he finds an industry in the dark ages, where homemade pyrotechnics are exploded in poorly dug mineshafts, killing many miners and ruining the quality of up to 75% of the stones they dig.



"If you see the damage being done to these stones... so much is lost", Yama Torabi from Integrity Watch Afghanistan tells us. The government here remains hopelessly out of touch with the industry that "still (uses) a mining law adopted 100 years ago". But as the country prepares for elections and Europeans like Raphael open up the gem trade here, could this be a beacon of hope for the future?



For downloads and more information visit: http://www.journeyman.tv/?lid=67019



Wild Angle Productions - Ref. 6082



Journeyman Pictures is your independent source for the world's most powerful films, exploring the burning issues of today. We represent stories from the world's top producers, with brand new content coming in all the time. On our channel you'll find outstanding and controversial journalism covering any global subject you can imagine wanting to know about.|||

Hidden Gems: After suffering the Soviets, the Taliban, and the War on Terror, Afghanistan has had its share of turmoil; but can 1,000 billion dollars worth o...