When I first heard of Grado Labs, my immediate thought was: here’s another audio company. Probably not much different than the rest.

Boy was I wrong. Grado Labs is totally different.

Before Beats came along, Grado Labs was unleashing sweet, melodious tunes into their customers' ears with award-winning headphones.

In fact, Grado Labs has now been around for 64 years.

And while Grado’s competitors spend millions on marketing — with a flashy internet ad here and another commercial there — Grado has built their brand without any advertising since 1953. They rely completely on word-of-mouth.

For Grado, this is business as usual.

For audiophiles everywhere, Grado Labs stands above the rest. What makes this brand special? Why are they so successful?

I went on a mission to find out. Here’s what I discovered.

“I was having the most fun when we were struggling the most,” jokes John Grado about the early days of Grado Labs.

In 1965, vinyl records were growing in popularity and Grado Labs phono cartridges were a popular choice for enthusiasts.

Over the next ten years, Grado would make almost 500,000 phono cartridges each year.

Every cartridge was build by hand in their small Brooklyn building, manually tested part-by-part, and carefully packaged and sent to stores.

But then, it all came to a screeching halt.

In 1988, phono cartridge production had slowed to a crawl as consumers moved to portable audio devices.

Overnight, Grado Labs went from “growing business” to “uncertain future.”

Deciding to retire, Joseph sold the business to his nephew John as big questions loomed on the horizon. Will phono cartridge sales ever pick up again? Is the business doomed? Where do we go from here?

“Business is like being a captain on a ship,” John explains. “There are ‘up’ times, where the weather is nice and anyone can steer the ship. But there are also ‘down’ times when you’re in the middle of a storm. It’s during the storm the talented people survive.”

Down to three employees and a lot of uncertainty, John made a critical decision for the future of Grado Labs.

"At first, I considered getting into the speaker business. I tinkered, looked around at what others were doing, and ultimately decided against it. There was so much competition and I thought there was a bigger opportunity with headphones."

Taking lessons he picked up working under Uncle Joseph, John started experimenting.

Failure after failure, and iteration after iteration, John tested until he built the perfect pair of headphones.

"Even today, people tell us everything we put out is a hit and it’s perfect. But what they don’t see is a big pile of stuff on the chair we didn’t put out because it didn’t match our standards."

In 1994, two years after starting headphone tests, John and Grado Labs released their second pair of headphones called the SR60.

They were a massive hit. An unexpected review in Stereophile magazine put the headphones on the map in the audio community. The headphones started selling like crazy.

In 1994, just a few years removed from near-extinction, Grado Labs saw revenue of seven figures.

Within a few years, audiophiles everywhere were raving about Grado Labs headphones. The business was growing again.

"Every ad says it's the world’s greatest product. Everything can’t be the world’s greatest. Wherever I look, I see ads I don’t believe. Why would anyone believe ads for Grado headphones?"

When John re-focused Grado Labs in 1990, he refused to pay for advertising — just like Joseph, going back to 1964.

Instead of spending money on ads, John decided to reinvest the money back into the business to create more incredible headphones.

Relying solely on good reviews and word-of-mouth from loyal supporters, Grado Labs grew their reputation.

Generation to generation, the headphones were passed down.

Grandparents handed down SR60s to their children — who then handed it down to their children.

Kids gathered around the living room to listen to a record player using a Grado phono cartridge made 40 years earlier.

And entire families would bond over the near-perfect sound Grado products produce.

Grado’s reputation didn’t stop with just families, though. Celebrities, musicians, and audiophiles obsess over their Grado headphones.

For example, Jimmy Fallon wears Grado headphones live on his award-winning show.

Music producer Rodney Hazard — who’s produced for Joe Budden, A$AP, and Meyhem Lauren — uses Grado SR80s to help him create the best possible music for his artists.

And Grammy Award winner John Mayer bought a pair of PS500e Grados to make sure his music sounds the best it can (and to enjoy the music of other artists).

Families, musicians, celebrities… for music lovers everywhere, Grado is synonymous with “premium.”

Recently, Grado Labs had another trick up their sleeve to grow the brand: social media marketing.

While in college, Jonathan Grado wanted to help his dad with the family business. “I had the idea to start marketing our brand to more people and hopefully help us grow.”

But Jonathan was in for a big surprise.

“My dad said I could help with marketing, but he couldn’t give me a budget. I had $0 to work with.”

Forced to be creative, Jonathan turned to Facebook and Twitter, “I wanted to create a place for Grado Lab fans and audiophiles to congregate.”

Almost every day, Jonathan would tweet and post on Facebook. His most successful posts were photos of Grado’s beautiful, hand-made headphones.

Since Jonathan started using social media to showcase the headphones, Grado’s popularity has skyrocketed.

In 2014, the leading social media news company Mashable named Grado Labs one of the top social media small businesses in the United States.

And over the past three years, revenue has more than doubled.

Now, with a Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter page, photos are just as important. “Photographs of our headphones drive a ton of great comments and draw a lot of potential buyers to our brand.”

“The major focus here is behind-the-scenes. We’ve never paid for an endorsement. We’d rather random people like our stuff than become a name-brand enterprise.”

As Jonathan shares the vision of Grado Labs, it’s clear the team is careful not to grow too quickly and lose their quality.

Even with healthy revenue, there’s no talk of building an ad budget. No talk of buying celebrity endorsements. And definitely no talk of mass-producing the headphones in China to lower cost.

“We don’t need to be the world’s largest company or conglomerate to be successful,” CEO John is quick to remind the small team at Grado.

With steady, focused growth there are two other marketing strategies Grado Labs is using with success:

Jonathan has always been a big fan of cool stickers. Going forward, he plans to further incorporate stickers into the Grado Labs brand.

“I keep some stickers with me at all times and some on my desk. They’re great to share with friends or include in orders.”

Over the years, Jonathan has used die cut stickers, rectangle stickers and transfer stickers from Sticker Mule. "No matter where our customers put the stickers, Sticker Mule quality speaks for itself. The stickers always last and look great."

Going forward, look for even more stickers from Grado Labs.

On the email side, Jonathan has been building the Grado Labs newsletter.

Over the years, Jonathan heard from thousands of dedicated followers who wrote to Grado Labs begging for updates.

Add in people who entered Grado contests and purchased headphones, and there were about 15,000 email addresses Jonathan had saved.

To appease their raving fans, Jonathan built a newsletter. Every month, he sends out new stories, films, photos, and more for the Grado Labs faithful.

The results have been positive. "Email works pretty well for us. It’s a good sign for the future."

After talking with John and Jonathan at Grado Labs, three key principles come to mind:

These key focuses bled through everything they shared:

“Give people the best product you can and eventually you’ll be successful.”

“We had a recent 5-year gap between new headphone products. We only release when it’s needed.”

“All the work and experience of 64 years leads to creating high-quality headphones today.”

The craftsmanship, care, and focus is what makes Grado Labs different. Instead of nickel-and-diming, or focusing on revenue and satisfying shareholders (like so many other companies), Grado focuses on releasing amazing products and let everything else take care of itself.

Today, 64 years later, you can still find Grado Labs in the same unassuming Brooklyn building. While they continue to grow, they’re doing it on their own terms.

There’s no sign on the door, and if you’ll have to knock loudly because John, Jonathan, and the rest of the team are hard at work building perfect headphones.

If you want to say hello to John and Jonathan (and the rest of Grado Labs), click here.|||

Learn how Grado Labs has built a successful business that has stood the test of time through word-of-mouth marketing.