In 2015, the United States was the second most visited country in the world. Where do all of these travellers come from and what are their reasons for coming to the United States?

In this article we will analyze a dataset from travel.state.gov looking at non-immigrant visa figures from 1997 through 2015. This research article illustrates how publicly available data collected by government organizations can be easily loaded into the non-relational Axibase Time Series Database (ATSD) for interactive analysis. Additionally, this article illustrates some of the capabilities of Redash, which is an open-source data visualization tool that is integrated with Axibase TSD. We will walk through how to make SQL queries in ATSD and create visualizations in Redash. Additionally, this article contains instructions on how to install your own ATSD instance and populate it with the raw data.

Let's take a look at the dataset from travel.state.gov, which can be accessed via our archive located in the Resources folder in this repository. Alternatively, you can download the Excel file from the travel.state.gov website and save each year as its own separate CSV file. The title of the Excel file on the travel.state.gov website is Nonimmigrant Visa Issuances by Visa Class and by Nationality FY1997-2015 NIV Detail Table.

This dataset contains yearly totals for non-immigrant visas issued from 1997 through 2015. Totals were collected for 84 different visa types. You can find the complete list of all the visa types included in this dataset here. You can find descriptions of all visa types on the U.S. Department of State website.

Visa figures were collected for 200 countries, 7 continents, and for unknown national origins. You can find a complete list of all the countries included in this dataset here.

As opposed to analyzing the dataset in Excel, it is much more convenient to interact with the data once it is loaded into a database. We will use the following two aspects of Axibase Time Series Database (ATSD) to look into this dataset: tabular outputs from analytical SQL queries and interactive graphs from Chart Lab which is similar to jsfiddle.

You can load the dataset into your ATSD instance by following the steps provided at the end of the article.

Let's begin by taking a look at travel by country. The portal shown below allows you to sort by country and visa type. You can toggle between different countries in the first dropdown, and by visa type in the second dropdown. The below image output shows an output for H-1B visas, which are temporary work visas for workers in speciality occupations, issued to Indian nationals from 1997 to 2015, which increased from 31,684 in 1997 to 119,952 in 2015. The number of visas issued to mainland China grew from 3,206 in 1997 to 18,306 in 2015.

You can explore this portal by clicking on the below button:

This next portal allows you to sort between continents and visa types. You can toggle between different continents in the first dropdown, and by visa type in the second dropdown. The below images is an output for H-1B visas issued to the continent of Asia as a whole. We can see that the number of visas issued increased from 47,726 in 1997 to 149,788 in 2015. Recalling from the previous Chart Lab portal, the number of H-1B visas issued to China and India in 2015 was 138,258, meaning that only 11,530 H-1B visas were issued to the rest of Asia as a whole.

You can explore this portal by right-clicking on the below button:

By looking at the two Chart Lab instances above, we can gain an understanding of the general situation of non-immigrant travel to the United States. Let's begin by taking a look at some of the more specialized visa types, beginning with the O-1 visa.

The below output shows countries with the greatest number of O-1 visa, which is a work visa for individuals with exceptional abilities. The brain-drain from other countries has steadily grown over the years, especially from the U.K., which in 2015 had 2,630 O-1 visas issued. In comparison, China only had 515 O-1 visas issued in 2015. Going back to our first Chart Lab portal, we can see that the total number of visas for the U.K. actually fell by 61% form 1997 to 2015.

You can explore this portal by clicking on the below button:

Below is an image for the total visas issued for the countries included in Trump administration's revised travel ban (which has since been lifted). These countries included Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen. After the September 11th terrorist attacks, the number of visas issued to these countries dropped to only 16,076 in 2003 but climbed back up to 62,464 in 2015. Visas to the United States are generally priced at $160, which amounted to $10 million in revenue in 2015.

You can explore this portal by clicking on the below button:

According to a recent article published by Reuters, the European Union (EU) becoming increasingly insistent on requiring American citizens to obtain travel visas to visit Europe (currently, Americans do not need visas). This is in response to Washington refusing to to grant visa-free access to 5 EU countries: Poland, Croatia, Bulgaria, Romania, and Cyprus. All EU countries except for these 5 may travel to the US without needing to obtain a travel visa. The following image shows the number of B-1 and B-2 visas from these countries between 1997 and 2015. The early to mid 2000's saw the peak of the total number of B-1 and B-2 visas issued to these countries, but in recent years these numbers has dropped off, falling to to 9,977 in 2015 ($1,596,320 in revenue at $160 per visa).

If the Eu would require U.S. citizens to obtain travel visas, Washington would likely as a response require the currently visa exempt countries from the EU to obtain visas. The total number of european travelers to the U.S. utilizing the visa waiver program was 14,043,823 and 13,997,570 in 2014 and 2015, respectively. At $160 per visa, this would have come to about $2.24 and $2.239 billion, a bill EU citizens may soon have to foot should the visa waiver program be lifted.

You can explore this portal by clicking on the below button:

This below figure shows how many dependents come with each primary visa holder. Saudi Arabian visa holders are currently bringing in the most dependents. Below are some ratios (in %) for Saudi nationals showing the number of dependent travellers coming to the United States per primary visa holder.

You can explore this portal by clicking on the below button:

In addition to outputs from Chart Lab, ATSD is also capable of performing SQL queries, which can be used to search for specific information contained in this dataset. You can read more about our SQL syntax here.

This query shows the number of the most popular visas issued worldwide, except for B (travel), C (transit), G (government), and A (diplomatic). We can see that by far the greatest number of visas issued in 2015 (except for the above mentioned visa types) was for F-1 (student visa), for which 644,233 were issued.

This below query shows the top 15 largest countries by non-immigrant visas in 2015, for all visa types except B (travel), C (transit), G (government), and A (diplomatic).

The query below shows some statistics for of B-1 and B-2 visas totals (which may be used for business or tourism). This query displays the number of these visas issued for 2005 and 2010 totals, 10-year percentage change, as well as a compound annual growth rate (CAGR). The output is ordered by the number of visas issued in 2015.

Total revenue for travel visas (in millions of USD) for the state department at $160 per visa from 1997 to 2015. Revenues from visas in this time period has more than doubled, from $491.3 million in 1997 to $1.152 billion in 2015.

SQL queries are a great tool for searching for and displaying specific information from a dataset in tabular format. One of the biggest drawbacks from SQL outputs is that you are not able to show these tables as some kind graphical output. But fear no more! Axibase is partnered with Redash, which is an open-source data visualization tool. You can plug in your query results into Redash, and with a few simple steps, create graphical outputs for your SQL queries. Begin by walking through setting up Redash through ATSD. The setup should take you about 10 minutes.

Let's begin by preparing a visualization for our last SQL query looking at worldwide visa issuances.

Below is the output from our query. You can toggle over any column to see what the visa issuances were for that particular visa type in 2015. By selecting the 'Save' button, you can save the configuration and come back to it anytime. By selecting the 'Publish' button, you can make this configuration available to anybody else who shares the same system credentials with you. As opposed to looking only at a tabular output from an SQL query, we can quickly see the scale of things looking at this output.

Here are some additional Redash charts for some of the queries that were included earlier in this article.

These two figures show the top 20 countries with the most B-1,2 visas issued for 2005 and 2015 (1st figure), as well as the compound annual growth rate for these countries (2nd figure). Looking at these outputs, we can see that Brazil and China have experienced tremendous growth in terms of the number of visas issued from 2005 to 2015, as well as the compound annual growth rate. What may not have stood out from the tabular SQL query output is that while the number of visas issued to Vietnam has remained relatively small, the compound annual growth rate in this 10-years period was 30.2%, which came in 2nd only behind Brazil (which finished at 35.6%).

Travellers have come to America from all over the world. With over 200 countries and 84 visa types included in this dataset, the possibilities for travel documents seem endless. Using ATSD can help you make sense of all this information. You can use Chart Lab to create interactive graphs which allow you to gain a general view of the situation, SQL queries to search for specific minutia contained within the datset, and Redash to display this specifically searched for information in a clear and concise manner.

Below are the summarized steps to follow to install local configurations of ATSD for analyzing United States visa statistics:

If you require assistance in installing this software or have any questions, please feel free to contact us and we would be happy to be of assistance!|||

atsd-use-cases - Axibase Time Series Database: Usage Examples and Research Articles