The mere mention of the name brings out chills to the mind of some, while for some others, it is a whiff of opportunity.

In 2012, the government-run Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) that earlier conducted the AIEEE, announced this common examination that replaced the AIEEE and IIT JEE.

JEE Main is an Objective Based Engineering Entrance Examination conducted for admission in various engineering colleges and courses all over the country.

JEE is regarded internationally as one of the most challenging engineering admission tests to date.

It is conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE).

The JEE Examination consists of two parts:

Those candidates who have cleared the JEE Main examination are eligible to appear for the JEE Advanced examination.

This is a National Level Examination and is conducted every year in the month of April. Every year more than 12,00,000 students appear for JEE examinations.

The Application Form for JEE Main exam is available on the Official Website.

JEE Main is considered as one of the marking scales for admissions to Engineering courses in various colleges in all the states of India except for Jammu & Kashmir, Assam and Meghalaya.

The applicants who have passed or are appearing for their Class XII examination from the states of J&K, Assam & Meghalaya need to enter the passport number, ration card number, bank account number or any other valid Govt. identity number, provided, they should select the city of examination in these states only.

The latest updates to JEE Main and JEE Advanced as per The Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India are:

JEE Main 2017 results today: How to check them

- Hindustan Times



Results of JEE Main 2017 will be released on jeemain.nic.in. 



Candidates can check their JEE (Main) Paper 1 score and rank at jeemain.nic.in and cbseresults.nic.in find out if they are eligible for JEE (Advanced).



This year, Class 12 marks will not be considered while computing the JEE Main 2017 ranks. However, as per the new eligibility criteria, candidates will now require a minimum of 75% in their Class 12 (65% for SC/ST) or be in the top 20 percentile of their states to be eligible for the admissions to the NITs, GFTIs and the IIITs. These institutes will receive common counselling through The Joint Seat Allocation Authority (JoSAA).

 Candidates will get marks for Paper 1 and status of candidates qualifying for JEE Advanced. The rank will comprise All India Rank (AIR) and All India category rank.

Score or rank card will be not be sent personally to candidates.



 JEE Mains 2017 exam results likely today: A step-by-step guide to check your result

- Live Mint



The CBSE likely will declare the results of Joint Entrance Examination (JEE Main) 2017, JEE Main 2017, on Thursday. Here is a step-by-step guide to check your result



Merit among candidates will be decided as per higher marks in mathematics and physics and ratio of positive and negative marks. A candidate with a higher absolute value of the ratio will be given better rank.



The results to be published on Thursday and will include the JEE Main Paper 1 score and rank and also the list of top 2, 20,000 candidates eligible for JEE Advanced. Earlier, the Ministry of Human Resource Development notified two changes in the JEE pattern for 2017, as per the information available on the CBSE website: First, there shall be no weightage for the 12th class marks in calculating the ranks in the JEE (Main) examination. Second, for the candidates to qualify for the admission in the IITs/NITs/IIITs and such other CFTIs whose admissions are based on the JEE Advanced/JEE Main ranks, they should have secured at least 75% marks in the 12th class examination, or be in the top 20 percentile in the 12th class examination conducted by the respective Boards.



 IIT JEE Main 2017: CBSE to declare results today at jeemain.nic.in

- The Indian Express JEE Main Results 2017: The entrance exam is held for admission in Indian Institute of Technology and National Institute of Technology.



Like last year, the results of the Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) mains 2017 will be released today, that is April 27, at afternoon. Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) will release the results on the official website – jeemain.nic.in.  This year, the number of candidates appeared for the exams have increased with respect to last year. The exam was held on April 2, 8 and 9, 2017.



While most students found maths section tricky, experts said the paper to be of moderate difficulty. 



Those who clear JEE Main 2017 will sit for JEE Advanced 2017 to be conducted by IIT Madras. The Admit Cards will be released soon.



The Union Ministry of Human Resource (HRD Ministry) has decided that Class 12 marks will not be a factor for determining rankings in the Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) for admissions to engineering undergraduate courses from next year.



 JEE Main Result 2017 to be declared today; check jeemain.nic.in and cbseresults.nic.in

- ZEE NEWS



 The results of Joint Entrance Examination (Main) 2017, JEE Main 2017 will be released on Thursday.



The CBSE on April 18 released the Joint Entrance Examination (Main) 2017 scanned images of OMR answer sheets of the candidates with their recorded responses and answer keys.



 The JEE Main exam, which is the nation's biggest engineering entrance exam was successfully conducted by the CBSE in online and offline mode on April 2.



 "The exam was easy and direct. I solved the questions very quickly and most of the questions were asked from the syllabus. Chemistry and Physics questions were directly asked from NCERT book, but Mathematics section was a bit lengthy," says a student. "The exam was of moderate level. I would not say too difficult also, but I would say some part of Mathematics questions were too lengthy to solve and it took a lot of time. I failed to give much of time to Physics and Chemistry," says another student.



 Students who appeared for the Joint Entrance Examination (main) on Sunday found some portions of the paper were lengthy and tricky. Rachana Rajeev Vaidya, II PU student of Deeksha Centre for Learning PU College, said, “I lost time in maths as it was lengthy. The chemistry and physics papers were comparatively easier.” she said. Rahul S, another class 12 student, said the mathematics section was tricky. Bhubaneswar: A fake examinee appearing JEE Main at Buxi Jagabandhu English Medium (BJEM) School here was arrested yesterday. He was identified as Sundar Mohan Singh, a resident of Rangamatia in Mayurbhanj district. Police also nabbed one of his associate, Rajesh Bhol, from Dumduma in the Capital city. Sundar was appearing the examination on behalf of a candidate, Babul Chapeyer. Sundar was arrested after the chairman of BJEM School informed the Badagada police about the illegitimacy. 



He was booked under Orissa Conduct of Examinations Act, 1988. JEE Main 2017: Over 10.2 Lakh Students To Appear Today

- NDTV



Over 10.2 lakh students will appear for the Joint Entrance Examination Mains (JEE Main) at 1,781 centres across the country for admission in engineering colleges, including the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs).



For the candidates to qualify for IITs/NITs/IIITs and such other CFTIs whose admissions are based on the JEE Advanced/JEE Main ranks, they should secure at least 75 percent marks in class 12 exams, or be in the top 20 percentile.



JEE Main 2017 results are expected to be declared on April 27. JEE Advanced 2017 will be conducted by IIT Madras.



 AURANGABAD: The state CET cell's decision to change the eligibility criteria for claiming the 15% all India quota for engineering seats for the academic year 2017-18 has not gone down well with the students and parents among other stakeholders, who have termed it as a whimsical stand that would have an adverse impact on students. Advocacy group Sajag Nagrik Manch has filed a written complaint with the State Higher and Technical Education department alleging that the government authorities were treating students like Guinea Pigs. "Till June 2015, the eligibility criteria for admissions to 15% under the all India quota seats in private unaided institutions was on the basis of the score of paper I of JEE Main. Last year, it was decided that the criteria for these admissions will be MH-CET score and not JEE score. So, assuming that the same would be followed this year, many students decided not to attempt JEE Main and started preparing MH-CET. But, the state CET cell has decided to accept JEE scores this year, " he said. Velankar said that the state CET cell informed them about the change in decision hardly a week before closing the applications for JEE Main. "While the application process for JEE ended on January 2, the state CET cell silently issued the controversial circular on December 23 last year," he said, adding that the majority of students are still in dark about the eligibility criteria. 

- Mathrubhumi



A few centres for the Computer Based (online) JEE (Main) - 2017 Examination scheduled to be held on the 08th and 9th of April 2017 have been changed. The new address of the examination centres is given on the Official Website of JEE (Main).



All such candidates are informed for change/rectification of centre address through SMS/E-mail, stated CBSE in a release here on Sunday. These candidates can download their revised Admit Cards from the Official Website of JEE (Main). i.e. 



 JEE (Main): Change in exam centres.- MathrubhumiA few centres for the Computer Based (online) JEE (Main) - 2017 Examination scheduled to be held on the 08th and 9th of April 2017 have been changed. The new address of the examination centres is given on the Official Website of JEE (Main).All such candidates are informed for change/rectification of centre address through SMS/E-mail, stated CBSE in a release here on Sunday. These candidates can download their revised Admit Cards from the Official Website of JEE (Main). i.e. jeemain.nic.in on 21/03/2017. 

 The CBSE has activated the facility to remove the discrepancy in the uploaded image in the online application form for Joint Entrance Examination (Main).



 The Admit Card to JEE Main 2017 will be available on the Official Website by the 14th of March 2017.

The top stories regarding JEE Main and JEE Advanced as per The Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India are:

Let me be the first to burst the bubble and tell you that "There is no proper preparation method for JEE Main, JEE Advanced or any other exam" for that matter.

It all depends on the candidate's mental capabilities and preparation routines.

For, that the candidate first needs to understand himself. How he/she works, what he/she can adapt to; whether it is a visual aid or audios or a special way in which he/she grasps the contents.

If it is by visual aid, then how; by practising or by references.

It is imperative that you understand how you are able to comprehend the information available to you so that you can actually start your preparation.

The best part about the preparation for JEE Main and JEE Advanced is that by the time you've completed your 12th, you have completed about 60% to 70% of your preparation.

The next step is to bring out your own skills to the game.

There are different ways to prepare for JEE. Such as:

But, the real question is, "How will I do it?"

Should I stick to question papers, or should I enrol in some Coaching Centre?

Should I undergo Video Coaching session or should I just go through my old notes and do my own preparations for JEE Main and JEE Advanced?

Or is there anything else I could do to ace the test?

The thought itself clouds up your mind.

So, we suggest you find yourself first.

Go berzerker, make short notes if you're good with that. Go for coaching if you need extra help. If you're a quick learner, take the video coaching sessions.

There is no shame in getting help from an extra hand if you feel down. If you're planning to reign over the entire competition, you need all the help you can get.

If you're comfortable in studying for 3 hours a day, push it to an extra 30 minutes of revision. Revising all that you have studied has proven to bring out better results for everyone irrespective of how you study.

Don't ever compare yourself to others and consider yourself lower. They did not walk down your road and they will not be walking it any later as well.

The goal is, "To bring out the best in yourself while making a mark on the History Lines in the process.".

We, ourselves at GetMyUni were interested in figuring out why JEE Main has been deemed one of the toughest exams to crack till date.

So, we started working on it and as of now, we have made a set of questionnaires of our own.

If you're planning on attempting JEE Main anytime soon, these may be of help to you.

We have a good set of questions from Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry. These are all MCQ's.

You will have access to questions which are divided in a chapter-wise manner.

If that doesn't suffice for your needs, then you can refer to our Study Materials right below these questions on the same page, which refers to all the major concepts to be dealt with while attempting for JEE Main.

We will also be providing you with a set of questions based on the NCERT Syllabus which will cover all the important topics from each chapter.

Just go to the following link to get a hold of the documents and you can add it to your list of preparation materials as well.

We hope these would be of good use to you and that each candidate who holds these up to achieve good grades in JEE Main.

Who knows, maybe it would prove to be just what you were missing.

Either way, JEE Main is proving itself to be "THE Himayala" for Engineering aspirants and you definitely need all the help you can get.

So, make sure you go through these prep materials and get a good view on the task at hand, JEE Main.

There are roughly about 24,000+ seats available for aspiring candidates who are looking to get admitted to various NITs', IITs' and GFTIs' all across India.

As per the new rules and Norms set out by CBSE for JEE Main,

Out of which, the IITs' will be doing their intakes based on All India Quota and the intakes to NITs' and GFITs' will be 50% for Home State Quota and 50% for Other State Quota.

"The use of Aadhaar for the candidates of JEE (Main) 2017 will result in providing accuracy to the candidates' details. This will also help in ascertaining identities of the candidates at the examination centres in a convenient and hassle free manner.

Aadhaar obviates the need for producing multiple documents to prove one's identity."

"The provisions of the Aadhaar Act and Regulations under the Act have come into effect from 14th September 2016 and notifications to this effect have been published in the Official Gazette. 

Section 57 of the Aadhaar Act 2016 permits the use of Aadhaar number for establishing the identity of an individual for any purpose pursuant to any law or any contract to this effect."

CBSE has decided to use Aadhaar Card for the candidates of JEE (Main) 2017, and hereby notifies the following:

Note: The above provisions shall be applicable in all states except J&K, Assam & Meghalaya.

A look back into the History Of The TITAN himself: JEE

The Programme of Action (PoA), 1992 under the National Policy on Education (NPE), 1986 visualised conducting a Common Entrance Examination on an All India basis for admissions to Professional and Technical programmes in the country.

For admission to Engineering and Architecture/Planning programmes, the Government of India saw through to a Resolution dated 18th October 2001 which laid down a 3–Exam Scheme:

This takes care of the varying admission standards in these programmes and helps in the maintenance of Professional Standards. This also solves any problems of overlapping and reduces the physical, mental and financial burden on the students and their parents which act out due to the numerous entrance examinations to be faced by a candidate.

A new concept was brought out in 2000 in the form of a screening test. This meant that before the main examination, there will be a screening examination from which only about the top 20,000 candidates will be selected for the main examination. This concept was probably introduced to reduce the load from the Main examination.

Another probable reason that crept up was that the JEE authorities and exam conductors wanted to scrutinise the capable students to a greater extent. This was easier now given that only few Answer Sheets were to be corrected and the people in charge of the evaluation had more time to look into the details of the Answers.

All this while the pattern of JEE exam was purely subjective. This means that a detailed description and the working of the problem was asked and the student was expected to answer in a stepwise manner. Marks were not only awarded for the correct answer but also for the working.

This type of Exam Pattern for JEE tested the concepts of the student more thoroughly. The examiner had a very clear idea of what the student had in mind before attempting the question. A subjective paper also provided a better scope for the student to display his knowledge and to prove how strong his fundamentals were.

This system of two different papers was abolished in the year 2006, a mere 6 years since it's introduction.

This was done as a part of some major reforms that were to be introduced in the 2006 edition of the examination.

One problem with the screening system was that the small time gap between the announcement of results and the commencement of the JEE Mains exam. The students who, after attempting the screening paper, devoted their time to the preparation for the Mains paper, cursed the system when they found out that they had not cleared the screening exam.

According to them, they could have devoted this time to the preparation of some other examination. Also, the students who missed clearing the screening cut-off by a mark or two considered themselves extremely unlucky and were broken down. The cumulative effect of all these disadvantages was the abolition of screening system in the beginning of the year 2006.

Probably the biggest change in the history of IIT JEE was that the pattern of the examination was changed from subjective to objective. This was an extremely drastic change and was also criticised by many. The change was said to be a step towards the reduction of the role of coaching institutes in the successful clearing of JEE.

This sudden turn of events in the JEE paper exam pattern caught many students of 2006 batch off guard. Objective questions meant that there was no longer a need of any working, hence only the answer mattered. Most of the questions now had options with them making the derivation of answer a bit easier. Some argued that this system encouraged the students to answer the questions by chance, but actually it was the reverse.

With the introduction of an objective paper in JEE, the concept of negative marking was also introduced. Many questions had a catch, a wrong answered fetched the student negative marks. So, in a way, answering by chance was actually strongly discouraged. This objective pattern is carrying on till date.

The JEE pattern has undergone many changes. Since 2010 candidates are given paper copies of their answers, and cutoffs are announced.

This transparency was achieved after a tenacious legal war waged by IIT Kharagpur professor Rajeev Kumar, who was nominated for the National RTI Award 2010 for his crusade. Since 2013-14, JEE has changed a lot and recently adopted new online admissions and application selection procedures which were not available in recent years.

Last September 2013, the Joint Admission Board’s decision to continue with the two-phase JEE pattern (one would take Main first and Advance later on if eligible) for IITs in 2014, which was approved by the IIT Council. Colleges like Indian Institute of Science and Research (IISER), Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology (RGIPT) and others uses the score of JEE Advanced candidates for admission. These colleges are non-participant institutes of Central IIT JEE Advanced advising of which all IITs and ISM are members.

Though the basic pattern of the examination remains the same, the type of questions and their difficulty keep changing every year. Various types of questions have been tried till now.

The JEE Board refreshes the pattern of the examination every year. This dynamic nature is built to ensure the merit-based selection and genuineness of the JEE Main entrance test. This is also done to oppose the coaching culture widely followed as a means of preparation for this exam. To further clarify the process of admission by merit, JEE Admission Board plans to replenish the exam structure from 2017.

As per the conclusions brought out by the JEE Board (CBSE) during December 2015 - February 2016, JEE Main, from 2017 onwards will comprise a compulsory "Science Aptitude Test" as the first phase of the exam and then the final objective paper as the rank decider. JAB bets that this aptitude test cannot be gamed by coaching institutes and thereby is a true merit process of selection.

And yet, the list of candidates who want to be known significantly in JEE Main increases day by day.

The first IIT to be established was IIT, Kharagpur in the year 1951.

Later on, as the need for more such premier institutes was felt, IITs were established in Mumbai, Delhi, Madras and Kanpur before the year 1960. The sixth IIT campus at Guwahati was established in 1994 while NIT Roorkee gained the status of an IIT in 2001.

Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee, on the 1st of October, 2003 announced plans to create more IITs "by upgrading existing academic institutions that have the necessary promise and potential". Subsequent developments led to the formation of the S K Joshi Committee in November 2003 to guide the selection of the five institutions which would become the five new IITs. Based on the initial recommendations of the Sarkar Committee, it was decided that further IITs should be spread throughout the country.

Thus, in 2008, 5 more IITs were opened; namely Bhubaneshwar, Hyderabad, Jodhpur, Patna and Ropar, and 2 new IITs were built up in Mandi and Indore in the year 2009 along with IIT Gandhinagar, which was already scheduled for the year.

Over the past few years, there have been a number of developments toward establishing new IITs.

In 2012, IIT Varanasi was established despite being found in the year 1919. And in the past few years, we have received a few new institutions as well; IIT Palakkad, IIT Tirupati, IIT (ISM) Dhanbad, IIT Bhilai, IIT Goa, IIT Jammu and IIT Dharwad.

Students who have taken admission tests in IITs and ISM Dhanbad cannot take the JEE Advanced exam next year. But it would not be a case with IISER, RGIPT and other institutes because they only use the JEE Advanced score for the basis of admission and they are not associated with IIT central counselling.

Plans have also been made to open IITs outside India, though not enough progress has been made in this regard.

All the IITs provide on-campus residential facilities to the students, research scholars and faculty. The students live in hostels (sometimes referred to as halls) throughout their stay in the IIT.

Students in all IITs must choose among National Cadet Corps (NCC), National Service Scheme (NSS) and National Sports Organisation (NSO) in their first years. All the IITs have sports grounds for basketball, cricket, football (soccer), hockey, volleyball, lawn tennis, badminton, and athletics; and swimming pools for aquatic events.

Usually, the hostels' also have their own sports grounds. Moreover, an Inter IIT Sports Meet has organised annually where participants from all 16 IITs contest for the General Championship Trophy in 13 different sports.|||

Find complete information for JEE MAIN 2017 including eligibility criteria, deadlines, application procedure for Indian Colleges