In this post, I describe how to publish a Python package to the index so that it becomes available from the package manager. The procedure has been tested on a few personal projects.

Create two accounts, you can use the same credentials ( and characters might create problems):

The official documentation on Packaging and Distributing Projects describes in detail the required files, and provides a PyPA sample project.

These are the files that must be present in your project's top directory:

Packages can be distributed as Source Distributions, Wheels, Universal Wheels and Platform Wheels [doc]. The following steps describe how to publish a Source Distribution.

Let's register your package on the PyPI test server:

Build and upload the package to the PyPI test server:

Install (or upgrade) the package from the PyPI test server:

You can see the PyPI's website of your package at .

If everything works smoothly, you can switch to the PyPI production server:

Congratulations! You've published your first Python package on PyPI.

Pure Python packages can be published as Pure Python Wheels. A wheel is a built package that can be installed without needing to go through the “build” process. Installing wheels is substantially faster for the end user than installing from a source distribution, even with pure Python packages.

To build and upload the source and wheel distributions:

There are thee methods: , and . seems the simplest, most portable and reliable method. The other two did not work for me, and their use is discouraged by the community even if the official documentation lists them as the preferred choice.

To add recursively the contents of a directory named , follow these steps:

Documentation on format and features: The MANIFEST.in template.

To install the package from its local development directory:|||

In this post, I describe how to publish a Python package to the PyPI index so that it becomes available from the pip package manager. The procedure has been tested on a few personal projects. Introductions: PyPI and pip The Python Package Index, abbreviated as PyPI, is the official third-party …