I went to sleep with gum in my mouth and woke up with gum in my hair, so I Googled “how to get gum out of hair” and found a video but it had a thirty-second pre-roll spot and that made me mad so I went to tweet about it but Twitter was down. FML.

At breakfast Anthony watched ESPN on his tablet and Nick watched “Zootopia” on his tablet but on my tablet the video kept freezing.

I think I’ll move to Australia, where hybrid fibre-coaxial cable networks run at up to thirty megabits per second in major metro areas.

In the carpool everyone had a seat by the window but me, and Mrs. Gibson was doing a conference call on speakerphone the whole time. I said I was launching a Change.org petition for a better seat. I said, “If this is how carpools work I am going to get an Uber.” No one even answered, and my petition went nowhere.

At school Mrs. Dickens liked Paul’s picture of the sailboat better than my picture of the Cloud.

At singing time she pointed her phone at me, and I’m pretty sure she was Periscoping. At counting time she said she knew it was me who left that nasty review of her on RateMyTeachers.com.

FML! And FML again, because Paul unfriended me and blocked me on Snapchat.

“I hope you get doxxed,” I said to Paul. “I hope the next time you download an app your phone gets malware and all of your data goes to Australia.”

When I opened my lunch bag I saw that my mom forgot to put in dessert, so I ordered a slice of chocolate cake from Grubhub but when it came it was smashed and the guy still expected a tip.

After school my mom took us all to the dentist and I had a cavity and Anthony pushed me into the mud and Nick tweeted that I was a #crybaby and while I was flaming Nick for calling me a crybaby my mom showed up and scolded me for cyberbullying.

“TFW you wish you lived in Australia,” I tweeted. No one even liked it.

So then we ordered shoes. Anthony chose white ones with blue stripes. Nick chose red ones with white stripes. I chose blue ones with white stripes but Zappos said they were all sold out.

They weren’t available on Shoes.com, either.

When we met my dad at Starbucks he said I couldn’t play with his laptop but I forgot. He also said don’t fool around with his phone but I think I FaceTimed Australia. My dad sighed and published a short piece on Medium about the challenges of raising kids in the digital age.

There was quinoa for dinner and I hate quinoa.

“Alexa,” I said. “Play sad trombone.” Alexa said, “Sorry, I didn’t catch that. Please try again.”

When I went to bed Nick took back the earbuds he said I could keep and I couldn’t find my iPad and my phone charger wasn’t working no matter how much I fiddled with it.

“It’s been a V bad day!” I shouted. My mom texted, “some days r like that. ;-)” Even in Australia, where I can fly for twenty-one hundred and thirty-five dollars round-trip. Less if my travel dates are flexible.|||

Mark Remy reimagines the children's book "Alexander and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day" for the age of Snapchat and Twitter.