Data administration is a crucial task in the modern business environment. As more businesses go online, the need for dedicated data storage solutions becomes more critical. As such, IT companies have developed highly specialized databases to ensure safer and more efficient data storage solutions.

Whether your website is dynamic or static, it is important to know the different options you have in data management. The database management industry has evolved to a point where it is now possible for website administrators to effectively manage their platforms without the need for specialized skills.

Database management tools now allow you to easily work with different database engines. You can now switch between different apps, edit your tables and carry out other tasks without the need for any skills. There are many DBA tools in the market but for 2017, the following software applications are rated among the best. They are making the news either as new entrants in DBMS or as long running trendsetters.

These are tools you should consider whether you are a web master or a DBA consultant working for a client.

MyDB Studio is a free database manager application for MySQL Server and it is highly regarded by DBAs due to the wide array of features.

Users can create databases, tables, records, enable SSH tunneling to overcome firewalls, edit and delete content, back up, restore or export data in different formats.

DBeaver is a DBA tool which works with multiple engines including MySQL Server, Oracle, Firebird, SQLite, Microsoft SQL Server and Sybase among others.

The application works with all major operating systems and has the capacity to handle all types of tasks including metadata editing, user management, custom SQL execution, multiple connections and much more.

Sequel Pro is rated as one of the fastest Mac database management tools. It works with MySQL databases and it gives access to both remote and local servers. It is an ideal tool that allows you to streamline your workflow.

This is an old player in the industry dating back to 1998 and still remains one of the most popular database management tools supporting different applications on MySQL and MariaDB. It enables a wide range of operations including database management, tables and columns management, permissions, user management, indexes and much more. It boasts of multiserver administration, ability to export data in formats like SQL, CSV or PDF and a rich history of solid performance.

This is a popular tool that is primarily used as a comparison tool for Microsoft SQL 2008 and 2005 databases. It is perfect when a team is managing different copies of the same database on an SQL server. It has an easy-to-use interface with users getting a clear presentation of results which can help reveal any differences. This makes it easy to identify, locate and eliminate differences in your database fast.

Database management need not be a complex process. It is now easier to manage and maintain any type of database using these highly-rated applications.|||

