You feel the frustration that even though your Kindle Fire is literally called an Android tablet, it doesn’t have the capabilities nor the support of Google like most other phones or tablets out there do…

I truly feel you my friend, and it sucks

But you know what?

All you need is less than 30 minutes,

And I’ll guide you by the hand and show you a way you can actually get the Google Play Store on your Kindle Fire in just 3 simple steps  🙂

Step 1:  Head over to your Settings, then Security. Enable Apps from Unknown Sources.

Why should you enable this?

Well, you’re going to need this for the next step as you’re going to install the APK files to get the Google Play Store.

Step 2:  Now, Open your Silk browser on your tablet, and then head over to this very page and download each of the 4 APK files below.

I have tested and tried these links (Updated 23 March 2017)

To download each APK file, just click on the link, and then scroll down where you’ll see Download APK. Click that.

Don’t worry if you see any pop-ups that appear to say that type of File can harm your device. (It won’t)

Just go ahead and Tap OK whenever it appears.

Once you have downloaded all the APK files,

Step 1:  Close out of your Silk browser and open up the built-in file manager app, Docs, that you have on your Fire tablet.

You will find all your APK files will be here in this folder.

All you have to do is simply tap on one to begin installing it onto your kindle fire.

Make sure that you install the APK files in the same exact order that you downloaded them from above.

Step 4: On the next screen, go ahead and confirm the installation by tapping on Install at the bottom.

You can actually see to your upper left hand corner that it says which APK File that you’re installing.

Again make sure to install all the files in the right order. 🙂

Once you’re done installing all the four APK files onto your kindle fire, you can see that the Google Play Store app just appeared on your kindle fire’s home screen.

Step 1:  All you have to do is tap on your new Google Play Store app, and Sign in with your Google account.

You may find that it might not work as you expected it to be just right after you signed in.

Your new Google Play Store and Google Play Services will update automatically in the background, and it may take around I’d say 10 minutes?

If you do find that it’s still not working after you’ve gave it some time..

Then all you have to do is just go ahead and search for any app (YouTube, Chrome, Gmail, etc.) and download it.

This collection of quality resources and tools are as valuable as what you would expect from a finely crafted watch. I update this collection whenever I find a great product that I myself use for Saint and rightfully deserves its place on this page.

You should save it, refer to it and use it because it’s truly the best of the best.

Learn more about these exclusive resources and tools|||

Here's how you can Install Google Play Store on Kindle Fire...You feel frustrated that practically your Amazon Kindle Fire is no use other than