You may have heard of virtual gaming worlds Minecraft or Second Life, but Roblox, a smaller entity that dates back to 2006, is determined to give both a run for their money. And on Tuesday the company announced it’s raised $92 million to back that vision.

“Every month 48 million kids from around the world come to play and create and imagine. They do it in an immersive, 3D environment created by the community. We have a big vision to create the world’s ultimate social platform for play,” says David Baszucki, CEO of the San Mateo, California-based company.

Roblox, named after “robots” and “blocks,” is a cloud-based gaming platform that is visually a cross between Minecraft and the Lego games, with a dose of physics-based realism. Players, most of whom are between the ages of 6 and 24, create games and experiences like they do in sandbox worlds like Minecraft or Terraria—think shooters, fighting games, and role-playing games. But on Roblox, all the content is 100% user-generated, and creators can earn revenue from their creations, selling premium content inside free games.

“Our top developers are making over $50,000 a month. They are starting to form small companies and studios with five or six people, all working to create immersive experiences that people come together and play and imagine in,” says Baszucki.

Roblox, which makes money from commissions it takes on the micro-transactions conducted on the platform, previously raised $10.5 million in funding in 2011. The company, which has 163 employees, has not disclosed last year’s financials, but in 2015, revenues amounted to $52.3 million.

The audience that creators have access to on Roblox itself is substantial: 48 million users—half in the U.S., half overseas—playing 22 million games. There are 1.7 million developers creating the content, according to the company, and there have been over 1 million users on at once, with top games having 20,000 or so players at any time. Altogether, 300 million hours are spent on Roblox each month. Though we know Minecraft has sold at least 107 million copies across PC, mobile, and console, we don’t know how many actual users that is, since players may buy multiple copies for different devices. Either way, at 48 million, Roblox is about where Minecraft was three years ago.

Some of Roblox’s developers are now in the IP business. In January toy maker Jazwares announced it had partnered with the platform’s leading developers to release physical versions of Roblox’s top user-made characters and avatars, which are already available for sale at Toys R’ Us. It wasn’t the platform’s first big partnership. The company partnered with Disney in 2015 to create branded virtual spaces, such as a virtual Disney World and virtual rides like Space Mountain.

Part of Roblox’s success can be tied to its accessibility. Content is created on PCs and Macs, but then uploaded to the cloud. Once there, not only can players on both computer platforms play, but also users on both iOS and Android mobile platforms and on Microsoft’s Xbox One console. Roblox even supports the Oculus Rift headset to allow players to enjoy games in virtual reality. And with the cloud, there is cross-platform play between all devices.|||

The cash will help the popular Minecraft-like sandbox expand its mobile and VR offerings and address concerns about abuse, says its CEO.