I was depressed for most of my childhood. I didn’t perform well at school and I was not great at any sport. I didn’t have a purpose. I though something was wrong with me. I told myself every morning: “When I come home from school, I’m going to study and nail that exam.”. When I came home from school, I watched television or went on the computer and play video games. Every weekend my friends would call me and we would go to a party. Everytime I came home from a party I felt like crap. I didn’t want this kind of life. Days, weeks, months and years passed by. I somehow managed to pass my primary school and highschool, but I never excelled, even thought I wanted it so badly.

I though I was the problem. I though I didn’t have enough willpower. I though I was weak. I was sad and depressed. Luckily I was born in the age of internet and I had easy access to a lot of personal growth and self improvement material. https://news.ycombinator.com helped me a lot. There was a new topic about personal growth and self improvement every day. I read about the idea, that everything we do and everything we are is based on our environment. At first this idea was very depressing, because it felt like we have no control over our life. It felt like we are no different than animals. But the more I though about it, the more it made sense.

Imagine your five closest friends are hardcore smokers. What are the odds that you are going to start smoking? Now imagine that your five closest friends are hardcore sportsman. What are the odds that you are going to become a sportsman? That’s right, the odds are very high. The bad news is that we are indirectly the reflection of our environment. The good news is that we can change the environment. I am not saying that it will happen immidiately and with 100%, but most of the time it will. Our enviroment, our friends and the places we hang at will slowly affect us. It might be scary at first, but you can make it as your advantage.

My curse was my home enviroment. Every morning I planned everything that I wanted to do that day. I planned how I am going to learn when I come home and how I am going to work out when I come home, but it never happend. I came home and there were distractions everywhere. There was television, computer, bed, food and friends. Some of those distractions always hooked me and all my plans vanished. When I realized the problem was the enviroment, everything changed. I realized I can’t get anything done at home, because there are so many distractions. So I changed the environment. Everyday after school I went to the library. There was no food, television and bed there. The only thing that I could do was study. So I studied.

The first few weeks were terrible. It was so hard to force myself to go to library after school. I missed the comfort of my home, where I didn’t have to do anything. That quickly changed when the results started to show. I started to get good at school. I was hooked with the library and its environment. I was so sad that the library already closed at 7pm, because I wanted to stay all night. I was so productive.

After I succesfully introduced library to my life, I took another step. I started going to the gym after library. I used a few tricks to get me started, because in the begining its very hard to stick to something. We need to be creative to make it happen. I bought a gym membership for a year, so I was forced to go. A few gym buddies also help a lot. It felt terrible the first few times.

Looking back, I can’t believe how much I changed. I am the same person. I just changed my environments. I just finished my computer science Master’s Degree and now I want to change the world and make it a better place. Friends ask me how I manage to get so much done. It feels like I have some kind of superpower. But it’s just my enviroment. I set the enviroment to work for me. When I come home I still can’t get anything done. But that doesn’t matter, because I now mostly only sleep at home. I met so many depressed people that want to take their life to the next level, but they come home after work and nothing happens then. Nothing happens for 40 years.

Our enviroment indirectly affects what we do and who we are. However unlike animals, we are able to CHANGE our enviroment. Don’t get me wrong, it’s not going to be easy. Friendships and relationships will fall apart, but do not worry, new and better friendships and relationships will be born. I think there are many people that think they can’t change anything. They think they are the problem. They think they are lazy and that they have no willpower. I dare you all to take that step and change your enviroment, CHANGE YOUR LIFE.|||

<hr />