Mobile, one technology that has seen enormous adoption in developing countries, is a key player in the drive of fintech through both the developed and developing world. It’s predicted that mobile phones could provide financial services to approximately 80% of the global population, and considering the millions of businesses in emerging economies that don’t currently have access to financial services, mobile technology is an invaluable fintech partner.

Unsurprisingly, mobile solutions are spreading quickly through developing nations, with payment apps making it easier for informal traders to sell their wares and mobile-based accounts steadily reducing the World Bank’s estimated 2 billion people unbanked around the globe. Fintech advances have been particularly evident in India, China, and Sub-Saharan Africa, and, since the introduction of mobile payment program M-Pesa in Kenya in 2007, more than 85% of the country’s population now use mobile payment apps to transact. A distinguishing characteristic of M-Pesa, the technology is available not only on smartphones but also on the most basic mobile phones obtainable, ensuring that availability is near complete.

Governments, traditional financial institutions, tech groups, and startups are all playing a role in the provision of fintech products and services that foster financial inclusion of the developing world in the global village. These advances are boosting economies and benefiting individuals in countless ways.

Financial Literacy

 Education has long been a challenge in the developing world, and with it financial literacy. Not only does a lack of financial understanding tend to produce poor financial choices, it furthers economic decline and creates an environment in which fraud and exploitation becomes the norm. Providing financial education has previously been a challenge, but straightforward fintech solutions are ensuring that users have easy access to streamlined information, making it possible for users to grasp their financial circumstances. This first step to financial literacy is the foundation that promises greater consumer protection as users are able to make informed decisions about their money and investigate options that better suit their needs.

Credit Histories & Financial Identity

 With so many people never accessing traditional financial products and services, many users in developing worlds don’t even have credit histories or financial identities, let alone understand how to support or bolster them. Thus there is a large population that banks, with their strict regulations, are able only to offer the most basic of services. Fintech provides the tools to gather data from a much wider range of sources, and through the employment of advanced analytics it’s possible to better understand users, capture necessary details regarding identity, and provide relevant services. Already several fintech companies are using alternate data from mobile phone bills, rental payments, and utility payments to understand financial behaviors, and biometrics are proving a useful tool in establishing financial identities.

Moving Money

 Money transfers are widely used in developing countries, but these services are often expensive and not always easily accessible. New advances, however, are seeing popular supermarkets offer such services, and startups are providing services for moving money via mobile phones. Such tools tend to offer a much broader reach, and at a fraction of the cost of the traditional providers.

Going Cashless

 Cash can be risky anywhere, and so cashless fintech solutions are popular worldwide. Typically making use of mobile phone technology, cashless payment products offer secure and reliable methods for merchants and consumers to transact. For users in developing nations without access to traditional banking products, these solutions are becoming the norm.

Micro-Finance & Peer-to-Peer Lending

 Providing a practical alternative to bank loans, micro-financing is often more easily accessed by the impoverished in developing countries. And peer lending, a solution already common in many developing nations, is advanced through fintech applications. Currently, the benefits of such applications also have some worrying drawbacks since most of them aren’t regulated, and unfair collection practices leave much room for improvement.

Installment and Pay-As-You-Go Plans

 Eliminating the need for upfront payment or large sums of cash, installment and pay-as-you-go plans aid the developing world by providing necessary commodities when they’re needed, with flexible payment arrangements more easily managed. When offered by reputable merchants through practical technological platforms, such solutions ensure both the provider and the user benefit.

Consumer Security

 Of particular note in locations where financial literacy is low, consumer security is essential for the appropriate development of economies. Fintech helps reduce fraud in a range of financial services, from lending, to payments, to transfers, and when the right measures are taken to develop secure financial service networks, both individuals and their economies profit.

Not merely a high growth area worth investigation by shrewd investors, fintech is providing the tools and services to millions of people who might otherwise struggle their whole lives on the outskirts of the financial sector. The technologically advanced developed world could certainly learn a thing or two about fintech innovation from the plucky newcomers capitalizing on developing nation opportunities.|||

Could the developing world be leading fintech? Find out how the world’s younger economies are leading the charge in financial technology innovations.