Evolving User Research in the Age of Platforms & Ecosystems Introducing the “Ecosystem Entity Portrait”, part of the Platform Design Toolkit

[Don’t forget: show support by recommending this post if you like it! >> ❤]

User Research always played a fundamental role in service design and Development: by investigating through qualitative and quantitative research the recipient(s) of a service strategy, it gives designers critical feedback that is a precious indication when it comes to designing meaningful services that meet user expectations and reduce friction in adoption.

As designers facing platform design challenges in the last 5 years or so, we’ve been able to understand that a switch in perspective is also key to evolve from the traditional service design approach towards a — quite more powerful but more complex — platform design approach. Like I wrote on this blog already, we need to move beyond the customer narrative — traditionally centered on solving problems and reducing frictions — and embrace a radically new approach that is focused more on the players’ potential and motivations.

Furthermore, by embracing platform design thinking, we learnt that is impossible to design today without taking into account the context we are experiencing on a global-local scale: in other words we understood that design is, today more than ever, a “connected” and “contextual” practice and, therefore, things such as complexity, network effects and continuous disruption need to be taken into account when approaching the design of any system.

Firstly, the fact that we are now experiencing what many call VUCA (Volatility, Uncertainty, Complexity and Ambiguity) is a non-negligible aspect of our modern design context. Indeed we are climbing a ramp of what is normally called the Taylor bathtub: in other words we are living an age where the world is coming back to interconnected complexity — after the industrial age pause — only, on the steroids of globalization.

As John Hagel effectively puts it in “The Dark Side of Technology”:

What Hagel calls “performance pressure” is essentially a force shaping the motivations that entities have to participate in ecosystems.

In an interconnected and digitally transformed world, insane and growing competition and the rising technological disruption create rising challenges for individuals and companies: these challenges push these entities to hone their capabilities or lose their productive space in society and get marginalized.

On the other hand of rising complexity, modern means of production (such as mobiles and computers) are now overly available and so is knowledge; if you couple this with the fact that we live in a post-consumerism / post-status society, where many (both individuals and companies) have accumulated assets of any type in years — as we come from an “ownership” culture — this means that the potential assets and capabilities an entity of the ecosystem can leverage on, while expressing its potential, can be huge.

This situation leaves us with a radically new design context respect to the industrial age: if in the past we were used to design for “consumers” with de-facto standardized needs, in the post industrial age we design for powerful individual entities — being them people or companies — motivated to emerge, pressured to improve their capacities to better compete, and able to deliver an impressive amount of value and influence, and influence others.

As the adopters of our platform design toolkit should know, our methodology suggests the use of the Ecosystem’s Motivations Matrix to investigate both what we call “intrinsic” motivations and “give-to” potential.

Through the motivations matrix — to our understanding first introduced by the awesome Ezio Manzini et al— is indeed very simple to analyze what elements of value the entities in the ecosystem are motivated to exchange with each other in an Entity A can give-to Entity B fashion.

Furthermore we traditionally use the motivations matrix to track down what we call the “intrinsic” motivation to join the ecosystem. So far, our analysis of intrinsic motivations is focused on identifying what we call the current goals of the entity and the differential gains that it could get from participating in the economic exchange through the platform versus playing the independent game, on the open market.

As an example: what would the gains be for a developer of mobile applications in creating her apps inside the Android or Apple platform instead of making apps outside of it (e.g.: making a web app)?

In months lasted after the first introduction of Platform Design Toolkit 2.0, when approaching motivational analysis and examining the context of the entities in the ecosystem we often felt the limitations of such a simplistic approach to the exploration of an entity’s context. While the matrix is good enough when you need to have a fast iteration, you sometimes need a deeper analysis. We often used empathy maps to complement the matrix insights but, in parallel, we started developing an experimental tool that was somehow designed with platform thinking in mind.

Here comes the Ecosystem Entity Portrait:

Thanks to this handy tool you can now perform a portrait of every entity in the Ecosystem. We chose the word “portrait” not by chance: portraits have the capacity to bring you in deep emphatic contact with the subject, and can help you identify with it. That’s what the Entity Portrait is for: identify yourself (as a platform designer, the creator of a platform’s story) with the ecosystem of entity-participants that are the recipients and co-creators of this story, understand their motivations, hopes and the value they seek.

Thanks to the Entity Portrait, you’ll be able to make first an analysis focused on the three essential context drivers of the entity:

In the second place the portrait helps you look into the three essential gains that participating in your platform should offer to the entity that chose to join the value creation process inside the platform itself (instead of playing the independent game):

Indeed that’s the next step normally when we use the Entity Portrait in our workshops:

An example of Entity Portrait for an Airbnb host follows:|||

User Research always played a fundamental role in service design and Development: by investigating through qualitative and quantitative research the recipient(s) of a service strategy, it gives…