Once the snow clears, silly season hits. Just in the nick of time, Jon and Brian have your enterprise keynote survival guide ready. Tips for attendees come first, but vendors must survive their own keynotes also, so we’ve got tips for vendors as well.

The silly season is almost upon us. Soon, driverless cars will be dropping off keynote speakers on stage, while drones deliver the just-in-time pizza Alexa ordered. Yep, enterprise software keynote season is upon us!

Soon, you too will have the wonderful chance to get your fix of the game-changing innovations your vendor is bravely pursuing, with the courageous leadership you can only find when enterprise software licenses are at stake.

But before you find yourself stuck in the front row, coated with the proverbial watermelon juice, we’ve got a few keynote survival tips for you. And vendors, not to worry – we’ve got your survival tips as well. Otherwise, your tech innovation keynote might be relegated to “email catchup time.”

Some think these events are about the customers. Some think it’s about innovation. Some think it’s about learning about technology or the product.  Whatever you might think these shows are about, remember that they’re actually sales and marketing events.

Vendors are either trying to win you over as a new customer or keep you as a customer. When you know it’s a sales event, you can plan accordingly – and set appropriate keynote expectations. What you don’t get from the keynotes, you can often get from educational sessions and meetings with experts – so plan ahead. And remember: the event is a failure if you don’t bring flair back for your friends and family.

Don’t be afraid to approach your friendly neighborhood bloggers and analysts. We/they can be well worth a chit chat – just tell the analysts to keep their quadrants and trapezoids to themselves.

Image credit - Images of flair and "too many dudes on stage" provided by Brian Sommer.|||

Jon and Brian have your enterprise keynote survival guide ready. Tips for attendees come first, but vendors must survive their own keynotes also.