AlphaLab Executive Director, Jim Jen recently typed up some thoughts on product-market fit to share with the founders in the current AlphaLab cohort as they move through the program. We realized that this information is relevant to a broad range of startups so we’re sharing it here:

I believe that early product-market fit occurs when you have a group of customers who are actively using your product and are getting great value from using it. Simply speaking, you have a product that your customers love (which is why we have labeled that as one of the key themes in AlphaLab.) Product-market fit is DEFINITELY NOT positive survey/focus group results, prospects reacting positively to your screenshots/demo, customers signing up for a trial or even necessarily customers paying you for the product. (I will discuss the latter point below.)

Don’t view “product-market fit” lightly or think you’ve moved past it as you build your company. It is probably the most important thing you can focus on and the foundation from which all the other things emanate (e.g. customer acquisition, fundraising, growth). And it’s an ongoing mindset — you have to create a culture around delivering a product that your customers truly love. You can’t just declare you’ve got “product-market fit,” check the box and then move on. You have to continually maintain product-market fit as your product and your customer needs evolve.

I often hear companies declare P-M fit when they’re not even close so I will spend the rest of this post sharing my thoughts and top articles I have found on the topic.

Here are some questions to consider when evaluating early product-market fit. They may not apply to all products but you should ask yourself:

Are your customers actively using your product?

What would your customers’ reaction be if you took away the product?

Do they put up with your product’s limitations (because it adds so much value anyway)?

Are they paying for it?

In the Medium post above, the author makes a good point about product-market fit being about repeatability, which includes additional elements sometimes associated with product-market fit — e.g. delivering product that adds value at a price point that can be profitably sold through a channel to an identifiable customer. These are all important considerations and things you have to do in the process of testing your product and business models.

I’d argue that the elements around pricing/channels/sales process, etc. are more around business model fit — but they are obviously inter-related. You do need to figure all of these things out but if you try to test/solve for all of these variables at once, you risk coming up with suboptimal product-market results since you are also trying to allow for pricing/distribution channels, etc.

One of the traps I’ve seen founders fall into is to spec a product feature because it enables monetization (or even worse because an investor suggested it.) To be clear, I’m not talking about if you identify a feature that customers say they really value/would pay for. I am referring to situations when you add a feature (e.g. for example payments) primarily because it naturally suggests a revenue model and you haven’t really vetted whether it adds unique value to your customer.

I could go on about this— so I will conclude by linking to a few additional articles on product-market fit that I have found spot-on.|||

AlphaLab Executive Director, Jim Jen recently typed up some thoughts on product-market fit to share with the founders in the current AlphaLab cohort as they move through the program. We realized that…