With a little bit of background in IT, a person would be knowledgeable about this new buzzword : IOT. Why is it a buzzword? And why so much ado about it? Read further to know.

Imagine a bunch of devices that can interact with you , in your controlled world. Which would be your dishwasher, refrigerator, coffee brewer and so on. What if they know that you have gotten up already and are going to the washroom for now, so you'd need that hot cuppa once you come out? On the other hand, the fridge knows that it rained last night, so it ought to change the temperature? It is tough to comprehend, but its already happening!

This isn't Star Trek or Star Wars that showed us how far beyond comprehension human creativity and imagination can travel. This , is the future. And its already here : The next gen embedded technology.

When we talk about computers, they are a combination of hardware and software. Chip read and written on, and all the logical action followed after. It is a subtle balance of something that you can easily touch e.g. the hard drive or say coffee brewer (hardware), and something that you can't (the intelligence of the brewer , the software).

With the exponential reduction of hardware sizes (including the device carrying the chip + the chip itself), it is becoming more and more possible to compress multiple software on the same chip. This would allow almost any device to become intelligent!

How Does it Work?

Essentially, you are going to load the same coffee brewer with its regular parts + an added chip that will use certain sensors to get data from outside world e.g temperature, humidity. These sensors will give you data based on which you can control your brewer behavior. Its the Internet of things because, all these data collected are stored onto a central cloud server (any host say Azure) for that particular user. So, the user and his data are connected all the time via Internet. This also implies all the devices owned by the user, are authenticated to communicate to each other as well.

One such example is : BrewPi . It is a simple combination of RaspBerryPi integrated with sensors to gather information. It can control the temperature of your brewery so that minimum human interaction is involved. You can explore more such devices here.

It works on three principles of connect, manage and search. Your app is the window to the devices that are enabling your smart home / factory / office premises. You can connect to the cloud, fetch the device states, search for the device that you want information about, and manage it by changing settings or changing parameters.

Using intelligent devices, we can greatly reduce waste, cost and losses. We would know which things need replacing or repairing at the right time. Various use cases include police department, hospitals, utilities, schools, waste management, public transportation, factory automation.

All this data is expanding the IOT. Giving us more information than ever before. Making smart decisions based on smart technology for better lives—longer, healthier, and happier.|||

