Background tabs can have a dramatic negative effect on browser performance, especially on battery life. To mitigate this, Chrome has been placing various restrictions on background tabs for the last several years. Recently there’s been a number of efforts to make further improvements, and this document gives an overview of the Chrome policy. This document focuses on describing current policies in Chrome 57. Long-term strategy and further plans can be found in this document.

Web developers should be aware that users often have a lot of tabs open in the background and it can have a serious effect on power usage and battery life. Work in the background should be kept to a minimum unless it’s absolutely necessary to provide a particular user experience. The Page visibility API should be used to detect when page is the backgrounded and suspend all unnecessary work like visual updates.

For some sites, this simple optimisation can reduce CPU usage by as much as 75%:

Per the documentation, Chrome does not call when a page is in the background. This behavior has been in place since 2011.

Since Chrome 11, each independent timer is run no more than once per second. Chrome runs these timers in batches once a second, ensuring that the number of process wakeups is kept to a minimum. Pages playing audible audio are considered user-visible and exempted from background timer throttling. Exemption lasts for several seconds after audio stops playing to allow applications to queue the next audio track.

Note that audio is considered audible when and only when Chrome shows the audio icon. Silent audio streams do not grant exemptions.

Shipping in Chrome 57, budget-based timer throttling is a further extension of the timer alignment mechanism, placing an additional limit on background timer CPU usage. It operates as follows:

There are a number of automatic exemptions from this throttling:

Note that this his mechanism uses wall time, not CPU time. It’s a good approximation of CPU time and penalises blocking the main thread for a long time.

Finally, remember that if you are using long tasks in the background, your application can be throttled for a very long period of time (up to 100 times the duration of your task). Split your work in to chunks of 50ms or less per the performance guidelines and use the listener to avoid doing unnecessary work in background.

Chrome provides the flag for use cases like running test suites and other user-sanctioned heavy computations.|||

