Over the past few years, psychologists have been trying to work out something of a mystery: Why is America so divided? How can perfectly reasonable people, who otherwise get along just fine, get so up in arms over politics?

What makes this division even more puzzling is that it occurs even in the simplest of situations. Take Trump’s latest presidential address. Half of America thought it was fantastic that he highlighted the sacrifices of the wife of a slain Navy SEAL. The other half? They thought it was downright awful. (We all watched the same speech, right?)

Perhaps strangest of all, political division has even crept into the living room, pulling apart members of the same family.

Preparation for an American family Thanksgiving typically includes several days of planning meal times in order to maximize turkey, gravy and stuffing intake.

But not this Thanksgiving. Instead, to avoid knife fights over dinner, many folks spent those days reading articles like, “How to keep your cool around your crazy Uncle who voted for Trump”.

No doubt, the question on everyone’s mind is: what’s causing this division?

In order to answer this question, let’s take a look at other “divides” in the world and see what we can learn.

What better example than “the world’s most intractable divide”, the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict?

To understand the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict, we need to start with a little history.

“Palestine” is a region of land in the middle east, currently occupied partially by Israelis (Israel) and partially by Palestinians.

Prior to World War I, Palestine was mostly inhabited by the native Palestinians and ruled by The Ottoman Empire.

During World War I, The Ottoman Empire sided with Germany. So Britain, at war with Germany, attacked the Ottomans and conquered Palestine in the process.

Unfortunately, World War I and World War II (especially The Holocaust) displaced millions of Jews. Many of these Jews believed God gave their people Palestine and thus had a rightful claim to the land.

So they began migrating en-masse to Palestine to form a new Jewish state, Israel.

Unfortunately, the native Palestinians objected to this migration because they also believed they had a religious right to the land.

And so, for the last 50+ years, Israelis (the Jews who migrated to Palestine) and the native Palestinians have been fighting for control of Palestine.

In dozens of attempts, top peacemakers and diplomats from around the globe have tried to bring peace to the region by dividing Palestine into two separate states, one for the Israelis and one for the Palestinians.

Unfortunately, the Israelis and Palestinians have never been able to agree on how to divide the land.

Instead, on many occasions, they’ve resorted to violence. Palestinians fire rockets into Israeli territory. Israelis launch air raids and ground invasions.

Over 14,500 people have died in these attacks.

No one on the planet has been able to crack this nut. Many wonder, is it even possible?

In September 2014 three researchers backed by the National Science Foundation set out to explain why the Israeli-Palestinian divide is so intractable.

They hypothesized that a psychological bias known as “motive attribution asymmetry” was at the heart of the conflict.

“Motive attribution asymmetry” is a simple concept. It’s when you lose all trust in someone, not just because you disagree with that person, but because you don’t even believe they have good intentions at heart.

For example, if you and a colleague at work disagree on how best to grow sales next quarter, you usually can come to a compromise by talking it out.

But what if you don’t just disagree? What if you believe your colleague is actually trying to sabotage your career?

In that case, there is no point in talking it out. There is no way to compromise.

These researchers see Israelis and Palestinians like two feuding colleagues each believing the other has bad intentions at heart.

And so neither side is willing to genuinely aim for compromise with the other.

To test this, the researchers conducted an experiment with 995 Israelis and 1,266 Palestinians.

First, the researchers reminded each participant about the recent conflicts. They stated: “As you know, there is often conflict between Israelis and Palestinians living in Gaza. Palestinians have fired rockets into Israel, and Israelis have launched bombing attacks against Gaza. Many Palestinians and Israelis supported these respective attacks.”

Next, the researchers asked the participants to judge the motives for these attacks. Do Israelis support bombing Palestinians out of hate (bad intentions) or love (good intentions)? Do Palestinians support firing rockets on Israelis out of hate or love?

Participants were asked to judge the degree to which “hate” and “love” motivated the attacks on a 4-point scale.

The chart below breaks down the results by Israeli and Palestinian participants:

Are the Israelis and Palestinians like two colleagues who won’t debate one another because each believes the other has bad intentions?

According to the data, yes. Both Israelis and Palestinians believe their side acts out of love more than hate. And they believe the other side acts out of hate more than love.

Surely, the liberal-conservative divide is much narrower than the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

We live in the same country.

We live under the same rule of law.

We don’t bomb each other.

We don’t fire rockets at each other.

We don’t erect fences to isolate each other.

Despite this, doesn’t the country just feel so divided?

To quantify the divide in America and compare it to the Israeli-Palestinian divide, we ran our own experiment.

We recruited 201 US residents (138 liberals, 63 conservatives). We asked each to rate for us the degree to which they felt “hate” and “love” motivated four recent conflicts (The DC Women’s March, The Black Lives Matter Movement, The Blue Lives Matter Movement, and Trump’s Travel Ban).

The results show just how differently conservatives and liberals view the motivations for the movements above.

The top two movements in the above graph (DC Women’s March and Black Lives Matter) were both movements with wide liberal support and conservative condemnation.

Fittingly, conservatives rate “hate” as a much stronger motivator for these two movements than “love”. And vice-versa for liberals.

The bottom two movements (Blue Lives Matter, Trump’s Immigration Ban) were both movements with more conservative support and less liberal support.

As expected, conservatives rate “love” as a much stronger motivator for these two movements than “hate” this time around. Liberals, on the other hand, view Trump’s Travel Ban as strongly motivated by “hate”.

Interestingly, they view “hate” and “love” as about equal motivators for Blue Lives Matter.

None of this is too out of the ordinary.

But what is surprising, very surprising, is what happens when you compare these results to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Israelis rated “hate” as a motive for Palestinian rocket attacks at about 3.3 / 4. And Palestinians rated “hate” as a motive for Israeli bombings at about 3.5 / 4.

But those two results are just peanuts compared to the DC Women’s March. Conservatives rate “hate” as a motive at an astounding 3.8 / 4.

The DC Women’s March isn’t a statistical fluke. Trump’s travel ban and Black Lives Matter are also highly motivated by hate according to “the other side”.

What’s so surprising about these results is the nature of these conflicts and the circumstances in which they occur.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflicts are violent and occur among populations largely isolated from one another. When a bunch of Palestinians you know nothing about fire a rocket into your town, of course you’ll assume hate motivated the attack.

But The DC Women’s March was a largely peaceful protest. No rockets were fired. No bombs dropped.

And there is no electric fence separating the two sides. Folks are free to meet each other and talk it out.

At EscapeYourBubble, we’ve dedicated significant time to analyzing how the media shapes public opinion.

What we’ve learned is that the media on both sides very often paint “the other side” as having bad intentions.

She says: “just like how you lock your door at night not because you hate those outside but because you love those inside your house, [we do the same by policing our border]”.

She uses the analogy to argue Trump’s intentions with his travel ban are rooted in love for Americans.

She argues that liberals oppose the ban for a number of reasons. Among them a love of protesting, a hatred of “real work”, an indifference to fellow Americans and a strong dislike for Trump and other conservatives who want to keep the country safe. All bad intentions.

Trevor, partially-sarcastically, mocks conservatives by insinuating that Trump finds it hilarious when families are separated.

As for the liberal side, he paints the protesters in a positive light, suggesting they are the only ones who don’t want to see families separated. In other words, they have good intentions.

Notice how both sides misunderstand each other. Each side is told their side acts out of good intentions while the other acts out of bad ones.

Folks on both sides in the media grasp the extent to which our division is fueled by our condemnation of each other’s intentions.

For example, Tomi Lahren notes in her conversation with Trevor Noah: “I wish that we could disagree with each other without thinking that we are bad people or ill intentioned”. She goes on: “Because I criticize a black person or the Black Lives Matter Movement doesn’t mean that I’m anti-black.”

This habit in the media of not just condemning the other side but also suggesting they have bad intentions drives a lot of this problem.

But the “filter bubble” effect makes this problem 10x worse.

Thirty years ago, if one media outlet, say a magazine you pick up in the grocery store, incorrectly tells you Black Lives Matter protesters only care about killing police, you’ll quickly learn that’s not true. Your morning paper may say otherwise. The nightly news may say otherwise. Friends who are protesters or know them may correct the mistake. You’re naturally exposed to other perspectives.

But nowadays, if you’re like the 44% of Americans who get news through Facebook, you are no longer naturally exposed to other perspectives. Facebook puts you in a “filter bubble” by largely showing you news from sources which reinforce one point of view, while hiding other points of view from you.

So you don’t get exposed to what is really motivating the other side. And so you are more easily convinced the other side has bad intentions. Because that’s all you know and hear.

This problem isn’t limited to Facebook. Google search results are also tailored to your viewpoints. Even recommended videos on YouTube are chosen in this fashion.

This problem also isn’t limited to the internet. Offline, we are geographically more isolated from “the other side” than ever before. We have fewer friends from “the others side”. Fewer neighbors. Fewer colleagues. Thus, we are much less likely to randomly bump into folks from “the other side” on a daily basis.

Finally, our psychological bias known as “motive attribution asymmetry” described above (our tendency to ascribe actions of our party to love and that of “the other side” to hate) further exacerbates the problem.

This psychological bias makes it really easy for us to blindly agree when the filter bubble Facebook puts us in tells us the other side has bad intentions. It isn’t in our nature to push back against the narrative forced upon us unless we actively remind ourselves to do so.

These three factors working in combination have created a huge, false sense of hatred in our country. So huge, in fact, it’s on the same level as that seen in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, even though our conflicts aren’t actually “violent” in the same way the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is.

The first step in overcoming any psychological bias is knowing and accepting you are subject to it.

Avoiding biases is like ditching an addiction - you can’t address your addiction until you admit you have one.

Our mission at EscapeYourBubble is to help you understand biases that affect your thinking so that next time you are listening to Tomi Lahren or Trevor Noah analyze an issue, you’ll remember this article.

You’ll remember that you are susceptible to believing the easy logic that “the other side” is acting out of hate when in reality, there is probably a deeper reason driving their behavior.

And so you’ll get curious. You’ll search for that deeper reasoning.

And so, even if you don’t agree with the other side, you’ll be able to appreciate their views.

If you believe this article can help reduce division in America by even the smallest amount, please click the Facebook/Twitter buttons below and share it so others can discover it.

Our next post is on the way language influences politics. To get notified when we post it, join our email list by adding your email below.

[1] An example article on keeping your cool during Thanksgiving dinner.

[2] Waytz, Young, Ginges: “Motive attribution asymmetry for love vs. hate drives intractable conflict”. Paper here.

Thanks to Lane Rettig and Michelle Gee for editing this piece.|||

Comparing the liberal-conservative divide in America to the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict.