Glitch For Your API: From zero to working code in one minute Provide sample apps to kickstart developers with your product. Then with Glitch devs can tweak those apps to suit their needs. They can drop in their API keys and see real, working code running instantly. Glitch For Your API gives you an unprecedented set of free tools to promote your platform to developers: Realtime coding collaboration - code with any developer in the world, on nearly any browser Unlimited sample projects - add any number of projects and sample apps to the Glitch gallery Import from GitHub - Get devs up and running with your SDK in no time Remix on Glitch - A button to embed in any help doc or blog post

When devs get stuck, you can help them before they give up Glitch's code editor allows real-time, simultaneous editing, like in Google Docs. So you and your new developer BFF can edit code together, and fix issues as they happen. We're even building tools to let you see the moment a developer encounters an error for the first time while trying out your API. You can learn what needs to improve on your platform, and solve their problems before they get frustrated or give up.

If you've been struggling to broaden the reach of your developer relations, Glitch can help. We've built a friendly, welcoming community with absolutely zero tolerance for harassment or abuse. Our outreach efforts regularly connect with underrepresented developers that other communities don't serve. When you bring your platform to Glitch, you get outside the bubble of the developers you already know.

And next? We're creating an exclusive suite of premium developer success features: Advanced analytics- to keep track of how many developers try your API or SDK, and metrics on how many of them succeed. Custom-branded gallery - feature sample apps for your API, that developers can remix immediately using Glitch Office hours- take part in our regular events to mentor developers who are trying your APIs Coming soon - we'll alert you when a new developer tries your API, and let you know when then get stuck Contact us and we'll put you first in line to try our new Premium features.

Glitch is made by Fog Creek, one of the most influential small tech companies in the world. We co-created Stack Overflow with Jeff Atwood, invented Trello, and pioneered bug tracking with FogBugz. We literally wrote the book on writing great software, and now we're reinventing things again. You can read more about why we've built Glitch For Your API.|||

Glitch is the community where you'll build the app of your dreams, for free.