Your skills, projects, etc, nobody gives a shit if they don’t know about you so priority uno is to eatecray youryay esumeray and plaster it over social media (AngelList, LinkedIn, any job site).

This statement may rub the loyalists the wrong way. Someone somewhere just popped a vein while furiously thinking “how can you be so fucking ungrateful, they — “the bootcamp” — took you this far, you have to believe in the process”.

If you are comfortable in competing on the job market with a cookie-cutter “standard” solution, that’s your decision to make.

Once the idea that your resume inadvertently camouflages-your-chance-of-being-noticed sinks in, let’s examine a typical bootcamp resume layout, we are engineers after all…right?

B. List your technical projects (you better do it)

C. List your work experience, education, awards (do it)

This is the most commonly abused and source of the urge to trash your resume.

What kills me is often there are companion “skill” badges on their personal website and LinkedIn endorsements as a show-of-collective-force agreeing that a said skill does exists and the emperor really has clothes.

I’m here to break your heart and kindly inform that you’re bloody wrong. These vanity tokens are the equivalents to the 90’s cult classic, RICE-BOY phenomenon.

All show and no-coding go, this is definitely the wrong approach in engineer peacock land. Perhaps my rationale will makes a bit more sense with a multiple-choice word completion game.

“Listing my skills, in a comma-delimited format, is useful for ___.”

A. clear communication of my skill sets to employers.

B. recruiters to quickly locate my resume via keyword search

C. I don’t know, I just do as I’m told

My faith in humanity believes that the majority subconsciously picked “C” but am only admits to selecting “A” at this moment.

I’m here to shock your world [again] and say choice “A” is dead wrong.

Based on the assumption that for a one-page resume, it’s a terrible waste of space and creates pointless clutter. I can see how the triple threat of a bootcamp + resume + skill endorsements misrepresented a plausible employment strategy but remember these wise words

The correct answer is “B” altho choice “D” isn’t exactly wrong (If you’re adamant choice “C” is the correct answer, please do everyone a favor and join an well-disciplined institution where decisions are made on your behalf daily.

Instead, I recommend utilizing the whitespace for your project section and listing your technical skills within a project’s context.

If we think about it for a second, at the very least — if you can construct a sentence using said technical skill, that is also technically-sounded — perhaps I can be convinced of the possibility that someone could have over 10+ years of experience in a technology that emerged 5 years ago.

People understand the situation, no need to go crazy on what your contributions were. How about keeping it simple and:

Write just enough to generate a talking point so when you are in that coveted face-to-face interview, minutes may be passionately spent glossing through all the nitty gritty fine details that you desperately wanted to convene on paper.

People are realistic and understands that you went to a bootcamp spanning across months not years. Nobody expects you to create Visual Studio Code just as you began understanding how callbacks work in the event loop.

Be realistic because everyone else is.

Quite obvious why its in your benefit to include it.

Your resume reflects who you are, aka “a summary”. There really is no-rhyme-or-reason to dedicate a section to explicitly state the obvious (think technical skill badges if you’re having trouble understanding)

I’m sure a number of readers who made it this far disagrees and can reference someone who had one of the taboos and is an engineer at a big tech shop despite the fact; and I agree with you, you are absolutely right.

Nothing above is a deal breaker, the same goes for “greeting guests with morning breath” or “showing up late to an interview dressed inappropriately”, these events won’t ever be the deciding factor but it just doesn’t help in any shape or form so why risk it?

You’ve already spent months climbing up the proverbial hill to reach this stage, and in this game of inches, you’re competing against the “bootcamp produces low-quality” stigma, so make every inch count.|||

I am the statistic bootcamps love to have, the crown drool of any for-profit education startup — the student with little-to-no prior engineering experience become employable after just mere months …