You'll be able to buy one of the rarest computers in history later this year: a working Apple-1, straight out of 1976.

German auctioneer Breker has told the Apple obsessive site MacRumors that it will be auctioning off one of the eight functioning Apple-1 computers remaining in the world. The buyer will get a couple bonus features as well: original manual and documentation, the receipt for the motherboard and cassette recorder, and a record of telephone conversations with Steve Jobs and Wozniak.

Expect it to be pricey. Apple was a small company starting out, and they only sold 175 of these computers. It's estimated that 50 to 60 or so remain in existence. A working Apple-1 went for a record $905,000 at a Bonhams auction in New York in October 2014, and another working machine went for $365,000 at a Christie's auction in New York two months later. CharityBuzz auctioned a "Celebration" model for $815,000.

The Apple-1 is more appreciated for its place in the company's history than its prowess. This was the first product ever sold by Apple, and Jobs and Wozniak each made personal sacrifices to finance it—the former selling his car, a VW microbus, and the latter selling an HP-65 calculator. Production only lasted from 1976 into 1977, when the company's breakout product, the Apple II, was introduced. Since Steve Wozniack was the only person who could answer any technical support questions about their computers at the time, the company offered to let Apple-1 owners trade in their old computers for the models, inadvertently enhancing their rarity.

Apple Computers are among the most recognizable in the world, and the company's history is revered among devotees. If you can't afford the Apple-1, you should be at least take a look at one in the museum of Apple products built by a teenager in Maine.|||

Popular Mechanics is a service magazine covering a variety of information on home improvement, automotive needs, electronics, computers, telecommunications, outdoors, fitness and science and technology. Popular Mechanics also features product evaluations, practical applications, how-to information and news of technological developments.