Join us for the second #LNM Meetup where we'll explore Node 7.7, Node 8, Node releases schedules, version numbering as well as the Long Term Support (LTS)

9:15 End of meetup, heading to a local pub (The Crown)

Tom is Node.js and Linux performance privateer, often seen happily writing code without any knowledge of his surroundings.

Node.js 7.7 now includes native support for async / await, but what is it, how do I use it and what is all the fuss about? This talk will debunk the thrills and spills; and provide you with some examples so that you can easily start using this fancy new piece of syntax!

Stewart is a developer of IBM's contributions to the Node.js runtime and leads the release team for the IBM SDK for Node.js, Stewart has extensive programming and system administration experience, with a focus on UNIX-based systems

The Node.js project is run as an open source project under control of the Node.js foundation. This talk will cover the history and versioning of the project including LTS (Long Term Support) releases critical for businesses as well as the individual component pieces of the Node.js runtime and how to get involved in the project, including some of the things that IBM has already been contributing. It will also cover how the community ensures that we do not break npm modules with new releases.

Thank You our Sponsors:

Thank you the Space Ape Games for hosting the meetup at their amazing office with some pizza and beer!

Space Ape Games is a mobile games studio based in Central London made up of games veterans and key people behind the biggest gaming companies and the biggest social games on the web. Space Ape's hit strategy games Rival Kingdoms, Samurai Siege and Transformers: Earth Wars available on iOS and Android devices, are played by more than 20 million players worldwide. Space Ape Games won the 2015 TIGA Award for Best Independent Studio and for Game of the Year for Rival Kingdoms, plus the 2014 Develop Award for Best New Studio and the 2015 Develop Award for Best Independent Studio For more information, visit www.spaceapegames.com.

YLD is a fast-growing, London-based Node.js firm, that delivers mission critical software to FTSE listed companies.

We are experts in delivering large enterprise projects using the best of breed open source technologies. We build high performance, scalable software products to help our clients address their business and technology challenges and stay on top of their markets.

For more information, visit us at YLD Blog for expert IT commentary, follow us on Twitter @YLDio and on LinkedIn.

We look forward to seeing you soon! If you are interested in sharing your knowledge, sponsoring or hosting - get in touch!|||

Join us for the second #LNM Meetup where we&amp;#039;ll explore Node 7.7, Node 8, Node releases schedules, version numbering as well as the Long Term Support (LTS)

Agenda:
6:45 Register, grab a drink