In the current startup paradigm, there are countless stories of ...

The current paradigm is NOT sustainable, and there’s no integrated program out there that teaches startup founders and leaders how to grow their companies in a positive, responsible way while maintaining a healthy, balanced, purposeful life.

I (Jeremy) experienced all of this first hand, after co-founding a company and grinding for 4.5 years to build it up to about 100 employees. Towards the end of those 4.5 years - almost two years ago at the time of this writing - it became painfully obvious that I needed to get away from the startup world and I left my company even though our growth was its highest (it’s still doing very well, with 250+ employees and over $50M raised).

Although I had a great, challenging experience living the startup dream, I left thinking I would never want to work in the startup world again.

When I left, the only plan I had was to “flow” - to see where the river of life takes me. This flow has led me through experiences that have deepened my understanding of my reality in ways I never could have imagined. I’ve traveled the world, built crazy large scale art, had my heart broken, met my life partner (Gigi), met my higher Self, and I’ve made peace with my own mortality. Most importantly, I’ve learned first hand the incredible power that my own beliefs have to create my reality, both consciously and, especially, unconsciously.

I’ve also learned that it’s possible - necessary, even - to be able to make a large, positive impact on the world while maintaining a balanced, healthy life. With this, I’ve come to see that there’s a reason I had to experience everything a typical startup founder goes through in the current paradigm: so I, working in closely with my partner Gigi, can help change it.

When Gigi and I made the realization that we can combine our unique experience and skills sets (startups/business + mindfulness/spirituality) to help people live better lives while creating more impactful companies, we put a lot of thought into whether that was really the direction we wanted to pursue. After many hours of meditation and discussion, we accepted that this was, together, one of our highest callings in life, and we created Awakened Founders.

We’re making a call to all startup founders and leaders to join us in changing the current paradigm. Every one of us is responsible for how we show up in the world, and it’s up to us to choose to show up awake or asleep.

Right now, startup culture is asleep. It’s resting in a paradigm that isn’t healthy or sustainable for the people involved.

The time has come for us to wake up to new possibilities.

The time has come for us to operate from abundance and not scarcity.

The time has come for positive, long term holistic change to be just as important as profits.

The time has come for empathy, compassion, and responsibility to be core to startup culture.

The time has come for founders, executives, and employees to live inspired, balanced, healthy lives aligned with their highest callings.

Waking up to a world like this isn’t impossible, and in fact it’s what we’re ALL here to do. Our beliefs create our reality, and I believe there are no limits to the amount of positive global change we each can create.

This is the world we’re creating through Awakened Founders.

Would you like to co-create it with us?|||

