Attackers that have capabilities to deliver high intensity acoustic interference in close proximity to the target MEMS sensor can spoof the sensor to output arbitrary, attacker–chosen, signals. Our experiments demonstrate the spelling of the word "WALNUT" over the output signal of a MEMS accelerometer. With proper knowledge of the algorithms that are utilizing the polluted sensor data, adversaries may be able to control the behavior of a system that relies on the sensor data to make automated decisions.

In the video below, we demonstrate playing a YouTube music video laced with special tones on a Samsung Galaxy S5 smartphone. The tones trick the phone's internal accelerometer to output a signal spelling "WALNUT". The computer plots the phone's accelerometer output signal in real time.

The second video below is the source of acoustic interference played in the first video above. Note that we laced a music video with the tones, demonstrating that the interference remains effective even when combined with videos and music that could be automatically played from websites, email attachments, Twitter links tapped on a smartphone, etc.

Finally, we show a video of injecting steps into a simple fitness monitor from Fitbit that contains a MEMS accelerometer. We do not feel this fitness attack poses a significant security risk given that the devices perform no medical therapy or diagnostics. However, it's illustrative as a proof of concept of acoustic interference to control the output of MEMS accelerometers.

Capacitive MEMS accelerometers use the deflection of a mass as a proxy for measuring acceleration. An ideal capacitive MEMS accelerometer architecture is shown below. When subjected to accelerative forces, the sensing mass shifts, causing a change in capacitance, which is translated to an analog voltage signal, s(t). The analog voltage signal is correlated to the acceleration function, s(t), sensed.

Acoustic pressure waves exhibit forces on physical objects in their path. Subjecting the sensing mass–spring structure to acoustic interference at its resonant frequency can displace the sensing mass enough to spoof false acceleration signals. These spoofed acceleration signals are correlated to the acoustic interference signal, s (t), as shown in the figure below. It is important note that the resonant frequency of the mass–spring structure is a characteristic of how it is physically designed, and that the frequency of acoustic interference must match the mass–spring structure's resonant frequency (or potentially a harmonic thereof) to successfully spoof false acceleration.

An acoustic attack on a MEMS accelerometer can be as simple as amplitude modulating the desired sensor output signal on top of the acoustic sinusoid, whose frequency matches the resonant frequency of the MEMS sensor. The figure below demonstrates how we spoofed a specific MEMS accelerometer to output a signal resembling the alphanumeric string "WALNUT".

If a system or device utilizes a vulnerable MEMS sensor to make autonomous state-changing decisions, an adversary can leverage the vulnerable MEMS sensor as an attack vector. To demonstrate this, we mounted an acoustic attack on a Samsung Galaxy S5 smartphone that was running an application to pilot an RC car based on real time measurements from the smartphone's MEMS accelerometer. Under normal operation, a user can steer the car by tilting the phone in the direction they wish the car to go. By mounting an acoustic attack on the phone, the car can be piloted without moving the phone.

Our experiments only measure the susceptibility of 20 different MEMS accelerometer models. Other MEMS sensors, including MEMS gyroscopes, are potentially also susceptible. The vulnerable sensors that we tested are listed below. Please note that not all configurations of the sensor are necessarily vulnerable, but it is possible that at least one configuration may be. Also note that our experiments consider the amplitude of acoustic interference to be 110 db SPL; however, lower amplitudes can also negatively impact various sensors.

For full details on acoustic attack defense mechanisms please refer to Section 8 in our IEEE paper. In short, deploying vulnerable sensors safely could involve a combination of various techniques, but two general approaches should be taken:|||

