Alaskan Klee Kai is a spitz type small purebred whereas Pomsky is a medium cross breed. These two puppies are of different breeds that share very few similarities. Alaskan Klee Kai is known as “working dog” whereas Pomsky is termed as “designer dog”. In fact, Alaskan Klee Kai is a miniature Alaskan Husky which is very old in the world of breeding as they came into the picture in 1970’s whereas Pomsky is new. Alaskan Husky also came from the mixed breed of Siberian Husky, German Shorthaired Pointer, and Greyhound. But now they are identified as a breed.

To draw the comparison between the two breeds that is Pomsky and Alaskan Klee Kai, I would like to share the features regarding colors, size, temperament and health so that you can clearly differentiate between the two. So, go through the features for clear understanding-

1) Klee Kai vs Pomsky: Color– Pomsky is of gray, brown, red, white, black, blue, copper and much more. Alaskan Klee Kai comes in all colors but black and white are more common. It is must for Alaskan Klee Kai to have the distinguishing mask of Alaskan Husky whereas Pomsky may or may not have the mask of a Siberian Husky.

2) Temperament– As Pomsky is the mixed breed of Pomeranian and Siberian Husky so they have mix temperaments of both the breeds. They can be playful, friendly, active, intelligent, outgoing, expressive, energetic and may need firm leadership. The small version of Alaskan Husky is Alaskan Klee Kai so they are quick, agile, intelligent, active and curious in behavior.

3) Health– Pomsky may suffer from the health problems of any two of the breeds – Pomeranian or Siberian Husky as it is the cross breed of the two. So Pomsky may suffer from dental disease, ear infection, luxating Patella, Hip Dysplasia, follicular dysplasia, corneal dystrophy and much more. The common health problems in Alaskan Klee are liver disease, thyroid disease, pyometra, cataracts at an early stage and cardiac problems.

4) Shedding– The Pomsky sheds more as compare to Alaskan Klee Kai.

5) Adaptability – Alaskan Husky better respond to the environment as it has the better adaptability as compare to Pomsky.

6) Exercise – Alaskan Klee Kai requires more exercise as compared to Pomsky.

Now I will show you the feature comparison of both Pomsky and Alaskan Klee kai in a tabular form.

Now you can clearly understand the characteristics of Pomsky and Alaskan Klee Kai. Both these breeds enjoy some similarities too. You can observe that both share some temperaments but altogether both are of different breeds. To be active, playful and active are the common traits of both the breeds. You can say these are mix traits of Alaskan Klee Kai and Pomeranian.

Alaskan Husky suffers from more health issues as compare to Pomsky. Generally, mixed breed dogs are found healthier in comparison to purebred. In Pomsky the prominent health problem is of dental disease so to keep their teeth in healthy condition regular checkups are required. Both these breeds are loving as Pomsky is adorable and Alaskan Klee kai has the sleek appearance. In Alaska, Alaskan Husky is the famous racing dog. So now there is the clear picture of “designer dog” that is Pomsky and “working dog” that is Alaskan Klee Kai. Both breeds have watchdog ability.|||

If you are looking to adopt puppy, then it is good to have a comparison between the best of them. Check comparison of Alaskan Klee Kai Vs Pomsky puppies.