Some student loan companies may now have more leeway to charge fees to borrowers trying to get out of default, thanks to a directive issued Thursday by the Department of Education.

The announcement reverses guidance provided by the Obama administration, which prohibited guarantee agencies — companies that issue and collect certain types of student loans that are backed by the government — from charging a defaulted borrower collection fees if he or she entered into an agreement to cure her default within two months.

When borrowers with federal student loans default on their student loan debt it can be a credit-ruining event that puts their Social Security check, tax refunds and wages at risk of garnishment. But the government does offer options for them to get out of default, including through a process called rehabilitation, which requires defaulted student loan borrowers to make nine on-time payments in 10 months to cure their default. The new directive provides guidance for how much certain student loan companies can charge borrowers as they pursue those options.

“It’s incredibly frustrating to see this administration take a stance against borrowers making a good effort to get out of default in a timely manner,” said Persis Yu, the director of the Student Loan Borrower Assistance Project at the National Consumer Law Center.

The controversy over the fees stretches back several years, when Bryana Bible filed a class-action suit against guarantee agency United Student Aid Funds or USA Funds, arguing the company illegally charged her more than $4,000 in collection fees. Bible defaulted on her debt in 2012, but claimed she quickly agreed to make efforts to become current on her loan through rehabilitation.

Typically, guarantee agencies can charge defaulted borrowers up to 16% of their principal and interest in collection fees if they rehabilitate, but Bible and her attorneys argued that the law prohibits guarantee agencies from charging those fees if the borrower enters into a rehabilitation agreement to get out of default within 60 days and makes the required nine of 10 monthly payments. (NCLC was one of the organizations representing Bible in that case).

As that case wound through the legal system, the court asked the Obama administration to weigh in with their interpretation of the rule. The Department ultimately backed Bible’s position in court and then issued the initial guidance in 2015.

USA Funds sued the Department over that directive. The judge in that case asked the Trump administration to weigh in about whether it would continue to back the Obama administration’s position. On Thursday, the Trump administration issued it’s decision, withdrawing the Obama administration’s initial guidance. In a letter announcing the decision, Lynn Mahaffie, the acting assistant secretary for the Office of Postsecondary Education at the Department, wrote that officials believe that the position set forth by the Obama administration “would have benefited from public input.” As a result, the Department is no longer requiring guarantee agencies to comply with the Obama-era directive “without providing prior notice and an opportunity for public comment,” according to the letter.

In a statement, Bob Murray, a spokesman for Strada Education Network, formerly USA Funds, said the organization was “pleased” with the Department’s decision, arguing that the Obama-era directive “should never have been issued in the first place.” Strada is no longer a guarantee agency. It now focuses on philanthropy and research instead.

To be sure, only a sliver of borrowers will be affected by the new directive. For one, it only applies to those who have defaulted. In addition, student loan borrowers who took out federal loans in the last several years, even if they’ve defaulted, likely aren’t affected by this directive. In 2010, the Obama administration got rid of guarantee agencies’ role in issuing new loans. Before that, the bulk of federal student loans were issued and managed by guarantee agencies, but backed by the government. Now, all new federal student loans, known as Direct Loans, are issued directly by the Department of Education. The Department doesn’t charge collection fees on borrowers with Direct Loans who default, but quickly agree to cure their defaults.

Still, borrowers with loans issued under the old program, known as the Federal Family Education Loan program, could be affected by the new directive. As of the last quarter of 2016, 4.2 million borrowers with FFEL loans were in default, compared with 4 million with Direct Loans.|||

The fees would apply to people who have defaulted.