The UK government is on a press-release diet. Between 2014 and 2016, the number of releases fell by 20 per cent. “The press release is dead”, said government comms chief Jonathan Aiken in 2014. And although there’s some way to go, he’s making clear progress nailing down the coffin lid. So, is the press release dead? Possibly. But for now, they still have a role to play. And if done right, they’re often the best way to communicate information about important breaking news quickly. But increasingly our role as communicators is not to announce news. There is simply not enough of it. And most companies are just not big enough to have real news to announce. Instead, the role of communicators is to build up relationships with their customers. To show people how their company sees the world differently from the others. To align themselves with their potential customers’ worldview and demonstrate that they’re both going in the same direction. Increasingly, the role of communicators is to build up relationships with their customers And the press release is a terrible way to do this. In fact, it may very well make it more difficult to break through. If you’re a FTSE 100 company, send out that press release In the hands of an expert, the press release is the best way to communicate company information quickly. It tells journalists what they need to know straight away. It gets to the nub of the news. It gets out the facts. And it throws in a quote to boot.

But, unless you’re a huge company, you likely don’t have any actual, real news. You might think you do, but you probably don’t. Unless you’re Apple or Google, the launch of your new product is just not news. Genuinely. It’s not. Occasionally, you may well have news. A multi-million-pound investment. A new large client. A new important hire. That may be newsworthy enough to make your sector publications. But I see lots of companies who even overestimate the amount of sector news they have. You probably have one news announcement every other month. At most. Beyond that, you’re probably deceived. This isn’t a new thing, by the way. In the past, newspapers and magazines were not any more likely to report news from a press release. It’s just that the Internet has made it easier for communications officers to write something non-newsworthy — fast; flooding journalists’ inboxes and giving them repetitive strain injuries from pressing the delete key. As communicator, your job is to connect with your customers But what has changed is the nature of our job as communicators and marketers. In the past, it was the job of the marketing department to tell the public about the companies’ products and their features. Get the information out. Today it is simply not enough to tell potential customers about the features of your products. That will not compel them to buy. The market is already too crowded. There is likely already five, if not 100, companies providing what you provide. Even if it is positioned slightly differently.

Instead, the role of communicators is to build a connection with our potential customer base. You set yourself and your company apart not merely by what you do or even how you do it, but why you do. The economy has taken an ethical turn, and consumers want to buy from companies who can not only provide them with what they want, but share the same worldview. The ridesharing app Lyft is a case in point. A competitor to Uber, its communication strategy has largely been built around how it, and its management team, see the world differently to Uber. After Travis Kalanick joined Donald Trump’s economic advisory group, Lyft deftly aligned itself with the public outcry by donating $1 million to the ACLU, a civil liberties organisation that exposed the Trump travel ban. Lyft wasn’t saying how it was better. It was saying how it saw the world differently. Lyft wasn’t saying how it was better. It was saying how it saw the world differently. This is something a press release could never do. Or would find it incredibly difficult. It requires action from leadership. It demands management take a public stand on national and global issues. Have a solid viewpoint and communicate it to the right audience at the right time. The press release is certainly not dead. Not yet. But in a world where companies are competing with each other on the vision of the world they’re selling to the public, they are very largely useless.|||

The UK government is on a press-release diet. Between 2014 and 2016, the number of releases fell by 20 per cent. “The press release is dead”, said government comms chief Jonathan Aiken in 2014. And…