elving into my genome, I learned a lot about how genetic variants influence my health, putting me at risk of some disorders and protecting me from others. But I also wanted to search inside my DNA for my history — my own ancestry, and that of our entire species.

I am hardly alone in my curiosity. Many people are sending their spit to testing companies so that they can learn about their origins.

The science behind genetic genealogy is young, but growing fast. A couple decades ago, researchers could only compare one gene in different people to see how they’re related. Now companies like 23andMe and Ancestry.com can look at hundreds of thousands of genetic markers at once. Yet those markers are just a tiny selection of our DNA. For the newest studies on our origins, researchers are comparing entire genomes.

To explore genealogy’s new frontier, I paid a visit to the New York Genome Center. It’s a fascinating vista, I discovered, although you have to beware of the mirages.

The researchers in New York ran a series of tests on my DNA, each pulling out different historical clues. In one test, they looked at my Y chromosome. Men have 22 pairs of nearly identical chromosomes, along with an X chromosome they get from their mothers and a Y they get from their fathers. The other 22 pairs shuffle segments of DNA together with each new generation.

The Y, on the other hand, is passed down virtually unchanged from father to son.

That unusual inheritance makes the Y relatively easy to study. If a man acquires a new mutation on a Y chromosome, all his male descendants will inherit it. They can quickly identify themselves as cousins by the mutations that they share.

It turns out I have a Y chromosome called E1b1b1. In some ways, that’s not a big surprise. E1b1b1 is a fairly common Y chromosome among Jewish men. My father is an Ashkenazi Jew with roots in Germany and eastern Europe.

But E1b1b1 is hardly just a “Jewish” chromosome. E1b1b1 turns out to be common as well among men in southern Europe and North Africa. And it’s most common in Ethiopia and Somalia.

Does that mean I’m Somali? I’m pretty sure I’d get turned away from a family reunion in Mogadishu. Nevertheless, my particular Y chromosome probably originated in a man who lived thousands of years ago in the Horn of Africa.

Some of his male descendants made their way to North Africa and then hopped into southern Europe. Others spread across the Red Sea to the Near East, where the Y chromosome ended up in the Jewish population. My Y chromosome took a long journey, in other words, that its original owner did not.

“The Y chromosome is just from one ancestor,” Joseph Pickrell, a researcher at the New York Genome Center, told me. “It’s an ancestor that a lot of people care about, but it’s randomly chosen from thousands of ancestors.”

To get a richer view of my ancestry, Pickrell and his colleagues looked at my entire genome, seeing how common each of its genetic variants is in different populations across the world. On its own, each variant can’t say much. They may find, for example, that one of my variants is present in 50 percent of northern Europeans but only 20 percent of Nigerians.

“That gives you a tiny bit of information,” said Pickrell. “But if you sum that up over hundreds of thousands of genetic variants, it gets to be very, very powerful.” If you have hundreds of thousands of variants that are all more common in Nigerians than Northern Europeans, you probably got them from Nigerian ancestors.

For someone like me, the picture isn’t so simple. While my father is an Ashkenazi Jew, my mother can trace her ancestry back to Protestants in England and Catholics in Ireland and Germany. Different parts of my DNA thus point back to different origins.

To figure out the sources of my genome, Pickrell and his colleagues used a variety of statistical methods to divide my ancestry up into the most likely combination of groups.

They confirmed that I’m a pan-European mutt. One of their methods, for example, found that about 43 percent of my genome is Ashkenazi, 25 percent from northern or central Europe, 23 percent Italian, 6 percent southwestern European (Spain, Portugal, and France). I have a speck of Northern Slavic DNA (2.2 percent), and 1.3 percent that they couldn’t place.

“You should treat those numbers as an approximation of reality,” Pickrell warned. Basically, his analysis showed that I’m half Jewish — which fits nicely with all the Passovers and bar mitzvahs I’ve had with my father’s side of the family. But the notion that I’m almost a quarter Italian comes as a complete surprise (as much as I may like gnocchi). My numbers may shift in years to come, Pickrell said, as scientists add more genomes to their studies.

These variants can only take me back a few centuries into my ancestry. To dig deeper into my origins, the New York Genome Center scientists used another piece of software, called RFMix, to probe my genome. It takes advantage of the way DNA gets passed down from generation to generation.

As eggs and sperm develop, their chromosome pairs come together and swap chunks of DNA. That means that our genomes are actually assembled from ancient chunks of DNA.

“It’s a quilt, made up of a segment from one ancestor attached to a segment from another ancestor,” said New York Genome Center researcher Nathaniel Pearson. “And we’re trying to figure out where those segments came from.”

Close relatives share long, identical stretches of DNA in the chromosomes. Over the generations, those stretches get smaller. Yet even when they get downright tiny, RFMix can pick out matching chunks of DNA in relatives. It can even find them in people who share a common ancestor a couple thousand years ago.

Pearson and his colleagues used RFMix to see how my Ashkenazi Jews came to be Ashkenazi in the first place. According to one theory, a kingdom near the Caspian Sea populated by people known as Khazars converted en masse to Judaism a thousand years ago. According to another, waves of Jews migrated out of the Near East during the Roman Empire, spreading to different parts of Europe. Later, in the Middle Ages, they came together in Poland to escape persecution.

Pearson and his colleague Dina Zielinski tested these possibilities by looking for matching chromosome segments in genomes from a few representative groups of people in Europe and the Near East. To test the Khazar hypothesis, for example, they looked at genomes from an ethnic group from that region, called the Adygei. To look for an ancestry in the Near East, they added Palestinians and Druze to the analysis. And to include western Europeans in the mix, they used genomes from French people and Russians.

A lot of my genome, Pearson and Zielinski found, was most similar to French DNA. That’s probably due mainly to my mother’s ancestry. My father’s Ashkenazi DNA, on the other hand, matched up in many segments with the Palestinian and Druze genomes. In other places, it matched the Russian DNA. Very little of it looks like Adygei.

Pearson warned me that this kind of research pushes the science of ancestry pretty close to its limits. “We have to have tons of grains of salt on the table,” he said. But at the very least, my genome turns out to be an argument against the Khazar theory of the Jews. Hidden behind the Ashkenazi curtain of my DNA lies an origin in the Near East.

But when it comes to human ancestry, each curtain pulled away reveals another curtain further back in time. The Jews may have first gotten their identity as a people in the Near East, but they shared a much older identity with the rest of humanity. And I was about to discover that there were echoes of that ancient identity in my genome as well.|||

STAT's Carl Zimmer takes a journey back through time, visiting ancestors over the past 2,000 years and going back further to meet his inner Neanderthal.