I an in favor of people generating less trash, and have been amazed that where I live (southern California), people have taken a “plastic bag ban” so well in stride. It felt like one of those things where we couldn’t live without it, but it turns out we can quite easily. Maybe there’s a lesson there, but that’s not the point of this post so I’ll get back to it (;

Where I live, you can BUY plastic bags for use from the grocery store for about 10 cents each, which is cost prohibitive enough that people tend to bring their own bags.

Now let me tell you, I’m no dummy. I am pretty sure those re-usable plastic bags everyone has gotten use far more resources to make and create more pollution in the process so seem like they will take some usage before they hit a break even point compared to the disposable bags. Google seems to give mixed results, saying that some bags are better than others: Google: are reusable bags better for the environment.

I think that the sentiment of what’s going on is good for sure though, and I’m hoping it’s a net positive (?), and I think that there is some winning to be had here environmentally – if done right.

However, let’s put the environmental concerns on the back burner for a second.

Grocery store baggers now get handed all sorts of differently shaped bags of various capacity, and folks often want their stuff bagged specific ways to make sure it all fits in however many they brought. It’s also very common for people to forget their bags at home, leave them in the car, etc. This makes things a bit awkward and definitely not as fast and smooth as it used to be with disposable bags.

My idea to address these issues is this:

The idea here is that at the end of the day…

There are some obvious issues to work through, including:

So, that’s my idea. Environmentally friendly semi-reusable bags – but with the convenience we all have come to enjoy from disposable bags. The best of both worlds.

As a video game programmer this is far outside of my interest and ability, so please take this business idea if you have the desire and the means. Let’s make it happen!|||

I an in favor of people generating less trash, and have been amazed that where I live (southern California), people have taken a "plastic bag ban" so well in