A curated list of tech blogs that I've came across over the time.

The Morning Paper - an interesting/influential/important paper from the world of CS every weekday morning, as selected by Adrian Colyer.

dev.to - A blog where programmers share ideas and help each other grow.

The Old New Thing - Posts by Raymond Chen.

The Daily WTF - The Daily WTF is your how-not-to guide for developing software.

Hackday - Hackaday serves up Fresh Hacks Every Day from around the Internet.

Hashnode - Where programmers share ideas and help each other grow.

Coderwall - The latest development and design tips, tools, and projects from the developer community.

Embedded in Academia - A blog by John Regehr, Professor of Computer Science, University of Utah, USA.

Hadoop Weekly - A summary of the week's top news in the Apache Hadoop™ ecosystem.

2ality - 2ality is a blog about JavaScript, web development and mobile computing.

Next Big Future - Coverage of Disruptive Science and Technology.

DeeperTech - A place for in-depth articles about how future technologies may be, digging deep into the technical and non-technical details.

Mysterios Code - Stuff around AWS but also FreeBSD and general IT security.

Syntax Sauce - Blog about JavaScript topics like frameworks and web performance.

Semiconductor Engineering - Deep insights into the increasingly complex task of designing, testing, verifying, integrating and manufacturing semiconductors.

Liliputing - All the news about tech.

The Hack Fator - A blog on security, privacy and (foto) forensics.

Build Please - Helpful development and design advice for .NET developers.

The Next Web - The Next Web — colloquially named TNW — has been sharing, inventing and advancing tech developments since 2006.

Ponyfoo - JavaScript consulting, modularity, front-end architecture, performance, and more. Authored by Nicolás Bevacqua.

Alexander Zeitler - Alexander Zeitler's Blog. A passionated developer love to create outstanding solutions for the web and mobile platforms since 1994.|||

tech-blogs - A curated list of tech blogs