analysis commissioned by Public Health England ( ) presents national suicide rates broken down by occupation for the first time in England.

An analysis of suicide prevalence statistics for 2011 to 2015 has been carried out to gain a better understanding of factors that influence suicide, in order to inform the government’s Suicide Prevention Strategy and help identify where inequalities exist amongst different groups.

To coincide with this, Public Health England ( ), Business in the Community ( ) and Samaritans have joined forces to produce toolkits for employers on how to prevent suicide and how to minimise the impact when it does happen.

The new analysis shows that suicides are less common for females than males, and that there are differences in the types of occupation where suicide is more common. For women, occupations with a high risk of suicide include nurses (23% above the national average), primary school teachers (42% above average) and those working in culture, media and sport (69% above average).

For men, low skilled labourers in construction had a risk that was 3 times higher than that the average for England; men working in skilled construction jobs also had an increased risk. Both male and female care workers have a risk of suicide that was almost twice the national average.

The toolkits produced by , and Samaritans include advice on steps employers can take action to prevent suicides and support them and their teams when responding to the death of an employee caused by suicide.

Suicide is the leading cause of death for men under 50, and more women are taking their own lives each year. Death by suicide is never inevitable, but for a person who is overwhelmed by feelings and events that appear insurmountable, it can seem like the only answer. People who die from suicide are usually not in contact with health services, and often push through in silence as their ability to cope deteriorates. With more than two-thirds of adults in employment, the workplace offers an opportunity to reach people who need extra support. I urge all employers, large or small, public or private sector to treat mental health as seriously as physical health. Early action can stop any employees reaching a desperate stage. Simple actions can make a huge difference - talking with a manager or colleague can help people get the support they need, and ultimately save lives.

Suicide is one of the leading causes of death in people aged 20 to 64 in England, and is the biggest killer of young people between 20 and 34. There were 18,998 deaths caused by suicide in England between 2011 and 2015.

Important actions employers can take include introducing specialised suicide awareness prevention training for managers, mental health first aid training, and using internal communications as a function to foster a culture of openness about mental health.

Suicide in the workplace is extremely uncommon, but the postvention toolkit is there to help employers respond. There is no single or right way to act when this happens, but effective postvention plans can ensure that timely and appropriate care and support is provided for those affected.

We spend a third of our lives at work and one-fifth of us experience suicidal thoughts, so these resources are much needed. We shouldn’t stop there though, it is up to us to create a culture in our workplaces where people feel safe enough to talk about their feelings and get support if they need it. The effects of suicide can be devastating and they can reach far beyond immediate family and friends. Samaritans is proud to have worked with Public Health England, Business in the Community and other partners on these resources.

As well as looking after the mental health of their staff, employers need to have preparations in place to ensure that if the worst happens, they have the knowledge and skills to minimise harms. This way they can help everyone deal with the devastating consequences of suicide as best they can. That’s where these toolkits come in. Both make a compelling business and moral case for employers to act responsibly and support employees to feel comfortable discussing these issues.

For more information on the government’s suicide prevention strategy, read Suicide prevention: third annual report.

Contact Naomi Ramage on 020 3682 0132 or Sean Kelleher on 020 7654 8096) at for further information.|||

Office for National Statistics (ONS) analysis reveals which professions have the highest risk of suicide.