Summer is coming up, so I decided that I wanted to lose weight and try something new. Being on a diet isn’t easy. It often comes with a lifestyle change. Usually it is tough to meet for social gatherings when you cannot eat or drink whatever you want. Often you have to restrict yourself and not enjoy yourself as much, especially when everyone around you is indulging.

For this diet, I wanted to conduct an experiment for roughly two weeks. I wanted to find a good block of time where I wouldn’t be traveling or have any large events. Once I found the time, I decided from Monday 3/6 to 3/17 will be the window for my experiment.

I had a rough idea of what I wanted to do. I had tried Intermittent Fasting before. I had also heard about an interesting diet, the Ketogenic Diet, where you restrict the amount of carbohydrates you intake. For this experiment, I thought it might be fun to combine them to see if I could get even better results.

Just a warning, for any kind of major change to your diet, you should consult your physician before beginning something like this.

In today’s society, it is very common to have three meals a day. Breakfast, lunch and dinner, every day. Your body is constantly fed on a regular schedule. Intermittent Fasting is simply restricting what you eat to certain time windows and breaking this cycle of three meals a day. As I had done some reading on this, by not eating for longer periods of time it puts your body in a fat burning state. This causes you to actually burn through your fat stores due to the long blocks of time.

For this experiment, I decided that I would stop eating in the evenings at 9PM and eat my first meal for lunch at noon. This means that I would skip breakfast, everyday. I would allow myself coffee in the morning, but it would be black, without any sugar or cream.

Plan:

 -Stop eating at 9PM in the evening

 -Skip breakfast and only have coffee and water

 -Start eating at 12PM or later with lunch

I started of with a goal of not eating for at least a certain amount of hours each day. In doing research, I found a great app called Zero that helps me track this and shows graphs of your progress. This definitely made it fun to track when I stopped and started eating. It also allows you to go back and edit the times in case you don’t have your mobile phone with you.

Some would say that skipping breakfast will sap you of energy to start the day. Others say that breakfast is the most important meal of the day. For these, I felt a bit tired the first couple of days doing this, as I had experimented with fasting before this experiment. It does affect you the first few days when you do feel a bit weaker. After a few days, your body gets used to it and it isn’t a problem. At least it wasn’t a problem for me anymore and I felt great in the mornings. The coffee definitely helped. Sometimes I would be in morning meetings and my stomach would growl. This was a good signal that I was in the zone.

Here is a screen shot of me hitting my goals of 13 hours of day of fasting the first week:

A Ketogenic diet is simply one that is high in fat and protein but lacking in carbohydrates. Leveraging this type of diet is to get your body to stop relying on carbohydrates to create glucose for fuel and use an alternate source. That alternate source is the fat in your body. Your liver will convert this fat into ketone bodies that will be used for fuel instead. These ketone bodies are allowed to pass into the brain, just like glucose.

So, when I started my first meal of the day at noon, I would only eat items that were lacking of carbohydrates.

This is the typical list of what is I do eat:

This definitely cut out some of my favorite things such as bagels and pizza. This is not an exhaustive list, it was a guideline to basically choose foods that don’t have any carbohydrates to low amounts of them in my diet. This will keep the body in a ketogenic state. The good thing, is that these aren’t bad to find in most places and doesn’t require a special purchase or special food. My favorite during the diet was a burrito bowl. Just beef, cheese, guacamole and sour cream would be all that I needed.

The other aspect that I added to this was to not drink alcohol. Alcohol is allowed on a ketogenic diet, if it doesn’t have carbohydrates. This basically eliminates beer and wine.

The only kind of alcohol allowed is the following:

I decided in this experiment to eliminate alcohol just to see i I could do it. It is best to avoid it if you can when dieting.

With Intermittent Fasting, you are basically only having two meals a day. That means only two times per day where you are somewhat inconvenienced.  After eating your last meal, get ready to fast for 13 or more hours until your next meal at lunch. The fasting causes your body to burn fat stores combined with the fact that the food you are eating has no carbohydrates, your body should mostly be converting fat into ketone bodies.

I also did an experiment with exercise. The first week I ran 3 times a week. I also lifted weights at the gym one day that week.

For the second week, I cut back on exercise to see if this diet still worked. I only went to the gym to lift weights one day that week and did not run at all. I still lost weight at the same rate. This is a good sign and shows that sticking to this diet doesn’t require a whole lot of training.

For my first week I lost 10 pounds. I didn’t feel that I was too inconvenienced in what I could eat. I did find that it was tough in social situations to say no to high carbohydrate foods or to say no to alcohol. Either way, I just drank water and smiled at social events, knowing I was going to stay strong and continue with my experiment.

The second week was a bit tougher because of the weekend. As you can see from the graph, it went up on the weekend a bit. This was due to eating breakfast on Saturday and Sunday. After getting back to the work week, I was back into strict mode and was able to keep losing the weight.

I use a Fitbit Aria Scale which can send my measurements via WiFi where I can read them in the graph later. I would weigh myself around the same time before my morning shower.

Here is the graph for the first week:

Here is the graph for the second week:

I am very happy with these results! It was a bit inconvenient at first, but I am glad that I found something I can stick to without a heavy training regimen.

I will continue this diet and keep posting any results or insights that I find. If you have any questions, let me know!|||

