Psychologist Dan Pink is very interesting to me because he makes the scholarly argument for working the way I work!

How do I work? Well, I don’t worry about money other than paying rent and other basic necessities. I don’t worry about career advancement at any one company because I follow my own interests and those cut across organizations.

I focus on entirely on doing work in which I am  interested because — as long as the work remains interesting — then I will work hard without having to force myself to do it and actually I will enjoy it and in the course of enjoying my work I will (experience shows) work with clients who are optimally satisfied with my work.

RSA Animate — Drive: The surprising truth about what motivates us from Daniel Pink on Vimeo.

Here are my notes on Dan Pink’s TED Talk. I would suggest watching the whole thing (embedded above) before reading my response — but if you want to treat this post like a skimmable cliffs-notes-version of the talk, that’s OK too! I’ve provided a transcript of the relevant bits of Dan’s talk, below.

Extrinsic rewards cause us to narrowly focus our attention. This works for repetetive tasks such as an assembly line. But narrow focus is ineffective for creative work.

“Financial incentives can have a negative impact on performance … Organizations are making decisions based on information that is outdated, unexamined, and rooted more in folklore for than in science”

"Traditional management is great if you want compliance. But for engagement, self-direction works better.” And engagement is more important than compliance when it comes to knowledge workers.

It shouldn’t matter where, when or how people do their work as long as the work gets done. Meetings are optional. In these situations so far, it appears that productivity goes up and turnover goes down.

Carrots and sticks are ineffective motivators for when it comes to software engineers (and knowledge workers in general). What does motivate us is: being in an environment where we have autonomy, mastery and purpose.

Conditional motivators: “if you do this then you will rewarded with that” — are not effective with creative tasks. In fact they make performance worse and this has been replicated in many experiments over several decades.

If-then rewards work really well for those sorts of tasks, where there is a simple set of rules and a clear destination to go to. Rewards, by their very nature, narrow our focus, concentrate the mind; that’s why they work in so many cases. And so, for tasks like this, a narrow focus, where you just see the goal right there, zoom straight ahead to it, they work really well. … Think about your own work. Are the problems that you face, … do they have a clear set of rules, and a single solution? No. The rules are mystifying. The solution, if it exists at all, is surprising and not obvious. …

Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, some evidence: Dan Ariely, one of the great economists of our time, he and three colleagues, did a study of some MIT students. They gave these MIT students a bunch of games, games that involved creativity, and motor skills, and concentration. And the offered them, for performance, three levels of rewards: small reward, medium reward, large reward. Okay? If you do really well you get the large reward, on down. What happened? As long as the task involved only mechanical skill bonuses worked as they would be expected: the higher the pay, the better the performance. Okay? But once the task called for even rudimentary cognitive skill, a larger reward led to poorer performance. … There is a mismatch between what science knows and what business does. And what worries me, as we stand here in the rubble of the economic collapse, is that too many organizations are making their decisions, their policies about talent and people, based on assumptions that are outdated, unexamined, and rooted more in folklore than in science. And if we really want to get out of this economic mess, and if we really want high performance on those definitional tasks of the 21st century, the solution is not to do more of the wrong things, to entice people with a sweeter carrot, or threaten them with a sharper stick. We need a whole new approach.

12:17 And the good news about all of this is that the scientists who’ve been studying motivation have given us this new approach. It’s an approach built much more around intrinsic motivation. Around the desire to do things because they matter, because we like it, because they’re interesting, because they are part of something important. And to my mind, that new operating system for our businesses revolves around three elements: autonomy, mastery and purpose. Autonomy: the urge to direct our own lives. Mastery: the desire to get better and better at something that matters. Purpose: the yearning to do what we do in the service of something larger than ourselves. These are the building blocks of an entirely new operating system for our businesses. … There is a mismatch between what science knows and what business does. And here is what science knows. One: Those 20th century rewards, those motivators we think are a natural part of business, do work, but only in a surprisingly narrow band of circumstances. Two: Those if-then rewards often destroy creativity. Three: The secret to high performance isn’t rewards and punishments, but that unseen intrinsic drive — the drive to do things for their own sake. The drive to do things cause they matter.|||

