free machines provides Artificial Intelligence solutions to solve key decision problems along the customer journey.

Higher personalisation leads to better outcomes. For firms, today there are no tools that personalise in a fast and optimal way and can be used with extremely low friction. We try to build this product with free machines.

Right now, in a lean experiment, we apply the technology as a zero-configuration solution optimising user interfaces like websites. You can check that out at hypermaus.free-machines.com.

We all came with a strong research background in Machine Learning and Deep Neural Networks. The team joined on the believe that Artificial Intelligence can have a very positive impact on humanity, and we want to sit in the front row when it happens.

When working at several A/B testing driven optimisation problems in different companies, we realised that this approach is fundamentally flawed:

Based on these observations and our research background in AI, we realised that modern methods can solve these problems entirely. This is possible as they operate in a closed-loop way.

The figure above shows one of the fundamental differences between the two optimisation approaches: While A/B testing tries out test variants of constant proportion, our solution can exploit growing confidence about the best variant from the very start.

We want to provide the services as a SaaS. In the HyperMaus experiment, we are targeting a lower-mid range price point, so we hope for a large amount of customers at a price range between 100,- and 1000,- $. Generally, we encrypt data before moving them to our AI models. That allows us to do transfer learning between the customers, expecting strong data network effects, and building artificial customers.

Since we started free machines, we always tried to get as much feedback as possible. One of the most valuable feedback meeting was with Dr. Martin Heibel, head of XPRENEURS. When approached us to join XPRENEURS as the first team, we were (1) quite honoured (2) and decided very quick to join, as we expect more intensive feedback from guidance of XPRENEURS to be extremely helpful.

It depends on the nature of the decision. We think today, AI can be extremely helpful if data size, dimensionality and frequency become too complex for humans to process. If you wait long enough it most probably will, and we shall do what we can to make that change a good one for everybody.

We have a proprietary AI core with the following properties:

That’s a tricky question. There are so many applications for our technology that our main challenge right now is to pick the right use case domain and the right focus in that domain. Basically, if you understand customer journeys broadly as websites, apps, or even contract properties (one could say that contracts are also a form of user experience), we could optimise all that.|||

free machines provides Artificial Intelligence solutions to solve key decision problems along the customer journey. Higher personalisation leads to better outcomes. For firms, today there are no…