No, you were with a probability bordering on certainty not spied on by the Weeping Angel at least as described in the leaked documents. Why? The attack involved a physical component—"physically plugging a USB cable"—which makes it very unlikely that you were targeted. After all, they would have to deploy an actual physical spy to deploy that hack. Every such operation has costs and has a (however slim) likelihood of the operative being caught. Thus, you'd have to be a high value target to be targeted. Furthermore, the attack window of the leaked hack is pretty short and ended with version 1118 which was released barely a year after market launch of the product.

However, and being abundantly clear, there is no way to know right now if they improved on the hack. If a Weeping Angel v2 got rid of the physical component the big data approach would get more likely. "Just hack everything and see what turns up."

There is no simple solution to detect such attacks. It's hard for the manufacturers of the devices to detect them and for the customer it's virtually impossible to do it for a device of a certain smartness.

Why? Simply put: The more functionalities a device has, the more endpoints it communicates with. That makes traffic analysis pretty hard. A few years ago, a TV of a certain manufacturer would only communicate with that manufacturer—and that already makes a few services, for example a streaming service, an update service, a shop service and whatnot. Nowadays more and more device in the processing power class of TVs get apps. Each app connects to its own cloud service. Monitoring of these channels costs a lot of effort. And if they are using some basic security you can't differentiate a bit because you can't look into the traffic, you can only see the endpoints by addressed IP.

Basically network analysis gets really nasty. Unfortunately, it's pattern analysis again. The same as in the linked question. You expect a TV to download a lot more stuff than it uploads. If your TV has gigabytes of upload something is up. Speech is a lot less data than video but normally the control stuff your TV uploads should be less than what speech data amounts to.

The only thing you can do is flashing the device with a trusted firmware from a trusted source. Maybe you can check if the device loads the firmware from a server that is associated with the manufacturer.

As Weeping Angel shows those updates may invalidate hacks on their own. It was done with version 1118—at least from what we know of the leak.|||

