The world is advancing every day so the Internet too, Internet space—Internet users—Internet technology—Internet fraudsters—Internet securities. You are surely an Internet user and you may decide to become your own security agent only when you are smart enough.

PLEASE READ CAREFULLY ! 

Hackers are from mankind, they are people like you. Why they different from others is their course of interest breaking through defence without being permitted.

Security hackers or certified ethical hackers are authorised hackers that grant permission in other to break through defence and access what have been protected. They are very skillful in assessing the security of computer systems, using penetration testing techniques.

Although real hacking involves skill and expertise so only minority are Certified ethical hackers. Majority of hackers are try by error. The color of hats does not determine the intelligence of a hackers potentials but what is under the hat does.

READ THIS ARTICLE LATER?  GO DOWN THIS PAGE

Within Family : To avoid being hacked at is a minor need because only few people are facing the risk. Why, because humanity and conscience does not permit family members from hacking each other. The possible causes of home hacking can be jealous, hatred and greed. Only few cases led to financial break down or blashpheming. So avoid using multiple family members as account recovery back-up contacts. Although the family is the safest place to feel secured but privacy is needed at home.

Avoid copying passwords and login details on calendars and notes at home, your kids can play with your valuable things.

Encryt confidential files on your device

School is a place to learn and privacy is useful as well at School. You surely will have a best friend. Having a best friend(s) that meet up with your standards means you can share work with them, join their study group and tell them more about yourself.

At work

Your job is part of your life, it is part of what makes life become more meaningful. Hacking attempts at at work place is part of the the most critical and devastating hacking outcome. It is often attempted by co-workers not external, although external may be involved due to carelessness and privacy ignorance. If you respect others privacy, they too will respect yours. The more you expose your privacy the higher the risk. Although you have to be open minded yet you need to be reserved.

Public Internet Computer

Browsing on public Internet computers also involve privacy and smartness expecially when you are to view check for new mails, visit your social networking accounts. To do all these you have to log in to your account. There are few facts You need to know about public or commercial computers (1) They have to monitor or moderate what/how people interact with their computers (2) Some public internet cafe setup recovery option on their system (3) someone might have installed a malware on the network (4) the network may be under attack.

Control :

Regardless of your, age, gender, profession, device and more you need internet smartness. Everyday each Internet user upload data to a server which helps to evaluate internet usage or statistic. On the social network, Internet safety and privacy has become a dilemma facing some youths, students, workers and some elderly people. The issue with social network smartness starts with individuals who are conscious of their privacy.

Chatting with strangers can put you in trouble, especially when sharing informations like the name of your favorite uncle, street you grew up, favorite meal, mobile number, email and your birthday are informative enough for a hacker to get you. When you see a post, comment  or photo you didn’t share and was shared by you, it means you have been hacked what you must do is to change your password and trace your activities.

This may involve stealing people’s personal data. A phisher may develop a program or form to prompt users to share information with their friends on social. Any innocent user who log in their details will fall a victim. Scamming Domains are confusing because they look like official website domain. For example, webclick.com.ng is our official website domain  but a scammer may may choose another domain name that is similar to webclick.com.ng and imitating our brand. So the issue with Scamming domains and websites url areto be considered with smartness.

If your connection is slow and not loading fast close your browser and restart it. Your credit card should be made confidential with you alone. When you receive a response that “this webpage is dangerous’ like if you visit a web page, browsers like Chrome check the content that’s loaded to see if any part of it is potentially dangerous. When it detects a problem, the browser shows a warning, alerting users that content from a site chrome have identified as being malicious is being loaded. Your choice is to leave the site (only developers may identify or know why some warnings are displayed and may choose to ignore the warning).

Email Scamming is pretending to be someone and deceiving people with the identity such attempt may regarded to as phishing. Every business individual needs private email address and such email should not be make public nor used to reply strange nor unknown mails.

Some accounts were hacked on facebook by hackers and used for personal purposes and can’t be retrieved by the authorised users. If your account have been hacked report the account. Social engineers are smart and intelligent, they can get your data through mutual activities like coffee hangout, partying and even obtain some of your data from innocent friends and family. They may propmt you to invite your friends on facebook, Google Plus, Yahoo, LinkedIn and fetch your details without your permition.

Do not use your birthday, graduation day, year, 1234 as password use H4Grue&a5 formats and don’t discuss your password with anyone.

Every prosperous website expecially Ecommerce face ceaseless hacking attempt. This is a big challenge for website owners when it comes security. A website may be hacked if there is any leakage by any of the admins, one should not under-estimate the efforts of hackers. Hacking attempts on a website may be caused by data leakage, competitors can do that as well.

This is Webclick online care for Internet users in Nigeria, to receive more free updates like this please Click on Subscribe to more updates by Email. Your friend may need this article or find it helpful so don’t waste time sharing it with them.

Don’t forget to Share with your friends !

Click here to read this article later  > HOW TO AVOID BEING HACKED—DO IT YOURSELF

THIS ARTICLE WILL ALWAYS BE UPDATED|||

Millions might be hacked soon, how to avoid being hacked—Be Smart do it yourself this way by. . .5 hacking tutorials are doing