It's a bright new day for the collection, cataloging, and distribution of public data in Detroit.

And you can put the emphasis on "new." Erica Raleigh is the executive director of

"You'd go and sit in one of the departmental offices with a little hard drive in back," she says. "You'd sit there all day. 'Please, can we have your data? We're going to do great things with it. We want to make things better.'"

"As a government entity, we should be providing clean [data] for the public, and then the

Providing comprehensive access to public data in Detroit is a major undertaking, and one that Heeres admits is still coming together. Prior to Heeres coming onboard last August, the data center was populated with what Heeres describes as "low-hanging fruit": previously accessible information like DDOT bus routes and blight violations.

"A few departments here and there had initiatives around sharing data, but it was really spotty and not consistent," Heeres says. "So we were really, to a large degree, starting from scratch."

In addition to continuing to add new data to the portal, Heeres' work has been focused on refining existing data and presenting it in a useful fashion. That can include tasks like adding parcel IDs to data sets on building and trade permits, or maintaining the



 Heeres also spends time interfacing with citizens and nonprofit organizations to determine what the public most wants to know.

"I have to meet the needs of a lot of different levels of users," Heeres says. "There's the grandmother who lives on the block and wants to know about whether the house across the street from her is going to be demoed or not. Then I have to deal with the Data Driven Detroits of the world. Those different needs often require different interventions."

Open Data isn't the city's only innovative initiative with regards to data.

Over at the Detroit Police Department (DPD),

But she's also been involved in the DPD's participation in the

Flora says that's not thanks specifically to her efforts, but to a broad mentality of data transparency throughout the department and city government in general.

"I was definitely an addition in support of the things that are already happening, in support of the vision that was already there, which makes my job a lot easier," she says. "It means that there was already an infrastructure to engage with by the time I got here."

That shift in mindset has caused Raleigh and her colleagues at D3 to reevaluate the way they do things.

After years of concentrating energies on gathering and disseminating public data, D3 has refocused its efforts on helping people understand it. D3 assists individuals and organizations in asking the right questions, finding the right data, analyzing and visualizing it, and then drawing conclusions from that analysis. That's been driven both by increasing transparency at the city and growing partnerships with community organizations like the Kresge Foundation and the Skillman Foundation.

The changing Detroit data landscape has also freed D3 up to pursue major new initiatives like its



 Not all public data projects relate directly to city government or availability of city documents.

Jessica McInchak is part of a team of three that manages the

"So much of the work just stemmed from this really basic information challenge," McInchak says. "This data is public and there for anyone to use, but it's just not anyone's idea of usable and it's in a non-searchable format."

It's an exciting time for McInchak and her colleagues, as the IRS recently made e-filed nonprofit tax returns

In other corners of the Detroit open data landscape, exciting possibilities are blossoming as well. Heeres notes that the Open Data Portal, with its accessible API built by government open-data specialists

At this point, the main mission for Detroit's data junkies is no longer begging for data, but making the best use of the digital wealth at their disposal.|||

For years, Detroiters had a hard time getting reliable data in a digestible format. But thanks to greater transparency from city government, and the work of a host of other companies and organizations, access to data has never been better.