Business Analytics.  Business Intelligence.  Data Science.  The Internet of Things.  There is an ever-increasing number of individuals becoming involved with these “buzz words”. (I don’t particularly like to view them as buzz words).  What does it take for a professional to participate in these activities? Well, maybe not so much participate, rather what skills and strategies are required when it comes to these topics?  For companies looking to hire data scientists or an individual looking to get hired by these companies, this list is a general overview of a business analytics degree. Excerpts of course descriptions have been cited from the ASU MSBA curriculum, followed by commentary and points highlighted in each one.

“Ensures the foundational understanding of contextualized analytics within the business enterprise continuum, covering how data flows and is managed across the landscape of business processes.”

In a course like this one would expect to see an overview of analytics, database basics, and entity-relationship modeling.  Skills to be learned may be SQL, Database Warehousing, IBM Cognos Insight, and Tableau.  This outlines the basic skills and concepts that will be applied throughout the course and in any industry where Business Analytics is utilized.

“Introduces quantitative modeling tools and techniques used to solve problems faced in modern supply chains, including forecasting demand, determining the capacity of a manufacturing line and the cycle times of parts being processed on the line, and methods to manage inventory.”

In a course like this one, you’ll expect to learn Excel tools such as StatTools, @RISK, and PrecisionTree.  Previous experience from Tableau may also be applied to visualize the work done with aforementioned statistical analysis tools.  Other tools such as relationship modeling, linear models, and forecasting are vital to a company’s analytical processes.

“Charts a roadmap for data-driven decision making and getting a practical understanding of how IT tools and techniques can allow managers to extract predictive analytics and patterns from numeric data.”

Data mining in it’s own rights is a vast field of study.  Azure ML is one of the more popular tools for practicing data mining techniques.  These may include Text Mining, Decision Trees, Model Over fitting, Model Evaluation, Ensemble Methods, Random Forests, Regressions, and Hoeffding Trees.  This list is by no means comprehensive, however the terms listed should be fairly commonplace.

“Addresses the use of analytics tools and techniques to enhance the ability of quality management approaches to improve processes. The course introduces modern quality management approaches including Six Sigma and Design for Six Sigma, and covers DMAIC, the implementation cycle used to drive Six Sigma projects.”

A course like this one will take a step away from the typical technical aspects of business analytics and dive more into the administrative and business-oriented concepts. You may see topics covering quality and quality improvement, modern quality management approaches, DMAIC and Six Sigma concepts, other statistical software tools, and how to interpret analytical results from those tools.

“Focuses on mastering quantitative modeling tools and techniques for business decision-making and deterministic optimization techniques. This includes linear, nonlinear, and integer programming, network models, and an introduction to metaheuristics.”

A course like this will typically entail framing, modeling, and analyzing various different business problems.  These may apply to departments such as logistics, marketing, manufacturing, and finance.  The majority of this may be implemented in Excel, however there are many other analytical software tools available.

“Explores how to support informed decision making and extract predictive analytics and patterns from nonnumeric data by leveraging tools and techniques to analyze unstructured data.”

This is primarily an extension of the previously-mentioned Data Mining segment, however there is a larger depth to the tools and skills learned. Typically seen are Hadoop, Python, Recommendation Systems, Text Mining, Social Network Analysis, HDFS, YARN, MapReduce, Pig, Hive, Kafka and Storm.

“Addresses the skills and knowledge necessary to model situations where uncertainty is a major factor. Models include decision trees, queuing theory, Monte Carlo simulation, discrete event simulation, and stochastic optimization, along with application for solving a wide variety of common business problems.”

As the previous section, this one is also an extension of the Analytical Decision Making Tools segment listed above.  This will extend in to further designing, building, testing, and use of Excel spreadsheets for more effective analysis.  Concepts such as communicating, persuading, and motivating change are also addressed.  PrecisionTree, among other analytical tools, can also be expected when learning these concepts.

“Evaluates how to strategically align, plan for and direct investments in, and governance of, processes for continuous renewal of analytic deployments in business.”

This portion is essentially a tie-in to business organizations as a whole.  You can expect to learn how companies compete with analytics and how to build an advantage that is sustainable.  Various business areas can use analytical applications, and processes can be seamlessly integrated into current business procedures and product designs.  Ethical issues may also be addressed within this scope.

“Focuses on developing analytical methods and applying statistical and mathematical tools to predict consumer behavior. Introduces formal models to analyze how and when customers make product purchase decisions, configure new products, develop market segments, forecast market share, and determine optimal pricing strategies.”

Throughout a Marketing Analytics course you can expect someone to learn key drivers for marketing success and be able to leverage analytics within.  Market research, surveys, and other voice of consumer tools will also be discusses along with software such as SPSS and Excel.  These softwares will be used for conjoint analysis, comparing means, descriptive statistics, OLS regression, factory analysis, logistic regression, cluster analysis, and other techniques.

Apart from the above courses you’ll typically see an applied project at the end of the degree.  This allows individuals to apply everything that was learned into a real world application.  For companies, you may seek out universities to see if there are student groups needing a project to work on and you could propose a joint-effort with regards to this applied project.  For students, this project will be great for your resume and in being able to explain how various concepts were applied in real life that your prospective employer may appreciate when it comes to their business.|||

Business Analytics.  Business Intelligence.  Data Science.  The Internet of Things.  There is an ever-increasing number of individuals becoming involved with these "buzz words". (I don't particularly like to view them as buzz words).  What does it take for a professional to participate in these activities? Well, maybe not so much participate, rather what skills and…