this post was created in an attempt to find a temporary solution for the breaking changes awaiting us in Firefox 57. As you all know Mozilla won't allow us to load XUL/XPCOM/legacy add-ons anymore once this Firefox iteration is released. This will have a huge impact for anyone using add-ons like Classic Theme Restorer, Tree Style Tabs, Tab Mix Plus, Tab Groups etc. As was announced before those add-ons will obviously become unusable going forward. Since Waterfox is independent from Mozilla on an organizational level there should be no problem when it comes to turning Waterfox 56 into an Extended Support Release (ESR). This would give the users some time to reconsider their options as well as a transition phase towards the new add-on ecosystem while still staying safe. WebExtensions are clearly not ready for prime time yet and I feel Waterfox should not go along with them for some time. MrAlex94 could provide a more lenient transition than Mozilla here. I could imagine that this version, let's call it "Waterfox Classic", could be held up to date for between six months and one year. It would also be possible to release new Waterfox versions (57, 58, 59...) along with ESR / security updates for Waterfox 56 for some time and to offer them side by side on the project's website. I believe the majority of users here would support such an approach. MrAlex94 already did this for a short period of time with Waterfox 40: https://www.waterfoxproject.org/blog/waterfox-40.1.0-release-download I believe the additional workload of porting back the fixes and maybe keeping the libraries up to date should be minimal. I for one would be very grateful if this was possible. What do you think about that?

@MrAlex94: This is a proposal you may or may not approve of. I would be very glad to hear what you think about that and whether or not you believe that's feasible.

Edit: This thread was covered at GHACKS. http://www.ghacks.net/2017/03/13/waterfox-dev-has-big-plans-for-the-browser/|||

Hello everyone, this post was created in an attempt to find a temporary solution for the breaking changes awaiting us in Firefox 57. As you all...