The engineer that gave the unfortunate command to delete our primary database was not only on our minds but also of other people. He's known by the community as "team-member-1", as we refered to him by this expression in our public communications during the incident.

After we posted the postmortem of the incident with GitLab.com, we received notes from our community asking how was team-member-1 doing. We're here to tell you that.

We are still putting all our efforts into improving GitLab.com's infrastructure as a whole, to ensure this type of incident never happens again.

We were all really touched by the love our community sent us via #HugOps:

At the end of the day, we are all team-member-1:

The support our engineers received from our community was fantastic, people were appreciative of our transparency in working on the solution. Even teams from other companies, who had been in that situation themselves, showed their support.

❤️  Thank you all! We're very touched by your support!  ❤️

The Codefresh team brought cookies to our HQ in San Francisco with a card saying:

A group from Google came to our HQ and got our engineers $300 to spend on something to make them feel better after all of this was over:

The engineers involved have agreed that this extremely generous gift from Google will be spent on sponsoring Rails Girls events. But the cookies were obviously eaten by the one who grabbed the pack! 😛

Needless to say, some special thank you swag is on its way to these amazing people that took the time to come to our office and try to help us feel a bit better.

At GitLab we think that the people making the most mistakes frequently correlate with the people doing the most work. I certainly make a lot of mistakes every day. It is important not to double down on them but to acknowledge them and learn from it.

We make mistakes. What's different from person to person, organization to organization, is how to deal with them. What we value most at GitLab is:

How could we value transparency if our team members were afraid of assuming their mistakes?

It is not our intent to have one of our team members implicated by the transparency. (…) We are very aware of the stress that such a mistake might cause and the rest of the team has been very supportive. (…) We recognize the risk to the company of being transparent, but your values are defined by what you do when it is hard. Sid Sijbrandij, CEO.

While we were putting the fire out, we received this comment:

Yes, team-member-1 is doing very well!

Coincidentally, just before the DB incident, team-member-1 had qualified for a promotion to senior developer. The outage did not change that decision.

When we promote people at GitLab, or give a them a bonus, we share the reasons for that with the whole company. With the permission of team-member-1, this blog post is both the internal and external announcement of that promotion.

Pablo Carranza (Production Lead), provided GitLab with the following reasons to promote team-member-1:

For those developers involved in the outage, we made a special T-shirt:

This T-shirt has two purposes. It reminds us what happened and motivates us not to let this happen again. It was also meant to thank the team that handled the incident, for that reason only they have gotten one.

At GitLab, we value most positive achievements and performance improvements of our team members, instead of focusing our attention on negative random situations.

Of course, we take situations like this very seriously, but we'd rather learn from them, and put all our efforts to avoid that they happen again, than punish honest and talented people for mistakes that can happen to anyone.

Do you like our values? Love GitLab as much as we do? Join us!|||

People asked how team-member-1 is doing after the DB incident of Jan 31st - Feb 1st. We're here to tell you that.