When Wacom introduced a significant range of Cintiq product, many competitors have come up with same or some extra features to be a top Cintiq alternative. There is a broad range of Wacom Cintiq alternatives available in the market but which one to choose. The first thing is the budget followed by the features coming with Wacom alternative. Here is our preferred list of cheap Cintiq alternative right now available in the market.

Huion H610PRO Drawing Pen Graphics Tablet has 10 X 6.25 inches of the work area. With 2048 of pressure sensitivity, the alteration of lines from thick to thin is done in one fluid motion. Get everything under control with the help of 16 hotkeys, eight customizable side buttons, and customized shortcuts as per your preference. The Huion H610PRO has one year warranty and compatible with Windows XP/7/8/8.1/10, Mac OS X 10.8.0/    advanced versions, Linux, Autodesk Sketchbook, Illustrator, Corel Painter, Manga Studio, Clip Studio, Adobe Photoshop, and Zbrush.

Ugee 1910B has a 19 inch LED drawing monitor with a 1440x 900 resolution, and 2048 levels pressure sensitivity that gives you enigmatic drawing experience. The package comes with a battery-free pen that can work as pen and eraser with one click of the button. The adjustable stand keeps your screen steady and can be switched in different angle as per the drawing needs. You also get, one drawing glove, screen protector, two rechargeable pen, pen charging cable and one year warranty with the product.

Huion KAMVAS GT-156HD is a big 15.6-inch tablet monitor that comes with1920 x 1080, and anti-glare screen for the clearest image despite any lighting condition. This Cintiq alternative gives your enjoyable drawing experience whether you are making professional art, graphics, fashion animation or anything else. With the new driver and pen offers you can get the best creative experience.

Lenovo ThinkVision LT1423p is the Best Cintiq Alternative mobile touch monitor that has a slim design, light weight and easily connected with USB3.0 cable for both video and power. Packed with 1600 x 900 resolution, Advanced High-Performance In-Panel Switching, Windows 8 certified 10 point touch input and Thinkpad Digitizer pen; your creative work becomes more convenient and comfortable.

Huion 21.5 Inches Pen Display Tablet comes with HD resolution and a widescreen aspect ratio that works both for beginners as well as professionals. Designed to deliver best visual experience while working, this monitor is easily adjustable, and with the help of stylus, you can bring out the creativity with ease.

Artisul D13 LCD Graphics Tablet is for creative people who are looking for gadgets to bring out their creativity. With 1920 x 1080 resolution and 2048 levels of pressure sensitivity, make professional design and pictures with ease. This graphic tablet also has six fast access keys and quick dial that can be customized. This thin gadget is powered via USB so need to carry the bulk charger. Also, it is compatible with Mac and Windows.

Yiynova MVP22U(V3) gives power to creative professionals working on industrial design, animation, illustration, etc. This full HD tablet monitor has a sturdy glass that won’t have any marks or scratches even after extensive use. The P2X Pen is easy to use and draw light or dark lines with slight pressure.

If you are looking for a cheap Cintiq alternative, then above pen display tablet comparison will help you picking the right one. Hopefully, with our pros and cons point, you will be able to find best Wacom alternative from the market.|||

If you have done a lot on your Wacom Cintiq and looking for Wacom alternatives to gain a new experience, then check the best Wacom Cintiq alternatives here.