Amazon.com (AMZN) and Microsoft (MSFT) have the most to gain if cloud computing evolves into an electricity-like service, while Alphabet's (GOOGL) Google cloud business could quadruple in size by 2020, Morgan Stanley said in a wide-ranging report issued Thursday.

China's Alibaba Group (BABA) looms as the biggest potential share gainer in public cloud computing, the brokerage says, which also upped its price target on IBM (IBM) to 212 from 187 on views that its "cloud strategy remains underappreciated."

IBM stock climbed 0.8% to close at 177.24 on the stock market today. Shares in Alibaba Group climbed 1.9% to 105.63, retaking a 104.67 buy point. Amazon edged up to 853.42, Alphabet ticked up to 870, a fresh high, while Microsoft lost 0.2% to 64.64 at the close.

On the one hand, Morgan Stanley says corporate spending on public cloud computing services could slow after 2020, after enterprises move 50% of business workloads to Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud Platform and other providers.

The report says, however, that "a more bullish view of public cloud suggests broader upside across cloud vendors. If public cloud is a transformational technology like electricity, usage broadens and workload growth accelerates, implying cloud stocks are widely undervalued today."

While AWS is by far the biggest provider of infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS), where clients rent computing resources by the hour, Morgan Stanley's market definition includes cloud-based products such as Microsoft's Office 365. And, Morgan Stanley says Oracle (ORCL), SAP, Salesforce.com (CRM), ServiceNow (NOW) and Workday (WDAY) will be significant players in public cloud.

Here are some of Morgan Stanley's forecasts and views.

IBD'S TAKE: Alibaba has been taken off  IBD's Leaderboard, which follows top stocks from their work on forming bases, through their breakouts, to their post-breakout action, up to the point where they start topping. Leaderboard's roster still includes steel maker Nucor, Marvell Technology, Veeva Systems and other fast-growing companies.

Alibaba should be the largest share-gainer, growing to $10 billion in cloud revenue, from $1 billion in 2016. AliCloud will make up 18% of Alibaba's sales in 2021, vs. 4% in fiscal 2017.

Google will more than quadruple the size of its cloud business by 2020, growing to $9 billion in revenue.

Software players Workday, ServiceNow and Salesforce.com have the highest gross margins in the group (82%-85%) followed by SAP (64%), and Oracle (55%).

IBM is transforming to a cognitive and cloud platform through investments. Morgan Stanley forecasts a $3 billion public cloud business at IBM, growing at a 33% annual compound rate through 2020.

Why You Need To Look At Apple, FANG Stocks Right Now

Alphabet Trots Out New Cloud Clients For Amazon, Microsoft To See

Google Plays Catch-Up In The Cloud With Amazon And Microsoft|||

Amazon.com and Microsoft have the most to gain if cloud computing evolves into an electricity-like service.