Since I was young, I found that illustrations are an efficient way to record and remember ideas. Time passed and I became a Software Engineer, but I still use illustrations and sketches to capture what I think is worthy to remember later. I only use analog tools like sketchbooks, markers, pens, etc, because I enjoy the manual process. (I definitely like drawing and designing).

The ideal scenario for me when I want to make an illustration or a sketchnote is to have a book, text, slides or video with the content, and take the time to reflect about the ideas. First, I make a draft sketch and after a polished final version. That could easily take me two or three hours of work, depending on the subject.

For example, when Sam Altman of Y Combinator launched the How to start a Startup program back in 2014, I decided to put my creativity to work and make some sketchnotes. Here are my favorites:

Sketchnotes have been popular since SXSW 2008, when Mike Rohde started a trend by making visual notes and with internet help and social media, it is now very well received in any conference. For more, see Mike Rohde’s book The Sketchnote Handbook.

In my case, I made these illustrations for me at first, but other people found them interesting and valuable to share on social media.

In 2015, I started my volunteer time with TEDxKanata, mostly helping with the social media coverage. After the talk videos were posted, I made some illustrations:

The same year, I had the opportunity to go to the 99u conference in NY, its official map for the event was too complicated to follow so I resolved the problem with a simple illustration:

It was very satisfying to see people using my map and not the official one.

In all the previous cases, I made the illustrations in a private and quiet place, where I could control my time and the resources to use.|||

Since I was young, I found that illustrations are an efficient way to record and remember ideas. Time passed and I became a Software Engineer, but I still use illustrations and sketches to capture…