This article introduces a new way of writing Data Driven Documents that contains interacive data visualization widgets - using Klipse.

Usually, in order to write a Data Driven Document will powerful data widgets, you need the help of a Software Developer or you do it by yourself but in most cases the document will be made of static screen shots of the charts that you generated in Excel for instance.

Another option is to host your document on a data platform that provides data visualization.

Klipse allows people who are not Software Developers (e.g. Business Analysts, Product Owners, CEOs) to leverage the full power of the javascript visualization libraries without requiring any help from a Software developer.

In this article we will show how a Business Analyst can create an interactive document using Google Charts - a very powerful and robust javascript Visualization library by .

With Klipse, it’s extremly simple to include Google Charts in any HTML document: no technical knoledged is required.

In order to include a Google Chart, you provide the specifications of the chart as a JSON object with threes keys:

For the data of the charts, there are two possibilities:

In order to visualize data that is included int the page itself, you specify the key:

You can alos visualize data from a Google Spreadsheet, by setting the and the keys:

Enough words, let’s this it in action…

In this article, we use Google Charts to visualize the coffee production in the world.

Here is the data that we are going to use in this article: The production of coffee in million of cups by year and by country.

The format of the data is a JSON array (in the future, we will support more formats like CSV and data coming from an HTTP endpoint).

When the reader modifies the data, the charts are updated immediately (give it a try)…

First, let’s look at the data in a sortable data table - using a Table chart:

Now, let’s visualize the data with a Combo chart:

Let’s see if we get more interesting insights when we visualize the data as an Area chart:

I have imported the World Population Data from Wikipedia in a Google Spreadsheet and made this spreadsheet public.

Let’s visualize the Data as a Bar chart: we need to select the columns that we want to visualize. We want the country name, the Population in 2016 and the Population in 2015. Therefore, our query is: :

You can play with the query, the chart will re-draw itself immediately.

For example, try:

Now, let’s visualiuze the population by Continent as a Pie chart. We need to aggregate the population by continent. Here is our query: 'select C, sum(E) group by C' .

Now, let’s use the full power of Google to create a Geo chart.

Feel free to contact me if you need help for creating your first Data Driven Interactive Document or if you want to use Klipse in your organisation for leveraging the power and the simplicity of Data Visualization.

Let us know what you think about this new way of writing Data Driven Documents in the comments below…

All you need to do in order to integrate Klipse in your HTML document, is to add this tag at the end of the of your web page:

By the way, this is exactly what we did on the page that you are currently reading.|||

Interactive Data Drive Documents with Google Charts. Klipse. Data Visualization.