The web is an overcrowded space of data. In fact, you will find it in different shapes and formats, from simple tabular sheets like excel files to large and unstructered NoSql databases. the variety of content is overwhelming: texts, logs, tweets, images, comments, likes, views, videos, reports, news headlines. All of these are constantly produced on a real time fashion, all over the world, generating quintillions of bytes everyday.

If you could think one second about what you could do about this and how you could make use of open-source data, you will find many applications:

In this tutorial, we will also make sense of the data for a specific use case. We will collect news feeds from 60 different sources (Google News, The BBC, Business Insider, BuzzFeed, etc). We will ingest them in a usable format. We'll then apply some machine learning techniques to cluster the articles by their similarity and we'll finally visualize the results to get high level insights. This will give us a visual sense of the grouping clusters and the underlying topics. These techniques are part of what we call topic mining.

Following the structure of the previous tutorial, I'll go through different steps and explain the code on the fly.

I'll collect the news by requesting an external powerful REST API called newsapi. I'll connect to this service through a python script that runs in my server background every five minutes and fetches the data and stores it in a csv file. Once the data is collected and stored, I'll ingest it in a pandas dataframe. I'll first preprocess it using text preprocessing tokenization and the tfidf algorithm and then I'll cluster it using 2 different algorithms: K-means and Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). Details below. Finally I'll visualize the resulting clusters using two interactive python visualization libraries. They're called Bokeh and pyldavis, they're awesome and you'll see why.|||

In this tutorial we'll dive in Topic Mining. We'll analyze a dataset of newsfeed extracted from more than 60 sources. We'll show how to process it, analyze it and extract visual clusters from it. We'll be using great python tools for interactive visualization, topic mining and text analytics. All the code is available to you to run and test. No bullshit. How to mine #newsfeed data, extract interactive insights in #Python #DataScience #MachineLearning @ahmed_besbes_ https://t.co/ZKzIEQ1r0O pic.twitter.com/O9Vn8TkTtR— KDnuggets (@kdnuggets) 20 mars 2017