We've redirected all child meta traffic from to , and are now forcing HTTPS. We have also rebaked links inside the network (except comments) to point to the new domains and protocol. We'll get to comments at the end.

We are aware of HTTPS Everywhere users getting too many redirects here, and unfortunately the issue is with their ruleset. I have submitted a PR to resolve this here: EFForg/https-everywhere/#9110

We are pausing further migrations while we observe how google handles sites like Super User over the next week or so. I'll be back from vacation on March 27th and we plan to deploy headers for reporting and proceed with full Q&A deployment across all main sites then.

This is a heads up, and a request for help. Related: original post from our test site, Meta Stack Overflow.

HTTPS for our entire network is long overdue, but we've been working hard on it behind the scenes. Expect a pretty big blog post when we turn it on everywhere that details the journey.

There are a few lingering questions on HTTPS we're not confident in until we do it live. One of these is the Google site move in webmasters. It still (to our disbelief) treats HTTP and HTTPS as different properties. I have no idea why. And the "change of address" tool doesn't support such a move either:

So we'll have to create property sets for every single site during the move to HTTPS. Fun!

Given the above, we need to see how all of this works in practice with real load:

 We're starting with meta.stackoverflow.com and meta.stackexchange.com.

Here's an order of things that's been going on (per site):

This is a really high level list, and there are a crazy number of nuances and edge cases to the above. This is for Q&A. Area 51, Chat, and stackexchange.com (the main site) have a separate set of concerns and code we'll address after Q&A. The list also isn't necessarily in order. While we're testing #6, Samo and I will be working on #11 at the same time.

But we have to do all of this across the network, and we're starting that process now. was our testing ground this week. While we're still waiting for Google's analytics to catch up so we can assess impact, we're ready to go on a few more sites. Here's our rough list:

We want your help simply reporting any issues with insecure content on or any other oddities you see. We'll try to address them as soon as possible. Since we get asked this a lot, yes - I'll write an exhaustive blog post about everything we hit along the way when we're finished here.|||

