HSB is the last in the series of four color encodings that I will explain. Photoshop provides two more color modes - Bitmap and Grayscale - but they do not support color, only black/white.

You may know that an older alternative exists, called HSL. It is very similar to HSB but no longer part of native Photoshop. You can download a Filter from the Adobe website to convert RGB from and to HSB and HSL. However, it is not possible to read out HSL values in the Info panel or set HSL sliders in the Color panel. For that reason, I stick to HSB only.

One important observation that I have to make is that one cannot create an image file in HSB color mode. When creating a new file, one can choose from one of RGB, CMYK, LAB, Grayscale and Bitmap. HSB is not possible. It follows that HSB is "for reference only". In an image color coded in any way, we can read out the HSB values. We can also choose a color by setting certain HSB values. But we cannot create an image coded in HSB.

Now first let's see how HSB works. Remember that LAB separates luminance and color. HSB goes even further than that: it also separates color into hue and saturation.

So not only does HSB give us the option to change luminance while keeping the same color, it also enables us to change hue without touching saturation and vice versa. Or does it? Well, it's not as simple as that. Because no image coded in HSB can exist, we cannot perform the usual adjustments (levels, curves etc.) on HSB components. We cannot simply manipulate the "S" to change the saturation of an image.

Yet, it's worthwile to study the three HSB components, and understand their relationships with other color spaces.

Start Photoshop, open the Color Picker window. Set all of RGB to 0 and read out the HSB values.

They are... 0,0,0. No surprise there, at least not for the second and third components. Black has no saturation and no brightness. It has no hue either, so fair enough, the first component is 0 too.

Move on to white, RGB = 255,255,255. It appears that HSB = 0,0,100 which cannot be a surprise either. Zero saturation, full luminance and no hue. Without further explanation I can state that RGB 128,128,128 translates to HSB 0,0,50.

First observation. For any neutral color, hue and saturation are both 0 in the HSB coding.

So far, so good. But we haven't seen any real color yet. What about red? Set RGB to 255,0,0 and see what happens. Brightness 100, saturation 100 and Hue 0. At least two of these may be unexpected. See figure 2.|||

