Apple (NASDAQ:AAPL) shares have now appreciated bout 30% since Samsung phones started imploding. That's a market cap gain of $150B. The strength of a run in the stock market has lifted the shares as well.

However, what we see from the earnings is not strength. What we can clearly see is Apple reducing r&d and increasing buybacks, to make earnings appear slightly better than they otherwise would be. Buybacks may feel good today, however this is a technology company. Eventually you need innovation, ideas, and new products.

Apple's $5B New Product looks like this:

Is the building necessary to attract tech talent: because Apple is no longer as attractive for young tech engineers?

There are many issues with a $5B new campus for Apple and its surprising you hear so little about it. This is a statement headquarters and might be one of the most expensive corporate headquarters in history.

A statement to the world; we are the strongest, most dominant American company right now. The other companies that built iconic statement corporate headquarters included Sears, Roebuck and Company and Woolworth and Co.

Of course, they were at the peak of their dominance when the buildings were opened. Essentially, both wound up bankrupt and irrelevant thereafter. What I am suggesting is that dominant companies that get fat, lazy, comfortable and stop innovating and can get overtaken by their competitors. It happens.

It's also a huge investment of time and energy to build a gigantic new headquarters that distracts management from running the business and innovating.

The budget for the new spaceship-like headquarters ballooned to a little under $3 billion in 2011 and almost $5 billion by 2013, although at this point it was reported that Apple was looking at ways to trim this by a billion (via Macworld)

Worth noting that costs for the project ballooned by more than $2B. Again, that's shareholder money and its easy to ignore it since things seem fine here with the stock at all-time highs, but it would be a mistake to overlook.

Amenities include the "Steve Jobs Theater" (opening later in the year), a visitors center (Apple Store, cafe; open to public), secure R&D facilities, a 100K-square-foot employee fitness center, paths, an orchard, meadow and pond.

Let me ask you, could you ever imagine Steve Jobs spending $5B on a new Apple campus full of cushy environs to coddle Apple engineers like a 100,000 fitness center or a movie theater? Does this sound like a young, hungry upstart company? Or is it more indicative of a complacent, overconfident market leader?

Is Apple losing the war for engineering talent?

The reason they need this expensive new building is because they need help attracting talent. Ask yourself if you were a young tech engineer in silicon valley- who would you want to work for? Google (NASDAQ:GOOG), Amazon (NASDAQ:AMZN), Tesla (NASDAQ:TSLA), Uber, Snapchat (NYSE:SNAP), Facebook (NASDAQ:FB), an AI company, or a robotics company. Or would you want to work on the Iphone upgrade?

Here's a better question, What product has Tim Cook and Apple developed in the last 5 years that could pay for this new building? The Apple watch? As an investor, it is important to ask, What do we see on the horizon from Apple that can move the needle?

The competition for innovation has never been more expensive. Innovation requires talent and engineers who can create great new products. That type of talent has never been more expensive. Amazon , Google (NASDAQ:GOOGL), Facebook , Uber, are now competing for engineers capable of creating new technological breakthroughs for the next great gadget or product. Even car companies working on self-driving cars now compete for this type of talent.

Innovation is essential and always has been at Apple. Eventually, investors will require something special and not just Iphone and Ipad upgrade cycles every few years. I have not seen or heard anything coming from Apple (or even from analysts), that will push the needle on innovation in a meaningful way and continue to justify the share price at current levels.

Apple is not strong; Samsung had a temporary disaster

According to fresh statistics from IDC's Worldwide Quarterly Mobile Phone Tracker, Samsung shipped 72.5 million smartphones during the three-month period ending in September, good for 20 percent of the global market. The figure is down 13.5 percent from 83.8 million units shipped in the year ago quarter.

The last time Samsung took only 20 percent of the global market was in the fourth quarter of 2014, back when Apple trailed the Korean tech giant by only 0.16 percent. (via Apple insider)

Considering the extent of the good fortune Apple and the iphone have received due to Samsung's problems, why weren't Apple's results stronger?

This is the best they can achieve when a major competitor is temporarily hobbled from competition? 3% growth.

Samsung will be back and Apple shares have priced in a 28% gain since then, or some $150B in market cap gains. Currently, Apple sports a rich 17 p/e, which is the highest in 5 years.

Is it an enduring competitive advantage that your competitor had a product disaster or is that just luck?

Q1 2017 results - revenue $78.4B (+3.3% Y/Y, $1.02B above estimates), EPS $3.36 (vs. $3.28 Y/Y, $0.14 above estimates), operating cash flow $27B, share repurchases and dividends $15B (cumulative payments through capital return program $200B+)

Comments from the CEO, Tim Cook on the earnings:

The valuation for Apple is certainly stretched. The share price has screaming higher, due to earnings inflated by Samsung's problems. In addition, buybacks inflate the results as well as strength in the overall stock market.

As this is happening, we see the growth rate of the company slowing, while the median p/e moves higher. Investors are thus paying higher prices for Apple's earnings and receiving a slower, growth company, with less innovation on the horizon. Of course, Samsung will no doubt be back with a more competitive offering.

The shares are extended beyond the 20 day, 50 day and 200 day moving averages more than at any point in the last 5 years. A pullback is certainly due.

More significant is that as the stock hit new highs recently, it did so on declining volume.

This is never a good sign and shows fading institutional interest in the shares at this level $140.

It's overbought and overpriced near term.

Again, we see a fading interest in the shares at all-time highs.

Apple is not as strong as investors believe it is.

Apple has gotten lucky due to the misfortunes of Samsung. This was great for Apple and the shares have hit all-time highs on a rising stock market and a temporary boost.

A preference for buybacks over research and development helps the share price but will hurt the company eventually.

The new $5B Apple campus raises questions as to whether Apple is having trouble attracting top tech talent in a competitive market. Without top talent, there is less innovation, and less growth.

All of these issues lead an investor to worry if Apple has become complacent and the recent gains are due more to luck than strength.|||

Apple is doing well because of Samsung's disaster. Valuation assumes Samsung is dead; they're not. Innovation?: Are they competitive for new talent? $5B new cam