In this tutorial we’ll walk through a really simple way to write and test docker images. The tests we’ll write will validate the official Nginx docker image using Goss in ~0.5s.

When you’re done with this tutorial you’ll have a small YAML file that describes your docker image’s desired state. This will allow you to test this:

The tests will run in about a half second, and output the following:

Note: If you’re more of a visual person, there’s a video version of this tutorial at the bottom of this blog post.

In order to follow along this tutorial, you need to have Docker installed.

We’ll be using Goss as the testing tool of choice. The installation is simple and only takes a few seconds.

NOTE: If you are weary of  , you can install it manually by following the instructions here.

More info can be found on the Goss webpage.

is a helper tool that comes with Goss to make it extremely easy to write docker tests. Let’s say we run our docker image in the following way:

To start writing our tests we substitute with :

This will run the docker image, and drop us into an interactive shell with Goss installed in the container, you will see an output similar to this:

Once in the interactive shell we can start writing our test suite. Paste in the following commands and they will derive tests from the running container’s state:

Note: “a” is short for “add” in Goss.

After we the container will be deleted, and you will now see a in your current directory that contains the following:

This can be executed by running:

The YAML file we generated in the last section can be written by hand. The command is intended as a helper to ease the process of writing tests. However, in most cases the generated YAML will need to be modified. Let's go ahead and do that..

For the files section, we only care that the log files are symlinked to stdout/stderr, so let’s remove the mode, size, owner, group, and contains checks. Our files section should look as follows:

For the http check, let’s remove the https related flags and validate that the “Welcome to nginx!” message appears in the response body:

Our YAML file should now be 28 lines:

Same as before, executing this is simply:

This tutorial is meant as a quick start showcasing a simple test scenario. For more advanced use cases take see the following resources:

If you found this article beneficial, please recommend it to others by clicking the heart.|||

In this tutorial we’ll walk through a really simple way to write and test docker images. The tests we’ll write will validate the official Nginx docker image using Goss in ~0.5s. When you’re done with…