Rogue-like video games are so old that they actually predate the term “video game”. You see, video monitors were not standard on computers until the 1980s, until then text-adventures were the only thing available. With OpenAIs move towards NLP and language creation, their paper describes what amounts to a rogue-like game that the computer will be allowed to navigate by itself.

Drawing the comparison, I will make a few predictions of what this will look like:

First, as described in the OpenAI blog post, the computer actors will be encouraged to create and share language idioms. This requires, at minimum, some amount of memory and general computation ascribed to each actor. Perhaps the zombie or goblin races will be instilled with certain belief systems, goals, thought patterns and then will be released into the dungeon to wreak havoc. Maybe adventurers are the odd ones this time. Everyone is out to get them. Perhaps driven by thirst, hunger, or searching for a safe place to sleep, mobs will travel through the landscape, learning about their world as they go. This first pillar of grounded NLP, I will call it tribal experience.

Second, to encourage language development, there should be some reward to development of culture and language. OpenAI described simple incentives that they would give to altruistic cooperation. They also described a need for disincentives against overly specific or long-winded dialogue. Human languages, assuming our grace in language, created grammar to exponentially increase the descriptive capacity of a few words. There is on-going debate about whether we are born with grammar or learn it from simpler constructs. One or the other can be assumed as necessary for our minions. This second pillar, I will call it semantic compression.

Third, to survive, a language itself must be viewed as a living organism. This is why linguists spend so much time in remote areas, documenting languages before they go extinct. We are still searching for the keys to creating artificial-natural language. By studying a larger spectrum of languages, linguists believe they can resolve the core concepts even further. Living language is a common term to describe all languages that are used as a primary language in a community. All philosophical languages, to date, have failed to cross this boundary. Perhaps it has something to do with the grounding aspect, or perhaps there are parts of language that we are simply born with. This aspect of language is not well understood, which is precisely why the computer simulation route may be worth expanding upon. I will call this third pillar durability.

So the open question is, what are the minimal actor and environment variables that are needed to manufacture languages that are tribal, compressed, and durable.

OpenAI has not released an environment for their work, so I will be building my own and fashioning it more closely to the gaming experience of dungeon crawling.|||

Rogue-like video games are so old that they actually predate the term “video game”. You see, video monitors were not standard on computers until the 1980s, until then text-adventures were the only…