Verifying facebook page account is very easy if you have an account on Facebook with your original name and DOB and then you can easily verify facebook page account . They have launched this feature and anyone can request to verify their account and get a blue tick on their account. Employees of FB will check your provided Govt. ID and your account and if they think your account deserves blue tick or you’ve provided the actual Govt ID then your account will be verified by Facebook.

This feature got a lot of attention because of due to increasing in the number of fake accounts on Facebook of popular celebrities. People gets spammed easily due to the fake account of facebook of popular artists, actors or celebrities.

If you think you also need a verified Facebook account and a blue tick on the Facebook account then you are at right place. We’ll be showing you the way by which you can verify your Facebook account and page easily.

 

 

 



A verified Facebook account means people can know it’s an original account of someone they’re looking for. Most of the celebrities have a verified Facebook account so that people can know they’re following a right account on Facebook.

Facebook automatically verify some of the accounts or pages automatically and there’s no need to submit a Govt. ID proof to facebook for verifying their account or page.

These four types of account are automatically verified in most of the cases.

Facebook gives a small blue tick in front of the name on user’s profile whose account is verified. Have a look on Mark Zuckerberg’s facebook account: –

Facebook has confirmed for this account that this is the authentic figure of this public profile. You can also get verified facebook account by following methods given below.

Facebook account verification can’t be done by anyone. If you are not a celebrity your account can’t be confirmed by facebook means this feature isn’t available for the public. But there’s a way which may help you in getting the blue tick on facebook.

Log out from your facebook account.

Now go to the link from here. You need to submit your ID here.

 

 

 



Now attack your Govt. ID here. Remind that your provided govt. id should have same DOB and Name as listed in your account. Only then facebook will verify you. You can attack your birth certificate, driving license, marriage certificate or any govt. ID which makes easier tp confirm your name and DOB by Facebook.

This method is the best alternative to get your  facebook   account verified with blue tick if you’re not a celebrity. Many users are able to confirm their facebook account using this way.

Now we need to show you how to verify your Facebook page. Below are all the things you must know before getting started: –

There are two methods which work in verifying a Facebook page. As I listed above that Facebook account is verified automatically only if someone’s account deserves a blue tick but there’s a method shown above which may work for you.

Page verification is way different. If your page falls under the category which is acceptable for verification then they will verify your page automatically even you can manually apply for page verification.

In this process, facebook employees will automatically check your page if your page starts receiving a good attention and followers. In most of the cases this process works but if your page is not automatically verified you might try the manual verification process where you’ve to provide and ID to facebook.

If your page is not verified automatically you can try the manual method of verifying the facebook page. In this method, you can request a verification badge from facebook.

Click here to launch the page where you can request a verification badge from facebook.

If you are having this error saying “This page isn’t available” then you can try using USA proxy to open the above link.|||

Verifying facebook page account is very easy if you have an account on Facebook with your original name and DOB and then you can easily verify facebook page account