First off, let me apologize if I come off as brusque, I’m coming up on 24 hours awake, and that’s not a very happy number. In addition, I’d like to preemptively apologize to the various employees of United Airlines. I know what follows is not the direct fault of any single one of you.

What this is, is the story of how I (and unnamed, unknown others) came to be treated as little more then “cogs in the jet engine” of United Airlines. You know, that feeling that you’ve become nothing more then a number, probably with a dollar sign at the front, and the company can not seem to focus on anything but that number.

This all started Friday afternoon, at a small airport, the kind that only gets 2 flights a day or so. I arrived to find a long line at the check in counter, and started hearing whispers that the flight had gotten delayed, which is frustrating to hear when you are just trying to get back home to family. I figured I’d be fine, as I had a 3 hour or so layover, so an hour delay wouldn’t be an issue. When I finally got to the check in counter, I learned that the flight had been delayed 3 hours or so, and that I wouldn’t be able to make my flight. And the next connecting flight to my destination wasn’t until the following afternoon(not quite true, as it turned out). But, as this was such a delay and disruption, United would provide me with a hotel room for the night. “Gee, that sounds swell.”

Well, finished getting checked in and all, “Oh, you’ll have all your luggage at the hotel, so no need to worry about keeping essentials with you”, I pass through TSA and begin waiting. Every so often, we hear announcements that the plane was going to be delayed a little longer or that it was on it’s way. Eventually I realized that my connecting flight was boarding just a few minutes after we were, but it wasn’t that big a deal, as United was taking care of me and the other passengers similarly affected. Our stewardess ran through the safety lecture at what seemed like warp speed, and we got off the ground relatively quickly. Once we were in the air, we got to hear why the flight was so delayed. Apparently bad weather, hours ago at an airport hundreds of miles from any of the airports I was actually passing through, had delayed a flight. I thought “That’s funny, for a company that can be affect by the weather so easily, they really don’t seem to have planned for it.”

Fast forward an hour or so, and we’re walking off the airplane, heading to the customer service area, where we had been told we would pick up our hotel vouchers. I stopped to get a bottle of water and some cough drops (that airplane air is so dry), so I wound up at the end of the line, but hey, we’re mostly all here for the same thing, this should be simple, right? Wrong. Everyone’s getting to the counter and being told that no, this was a weather caused delay, so they weren’t going to do anything at all for any of us. That was the first hint of “cog”. Next up, one of the passengers asked to talk to a supervisor. After quite a few minutes, it boiled down to “The supervisor isn’t going to come here, you can go to this other customer service if you want to talk to them.” Again, that feeling like United just didn’t care. Then, wait, our luggage! It only got checked to here, cause we were going to get put in a hotel! “Yeap, you’ll have to go get it from baggage claim and take it and check it back in.” That was it, that was all the effort that they’d put into it. Looking back, if I had known what was coming next, I might have just abandoned it. But I didn’t. Know better, that is.

My plan at this point was to get my luggage, turn around, check in, find something to eat and then somewhere comfortable to try to get some rest. What I didn’t count on is that, even though I’m at United’s “home” airport, Chicago O’Hare, their check in and such shuts down in the middle of the night. I’m not a terribly frequent flyer, and generally I don’t have to deal with stuff like this, so I guess I just wasn’t thinking about worst cases… yet. I got my luggage easily enough, then headed towards ticketing… only to find it devoid of any employees other then a janitor. So now I’m stuck outside the terminal, and I have to wait for hours to get back in. Well, that’s a bit of a shock. I tried to call up United’s customer service, and I get even more of that “they don’t care” feeling. One guy suggested that I look for the “office”, but that’s all he could say. Another put me on hold for 20 minutes before finally hanging up, and then the last agent finally was able to tell me that they don’t open until 5am. “But that’s plenty of time before your flight.” Yes, it’s plenty of time stuck out here with 1 bottle of water, thanks.

At this point, I’ve got time to kill, so I figure I’ll just get on twitter and bitch some. Hey, that’s the new “thing”, right? Use twitter to complain and companies will jump to try to fix things! Well, frankly, half of it was just a desire to vent. So I complain about how today has been a horrible experience, and soon @United has sent back a message asking about for more information. I start to lay it out, and get a fairly obviously “copypasta” response that “if the delay or cancellation was due to weather, ATC or beyond our control, we would not provide accommodation.” Great, thanks, I already knew that. And that was about all. So now I’m sitting here, I finally got in (Oh, and the “doesn’t open until 5am”? The actually opened up around 3am. Twitter people got that wrong too…), had a little breakfast, and waiting for my flight.

The real kicker in all this? It’s not like I’m terribly suffering, I’m only about 14 hours delayed (still quite a bit, but not terrible). But through the whole situation, there were only occasional bits of “Yes, you are a human” expressed. The rest of the time, I just felt like I was one more piece of luggage, like I should be grateful that they were getting me rebooked on a new flight. And on top of that, I’m sorry, but if one of your employees screws up and promises something they shouldn’t, you need to own up to that. Fine, explain that you can’t give me that, but throw me a freaking bone. Would a pillow and a thin blanket have been too much for you to throw in? How about a voucher for breakfast or something? Instead all I got was “Oh, our contract says we don’t have to do that”. Big whoop. Bottom line? I was promised something by a United employee, and then got nothing but bullshit.

Next time, I’m flying whoever else I can book. Even if it costs a hundred or 2 more. I’ll still be crammed in like a sardine in a tin, but maybe another airline will actually give a shit about me as a human.|||

First off, let me apologize if I come off as brusque, I’m coming up on 24 hours awake, and that’s not a very happy number. In addition, I’d like to preemptively apologize to the various employees of…