Block ads for all your devices without the need to install client-side software. The Pi-hole™ blocks ads at the DNS-level, so all your devices are protected.

Digital Ocean helps with our infrastructure, but our developers are all volunteers so your donations help keep us innovating. Sending a donation using our links below helps us offset a portion of our monthly costs.

If you wish to read over the script before running it, run to open the file in a text viewer.

Once installed, configure your router to have DHCP clients use the Pi as their DNS server and then any device that connects to your network will have ads blocked without any further configuration. Alternatively, you can manually set each device to use Pi-hole™ as their DNS server.

The Pi-hole™ is an advertising-aware DNS/Web server. If an ad domain is queried, a small Web page or GIF is delivered in place of the advertisement.

The gravity.sh does most of the magic. The script pulls in ad domains from many sources and compiles them into a single list of over 1.6 million entries (if you decide to use the mahakala list). This script is controlled by the command. Please run to see what commands can be run via .

The automated install is only for a clean install of a Debian family or Fedora based system, such as the Raspberry Pi. However, this script will work for most UNIX-like systems, some with some slight modifications that we can help you work through. If you can install and a web server, it should work OK. If there are other platforms you'd like supported, let us know.

The Web interface will be installed automatically so you can view stats and change settings. You can find it at:

Domains can be whitelisted and blacklisted using either the web interface or the command line. See the wiki page for more details

The settings page lets you control and configure your Pi-hole™. You can do things like:

Pi-hole™ ships with a built-in DHCP server. This allows you to let your network devices use Pi-hole™ as their DNS server if your router does not let you adjust the DHCP options.

A basic read-only API can be accessed at . It returns the following JSON:

The same output can be achieved on the CLI by running

You can view real-time stats via or on an 2.8" LCD screen. This is accomplished via .|||

pi-hole - A black hole for Internet advertisements