In this article I would like to really briefly touch on Network Effects; what they are, and why they are so powerful for an evolving company that relies on the exponential growth of its users.

In its simplest form, ‘Network Effects’ is the term used for the increase in value of a product or service for its users, the more users it has. So, as new users adopt a certain service, their influx and presence directly affects the value of the network for the previous or current users in a positive way.

To break it down a little further: the best example of network effects is probably the first - the telephone. When the telephone was first introduced in the early 1900’s it was, quite rightly, heralded as a miracle of modern communication. There was only one problem for the first few early adopters- they could only speak to each other! As more and more people started to have telephones in their homes the network grew, and for each new telephone user there were more and more people to connect with. This in turn had a very positive impact on the network as a whole, because more users meant more demand, more demand meant more revenue, more revenue meant a better service and (take a breath) a better service attracted more users!

How trivago is using Big Data to influence Network Effects

trivago is widely renowned as a ‘hotel price-comparison website’ which is, in essence, not entirely wrong. Where trivago continues to develop is not in only finding its users the ‘cheapest hotel in a region’ but rather in finding their users the ideal hotel based on their requirements.

These requirements can include not only price and location, but also other specialised amenities such as if the hotel has a pool, or the room has wi-fi for instance. Each time a user selects (or doesn’t select) a specific requirement; geographical, financial or otherwise, all that information is logged and analysed.

User reviews of hotels are also recorded and aggregated in order to establish a guest’s satisfaction at their stay there, which influences the hotels relevance score to future users.

This is how trivago strive to achieve their mission of putting people in their ideal hotel: by constantly evaluating the data supplied by the users in order to make the most informed decisions on how to continuously improve the experience. More data improves the ability to do predictive data analysis.

As trivago has already reached that ‘critical mass’ mentioned before (the search is being used approximately 100 times a second…) even if they started measuring user data from today, there would be a pretty reliable base of information to interpret.

This is where the network effects ‘flywheel’ really hits home. Once a company starts ‘flywheeling’ it basically means it has reached the critical mass that allows it to almost taking care of itself, a little like a runaway train, or the ‘snowball’ effect. Does that mean that the company will rest on their laurels or slow down when it comes to its aggressive marketing strategies?

It is estimated that currently only one third of people are booking their hotels online (crazy, right?) so really this is just the beginning for trivago. As a globally renowned tech company that believes constant innovation is the key to not only having the biggest moat in the marketplace, but also just staying in the game in such a disruptive ecosystem, there will always be room for improvement.

Perpetual data analysis means a better understanding of the users needs and a greater insight into their requirements, which provides the blueprint to further optimize the site to improve the users’ experience, which in turn leads to brand loyalty, user retention and recommendation. The latter of which entices new users to trivago which (deep breath again) means a bigger data-base for trivago and therefore even more concise insights into what the users truly desire.

One of the messages spread internally at trivago is that they are “Never great, never wise, never done” and it is this philosophy that drives the company toward their mission; to never stop until they have placed every person in the world in their ideal hotel.

trivago are hiring for data analysts, data scientists and algorithm experts. To see open opportunities take a look here - http://company.trivago.com/careers/business/|||

In this article I would like to really briefly touch on Network Effects; what they are, and why they are so powerful for an evolving company that relies on the exponential growth of its users. In its…