Most people find Japanese sentence structure to be difficult and confusing.

One of the biggest reasons for this is that the usual way of learning Japanese involves remembering random phrases and sentence patterns in isolation, without actually being taught why those sentences work the way they do. This is fine in the beginning when you’re just trying to learn a few basic phrases, but it makes it very hard to take the next step.

The truth is, Japanese sentence structure is actually incredibly logical, and a solid understanding of it will save you a huge amount of time trying to make sense of Japanese grammar.

In this guide, I break it all down and show you exactly how Japanese sentences work. Every aspect of Japanese grammar fits within the structure outlined below.

Let’s start by looking at basic sentences that use the special verb “desu”「です」 (pronounced “dess”), which is effectively equivalent to the English verb “be” (am, are, is).

Sentences using “desu”「です」 usually follow this basic structure:

[topic] waは … (something that describes the topic) … desuです

Here are a few simple examples:

The first step to understanding this structure is knowing what “wa”「は」 is.

“Wa”「は」 (pronounced “wa”) is what is known as a particle. Particles are like markers that identify what role each word or phrase plays within a sentence.

The particle “wa”「は」 tells us that the word or phrase before it is the topic of that sentence.

The topic is basically the thing that is being talked about in that sentence, and usually appears near the beginning. In our examples above, the things that are being talked about are “I”, “this”, and “the car”, respectively, so the topics of these sentences in Japanese are “watashi”, kore” and “kuruma”「 」, 「これ」 and 「 」.

The topic of a Japanese sentence is very similar to what other languages refer to as the subject. The subject of a sentence is the person or thing that does the action described by the main verb in the sentence. These are, in fact, slightly different concepts, but for now, we will treat them as being the same so as to keep things simple.

Particles like “wa”「は」 do not exist in English, but they are the backbone of Japanese grammar. We’ll look at particles in more detail soon.

These sentences also show us another important rule that applies to all Japanese sentences:

The main verb comes at the end of the sentence.

In all of the above examples, that verb is “desu”「です」, which takes the form of “is” or “am” in the English translations. However, this rule also applies for other verbs, which we will look at shortly.

First, let’s take another look at the first two sentences above. Text with the same formatting has the same meaning.

First of all, we can see that “wa”「は」 has no English equivalent. This is because its entire purpose is to show that “watashi”「 」 or “kore”「これ」 is the topic of these sentences. That is, “wa”「は」 defines these words as the topic. In English, there is no need for a particle like “wa”「は」 because the subject of a sentence can be determined based on the word order. We’ll look at this more closely in the next section.

Secondly, since “hito”「 」 means “person” and “kuruma”「 」 means “car”, we can see that there is no Japanese equivalent of “a”.

The articles “a”, “an” and “the” do not exist in Japanese.

What this means is that the sentences, “This is a car”, and, “This is the car”, would both be, “kore wa kuruma desu”「これは です」. There is no differentiation.

This makes things simpler in some ways, but can be hard to get used if you’ve spent your entire life speaking English or similar languages, as not having these words can sometimes make a sentence feel incomplete. Without them, it can be hard to know if someone is referring to a specific car, or just any car. There are other ways to specify which car is being talked about, but in many cases, this is implied purely by context. This is something you will get used to over time.

We now know three very important rules relating to Japanese sentence structure:

These rules apply to everything, so using the first two in particular, we can adapt our sentence structure model from earlier to this:

When the verb is “desu”「です」, the ‘other information’ can just be a noun (kore wa kuruma desuこれは です) or adjective (kuruma wa akai desu は いです). In fact, the last thing immediately before “desu”「です」 should be either a noun or an adjective.

For verbs other than “desu”「です」, however, basically everything in the ‘other information’ section needs to be accompanied by a particle.

The main thing that differentiates Japanese from most other languages is its use of particles. We’ve already seen the particle “wa”「は」, but there are many more particles, and a proper understanding of what they are and how to use them will make the Japanese language much easier to decipher.

Particles are like markers that tell us the role each word plays in a sentence.

In any language, a combination of words only makes sense if the role of each word is clear. The biggest difference between Japanese and English (and many other languages) is how these roles are defined.

First, let’s understand what is meant by ‘the role each word plays in a sentence’.

In English, for the main elements in a sentence, this role is determined by word order. Here’s a very basic example:

This sentence has three words: Taro, saw and Noriko. The central word in any sentence, in both English and Japanese, is the main verb, which in this case is “saw”. The other words in a sentence always relate to the main verb, either directly or indirectly, so every sentence must have a main verb.

To figure out what the role of each of the other words is, we look at the word order:

If we change the order and put “Noriko” first, we end up with the sentence:

This has an entirely different meaning because changing the word order changes the role that each word plays, which in turn, changes the overall meaning of the sentence.

Japanese is different. In Japanese, particles determine the role of each word in a sentence.

Given that the Japanese word for “saw” is “mimashita”「 ました」, we would normally write the above sentence as:

This sentence has two particles:

Importantly, particles define the role of the word that comes before them. In the above example:

If we put this all together, it means: Taro saw Noriko.

Because of particles like these, word order is not as important as it is in English. In Japanese, we can actually change the order of the words without changing the fundamental meaning of the sentence, as long as the same particles are paired with the same words. Both of the following mean effectively the same thing:

These two sentences both mean “Taro saw Noriko”. The word order doesn’t affect the fundamental meaning because the particles tell us what each word in the sentence does.

That said, we wouldn’t normally use sentence two above because, as our sentence structure model shows, the topic is usually near the beginning of the sentence. This is not a hard rule, but it is unnatural in most situations for the topic to be placed after other key elements in the same clause.

In our basic example sentence involving Taro and Noriko, the only roles that have actually been defined are the topic (Taro) and the object (Noriko).

These, together with the verb, are the three most important pieces of information in a sentence. They tell us:

Of course, there are many more pieces of information that can be added to a sentence.

Let’s start by considering some basic information that relates directly to the action itself, such as:

When we include this information, we need to specify how that information relates to the other parts of the sentence, and to the main verb in particular.

Before we look at how this is done in Japanese, let’s consider how the role of additional information is defined in English.

We know that the subject and the object are determined based on word order. For most additional information, however, word order alone is not enough – we need prepositions like “in”, “on”, “at”, “to” and “from”.

For example, we can’t just say “Taro saw Noriko the library”. We need a preposition to tell us how “the library” relates to everything else. The preposition we use depends on what role we want to attribute to “the library”.

The diagram below shows some examples of how prepositions are used to define the relationship between different pieces of information and the action described by the main verb.

We can usually just add this additional information – together with the appropriate preposition – to the end of the sentence after the object. For example, to define the location where Taro saw Noriko, we could use the preposition “at” and insert it after “Noriko” (the object of the verb “saw”):

Taro saw Noriko at the library.

It can also go at the beginning of the sentence:

At the library, Taro saw Noriko.

Either way, the “at” is essential to understanding what role the library plays. Without it, we don’t know if Taro saw Noriko at the library, in front of the library, on his way to the library, or while he was thinking about what he would do when he got to the library. The role needs to be defined.

In Japanese, just as we did with the topic and the object, we define the roles of additional elements using particles. The Japanese version of the above diagram looks like this:

The first major difference, as we’ve already discussed, is that the topic and the object, like everything else, are determined by particles, not word order as they are in English.

Each of the elements – including the topic and object – need to be included in a sentence with the appropriate particle after them. There are a few exceptions to this (such as time words, where “ni”「に」 is only required in some cases), but in general, particles are required.

To build a sentence, we just need to insert each piece of information – together with its particle – into the sentence structure we identified earlier:

Note that, as mentioned, the topic is only placed at the beginning of the sentence because that is its natural location in most situations. It is not, however, a requirement.

Let’s do this with our example sentence:

Taro saw Noriko at the library.

We know that Taro is the topic, and the verb is saw (mimashita). The ‘other information’ is:

This fits into our diagram like so:

The ‘other information’ can go in basically any order, so we just need to insert it together with the appropriate particles:

To say that the order doesn’t matter is oversimplifying things a little, as it does make a subtle difference to where the emphasis lies, and certain orderings are generally more natural than others. However, this is far less important than using the right particles, as using the wrong ones would change the meaning entirely. If we swap “wo” and “de”, for example, we get:

Although grammatically correct, this obviously makes no sense. When it comes to the meaning of a sentence, particles are critical.

Now let’s add another element and try building the following sentence in Japanese:

On Sunday, Taro saw Noriko at the train station

If we put this into our diagram, we get this:

As indicated, we attribute the particles as follows:

Using our three basic rules, we can then create our sentence to be any of the following:

There are other possible combinations too, and as long as all the pieces of information are followed by the correct particles, they are grammatically correct and have the same fundamental meaning.

Again, some orderings are more natural than others. For example, time phrases usually appear near the beginning of the sentence, so in most cases, the third option above is less preferable. Time phrases are also unique in that they often appear even before the topic, like so:

This would make our example look like this:

The actual difference between this and the other orderings above is negligible. It’s like the difference between the following:

On Sunday, Taro saw Noriko at the train station

 Taro saw Noriko at the train station on Sunday

As you can see, the word order doesn’t really affect the meaning.

Let’s look at another example:

Taro went with Noriko from the train station to the library by car.

Here’s the diagram for this:

This gives us:

Note that Noriko’s role has changed from object to co-participant, hence the particle after her name has changed too. The same is true for eki .

Our sentence could be written as:

Again, these are all correct and have essentially the same meaning, with just a slight difference in emphasis.

Now let’s look at another way that we can add more information to a sentence.

An important point about the diagrams above are that they show the relationship between certain pieces of information and the main verb. This is because each of them relates directly to the action. For example:

We can, however, add other information that doesn’t relate directly to the verb. Instead it relates specifically to one of the individual elements in the sentence.

The simplest example of this is adjectives.

In Japanese, adjectives are used in much the same way as they are in English – immediately before the noun they describe. (This is in addition to their use in simple sentences where the main verb is “desu”「です」, such as “kuruma wa akai desu”「 は いです」).

Let’s take a shorter version of our sentence from earlier…

…and change it to specify that the car was blue:

(Note that in English, “by” changes to “in”, but the meaning is essentially the same).

What we’re essentially doing is expanding the individual element, “kuruma”「 」, to add more detail. In this case, the ‘means of transport’ has changed from “kuruma”「 」 to “aoi kuruma”「 い 」. When we do this, “aoi kuruma”「 い 」 as a whole should be marked by “de”「で」, since “a blue car” is the means of transport, not just “a car”.

This has no impact on the other parts of the sentence, so it fits into the diagram differently:

Expanding on a single noun like this creates what is called a noun phrase. A noun phrase is essentially a phrase that, as a whole, represents a single thing. Technically, “car” by itself is a noun phrase, but so are all of the following:

All of these represent a single thing – a car – and can be substituted into sentences in the same way, like so:

Noun phrases are just as common in Japanese as they are in English, and serve the same fundamental purpose – to add more information about a specific noun.

There are many different ways that noun phrases can be formed, in both English and Japanese. Another very common example is:

Here, we’ve taken the noun “car” and expanded on it to indicate that it belongs to ‘me’. The result is the noun phrase, “my car”, which in Japanese is:

This makes use of another very common particle: noの.

Effectively, “no”「の」 converts “I”, “you”, “he”, “she” and “they” into “my”, “your”, “his”, “her” and “their”, respectively. For other things like people’s names, animals, places and objects, it has the same effect as adding “‘s” (apostrophe s).

If instead we wanted to say “Taro’s car”, for example, we would say “Tarō no kuruma”「 の 」, with the “no”「の」 indicating that the car belongs to Taro.

The one-size-fits-all way of defining “no”「の」 would be to say it is equal to English “of ”. For example, instead of “my car” or “Taro’s car”, “watashi no kuruma”「 の 」 and “Tarō no kuruma”「 の 」 could be thought of as “the car of me” or “the car of Taro”.

“No”「の」 can be used to connect just about any two things, where one of the two things belongs to the other in some way, such as “the back of the door”, “the color of your eyes” or even “the rain of yesterday”.

Now that we know this, let’s substitute “watashi no kuruma”「 の 」 into our example sentence. First, here’s the diagram:

This can be turned into the following:

Here, the means of transportation is “my car”, so the noun phrase “watashi no kuruma”「 の 」 needs to be followed by the particle “de”「で」.

It’s important to note that even though “no”「の」 is a particle, it cannot be moved around freely like the other particles we’ve looked at. This is because it is part of a noun phrase, and noun phrases cannot be separated. Doing so would be like separating “my” from “car”. The result might be something like this:

If we want to change the word order, we can, but we need to move the whole noun phrase “watashi no kuruma”「 の 」, and the associated particle “de”「で」, together as a single block. Here’s one way we could do this:

This is true for any noun in any sentence. That is, any noun can be expanded into a more detailed noun phrase. The resulting noun phrase can then be used in the same way as the original noun, no matter what role that noun has in the sentence. It just has to be kept together as a single block.

For example, the destination could be changed from “the library” to “the university library”:

Or “my car” could be used as the object, defined by “wo”「を」:

It can even be used as the topic:

Any noun, no matter where it is used, can be expanded as long as the resulting phrase is a valid noun phrase.

Our diagram can therefore be modified to look like this:

In Japanese, noun phrases are used in a lot of different ways, from simple examples like the ones above, to more complex expressions like:

The various ways of building different noun phrases and using them in sentences are covered in detail in 80/20 Japanese.

The most important things to remember about Japanese sentence structure are:

The result is that basic sentences usually look like this, with the ‘other information’ appearing optionally and in any order:

This basic structure is the foundation of the entire Japanese language. If you understand this, Japanese will start to make a lot more sense.

You can learn more about particles, noun phrases and everything else essential to the Japanese language in my book, 80/20 Japanese. To receive a free sample chapter, click here.|||

In this detailed guide, you will learn exactly how Japanese sentence structure works, with clear diagrams and examples to help you make sense of it all.