For any company, the team is very critical. For a tech company finding the right programmer with right skills and attitude is very important. One of the best ways is to find candidates is Stackoverflow. In this article, I am going to tell you how to find awesome programmers on StackOverflow.

Stackoverflow is one of the best places to find software engineers, where nearly 5,247,935 programmers from all over the world ask and answer queries related to programming. And they come here every day, not once every 18 months, like LinkedIn! So their StackOverflow activity is going to be a better reflection of what they do, professionally, thank their sparse LinkedIn profile.

And the best thing about it all? Other StackOverflow users rate every question and answer– all of a given engineer’s activity on StackOverflow which is then compiled into easily accessible profiles, along with links to personal blogs, twitter, and anything else you can imagine.

The better question is, why AREN’T you sourcing on StackOverflow.

There are three ways to source the programmers on StackOverflow

1. Top developer on the basis of tags

Tag based searches are the easiest and quickest to get the results. I have marked tag option in the red box in below image.

Though it is very limited and you can’t search based on location and many other things, tag based search can be useful if you have the knowledge about what is the core technology you are looking for.

Click on tag option present on the homepage and you should land on the below page. The `tag` is nothing but the skill, enter the tag you want to search a developer for. For example, I am searching for python. The result of the search will look like this.

Click on the python tag and you will land on this below page. This page has the all latest Q&A for the python tag. Prasad, but where I can find developers?

No worries, just click on the top user as shown in the image above and you will get the top 40 users for python as well as top 40 users on the basis of the last 30 days. Find the images below.

As you can see, we get profiles of our ideal talent pool.

With X-ray search, you can find people on the basis of skills plus location. So it would be more useful than the simple boolean search. You can also add reputation as one more filter in your X-Ray search.

Reputation is a rough measurement of how much the community trusts you; it is earned by convincing your peers that you know what you’re talking about. Basic use of the site, including asking questions, answering, and suggesting edits, does not require any reputation at all. But more the reputation you earn, more the privileges you earn

The primary way to gain reputation is by posting good questions and useful answers. Votes on these posts cause you to gain reputation. Please note that votes for posts marked “community wiki” do not generate any reputation.

Now let’s look at a scenario where I am hiring a JavaScript developer who also knows angular and he/she must be from Bangalore or Pune, also should have a reputation of 1000 and more. My X-ray query will look like

With just one query , I get 20 profiles in the result. Please checkout the below screenshot for the actual result.

Let’s go deeper and checkout the candidate’s profile. I clicked on the first result, who is Arun P Johny, to me his profile looks like

This guy has filled every detail he can, although everyone doesn’t. There might be a chance you won’t be able to see all this information in other profiles. With StackOverflow data, you will be able to see the following terms

Reputation: StackOverflow reputation is very hard to earn, you get reputation when people upvote the question/answer you asked or given an answer to. Reputation is a rough measure of:

Badges: Besides gaining reputation with your questions and answers, you receive badges for being especially helpful in a specific topic. You can read more about badges on http://stackoverflow.com/help/badges. This guy has 38 gold badges, 280 silver badges, and 329 bronze badges. These badges are very hard to earn and can speak a lot about a developer’s knowledge about the topic. The above guy has got the gold badge for ajax, can speak a lot about his knowledge about the topic.

Overall Rank: Stackoverflow compares every profile and shows you the rank, It shows rank in terms of overall percentage. The lesser the percentage the greater the overall rank. This above guy is in top 0.02 percentage overall. StackOverflow has around 5 million profiles so his StackOverflow rank would be 1000 and which is very good.

Last seen: This particular thing will let you know that when the user visited the site lately, by this piece of information you would get to know that how much a user is active on the site. This above guy has a last seen of 14 minutes means just 14 minutes ago he was interacting with the site in some way.

Other profile details: With StackOverflow, developers can enter public profile links like LinkedIn and Github. It would be very helpful to recruiters as they don’t have to search for particular candidate separately on those sites. However as mentioned earlier you might not able to see these links on every profile.

Top Tags: “Top tags” is the summation of the developer’s activity on StackOverflow. These tags appear on the profile when a developer writes an answer or asks a question on StackOverflow for the particular tag. In Arun’s case his top tags are Jquery, Javascript, and HTML, also beside a tag, badges are shown if a developer has got any for the particular tag. In Arun’s case, he got gold badges for all 3 top tags. Always check for a post percentage, it shows if the developer is asking more or writing more. If he is asking more then developer might be learning the particular tag, higher post percentage can show the knowledge of the developer about the tag.

Communities: Stackoverflow.com is the Q&A site for programming discussion, on the similar ground Stackoverflow Inc. created stackexhange.com which has over 60 Q&A forums in accordance with the topic of discussion. Some of them are http://unix.stackexchange.com/ ,http://android.stackexchange.com/, Check if a developer has accounts on those websites also.

There are also plugins which build the X-ray searches depending upon the data you want. One of them is https://recruitin.net/stackoverflow.php. It’s very simple to use, just enter the choices and Voila, x-ray query is ready.

What is data.stackexchange.com?

StackOverflow data explorer is an open source tool for running arbitrary queries against public data from the Stack Exchange network. In simple terms, you can query whatever data you want from StackOverflow network. Isn’t that great?

But here comes the tricky part, to be able to fetch the data from StackOverflow you need to write a query. As we all know 85% of the recruiters are from a non-technical background. But don’t worry I have already written a long query which will be useful for you to search developers on the basis of location, skills, and reputation. You can find that query at

Once you visit the website you would land on the page which looks like below image.

Suppose I am looking for a Django developer from Pune, India. In location text, I will put Pune. Django developer should have a sound knowledge of python so I will put python in skill 1 box and Django as a skill 2 box. It is considered good if you have a reputation of more than 1000 points on StackOverflow, so I will put 1000 on reputation. Run the query and you will get top 100 profiles (In the query I have specifically mentioned that I need top 100 candidates). Below image shows my result

Developers name, their profile link, candidates tag score on python & Django and candidates overall reputation, All at one place. You can sort these columns like the way you can do in excel. If you want the candidates to be strong in python and not necessarily have the knowledge of Django then sort the python data descending way.

You can download this data in a CSV which is a cherry on the cake. You can share this data with colleagues or even hiring managers. Do let me know through comments if you need more modifications in the query.

Stackoverflow is an awesome community of 5 million developers which can be a great place to source some kickass developers. It is very hard to predict candidate’s technical skills and knowledge just by looking at his/her LinkedIn profile. Also, Endorsement received on LinkedIn are very easy to earn and does not speak fully about the topic’s knowledge. Whereas StackOverflow badges and reputation is hard to earn and can speak a lot about the candidate’s knowledge of the topic.

To build a great StackOverflow profile a person has to put his/her time to write good answers. There are many good developers present on StackOverflow but are not active. There are also many great developers out there who are not even on StackOverflow.

However, Stackoverflow is the community of over 5 million developers globally. Being able to source them on the basis of reputation and badges is very helpful. This certainly gives a technical recruiter to look beyond candidate’s LinkedIn profile and resumes.

I am Prasad, Founder of QuodeIt.com which is a Pune based startup trying to save recruiters time spent on initial filtering of programmers. We are going to post such in-detailed blog twice in a month. If you like this blog don’t forget to like, Peace!|||

For any company, the team is very critical. For a tech company finding the right programmer with right skills and attitude is very important. One of the best ways is to find candidates is…