A workbench for Data Science powered by Jupyter and Docker which includes:

In many ways, VNode can be thought of as a distribution of the amazing Project Jupyter wherein VNode aims to incorporate some little conveniences in an extensible way.

With VNode you can build models locally, connect with your corporate data sources, and collaborate with your team. If you need additional resources you can easily use Spark, Hadoop, anything that can be scripted to connect to from the VNode. If you prefer to simply replicate your environment on a supercomputer in the cloud, you can do that too with a few simple shell commands.

The default settings will create a VNode with Jupyter supporting Python 2, 3, Julia, and R. The web-enabled bash terminal and in-built conda environment make adding and managing packages simple.

Note: VNode is experimental at this stage. It is not suitable for production use and does not use SSL yet.

Installing VNodes on Windows does work fine however it can require some extra steps depending on the environment along with Cygwin and Git bash as pre-requisites. In addition, installing Docker can render virtualbox useless; install the engine binary without activating hypervisor to avoid this. If you are on a machine which uses Cisco's AnyConnect VPN, you'll notice that having the VPN active creates errors and leaves VNodes unreachable. The only workround for now is to remain out of VPN when using locally (although other fixes are available through manual configuration updates).

To use a non-local, environment like VMWare vSphere, Digital Ocean, Azure, AWS pick a supported docker-machine driver, set the evars and follow the same steps as above. Alternatively replace create.sh with your creation step. Here's an example with Digital Ocean:

get the notebook token from the VVM $ bash open.sh $ NB_DSIMAGE=datascience-notebook bash vvm_node/build.sh remove all containers (use down.sh, but this can be helpful for $ docker rm remove all volumes (useful for dev/test if needing to wipe data) $ docker volume rm|||

vnode - Vivitics Node (VNode): A workbench for Data Science powered by Jupyter and Docker