At the 2017 Academy Awards, Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway were the presenters for best picture, the last award of the evening. A critical error occurred when the PwC accountant who held the envelopes of the winners incorrectly gave the envelope for best actress to Warren Beatty. This occurred five minutes prior to the actual announcement of the incorrect award during which time there were missed opportunities to catch the error. Given the mistake, what were the opportunities to prevent error propagation?

The envelope Beatty walked on stage with an envelope which was labeled on the outside “Actress in a Leading Role,” the award that was just presented to Emma Stone, but the design of the envelope made this hard to see. Beatty carried the envelope with the back side toward him and the front away. At one point, a still frame close up shows the that Beatty is holding the wrong envelope.

Beatty and Dunaway started the preamble for the award and announced the nominees and stood on stage for the trailers. Four minutes passed but neither Beatty nor Dunaway looked at the envelope to confirm it was the correct one. They had no reason to suspect anything was amiss. Inside, the card said “Emma Stone, La La Land.”

In front of millions of viewers, Beatty opened the envelope, looked at the card and recognized that something was wrong. Why would the card for best picture have the name Emma Stone on it? In very small font at the bottom of the card were the words “Actress in a Leading Role” – but noticing this would have required Beatty to scrutinize the card. Beatty looked in the envelope again, he paused and then he started into the script for the award presentation, “And the award for best picture…” Since Beatty had started the script, Dunaway was primed to announce the winner. Beatty showed the card to Dunaway and she immediately said “La La Land.”

High reliability organizations work not only to reduce errors from being made but also to prevent the propagation of an error thought the system. Critical to the prevention of errors, and the prevention of the propagation of errors is a questioning attitude and an expansive view of one’s job. The question is: how did Beatty and Dunaway think of their jobs that night? Secondly, when Beatty suspected there was a problem, why did he persist with the presentation?

Studies of accidents show that this pattern of human behavior happens frequently. One of the team members will see something amiss but not say something. Later, when it is revealed that they held information that would have prevented the accident they say things like, “I thought I was wrong because no one else seemed to see it” or “I thought everyone else knew it but it didn’t matter.”

In order to create a high-reliability organization that has the maximum chance of reducing error propagation the organization must be designed to make it as easy as possible for that person to say something.

First, the person needs know what to say. There should be a known trigger phrase and a release phrase. For example, “time out” when the error is suspected and activity should be stopped. This is the verbal equivalent of the “andon cord” in Toyota production lines. It’s called a trigger phrase because it triggers a shift in thinking from compliance thinking (following a procedure) to critical thinking (evaluating if the procedure and actions are correct). Then, there should be a release word which puts the team back to work if an investigation reveals no error. For example, “carry on.”

Secondly, the trigger phrase must be practiced. Practice destigmatizes the word. People hear it in the work place and hear it applied to them. People can call the trigger on themselves, and call the trigger if they suspect a team member has or is about to make a mistake. Practicing the phrase both ways will help people react unemotionally when the phrase is called on them. We want to inoculate the team members against getting defensive when their actions are questioned.

Thirdly, encourage a probabilistic approach to calling the trigger. If the mindset of the person has to be “we’ve moved from safe to unsafe” then that creates a high psychological barrier to speaking up -- is it really unsafe, really wrong? However, if the threshold to call the trigger only needs to be “something has happened that causes me to suspect we are not as safe as we thought we were” then that lowers the psychological barrier and makes it easier to speak up.

Finally, encourage a broad perspective of each person’s job. Had Beatty and Dunaway thought of their jobs as “reading the correct card” rather than thinking of their jobs as “reading the cards” they may have taken additional steps that would have prevented the mistake.

Again, in this case the burden of the mistake falls upon PwC since their process failed and their partner handed the incorrect card to the presenter. PwC rightly acknowledged that in their statement. Still, in high reliability organizations the entire team feels a responsibility for the correct outcome and endeavors to reduce errors.

David Marquet is the author of Turn the Ship Around! Follow him on Twitter @ldavidmarquet.|||

An invisible error at the Oscars when the PwC accountant gave Faye Dunaway and Warren Beatty the wrong envelope -- that error propagated through the system unchecked despite opportunities to stop it. Here are 4 practices that high reliability organizations want to practice.