The Global Airport Database (GADB) is a FREE downloadable database of 9300 airports big and small from all around the world. The database is presented in a simple token delimited format. The database provides detailed information about the airports listed including:

The Global Airport Database is comprised from a series of tuples. Each tuple contains exactly 16 fields of varying pieces of information. The fields depending on what they represent are either a text string, integer, floating point or character.

Some fields are of constant length whilst others are of varying length. The fields are separated from each other by a single colon character ':' acting as a delimiter. There are no leading or trailing delimiters or white-space.

The following table describes lists each of the fields, their order and their associated value type:

As an example, the following tuple taken from the database, depicits the details of the Melbourne international airport (aka Tullamarine airport):

Note: Some tuples may have missing or otherwise unaviable pieces of data. In the event the values are not present, given the data type a default value will be used as follows:

Free use of The Global Airport Database is permitted under the guidelines and in accordance with the MIT License.

In order to maintain the integrity of The Global Airport Database assistance is needed from the general public for information about new airports not already listed in the database, also information in order to fill in missing pieces of data from currently listed airports such as ICAO/IATA codes, lat-long coordinates and any other details.



 Any help correcting or collecting new airport data would be greatly appreciated. For more information or to suggest a new airport or correction please get in contact via the following e-mail address:

The following are some "fun facts" derived from the global airport database:|||

The Global Airport Database by Arash Partow is a FREE online downloadable database of aiports big and small from around the world. The database is presented in a simple token seperated format.