In my fourth year as a practicing lawyer, in an earnest attempt to persuade a starry-eyed student who’d just been admitted to law school to save himself, I warned him: Going to law school was one of my biggest regrets, ranking right up there with the time I accidentally bought low-fat Brie.

I was stuck inside with that sad slab of cheese for all of Snowmageddon 2010.

Harvard Law School recently announced that it will no longer require Law School Admission Test scores from applicants, joining the University of Arizona James E. Rogers College of Law in this new policy. Students can now submit scores on the Graduate Record Examination, known as the G.R.E., instead.

The move might succeed in expanding the pool of applicants. But here’s what it won’t do: increase the number of people in law school who actually want to be lawyers.

See, the LSAT is a speed bump with potential to separate those who truly want to be lawyers — the ones who thrive doing logic games in the same way they’ll relish adding Bluebook-style footnotes to briefs and motions in years to come — from those who just aren’t sure what else to do with their lives.

I practiced at a firm for seven years. Lawyers are notoriously dissatisfied and depressed, but I had an unusually positive experience. Even so, I eventually quit, to pursue the TV writing career I’d always wanted.

But not before spending — some would say wasting — 10 years and six figures to get there.

The LSAT was rough. The logic games that make up its most infamous section are real killers, and my name, which means “logical” in Arabic, failed to give me any sort of edge. Studying was grueling, repetitive and at times mind-numbingly boring, adjectives that happen to have quite a bit of overlap with the way some lawyers would describe their jobs.

To be fair, some people truly savor the privilege of being a member of the bar. They proudly tack on “Esquire” at the end of their names when introducing themselves at parties or asking to speak with a restaurant manager.

But that’s not most lawyers. For many I’ve met, pursuing a law degree was simply the path of least resistance. (This is anecdotal. I don’t have the statistics because I’m not a math person — another reason I took the LSAT, not the G.R.E.) The end of the LSAT requirement could make defaulting to this option even more convenient.

The test is to the desire to become a lawyer as a dating service with 2,000 personal questions and a registration fee is to the desire for a relationship. It’s easier to swipe aimlessly on your phone while binging on Netflix at 2 a.m., but if swiping is all you’re willing to do, that might tell you something about what you actually want.

And remember, studying for the LSAT creates a lot of angst — but so will being a lawyer, if being a lawyer isn’t for you.

You may avoid taking the test, but believe me, you don’t want to end up talking about the decision to start a legal career, the same way you talk about the time you accidentally bought low-fat Brie.|||

