Failure is that lonely child, which everybody hates. It gets bullied often, and so spends most of its time huddled in it’s room, away from society, thinking its better off like that. Failure needs love. Failure needs help. Because if its not helped, it will transform into something that would inflict upon the person, what has been inflicted upon it.

Failure is that lonely child, which can end up becoming a demon. It is a wolf, which has both good and bad inside it, and will only become what it is subjected to. The good will grow, if you help it, pick it up and love it. The more you ignore it, are ashamed of it, make it feel guilty, the more sinful and evil it becomes.

The evil face of failure is not good. It will kill you. You shall breathe, but you shall not be alive. You will become the walking dead. And worst of all, you won’t even realise it. Don’t neglect failure either, it is not the one which goes to sleep that easily. Failure is that lonely child, which can either become the next Gandhi, or easily the next Hitler. What it grows into, depends on you. The way you feed it, the way you make it feel, defines how it treats you later.

People will try to shame the lonely child. People will run away from it. People will hate it because it is ugly. But remember, it only becomes what it is subjected to. So it is upto you to protect it. Make it feel loved. Welcome it. And it will become something that kills the biggest dragon of them all. Fear. Only failure can kill fear. Failure is the chosen one. Failure has magical powers. The more you love it, the more it becomes clear on its purpose in life. The more it gains power, the more kinder it gets and the more it wants to help you. Create a hero, not a monster. Monsters align. Don’t let failure become friends with fear. Create a hero, not a monster. Help failure become powerful. Help it kill fear.

That’s the path to being liberated. Fear is the evil dragon. It will try and cajole failure. Don’t let it. Embrace failure. You don’t fail if you don’t fail failure. Failure will kill the dragon. It’s the most powerful entity in the world. How it treats you, depends on how you treat it.|||

Failure is that lonely child, which everybody hates. It gets bullied often, and so spends most of its time huddled in it’s room, away from society, thinking its better off like that. Failure needs…