Native, easy to use Icinga2 to send Host and Service notifications to pre-configured Slack channel - with only 1 external dependency:

Also available on Icinga2 exchange portal

We found the following 2 existing Icinga2 to Slack integrations.

This plugin provides a polling interface towards Icinga2, giving the possibility to query the Icinga2 API and get information. Since we cannot open our firewalls to enable access for slack servers to our Icinga2 instances, we need to have Icinga2 sending push notifications to Slack to report our Host and Service state changes. The plugin provides the possibility to send NotificationCommand to slack, however we found the following downsides to be show stoppers for us: Does not use Lambdas! The Integration is time consuming and cumbersome The author requires you to modify his source files in order to configure the slack webhook and channel. So we'd have to configure everything again when we have to install an update of that integration. No Debian package available, which leads to increased installation and maintenance effort. Numerous bugs since the host output is not properly encoded: as shell argument before it's passed to the shell script as JSON before it's send to Slacks REST API

We use reprepro to distribute our package from github. You would need to install that supports adding an based repository to the debian repo list.

here are the steps to perform:

You are now ready to install the plugin with

This will create the plugin files in the correct conf directory.

In order for the slack-notifications to work you need at least the following icinga2 features enabled

In order to see the list of currently enabled features execute the following command

In order to enable a feature use

In order to enable the slack-notifications for Hosts add to your Host template, e.g. in

Make sure to restart icinga after the changes

You can customize the following parameters of slack-notifications :

In order to do so, place the desired parameter into file.

The section applies to both Host and Service, whereas the and sections apply to Host and Service respectively

Example channel name configuration for Service notifications

You can choose to override the whole icon dictionary, or override specific types only:

Example override the whole icon dictionary

If you, for some reason, want to disable the slack-notifications from icinga2 change the following parameter inside the corresponding Host or Service configuration object/template:

Besides configuring the slack-notifications parameters you can also configure other Icinga2 specific configuration parameters of the Host and Service, e.g.:

slack-notifications uses the icinga2 native [NotificationCommand] (https://docs.icinga.com/icinga2/latest/doc/module/icinga2/chapter/object-types#objecttype-notificationcommand) to collect the required data and send a message to configured slack channel using

The implementation can be found in and it uses Lambdas!

The slack-notifications command provides detailed debug logs. In order to see them, make sure the feature of icinga2 is enabled.

After that you should see the logs in file. All the slack-notifications specific logs are pre-pended with "debug/slack-notifications"

Use the following grep for troubleshooting:|||

icinga2-slack-notifications - Icinga2 notification integration with slack