Summary: Peter Singer reflects upon Derek Parfit’s death, and talks about moral objectivity, malaria, climate change, existential risks, and doing your “personal best” when it comes to helping others.

Peter Singer is often considered one of the world’s most influential and controversial practical ethicists. He has published many books and papers with extremely lucid but stark arguments about concern for farmed animal welfare, theories of personhood, and our moral obligation to those in extreme poverty. Recently he has also become one of the leading voices of the effective altruism movement, arguing that we should put much greater emphasis on evidence in our charitable and other altruistic endeavors. Singer is an early member of Giving What We Can, a secular pledge that members take to give 10% or more of their income to whatever organizations that will help others the most. His own organization, The Life You Can Save, is responsible for disseminating information about effective giving and moving millions of dollars to organizations that are most effective at combating the ills of extreme poverty.

Singer: I wasn’t as close to him as some people I know, but I have known him for a very long time -- since I was a graduate student and then a junior lecturer at Oxford, in the early 1970s -- and we kept in touch over the years. We became closer again recently, because I became very interested in his arguments for objectivism in ethics, and that led to my editing Does Anything Really Matter: Essays on Parfit on Objectivity, which in turn led to Parfit publishing his response to these essays in On What Matters, Volume Three, which has also just appeared.

Singer: Oh, in many ways. Initially, it was through his discussion of the problem of what is an optimum population [size]. I first became aware of this issue through seminars he gave at Oxford when I was a student there. It baffled me then, and despite some attempts to solve it, it baffles me still. And I’m not the only one. I don’t know anyone who has been able to come up with a solution that doesn’t have some deeply troubling implications.

There are too many other aspects of Parfit’s thought and writing that have influenced me to mention them all, but I should say that for most of my philosophical career I have accepted David Hume’s view that reasons for action have to start from a desire. I became increasingly uncomfortable with that view, but struggled to find strong enough grounds for rejecting it. Then I read a draft of On What Matters (volumes one and two), and exchanged some emails with Parfit briefly, at a time when I was rethinking my views on whether normative judgments can be objectively true. That persuaded me that I had been wrong all along. There are objective reasons for action, and so there can also be objective ethical truths.

Linch: Whoa. This is actually surprising to me, that this is a relatively recent change for you. You (and I think, most moral philosophers) say that you believe that right and wrong are objective facts about the world, aka moral realism. Whereas many of my friends (including people very concerned about doing the right thing, including people in the effective altruism movement), believe that morality is more subjective from culture to culture and individual to individual, and is closer to an expression of preferences. Can you give a short argument for moral realism that will be understandable to people without a background in the academic literature?

Linch: You are one of the earliest members of Giving What We Can, a voluntary pledge where members commit to donating 10% or more of their income to the organizations that help others the most. (GWWC now has over 2700 members). You’ve also founded The Life You Can Save, which has a more complicated formula for how much people in the developed world should donate to alleviate global poverty, based on a sliding scale. How do you compare and contrast the two pledges? If somebody is trying to decide between taking one of the pledges or the other, what core considerations should they think about?

Singer: Both organizations want to do as much as possible to help others, but they use somewhat different tactics to get there. TLYCS is focused only on helping people in extreme poverty, whereas GWWC is now more open about what causes people should support. On the other hand, TLYCS is seeking a broader audience than GWWC, and so is less demanding. In fact TLYCS has now de-emphasized the pledge aspect of its work. It just asks people to make a start, by giving something significant, and then to try to do better next year – it is the psychology of “personal best” – whether it is running or giving, try to beat your own previous record.

Linch: One criticism of pledges like Giving What We Can is that it strictly decreases future flexibility (for example, donating might mean less money to let me launch independent projects, or working directly at an effective nonprofit). How do I balance the clear commitment benefits to publicly commit myself to future actions that I think are morally good (but my short-term focused ego might come up with excuses to avoid) against the disadvantages of constricting the options my better-informed future self has?

Singer: As I said, neither I, nor TLYCS, are really committed to the idea of a specific pledge, and what you suggest is one of the reasons for this. The most important reason for our putting less emphasis on pledging, however, is to make it as easy as possible for people to get involved with helping people in extreme poverty. Our hunch is that this will have the biggest impact in the long run.

Singer: Whether we should give the highest priority to reducing existential risks depends on how likely it is that we can reduce those risks, and on how much weight we give to the well-being of possible future people who may never exist. I think it is good to work on reducing existential risk, but I am not prepared to say that it is the most important thing to work on right now.

Linch: One of your largest focuses as a public figure is emphasizing the harms of climate change and the need to do something about it. I’m guessing this is probably not a question you ever get outside of effective altruism(EA) circles, but what is the rationale for emphasizing climate change? As a sanity check, depending on various estimates, climate change kills between 150,000 and 400,000 people a year, and is projected to approach 600,000 in 2030. This is no doubt extremely horrifying. But at the same time, roughly the same number of people die from malaria every year, while climate change gets far more attention, and seems harder to solve. At the margins, why should a concerned aspiring effective altruist or a HuffPost reader focus on mitigating climate change instead of malaria or other highly neglected problems?|||

Summary: Peter Singer reflects upon Derek Parfit’s death, and talks about moral objectivity, malaria, climate change, existential risks, and doing your “...