Our pulsed electromagnetic field therapy sleep machine for sleep problems tunes brain and body down toward deeper sleep. Unlike light and sound sleep machines, EarthPulse™ PEMF sleep machine simultaneously tunes body’s cells for vastly improved systemic energy production. Sleep machines employing light and sound have no cellular energy effects. These types of sleep machines may, perhaps (dubiously) help you sleep but you derive no other physiological or psychological benefit beside slightly (if that) better sleep.

We guarantee your satisfaction with our sleep machine with the best 90-day satisfaction guarantee in the business. Our last year of version 4 production yielded less than 3% returns; v.5 returns running at just a bit over 2% due to our new Manual-Mode program and 30% more overall power.

The synergistic effects of better sleep and improved energy production from use of our sleep machine will have you feeling a decade or two younger in 90-days or your money-back. EarthPulse™ is far more than a sleep machine; it’s the world’s only pulsed magnetic sleep, recovery, performance enhancement & anti-aging system.

Read our amazing PEMF reviews page to see what we mean.

Our sleep machine technology employs Pulsed Electromagnetic Fields and is the most efficient and cost effective way to enhance both sleep onset and deep sleep (while improving nighttime recovery and daytime performance) guaranteed or your money back. There is no comparison between our magnetic sleep machine and PEMF systems, transcutaneous direct current stimulation tDCS, or static magnetic pads.

Large magnetic sleep pad magnet systems that create HUGE magnetic field designed for under your mattress are extremely expensive, cost huge amounts of money for shipping and once placed become a nearly permanent-fixture. Our sleep machine weighs less than 1 Kg and is so compact it can travel in a woman’s hand bag or men’s briefcase. Perfect for lunch-time power-naps at the office.

Tired of feeling tired? Our sleep machines have helped nearly ten-thousand clients sleep better since 2002. Feel and perform a decade or two younger in 90-days or your money-back. Our 5 SLEEP-MODE programs step down to Delta-rhythm, through the stages of sleep throughout the night and step up to low-Beta-rhythm in the morning to even help you wake-up.

Our unique in the industry use of infrasonic frequencies (14.1 Hz and lower) in our sleep machine result in effects that are (still) unprecedented in the scientific literature. Sports performance and recovery are enhanced as much or more than by use of banned and illegal substances, with no negative side effects. And our sleep machine use is covert and untestable.

The Sleep on Command™  sleep machine systems are effective on sleep and physical & mental performance enhancement no matter if elderly or athletic; whether you’re Joe-six-pack couch potato or a world-class professional athlete; sleep better, perform a decade or two younger and be setting personal performance records in under 90-days or return it. Greatly enhances flexibility. We don’t care if you’re 19 y.o. or 90, training for a marathon or happy to be able to walk around this block…our sleep machine will work for you!

Don’t waste money on light or white-noise sleep machines when neither type of sleep machine has any cellular effect other than what slightly better sleep provides. Sure, the EarthPulse Sleep on Command™ sleep machine is a lot more expensive than either white-noise or light-type sleep machines, but the effects our clients report are priceless and unmatched by anything known.

There is life without our Sleep on Command™ sleep machines, and then there is life with them. There is no better feeling than knowing you’re going to go to bed and sleep well while feeling yourself growing younger for the few years!

Strapping a radio frequency transmitting device to your head or wrist all night makes absolutely no sense at all and is downright unhealthy!

RF exposure contributes to unhealthy sleep regardless if it is blue tooth or not. Further, it is negligent due to damaging effect of RF to use wireless baby monitors particularly the new generation your baby actually wears!

Don’t waste money wearing uncomfortable head-gear required by sleep-monitoring equipment; you already know you sleep terrible. Invest that money into sleep machine technology that will actually help improve your sleep and daytime performance! See our RF / EMF protection data.

Get all the benefit of pulsed electromagnetic therapy systems and so much MORE,…while you sleep, without the inconvenience of stopping your day for “therapy”. Our sleep machines improve sleep, while enhancing cells’ oxygen metabolism to help promote huge gains in cellular energy and subsequently gains in cell repair, immune function, memory consolidation, hormone production, daytime vitality and overall longevity.

If your older cut your trips to the toilet from as many as 3 to ZERO in 90 days or less guaranteed. Spontaneously recover from catastrophic, even old, partially healed injuries during the first 90 days or return it. Priceless.

The EarthPulse Sleep on Command™ sleep machine system is the world’s first age-reversal system. By tuning cells to promote better oxygen metabolism, one creates a robust environment where physical body and the mind thrive. So much so that cells revert from mature to developmental. Based upon frequency-specific 10 Hz pulsed electromagnetic / electric stimulation research we have developed our theorem on anti-aging called More-Atp; the Mitochondrial Theory of Aging… in Reverse.

EarthPulse™ provides the most convenient manner of providing pulsed electromagnetic field therapy for your pet. NO supervision is required. Use yours all-night and then set it up all-day in RECOVER-MODE (or 9.6 Hz) for your pet in it’s favourite daytime hangout spot. You’ll notice a huge change in mobility in just a few days.|||

EarthPulse™ sleep machine promotes cellular energy while entraining brain toward deeper sleep; far more efficient than white noise or other sleep machines