Email client, email reader or more formally mail user agent (MUA) is a computer program in the category of groupware environments used to access and manage a user’s email. Email client may be referred to a piece of computer hardware or software whose primary or most visible role is to work as an email client as per Wikipedia.

Let’s start with the list of best desktop email client for every mac user:

The World’s Most Powerful Email Tools In a Simple, Beautiful App For iOS And Mac.

They redesigned the email client to bring the most powerful productivity tools to a seamless experience on desktop and mobile. Polymail lets you expand your outreach, close more deals, and stay on top of important connections like never before. Some features:-

Pricing: 14 day trial, pick any plan after. Plan starts from 9$ per month.

Airmail was designed from the ground up to give you a consistent experience whether you use single or multiple accounts, and to provide a quick, modern, and easy-to-use interface. Airmail is clean and allows you to get to your emails without interruption.

Email has taken too much time from people. Spark gives time back to all those who live by their inbox. Quickly see what’s important and clean up the rest. Some features:-

The Best Free Email App For Mac And Windows.

Nylas is a modern platform for email, calendars, and contacts. Today hundreds of applications are powered by Nylas Cloud infrastructure, including our flagship desktop app Nylas Mail etc.

When you are serious about email, Postbox has the tools you need to power through mountains of messages. Some features:-

Rock-solid emailing built to delight, with push notifications for all your email accounts, on all your devices — iOS, Android & macOS. Some features:-

The Best Inbox By Gmail Client For Mac.

This unofficial Mac client brings all the power of Inbox by Gmail to your desktop, with a modern design.

They fine-tuned the look and feel of Inbox by Gmail, crafting a responsive and customisable UI built to look great on OS X. Some features:-

Pricing: Buy now on the Mac App Store, download 14 days trial.

With Unibox your inbox is always cleaned up. Some features:-

Pricing: Trial version, is fully functional and will work for 15 days. It requires Mac OS X El Capitan (10.11), Yosemite (10.10), Mavericks (10.9) or Mountain Lion (10.8).

Thunderbird is a free email application that’s easy to set up and customize.

Now Comes To Mac.

A simple but not simple mail client, an efficient and efficient way to deal with mail, one can take into account the work of life mail contact assistant. Some features:-

A desktop email client for your Mac, without a browser.

Mia for Gmail is the perfect replacement for the late Google Notifier. Some features:-

Kiwi for Gmail is formerly known as Gmail for Mac. Some features:-

A new kind of Email Client with build in privacy protection. It boasts as unique encryption feature so user friendly that can be used by anyone. Some features:-

Puts You In Control Of Your Inbox.

With an ingenious new email workflow that empowers your inbox productivity, packaged in a beautiful, minimalistic interface that allows only your content and simplicity to shine through.

One can use myMail to work with Gmail, Hotmail, Live, Outlook, MSN , iCloud, AOL, Yandex, Rambler, QIP, Mail.Ru and Yahoo. The application also supports all the mailboxes on the IMAP and POP3 protocols. It collects all your mail from different boxes in one simple, beautiful and friendly interface.

The Best Way To Use Gmail On Your Mac.

Boxer Email is a faster, smarter mobile inbox that adapts to the way you work. With tools like bulk edit, quick response and smart labels, etc. Tailor every aspect of your inbox and get more done in less time.

Power plugins to make Mail more useful.

A new company that will carry our suite of Mail related products into the future. Some features:-

Shift makes it easy & beautiful to navigate between multiple Gmail, Calendar & Drive accounts.

Shift into higher gear with the email client that makes navigating between

Mail, Calendar and Drive accounts fast, easy, and beautiful. Some Features:-

Pricing: Trial available, further paid from $19.99/ year.|||

Desktop Email client that every mac users must know in 2017 are described below in this list. Email client is a computer program in the category of groupware environment used to access and manage…