I spent almost a year and a half working for one of my favorite startups, but I was totally unprepared.

I was lucky enough to be a part of some amazing things at Product Hunt, met truly incredible people, grew up personally and professionally, and learned more than any other 16 month stretch in my life.

It’s the learnings that I feel most compelled to share. Some things that may be specific to me, but hopefully something that can be helpful to you.

I’ve always heard internet wizards say that joining an early-stage startup is the greatest learning experience anyone can get (behind failing, which is held in higher regard than the Rhodes Scholarship).

But how do you prepare for such an incredible learning experience? You don’t and I think that’s the point.

I’ve always been ambitious and had a solid work ethic, but I didn’t really know what “hard work” was until I was working for something more than personal gain. Sure, it’s a lot of hours, but everyone just seemed to work harder, more focused hours than I was used to. Some people (Ryan) even compete with robot-level output.

I’ve since realized that I could’ve been sitting on Facebook in 2004, Snapchat in 2011, or fire 400,000 years ago, and I probably would’ve driven each one into the ground.

There are millions of good ideas, but very few good companies. I’d argue that a good idea is no more than 20% of the recipe for a good company. And a significant chunk of the remaining 80% can probably be taught (but I damn sure had never learned it).

In this fast-paced environment, what you want to focus on and what you should focus on are two entirely different things. A guaranteed way to fail-faster is to just wing it, which was often my go-to strategy in a pinch.

When doing the job of ten with no real playbook and limitless options, decision-making needs to be methodical, but not overly-analytical. Time is your most valuable resource and to not take a little bit of it to prioritize for highest ROI would be to your detriment.

Communication in a mostly-remote team spread across 10+ timezones is not the same as your typical forms of communication. Not to mention, the implicit cultural and linguistic barriers that comes with being dispersed/remote. Slack has no sarcasm font, file names provide minimal context, and smiling on mute throughout an entire team video call gets a little weird.

Efficient communication is an exponential time saver. Taking a minute to add additional information and context wherever possible will often save a handful of people a lot of time. And, again, time is money.|||

I spent almost a year and a half working for one of my favorite startups, but I was totally unprepared. I was lucky enough to be a part of some amazing things at Product Hunt, met truly incredible…