The latest rise of Bitcoin price has bought the world's attention to the cryptocurrency, and by now you should be familiarized with the concept and it's effects. But the hype around blockchain-based currencies may let you get an understanding of the technology superficial enough to make one believe that it has only benefits, once that most of the bad aspects are hidden behind very technical and hard-to-read articles. Bitcoin is the most known and used cryptocurrency, making it worth more than 16 billion dollars, but two main negative aspects makes it a quite vulnerable asset.

First we have a technological issue, where a single line of code on the implementation of the blockchain backing Bitcoin, brings it to a limit of 7 transactions per second (TPS), in a world where VISA, for instance, says it currently processes 350 TPS, and can handle much more. Software developers will get how small a problem it is, once it is represented literally by a single line of code, where it is configured the size of the transactions (the block size). The problem is small, but the fixing is quite complex, once that an upgrade in the technology requires a bit of control of the currency, which breaks its main principle, and brings us to the second bad aspect.

Second, there is the mining monopoly being made by China miners, which threatens the currency independency. You should be familiar with the concept of miners on the blockchain ecosystem, where anybody could be part of the mechanism behind the transactions processing, getting the small fee you are charged per transaction in reward, and so the more you process, the more you earn. The main principle of a blockchain is to be decentralized and have no owner, where non-trusted parts can have agreements, which are verified by a random third-party, making it decentralized. If this third element starts to centralize the work, some issues arise.

The community around Bitcoin is divergent around the upgrade on the technology, once that it is of interest of some people not to make it widely adopted. However, to make such an step on the chain, there needs to be an agreement of more than 50% of the whole transaction processors (miners), so if we have a few group of miners centralized, with a high percentage of the mining, there is a risk of this group taking the control of the technology and, instead of applying improvements, they could apply changes to benefit their earnings on the mining, or even worse, break the blockchain. Due to the low energy costs and the country infrastructure, China has made a big move towards having the majority of Bitcoin miners, concentrating more than 70% of the mining on the blockchain, with a few companies representing huge pieces of this total.

Is the Bitcoin community going to handle the TPS technology upgrade, allowing the currency to expand to a wider reach on usage? or will a group of miners take control of the blockchain and undermine the currency? Only the future will answer these questions, and there is still some time left to Bitcoin as it is. Until we reach one point or another, we shall keep seeing these rises and fall on prices, which nothing have to do with the points exploited here, but instead are reflects of isolated events around the world impacting the currency.|||

