We talked to a guy who makes his living doing just that:

The laughter would abruptly end, however, when they found out just how much these collectible cards sell for. Games like Yu-Gi-Oh! , Pokemon , and -- the granddaddy of them all -- Magic: The Gathering remain a $4.3 billion industry. Get good enough at making your own cards and it's more lucrative -- and safer -- than printing your own cash.

If you found yourself in a prison cell with a hardened criminal asking what you're in for, what's the most embarrassing possible answer? We're going to go with " Magic: The Gathering card counterfeiter."

When a player goes to a tournament to play Magic: The Gathering, it suddenly makes sense to them to buy cards from a random creepy guy in a trench coat for hundreds, or even thousands, of dollars.

The reason is that the biggest tournaments may have thousands of players fighting for cash prizes that are five figures each. Even the smaller tournaments, the ones I more regularly troll, see top prizes of $1,000, so spending $250 on that perfect card isn't just a purchase: it's an investment. Most players aren't going to win big money, but they also really, really want to have rare cards in their pockets -- to show off, for bragging rights. So everyone's got their defenses down and are ready to buy stuff they shouldn't.



 They're here for Magic: The Gathering, I'm here for Money: The Taking.

"Psst," I say. "You looking for some cards on the cheap?"

He looks through my binder full of plastic-protected merchandise.

"A single beta Taiga?" he says. "Which counts as forest and mountains?"

"Damn straight. One tap, and you add red mana or green mana to your pool. Your choice. And this is affected by spells that hit forest or mountain, don't forget that."

I look to see if anyone else is watching, then go closer to him and whisper: "$400."

"Wait, hold on. Check the mint eval on this. Centering? Nine. Edges? Nine. Corners? Nine. Surface? Fuckin' nine-point-five, you're not going to get that anywhere, and if you don't buy it, trust me, you're going to see this card played against you by the competition instead. C'mon. What do you say?"



 "Look at that card full of arbitrary numbers; can't fake something like that."|||

Get good enough at making your own cards and it's more lucrative -- and safer -- than printing your own cash.