How to convert and prepare TopoJSON files for interactive mapping with d3

This tutorial will show you how to convert publicly available shapefiles to TopoJSON to create interactive maps with d3/d3-geo. I will show you how to do this without the use of the command line so you can get into experimenting with d3 as fast as possible. If you are interested in working with shapefiles and TopoJSON in a more advanced fashion, I suggest you take a look at Mike Bostock’s recent multipart tutorials on command-line cartography.

One of the first maps you may want to get your hands on is the world map. A great resource for this is Natural Earth, a public domain map dataset available at 1:10m, 1:50m, and 1:100 million scales. For each scale (level of detail), Natural Earth provides cultural, physical, and raster maps.

Select your preferred map according to level of detail (1:10m, 1:50m, and 1:100m) and category (cultural, physical and raster). When building maps for the web the level of detail is important as it will impact file size and rendering speed significantly, especially when rendering maps with SVG.

To create world maps based on country data (GDP, population, etc.) you should choose the cultural vectors. In the next steps I will create a TopoJSON map based on the 1:50m cultural vectors Admin 0 countries map.

The downloaded folder will contain a number of files with different extensions such as .dbf, .prj, .shp, and .shx. To convert the shapefile into TopoJSON, you will need the .shp file, as well as a .dbf file (in case it’s available).

To convert shapefiles into TopoJSON, you can use mapshaper, a tool for shape simplification and conversion from one geo format to another. It supports Shapefiles, GeoJSON and TopoJSON formats. While mapshaper can be used on the commandline, the online tool also provides a nice visual interface for the simplification process.

Import the files ending in .shp and .dbf into mapshaper. Make sure that the “detect line intersections” option is checked. You can also check “snap vertices” to fix topology errors.|||

This tutorial will show you how to convert publicly available shapefiles to TopoJSON to create interactive maps with d3/d3-geo. I will show you how to do this without the use of the command line so…