A military spouse like Sabrina Tierce may answer when you call for customer service. Watch Sabrina talk about her work-at-home role in the Virtual Customer Service program and why it's right for her.

Lydia Flanders - Amazon Associate Rises Through the Ranks—and Introduces the President

Amazon Associate Rises Through the Ranks—and Introduces the President After Lydia and her husband lost their jobs, they were hired on as seasonal Amazon fulfillment center associates and rose through the ranks.

Melissa didn't know the first thing about serving as the caretaker of her late father's beloved, broken-down convertible. Luckily, her career has taught her she knows how to figure things out.

Tiffany started as an intern at Amazon, and discovered in her first week that it was a place where she could make a real impact.

Beryl’s name is on a patent. She loves sprinting toward goals, but she knows the value of slowing down.

By operating like a start-up, our team members are given opportunities to take on big challenges and make a difference for our customers.

Career Choice - Amazon Pre-Pays up to 95% of Tuition for Courses Related to In-Demand Fields

Amazon Pre-Pays up to 95% of Tuition for Courses Related to In-Demand Fields In July 2012 Amazon launched a program to expand choices available to our associates in their future careers.

Amazon's Urban Campus - Our Headquarters in the Heart of Seattle

Our Headquarters in the Heart of Seattle We made a conscious choice to invest in downtown Seattle, and our employees tell us that they love being in the heart of the city.

Our Leadership Principles - How Amazonians Approach Their Work

Our Global Offices - Offices in more than 30 Countries

Offices in More than 30 Countries From a garage to offices in more than 30 countries, Amazon offices have their own unique designs.

Kaizen - Change for the Better

Keeping associates connected to news happening throughout the company. From A to Z is a global, internal print magazine that aims to share news and employee stories from around the world, with a focus on Amazon Operations.|||

