Hello everybody. Long time no see. How are you?

First of all, apologize for not writing in a long time. The last months have been pretty crazy. We’ve closed a pre-seed and seed funding round, hired more people, traveled to the most amazing places such as Tel Aviv, Istanbul, Amsterdam and New York City. The whole team has also designed and developed our product Bynd from scratch.

But before I get into that in detail, I want you to remember this:

What a great product! It wasn’t that big of an innovation back then, but the waiting line was huge and I loved the concept of “Inbox Zero”.

The company realized, that there are two types of people in this world. The one who mute their phones, the ones who don’t.

People who are organized and keep it tidy, and people who don’t care.

..and most importantly: smartphone users who care about noise reduction and silence.

Starting and running a startup is really hard. If you want to be successful, I highly recommend to reduce the noise, eliminate distraction, keep everything clean and work with checklists. Often times, the very first task of mine is to reach inbox zero, once I’m at the office, so I can focus on more important things such as product development afterwards.

Sadly, after Mailbox has shut down, there was no real alternative solution. Even worse, I found myself trying to reach inbox zero with Facebook or News, but it didn’t work.

With Bynd v3.0 we are going to introduce Inbox Zero for Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, Instagram and up to 70 of the most important News channels such as New York Times, BBC or Washington Post. You only have to open Bynd, scroll and consume the most important content. Bynd will automatically reach inbox zero for you.

There is a deep satisfaction, once I finish a task and reach an empty inbox. That’s the reason we want to share this with you guys!

p.s.: Bynd v3.0 is still in private beta. If you want exclusive access, before anyone else, just simply write to: beta@byndapp.com. The team will take care of the rest!|||

First of all, apologize for not writing in a long time. The last months have been pretty crazy. We’ve closed a pre-seed and seed funding round, hired more people, traveled to the most amazing places…