According to research by J’son & Partners Consulting, VK is Russia’s leading messenger, topping the rating of most popular messengers in Russia ahead of WhatsApp, Skype and Viber.

The report on the Russian messaging market released by J’son & Partners Consulting demonstrates that VK, developed by Mail.Ru Group, is not only the most popular social network in Russia, but also is the leading mobile messenger on the Russian market (based on J’son & Partners Consulting study on Perspectives of Russian and International Mobile Messages Market up to 2020, March 2017).

As previously reported by Mail.Ru Group, at the end of 2016, the daily audience of VK messenger for mobile and desktop reached 82 million monthly active users, while the total number of VK users hit the record of 95 million monthly active users.

Previously VK was the most popular mobile messaging and social networking app in Russia in the survey commissioned by Deloitte (online survey by Ipsos Mori, summer 2016, 2000 participants aged 18 to 60).

“We are really excited by the performance of VK messenger, and the fact that it beat out such global competitors as WhatsApp, Skype, and Viber. This impressive growth has been achieved by constantly improving the product, and we believe that continued focus on enhancing VK will allow Mail.Ru Group further expand the audience and increase engagement,” says Dmitry Sergeev, Deputy CEO (Russia) of Mail.Ru Group.

Mail.Ru Group, international brand My.com (LSE: MAIL, listed since November 5, 2010) is the largest internet business in Russia, based on mobile daily audience (TNS Mobile Index, population aged 12–64 in the cities 700 000+, January 2017, Russia).

In line with the communitainment (communication plus entertainment) strategy, the company is developing an integrated communications and entertainment platform. The company owns Russia’s leading email service and one of Russia’s largest internet portals Mail.Ru. The company operates three of the major Russian language social networks, VKontakte (VK), Odnoklassniki (OK) and Moi Mir (My World), and Russia’s largest online games, including Warface, Armored Warfare, Skyforge and Perfect World. The сompany’s portfolio also includes a leading OpenStreetMap-based offline mobile maps and navigation service MAPS.ME, and two instant messaging services popular in Russia and CIS: Agent Mail.Ru and ICQ.

The company owns 100% of mobile games developer Pixonic, and 100% of Delivery Club, the number one food delivery company in Russia.|||

According to research by J’son & Partners Consulting, VK is Russia’s leading messenger, topping the rating of most popular messengers in Russia ahead of WhatsApp, Skype and Viber. The report on the…