In 2017 there are still banks and storefronts with flawed implementations of security technologies. Savvy technology companies understand how implementation of secure protocols like HTTPS increase trust among consumers, and it’s become a requirement of conducting sales transactions online via PCI compliance.

Why is it then that our supposed bastions of truth, mainstream media outlets owned by multibillion dollar conglomerates, have done so little to adopt cryptographic security measures in their online digital presences? We should expect innovation from the journalism sector around identity, provenance and trust but most have missed the boat. HTTPS should be table stakes.

Which sites constitute mainstream media? Wikipedia provides a starting definition under The Big Six. Let’s take a look at how they shape up in their HTTPS offerings.

Lately Google searches from my mobile devices include AMP links, especially for news articles. I noticed that Google is very transparent about indicating that it’s effectively framing the destination by displaying the direct link to the content in the AMP frame. Frequently for articles on CNN.com, the url read http:// instead of https:// which I thought had to be a mistake. After a brief exchange on Twitter, turns out it’s likely intentional rather than malicious. The question becomes:

The tech community has a lot of work to do. It should be easier to explain why HTTPS matters, and we should eliminate our usage of HTTP. It should be easier to use things like keybase.io or PGP signatures or proof-of-work blockchains to follow journalists across their employment in their career and have proof of identity when reading their work.

It’s worth noting that in my view, a CDN provider shouldn’t provide SSL certificates when serving HTTPS traffic for hosts they are not canonical for. It’s not the CDN provider’s fault for their customers lack of HTTPS adoption but they don’t need to muddy the waters.

Browser vendors could certainly refuse to follow redirects from secure sites to non-secure sites. I’ve opened https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=703033 to see what the response is from the Chromium team.

The security conscious and brand-aware have already identified SSL as a critical source of consumer trust and go so far as to question the use of vendor-provided SSL offload, from CDN providers like Akamai and Fastly, or virtual appliances like AWS ELBs.

How can an organization provide accurate assurances of proper shepherding of user data when they can’t ascertain whether it’s being exfiltrated or manipulated through vendor systems? Is it overly paranoid to worry about CDN edge locations being hacked?|||

In 2017 there are still banks and storefronts with flawed implementations of security technologies. Savvy technology companies understand how implementation of secure protocols like HTTPS increase…