philwhineray released this Mar 20, 2017 · 329 commits to master since this release

netdata was first published on March 30th, 2016.

 It has been a crazy year since then:

225.000 unique netdata users

 currently, at 1.000 new unique users per day 

 

 80.000 unique netdata installations

 currently, at 500 new unique installations per day 

 

 610.000 docker pulls on docker hub

 

 4.000.000 netdata sessions served

 currently, at 15.000 unique netdata sessions served per day 

 

 20.000 github stars

 

 Thank you!

 You are awesome!



This is the first release that supports real-time streaming of metrics between netdata servers.

netdata can now be:

metrics databases can be configured on all nodes and each node maintaining a database may have a different retention policy and possibly run (even different) alarms on them.

There are 4 settings that control what netdata can be:

Using the above, we support a lot of different configurations, like these:

netdata now supports monitoring autoscaled ephemeral nodes, that are started and stopped on demand (their IP is not known).

When the ephemeral nodes start streaming metrics to the central netdata, the central netdata will show register them at menu on the dashboard, like this:

You can see this live at https://build.my-netdata.io (this server may not always be available for demo).

netdata now cleans up container, guest VM, network interfaces and mounted disk metrics, disabling automatically their alarms too.

netdata can now provide , and under FreeBSD too:

Also, the CPU utilization of netdata under FreeBSD, is now a lot less compared to netdata v1.5.

See it live at our FreeBSD demo server.

Ilya Mashchenko has done a wonderful job creating a unified web log parsing plugin for all kinds of web server logs. With it, netdata provides real-time performance information and health monitoring alarms for web applications and web sites!

URL patterns of interest (you configure the patterns):



For more information check: the spectacles of a web server log file.

netdata can now archive metrics to backends (both push, by @lfdominguez, and pull modes).

netdata now has an IPMI plugin (based on freeipmi) for monitoring server hardware.

The plugin creates (up to) 8 charts, based on the information collected from IPMI:

It also supports alarms (including the number of sensors in critical state):

Ilya Mashchenko builds python data collection plugins for netdata at an wonderfull rate! He rocks!

netdata has received a lot more improvements from many more contributors! (it was really a lot of work to dig into git log to collect all the above, so forgive me if I forgot to mention a few contributions and contributors).

Thank you all!|||

Get control of your servers. Simple. Effective. Awesome. https://my-netdata.io/