In his lifetime, Ray Bradbury wrote over 400 short stories and 11 novels — including Fahrenheit 451, his most famous work.

With such a prolific history, it’s easy for us to call Ray a genius. But if we do that, we are forgetting something: Ray wasn’t always a good writer.

I took him ten years to write his first good story.

Here’s Ray telling his story in Zen in the Art of Writing — a collection of his essays on creativity:

Three million words to write something truly good — that’s not what we typically think of when we think of “genius.”

Even after he wrote The Lake, Ray still struggled to write truly good stories. He found himself imitating his heroes, writing for the wrong reasons, or caring too much about what critics said.

So how did he get out of this hole?

By writing more, of course:

It’s easy to believe in the myth of the genius — that great writers, entrepreneurs and scholars are born, not made. For then we have an excuse not to not show up, to not do the work.

Sure, genetics matter. But how will you know if you’ve got “the stuff” unless you try?

In his life Ray Bradbury always gave one simple piece of advice to aspiring writers.

Here he is again in Zen in the Art of Writing:

Ray wasn’t born with genius, he found it.

Everyday for his entire adult life, he showed up in front of his typewriter and started to write. No ideas? Write. Not motivated? Write. And no matter how much he improved, sometimes the stories were bad.

But with each story, he got a little bit better. Ray went from selling one story a year to one story a month and, eventually, one story every single week.

Behind every “overnight success” story is another story — one of hard, hard work.

And so, Ray tells us to make work our partner:

It won’t be easy, of course. You might get a hundred rejection slips. You might have eat canned beans every meal.

But your failures are not your failures:

There is no failure unless you stop.|||

In his lifetime, Ray Bradbury wrote over 400 short stories and 11 novels —  including Fahrenheit 451, his most famous work. With such a prolific history, it’s easy for us to call Ray a genius. But…