IBM and Galvanize today announced new cognitive, cloud and data science initiatives on IBM Cloud which will aim to increase the talent pool of cognitive developers and data scientists.

This partnership will work to bridge the emerging skills gap for professionals by tapping the accessibility of cloud to bring an advanced cognitive and data skills curriculum to a broad range of global developers and data scientists.

This extension of the IBM and Galvanize partnership consists of the new IBM Cognitive Course, delivered digitally through Bluemix, IBM’s cloud platform. The collaboration also includes physical spaces for training and education through the new “Cognitive Builder Fair” initiative and the “Cognitive Builder Space,” both of which provide opportunities for hands-on learning and access to cognitive and data science experts.

The curriculum will be hosted on IBM Bluemix, which provides the foundation and services for a range of development environments, including the Watson Data Platform, the Watson Developer Cloud Platform, and the IBM Data Science Experience.

Technology advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) are moving rapidly, and as is the case with any budding industry, a skills gap is emerging in which the market doesn’t have enough experienced developers to address the growing demand for cognitive and AI development. IBM and Galvanize together will bring cognitive skills and data science curriculum to individuals interested in some of the most lucrative careers in tech and in helping bring to bear the benefits of man and machine.

“There is simply more demand for cognitive and AI development skills than currently exists in the market,” said Willie Tejada, IBM Chief Developer Advocate. “We want to help developers access the skills required to pursue some of the most lucrative jobs in tech, while supporting business by increasing the talent pool. The cognitive and AI revolution is upon us, and together with organizations like Galvanize we can advance the state of technology innovation and increase contributions from more people than ever before.”

The new programs integrate IBM’s skills and subject matter expertise in data science and cognitive development with Galvanize’s immersive learning philosophy and deep community of students, startups, and instructors. IBM is among the first major cognitive technology providers to design such a course to prepare next-generation developers and data scientists for new collar jobs that support the fast pace of innovation in this area.

This partnership with Galvanize extends the relationship between IBM and Galvanize, which was founded in 2014 with the launch of IBM Bluemix Garages. The San Francisco and New York locations of the IBM Bluemix Garage network are hosted within the Galvanize campuses in those cities, embedding IBM in the heart of Galvanize’s entrepreneurial tech learning communities. Also located in London, Toronto, Melbourne, Nice, Singapore and Tokyo, IBM Bluemix Garages serve as a hub where developers, product managers and designers can come together to build on Bluemix.

For more information, visit: 

 Press Release: IBM and Galvanize Launch New Cognitive Curriculum on IBM Cloud for Developers and Data Scientists 

 Stream InterConnect: Keynotes, sessions and on demand video via IBMGO .|||

