An almost perfect storm is coming for Tim Cook and his team at Apple. It is not going to kill the iPhone line stone dead, but it has the power to inflict lasting scars on the mystique surrounding Cupertino’s smartphone. Higher costs, lower margins, less technology, and lax scheduling could distract from the tenth-anniversary iPhone.

First up is cost. There is little to suggest that the presumptively priced iPhone 8 will not start at $1000. Even allowing for the salesman’s trick of going at $999, once you add on tax in the US you are into four figures. You can manage that just now if you add in all the features on an iPhone 7 Plus (an iPhone 7 Plus with 256 GB of storage and protected by Apple Care comes in at $1098), but when your baseline model passes a grand on the sticker, people will pay attention.

That higher cost level may be masked through either network subsidies or Apple’s iPhone Upgrade Program, but anyone looking at the total cost of ownership is going to see an eye-watering amount.

Horse number two… can Apple justify the higher price? Since the start of 2017 information from the supply chain and trusted sources has seen the feature list of the iPhone 8 slowly being whittled away. The iPhone 8 of January 1st had fast cabled charging, wireless charging over a distance of one metre, a curved screen, a bright and vivid OLED display, touchID embedded into the screen... all of these are now being downgraded like tears in the digital rain.

As it stands the only real advance will be an OLED screen (something the Android powered competition has had for years) and whatever extra speed and capability Apple’s engineers can bring to the Axxx range chips. Apple has been in the situation before where it had nothing that could be portrayed as being genuinely new to the smartphone world. It defaulted back to the ‘new to iPhone’ line, a strategy that is going to have to be used here to big up the OLED screen and faster chip… at least Tim Cook has a good poker face.

The underlying message of these two issues leads to the third horse… profit. The cost of components is rising, the cost of R&D is rising, and the cost of handsets is rising. Apple famously has higher margins on the iPhone than other smartphone manufacturers so it has some capacity to absorb the rising costs to keep the retail price at a reasonable level (or at the very least a ‘prices start at $999’ on the stage). The iPhone 8 could well be the point where the margin has to be reduced to keep the wheels spinning at high speed. Revenue no doubt will remain high but the per handset profit levels could be set for a drop that may never be reversed.

All of this leaves our fourth horse of reputation. Given Tim Cook’s legend was built on supply chain management and an ability to get everything in the right place at the right time, the idea of a flagship iPhone missing the traditional release at the end of September is a pretty big ‘wow’ moment. No doubt this will be mitigated by the expected reveal on stage in early September, but it runs the risk of Apple not only missing a large part of the Q4 sales window but also Osbourning the iPhone 7S and Phone 7S Plus handsets that are also expected to be unveiled and released shortly afterwards.

Apple hardware has always been priced high to create the feel of luxury at a just about affordable price. That is now out the window as the iPhone 8 will genuinely be in the luxury category but with the potential of a lower financial return per handset.. The lack of genuinely new hardware will mean more reliance on slick marketing and buzzwords rather than practicality, and the regular cycle of handset releases that will have synced up the mobile contracts of the geekerati will be disrupted.

The curious thing is that when similar but smaller issues to these have cropped up, there has been very little impact on the overall sales and Apple has carried on regardless.

Past performance is not a guide to future riches or losses. Apple has a number of key issues that it needs to face this year and they are not easy issues. The expectation is that they will be safely navigated, the audience will be happy to wait, and the iterative progress of the iPhone 8 will be enough to placate demand and generate record-breaking sales.

Now read why innovation is not Apple's strong point in selling the iPhone 8...

Follow me on Facebook. Find more of my work at ewanspence.co.uk, on Twitter, and Linked In. You should subscribe to my weekly newsletter of 'Trivial Posts'.|||

An almost perfect storm is coming for Tim Cook and his team at Apple. It is not going to kill the iPhone line stone dead, but it has the power to inflict lasting scars on Cupertino. Higher costs, lower margins, less technology, and lax scheduling could distract from the tenth-anniversary iPhone.