The Insider Picks team writes about stuff we think you'll like. Business Insider has affiliate partnerships, so we get a share of the revenue from your purchase.

For the longest time, I didn't put much thought into my gym socks. As long as they were clean, they were fine.

Turns out, the socks you wear to the gym matter. According to Greatist, the right pair can keep moisture at bay, offer extra comfort and support, and even prevent irritation.

Regardless of how comfortable your socks are, your feet will hurt if you're running a marathon or walking for hours on end. That said, I have tried several types of athletic socks and am consistently amazed by Bombas' socks.

Launched in 2013 by Randy Goldberg and David Heath, Bombas spent two years researching and developing their product, and eventually created a line of socks that solve almost every annoying sock problem you can think of.

Bombas' socks are made from a special cotton that naturally wicks away moisture, stays cool in the summer, and stays warm in the winter. There's extra cushioning on the footbeds, which is comfortable but but won't weigh your feet down. If you're looking for support during a long run, a special honeycomb stitching around the middle of each sock provides a tight fit at your arches.

I prefer to wear ankle-length socks to the gym, but many of my other pairs slip off my heel mid-run or expose the backs of my ankles to debilitating blisters. My pair of ankle-length socks from Bombas have extra padding along the heel that helps keep my socks up and my feet blister-free.

If you needed an extra incentive to pick up some new socks, Bombas will donate a pair of socks to someone in need for every pair sold.

First-time customers can take 15% off when they enter the code "BXGET15" at checkout.

This article was originally published on 1/31/2017.

Disclosure: This post is brought to you by Business Insider's Insider Picks team. We aim to highlight products and services you might find interesting, and if you buy them, we get a small share of the revenue from the sale from our commerce partners, including Amazon. Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon, is an investor in Business Insider through his personal investment company Bezos Expeditions. We frequently receive products free of charge from manufacturers to test. This does not drive our decision as to whether or not a product is featured or recommended. We operate independently from our advertising sales team. We welcome your feedback. Have something you think we should know about? Email us at insiderpicks@businessinsider.com.

Read the original article on Insider Picks. Copyright 2017. Follow Insider Picks on Twitter.|||

The socks you wear to the gym matter. I've tried several types of active socks and am consistently amazed by how comfortable and lightweight Bombas' socks are.