Neither is the solution, and the above premises are wrong. In fact, the evidence is that there is a very inconsistent relationship between development density and travel time; very long commute times affect those who live in the spread-out suburbs of Houston and Atlanta as well as in transit-rich New York and Chicago. And as for delay—lost travel time due to congestion—this is a slippery notion, because the baseline for measuring "delay" is arbitrary, and its actual cost in people's lives is hard or impossible to measure, since people don't actually value their travel time the way these simplistic models presume they do.

So no, I don't believe we have a problem with too much traffic. I do believe Sarasota and many other cities actually have a problem with both the nature and the distribution of traffic. But this prescribes a different set of solutions, because the problem ultimately comes down to the qualitative experience of driving here, not a quantitative measure of travel time or delay. Perhaps we need a "Traffic Frustration Index" to replace the Traffic Congestion Index.

To lay out why I believe "traffic frustration" is the real issue, let's step back and examine what different things we might actually mean when we say that traffic is a problem.

Let's get this out of the way first: "too many cars on the road" doesn't mean anything. How many is too many? 1,000? 10,000? 100,000? Over what area? Over what span of time? Are the cars sitting still? Are they free flowing? Are they arranged in a Stonehenge-like roadside tourist trap? A traffic problem can't just mean that there is traffic; it means that people's lives are being negatively affected by traffic. So I propose three ways in which that could be the case.

It's important to determine which of these things are actually true in order to get at solutions that are affordable, effective, and without harmful unintended consequences.

This feels like an arbitrary concept from the get-go. What does "too long" mean? How long is long?

It turns out that the history of cities offers a pretty compelling answer to this question: more than an hour round trip. This is called Marchetti's constant, and it was offered up by the Italian physicist Cesare Marchetti in 1994 as a bound on city size: a city would only grow to the extent that residents using the prevailing transportation technology of the era could commute to and from their work in about half an hour each way. People were not willing to spend more than that amount of time traveling. Marchetti's constant is remarkably accurate in predicting the size of ancient Greek and medieval European villages as well as modern American metropolises.|||

Most cities' "traffic problems" are actually problems with the qualitative 
experience of traffic, not with simple travel time or delay. Perhaps we 
need a "Traffic Frustration Index" instead of a Traffic Congestion Index.