Forrester recently published the Wave™ for Predictive Analytics And Machine Learning Solutions. You can purchase a copy from Forrester for $2,495, or get a free copy here.

When Forrester last delivered this analysis in 2015, they called it the Wave™ for Big Data Predictive Analytics Solutions. So, I guess that Big Data is “out” and machine learning is “in.”

The chart below shows the 2015 Wave™ on the left and the 2017 Wave™ on the right. Green arrows indicate movement in a positive direction, red arrows in a negative direction.

Bob Muenchen reports on the Forrester analysis in the latest update to his article on the popularity of analysis software.

Here are eight notes on the 2017 Wave™.

The graphic below shows the measures and weights Forrester used to evaluate vendors in 2015 and 2017.

The 2017 analysis places much more importance on data prep tools, model management, and the solution roadmap. It places correspondingly less weight on business applications, security, and growth rate.

Alteryx, Oracle and Predixion are out.

Alteryx is a data blending tool with the capability to run R scripts. It doesn’t have a native machine learning capability, which explains why Forrester excluded them.

Oracle has native machine learning capabilities, but they are embedded in Oracle Database, and not standalone, as Forrester requires. Oracle also distributes an enhanced R distribution, but that doesn’t count for anything (in Forrester’s eyes.)

IoT vendor Greenwave Systems acquired Predixion last fall, and they are out of the category.

Dataiku, Domino Data, H2O.ai, and Salford Systems are in the Wave™ this year.

The first three also made it into the 2017 Gartner Magic Quadrant for the first time, so kudos to them. I wrote about them in my analysis of the Gartner report, so no need to say more.

Salford Systems, a company founded in 1984 and the original publisher of CART software for decision trees, was in the Wave™ previously but fell out in 2015. This time, they made it back just in time to be acquired by Minitab. No offense, but who knew Minitab was still around?

Thanks to Forrester’s revised methodology, several vendors with robust data prep tools drew stronger overall ratings in the 2017 Wave™.

— Angoss leapfrogged into the Leader category. More on that below.

— FICO went from Strong Performer to Leader largely on the strength of improved ratings for architecture and data preparation.

— KNIME and RapidMiner leapt into the Leader category. Forrester awarded them much higher ratings in Architecture and Pricing. As far as I know, neither vendor has radically changed its architecture or pricing in the past two years so whatever.

Shockingly, KNIME’s community cares more about new analytical methods.

— Forrester rated SAP a Leader in 2015 and again in 2017, but with an overall higher rating on the current offering. More on SAP below.

Microsoft improved its rating within the Strong Performer category, but drew this bit of snark:

Mr. Forrester, what are you smoking? For the record, Microsoft distributes Anaconda, supported Python in Visual Studio long before it even thought about supporting R, and offers managed services for both Python and R in Azure.

Other than that, SAP’s customers are satisfied.

DSx is a managed service for Python, R, and Spark that runs in IBM Cloud, everyone’s last choice for a cloud platform. Feature-wise, it competes poorly with other cloud-based data science platforms. Even in IBM Cloud, it has no connection to SPSS, which IBM brands (comically) as “Watson Machine Learning.”

You cannot license the “SAS Analytics Suite.” SAS’ advanced analytics product page currently lists 32 software products with six different architectures. Why does this matter? Because how you evaluate SAS software depends on which SAS software you’re evaluating.

According to Forrester, SAS has “reimagined” its data science portfolio.

If you want to transfer data from LASR Server to CAS, just execute this command:

Be sure to check all eighteen arguments.

Other than that, they are unified.

I’ll believe that SAS is serious about deep learning when it supports GPUs.

The three data scientists who use Lua are calling. They want their notebooks back.

It’s hard to argue that SAS isn’t “old school” when CEO Jim Goodnight regularly snarks at everything invented after 1995. It’s like your uncle at Thanksgiving dinner who complains about socialism and rock ‘n’ roll music.

Have you ever noticed that SAS devotees never seem to pay for the software out of their own budgets? IT executives who pay the bills, on the other hand, would throw SAS out in a heartbeat.|||

Forrester recently published the Wave™ for Predictive Analytics And Machine Learning Solutions. You can purchase a copy from Forrester for $2,495, or get a free copy here. When Forrester last delivered this analysis in 2015, they called it the Wave™ for Big Data Predictive Analytics Solutions. So, I guess that Big Data is "out" and machine learning is "in."…