#Awesome

“How do we get more people where they want to go safely with autonomous driving? How do we increase the throughput and reliability of our food supply chain with autonomous shipping? How can we make people healthier by analyzing medical problem sets so large that no human can reliably contemplate it? How do we better understand and improve our climate with planet-scale data analysis?

It may not be able to address every problem, but we’ll see machine learning help us better understand all of this data, make it useful and then ultimately act on it in new and exciting ways.” — Mark Papermaster, AMD Chief Technology Officer. Learn More on MarketWatch >

#Not Awesome

“What would the Russians or the Chinese do if they heard that some company in Silicon Valley was about to deploy a superintelligent AI? This machine would be capable of waging war, whether terrestrial or cyber, with unprecedented power.

This is a winner-take-all scenario. To be six months ahead of the competition here is to be 500,000 years ahead, at a minimum. So it seems that even mere rumors of this kind of breakthrough could cause our species to go berserk.” — Sam Harris, Neuroscientist and philosopher. Learn More on TED >

1/ Artificial intelligence is helping managers to screen candidates, detect employees that are likely to quit, track productivity levels, and even understand how happy (or pissed) people are.

2/ If we don’t expose the biases that are baked into most AI algorithms, a fascist could use them to manipulate police forces and persecute millions of innocent people.

3/ Speaking of ways in which invisible biases will hurt innocent people, Artificial Intelligence is slowly removing human-led activities from many aspects of the legal system.

4/ Intelligent robot pets are being used to comfort elderly people suffering from dementia, rehabilitate stroke survivors, and help non-verbal patients that to speak again.

5/ Top AI researchers have created a virtual world where bots are learning to create their own forms of communication and gestures, just like human babies do.

6/ All of our efforts to create human-level intelligence in machines might be pointless unless we help them to inform new solutions with old information, similar to how “humans think with their bodies and brains.”

7/ AI won’t automate any of our jobs entirely in the near future, but it is starting to automate many of the parts we spend the majority our time on.

“Opportunities for Machine-Learning Startups: An Investor Perspective” by Medha Agarwal (@mkhandel). Learn More on VentureBeat >

“Machine Learning: An In-Depth Guide — Model Evaluation, Validation, Complexity, and Improvement” by Alex Castrounis (@innoarchitech). Learn More on InnoArchiTech >

“Enabling Continual Learning in Neural Networks” submitted by Avi Eisenberger (@aeisenberger). Learn More on DeepMind >

“How to Get the Best Deep Learning Education for Free” by Mariya Yao (@thinkmariya). Learn More on TOPBOTS >

Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning will radically change the way we work and live. Machine Learnings covers the most remarkable news in AI, so you’ll feel prepared for the future.|||

#Awesome
“How do we get more people where they want to go safely with autonomous driving? How do we increase the throughput and reliability of our food supply chain with autonomous shipping? How can…