Let’s imagine that you can explore apartments or hotel’s rooms even staying at home. You think it’s boring? Sure, it doesn’t compare with a real view. Buthelp people with physical disabilities, for instance, feel the world, visit the museums or planet’s distant places everywhere.

In this article,  we are going to talk about VR tours which are fairly useful to businesses to present themselves. It will be very useful for hotels, real estate agencies, museums and so on.

Let us guide you through 5 simple steps to build your own Virtual Reality tour. You will see that it is much easier than you might have ever imagined.

To create our VR tour we’ve chosen an Apartment as the site for illustration.

Whether it’s a hotel or large condo you should go with 360-degree pictures. Customers need to see all the details of an apartment and feel themselves inside of it.

After all pictures of rooms and environment have been provided, we can move forward.

To not lose the effect of presence it is important to understand the connections between environments.

When ready it’s time to start the development. After these steps, there’s no need to bother a client anymore.

Unity3D developers take each 360-degree photo to wrap it in the sphere. Now, a user is immersed from all sides with texture, that is what provides a virtual reality effect. It takes few hours to create the sphere using math formulas, but after that, you can play with images as you like and with ease.

The last stage is making our tour ‘usable’ so that users should be able to feel this VR experience. We have to go back to step 2 to see the connections between locations and to place the markers. In this example, we’ve used arrows placed on the ground to navigate through various rooms, as it is quite intuitive and the ground placement is crucial. While rotating the head, the ground below is only stable place where you can move around.

The code with information is embedded into the button to directly identify which image should appear next without going to menu. The tour can be created either flat or spherical full-view, so the users can have VR experience regardless of having the headset or not.

Different environments would contain their own interactions and for these you would love to have a menu. Imagine walking through arrows from 1st to 5th floor crossing all rooms. The menu is designed separately like all the buttons in the app, so you can create your own design which will suit your taste and/or business needs.

The cost of VR tour usually depends on:

The platform you are planning to use:

When everything is settled and decided upon, we can evaluate the development process more deeply. Let’s say, we are developing a Samsung Gear VR version with 360 panoramic photos and video already delivered.

First of all, we need to start by building app architecture with Oculus SDK:

After, the app skeleton will be processed with UI/UX design elements. Depending on complexity and number of visual effects it may take:

Programming the system, loading scenes and providing movement logic through arrow navigation that is located on the ground.

Development of Unity spheres with 360 photos and their connections depends on the number of rooms and navigation. For example

You should also consider movement in the environment like walking from one place to another, but in the app it navigates you from photo to photo. You can check also the real estimate, to visualize the development process in depth.|||

How much it will cost to create virtual reality estate tour? AirBnB with simple step by step guide with cost calculation to increate sales?