The pijul team is proud and happy to announce the first bootstrapped release of pijul, and of the Nest, a hosting service for pijul repositories.

Pijul is a new version control system, written in Rust. It aims at combining the performance of git with the ease of use of darcs. In particular, thanks to its patch-based theory, it aims at making merging and cherry-picking more intuitive.

The easiest way to get pijul is to use cargo, the package manager for the Rust language. If you have cargo configured on your system, will give you a working, cutting-edge pijul. Pijul needs rust version 1.15.1 (the latest stable version), you may want to use rustup if this is not the version of Rust your system has.

Documentation is not yet pijul’s forte. Here are some of the basic commands, they should be familiar if you have used git or another version control system.

Here is a mini-tutorial. The following commands create a repository with one file in it.

Here is how to clone that repository and make a modification; this time, we use record with the flag to save all changes to tracked files instead of asking about each one. defines the accompanying message instead of opening an editor, and lets us change the identity of the author, just for once.

Let’s go back to the original repository, and pull these changes:

If you want to hack on pijul itself, you’re just one away!

Pijul is very young software: we’ve just started using it for developping our project… pijul itself! As such, it is lacking a lot of functionnalities and documentation! It probably won’t eat all your data too often, but it might.

Pijul is the name of a south-American bird that gather to build communal nests, and take care of the eggs and young in common.

Pijul can be used through the command-line, as shown above, but it also has a web interface for hosting your project: the nest. Like the rest of our software, that nest is still experimental, and intended as a “feature preview”.

In particular, pijul itself is hosted in its own repository on the nest.|||

The pijul team is proud and happy to announce the first bootstrapped release of pijul, and of the Nest, a hosting service for pijul repositories.