I wanted to be one of the naturals—one of those kids with a lot of friends that ruled the schoolyard with an easy social grace. Each time I fumbled in front of a girl, each time I ate alone in the cafeteria, I hated myself a bit more.

Why am I so dysfunctional? I asked myself.

Later, I decided to fight my shy side. Through self-help books and daily practice, I would “reprogram” my personality… I would become a natural.

All that effort payed off. I’m a lot less shy today.

But during all that time, I never considered that there could be an advantage to being shy.

I only changed my mind after reading David Lipsky’s Although Of Course You End Up Becoming Yourself. In it, Lipsky follows David Foster Wallace on a 5-day book tour for Infinite Jest — which Time magazine considers one of the 100 greatest novels of the last century.

Wallace goes on to explain how shyness can benefit to the writer:

When I read this, something clicked for me.

Oh, I thought. I’ve been playing mental chess all my life.

Every social struggle I’ve been through has been a mental battlefield — a battlefield where I’ve learned how to get inside people’s heads and “see” how they think.

Shyness, it seems, has an incredible upside: it teaches us to empathize.

Literary genius or not, David Foster Wallace fought depression all his life. In 2008, his wife came home to find him with a rope around his neck.

If suicidal depression is the tradeoff for the benefits of “mental chess,” it is — in my mind — not worth it.

But what if it is not shyness that leads to mental chess but one of its close cousins, introversion?

Contrary to what most people believe, shyness and introversion are not the same thing.

In her book Quiet, Susan Cain explains the difference:

Introversion is, as far as we understand, mostly innate. Shyness, on the other hand, is something we acquire — put a introvert into the world and there’s a high chance she’ll develop a fear of social humiliation.

If shyness is developed, it means that shyness can be overcome.

Ten years ago, if you had asked me if I wanted to be born again as an extrovert, it would have been an easy yes.

Now, it’s an easy no.

I’ve realized that introvert have all sorts of advantages — many of them related to Wallace’s mental chess.

Here’s Sebastian Marshall, author of Gateless (one of my all-time favorite books), on the introvert advantage:

Introverts are naturally better at reflecting. This gives us the ability to learn and affect outcomes. We tend to start out lower (shy in school) but our “ceiling” for improvement is also much higher.

If you look at high-level performers, says Marshall, you see a lot of introspective types:

I’m not saying introverts are better than extroverts. Rather, I agree with Susan Cain when she says there are many kinds of people in the world:

This was my roll of the dice, and it’s not all bad.

I am an introvert, and that’s okay.|||

I wanted to be one of the naturals—one of those kids with a lot of friends that ruled the schoolyard with an easy social grace. Each time I fumbled in front of a girl, each time I ate alone in the…