I asked our members about their personal preferences, with one simple, direct question: “Should men always pay on the first date?”

Men and women in NYC from ages 21–35 seem to have totally different views on this subject, however, it’s still an interesting look at why.

Since launching in March 2016, Dine has seen thousands of people identify their personal preference on this controversial dating concept by activating Dine’s “My Treat” feature which displays a tag on your profile, letting potential matches know that you’re willing to pay for the first date…a quick solution in figuring out who’s paying.

Despite having features like this available to distinguish the paying arrangement, when actually on the first date, many men and women still continue to fall into the gray zone of how the bill should be taken care of.

Should the man always pay? Should the woman tip? Is going dutch the safest way? For online dating, many people have many different expectations so this controversy seems to really confuse first daters who are sometimes not always on the same page.

Dine’s concept is focused on going out to eat at restaurants and bars for a first date and therefore naturally became a hotbed for hosting this controversial topic. Dine’s users made great candidates for shedding a little light on the issue.

With gender neutrality and role reversal being a common theme of 2017, our first findings were very interesting in that single men preferred to pay for the first date (52% versus 48%). But what was even more eye opening was that ALMOST ALL WOMEN preferred that men also pay for the first date (72% versus 28%)!

“We are certainly living in a different age than our parents were. The traditional ‘social norms and expectations’ when out on a date are not really practiced by our millennial generation. But with all the controversy surrounding how men and women should work towards closing the gender neutrality gap, it was very interesting to find that the majority of both men and women still prefer the man to pay the bill when out on a first date. It says a lot about how deeply ingrained this old school dating custom is within our culture. With 72% of the women surveyed saying they prefer the man to pay, I think it’s fair to say this attitude isn’t dying out anytime soon, as many are expecting in 2017”, wrote Michael Tudda, Marketing Director for Dine.

As you can see from reasons provided, another interesting find was the common logic of reason both men and women Dine users shared to support their preference. Almost all these men and women stated their reason that men should always pay on the first date because it is too “be a gentleman” or to “show a chivalrous gesture or manners and appreciation” which highlights the fact that many forward thinking Millennials still have traditional first-date expectations.

Overall, the findings were a lot more surprising than one would expect in 2017, New York City.

We designed Dine to solve a major issue we found among existing dating services. While all of these services allow people to mutually like each other and then start talking, there’s a big problem: all that hassle leads to an actual date only a fraction of the time! That means liking 100s of users just to go on a single date! Plus, it’s been shown that the average time it takes from first greeting to first date is usually around two full weeks.|||

I asked our members about their personal preferences, with one simple, direct question: “Should men always pay on the first date?” Men and women in NYC from ages 21–35 seem to have totally different…