Complacency is defined as self-satisfaction accompanied by unawareness of possible deficiencies or dangers. In The Complacent Class: The Self-Defeating Quest for the American Dream, Tyler Cowen argues that more Americans are living comfortably and contently with what life has handed them. By sheltering ourselves from the new and different, it’s hard to see what is lost by standing still. But if you look at the data, we’re seeing a shift in the fabric of American society—from losses in new startups and economic growth to more instances of segregation and inequality. It’s not too late to change course and re-embrace the restlessness that has long defined America.

Are you part of the complacent class? Take the quiz to find out. (Please note: Hitting the “back” button during the quiz could result in an error message).

You can also find more suggestions in Bloomberg’s debate between Tyler and Noah Smith.

Tyler Cowen describes American complacency in the book through the lens of several different social and economic indicators. The quiz draws from the most notable examples from each chapter in the book including America’s “matching” culture, how much Americans move or travel, progress in the workplace, political engagement, adventurousness, segregation, and innovation.

The quiz asks you 27 questions to provide a complete picture of complacency or ambition based on trends that contribute to complacency outlined in the book. Based on your answers, it will tell you whether you exhibit behaviors that make you one of four possibilities: complacent, comfortable, a striver, or a trailblazer.

Each question has a set of possible answers weighted from high to low on levels of complacency relative to one another. Depending on how you answered each question, you earned points toward a total combined score. A few of the more pointed questions were weighted slightly greater than the rest, and the three demographic questions at the end did not count toward your score. Your total score falls within a range of four distinct categories alluded to above.

By reading The Complacent Class, you will have a good idea of what Tyler Cowen defines as “complacent” and which of the four buckets your answer likely falls into for each question. We do not publish the scoring for each question because we would like people to be truthful in how they answer without trying to get a specific score. What’s the fun in that? If you have specific questions, please email us at mercatus@mercatus.gmu.edu.

By popular demand, we have created a global version of the quiz.

For more information on Tyler Cowen’s new book or to purchase a copy for yourself, please visit complacentclass.com.|||

