E.g., “When you deploy the new stuff, make sure you’re looking at the logs. And ignore the errors that are normally there, so you can focus on the right ones to pay attention to. Oh, and the dashboard graph of errors…pay attention to that. And the deployment process. And the system resources on each node as you deploy to them. And the network bandwidth. Also: remember, we have to get this done quickly.”

E.g., “Deploy the new stuff, and do it quickly because our competitors may beat us! Also: take care of all of the details while you do it quickly, because one small mistake could make for a big deal!”

People do what makes sense to them, given their focus, their goals, and what they perceive to be their environment. This is known as the local rationality principle, and it is required in order to tease out second stories, which in turn is required for learning from failure . People’s local rationality is influenced by many dynamics, and I can imagine some of these things might feel familiar to any engineers who operate in high-tempo organizations:

Why are these statements woefully inappropriate for aiding explanation of what happened? Because stating what you think should have happened doesn’t explain people’s (or an organization’s) behavior. Counterfactuals serve as a massive distraction, because it brings sharply into focus what didn’t happen, when what is required for explanation is to understand why people did what they did.

David Woods put counterfactual thinking in context with how people actually work:

“After-the-fact, based on knowledge of outcome, outsiders can identify “critical” decisions and actions that, if different, would have averted the negative outcome. Since these “critical” points are so clear to you with the benefit of hindsight, you could be tempted to think they should have been equally clear and obvious to the people involved in the incident. These people’s failure to see what is obvious now to you seems inexplicable and therefore irrational or even perverse. In fact, what seems to be irrational behavior in hindsight turns out to be quite reasonable from the point of view of the demands practitioners face and the resources they can bring bear.” (Woods, 2010)



“You construct a referent world from outside the accident sequence, based on data you now have access to, based on facts you now know to be true. The problem is that these after-the-fact-worlds may have very little relevance to the circumstances of the accident sequence. They do not explain the observed behavior. You have substituted your own world for the one that surrounded the people in question.” (Dekker, 2004, p.33) “Saying what people failed to do, or implying what they could or should have done to prevent the mishap, has no role in understanding human error.”  (Dekker, 2004, p.43)

The engineers and managers at Knight Capital did not set out that morning of August 1, 2012 to lose $460 million. If they did, we’d be talking about sabotage and not human error. They did, however, set out to perform some work successfully (in this case, roll out what they needed to participate in the Retail Liquidity Program.)

If you haven’t picked up on it already, the use of counterfactuals is a manifestation of one of the most studied cognitive bias in modern psychology: The Hindsight Bias. I will leave it as an exercise to the reader to dig into that.

Cognitive biases are the greatest pitfalls in explaining surprising outcomes. The weird cousin of The Hindsight Bias is Outcome Bias. In a nutshell, it says that we are biased to “judge a past decision by its ultimate outcome instead of based on the quality of the decision at the time it was made, given what was known at that time.” (Outcome Bias, 2013)

In other words, we can be tricked into thinking that if the result of an accident is truly awful (like people dying, something crashing, or, say, losing $460 million in 20 minutes) then the decisions that led up to that outcome must have been reeeeeealllllllyyyy bad. Right?

This is a myth debunked by a few decades of social science, but it remains persistent. No decision maker has omniscience about results, so the severity of the outcome cannot be seen to be proportional to the quality of thought that went into the decisions or actions that led up to the result. Why we have this bias to begin with is yet another topic that we can explore another time.

But a possible indication that you are susceptible to The Outcome Bias is a quick thought exercise on results: if Knight Capital lost only $1,000 (or less) would you think them to be more or less prudent in their preventative measures than in the case of $460 million?

If you’re into sports, maybe this can help shed light on The Outcome Bias.

Operators (within complex systems, at least) have procedures and rules to help them achieve their goals safely. They come in many forms: checklists, guidelines, playbooks, laws, etc. There is a distinction between procedures and rules, but they have similarities when it comes to gaining understanding of the past.

First let’s talk about procedures. In the aftermath of an accident, we can (and will, in the SEC release) see many calls for “they didn’t follow procedures!” or “they didn’t even have a checklist!” This sort of statement can nicely serve as a counterfactual.

What is important to recognize is that procedures are but only one resource people use to do work. If we only worked by following every rule and procedure we’ve written for ourselves, by the letter, then I suspect society would come to a halt. As an aside, “work-to-rule” is a tactic that labor organizations have used to demonstrate the issues that onerous rules and procedures can rob people of their adaptive capacities, and therefore bring business to an effective standstill.

Some more thought exercises to think with on procedures:

Procedures are important for a number of reasons. They serve as institutional knowledge and guidelines for safe work. But, like wikis, they make sense to the authors of the procedure the day they wrote it. They are written to take into account all of the scenarios and contexts that the author can imagine.

But since that imagination is limited, many procedures that are thought to ensure safety are context-sensitive and they require interpretation, modification, and adaptation.

There are multiple issues with procedures as they are navigated by people who do real work. Stealing from Dekker again:

Anyone operating in high-tempo and high-consequence environments recognize both the utility and also the brittleness of a procedure, no matter how much thought went into it.

Let’s keep this idea in mind as we walk through the SEC release below.

Now let’s talk about rules. The SEC’s job (in a nutshell) is to design, maintain, and enforce regulations of practice for various types of financially-driven organizations in the United States. Note that they are not charged with explaining or preventing events. Preventing may or may not result from their work in regulations, but prevention demands much more than abiding by rules.

Rules and regulations are similar to procedures in that they are written with deliberate but ultimately interpretable intention. Judges and juries help interpret different contexts as they relate to a given rule, law, or regulation. Rules are good for a number of reasons that are beyond the scope of this (now lengthy) post.

If we think about regulations in the context of causality, however, we can get into trouble.

Because we can find ourselves in uncertain contexts that have some of the dynamics that I listed above (multiple conflicting goals and targets of attention) regulations (even when we are acutely aware of them) pose some issues. In the Man-Made Disasters Model, Nick Pidgeon lays some of this out for us:

Rules and regulations need to allow for interpretation, otherwise they would be brittle in enforcement. So therefore, vagueness and flexibility in rules is desired. We’ll see how this vagueness can be exploited for enforcement, however, at the expense of learning.

Once more: the SEC document cannot be viewed as a canonical description of what happened with Knight Capital on August 1, 2012.

It can, however, be viewed as a comprehensive account of the exchange and trading regulations the SEC deems were violated by the organization. This is its purpose. My goal here is not to critique the SEC release for its purpose, it is to reveal how it cannot be seen to aid either explanation or prevention of the event, and so should not be used for that.

Before we walk through (at least parts) of the document, it’s worth noting that there is no objective accident investigative body that exists for electronic trading systems. In aviation, there is a regulative body (the FAA) and an investigative body (the NTSB) and there is significant differences between the two, charter-wise and operations-wise. There exists no such independent investigative body analogous to the NTSB in Knight Capital’s industry. There is only the SEC.

I’ll have comments in italics, in blue and talk about the highlighted pieces. After getting feedback from many colleagues, I decided to keep the length here for people to dig into, because I think it’s important to understand. If you make it through this, you deserve cake.

If you want to skip the annotated and butchered SEC statement, you can just go to the summary.|||

