Uber president Jeff Jones, a marketing expert who joined just six months ago to help soften Uber's abrasive image, has quit because his "beliefs and approach to leadership" were incompatible with what he "saw and experienced at Uber."

Jones had previously been the chief marketing officer at Target. "I joined Uber because of its mission," Jones said on Sunday evening in a statement to Reuters, "and the challenge to build global capabilities that would help the company mature and thrive long term.

"It is now clear, however, that the beliefs and approach to leadership that have guided my career are inconsistent with what I saw and experienced at Uber, and I can no longer continue as president of the ride sharing business."

Earlier this month, following a really rather shocking amount of corporate misery, Uber announced that it was searching for a chief operating officer. As president, according to Reuters, Jones had been holding some of the COO's responsibilities.

In other news, Uber's VP of maps and business platform said he plans to leave the company by the end of the month to explore politics. Earlier in March the company's VP of product and growth left the company, as did Charlie Miller, a security researcher employed by Uber who has been featured on the hallowed pages of this humble website many times in the past.

“I need leadership help,” Uber CEO Kalanick says after video goes viral Those departures in March followed the uncovering of Greyball, an in-house tool used by Uber to operate in territories where the service had been banned or not yet approved by regulators, and CEO Travis Kalanick saying "I need leadership help" after a video of him arguing with an Uber driver was released by Bloomberg.

Before that, in February, Amit Singhal, one of Uber's top engineers, was asked to resign after a sexual harassment allegation stemming from his previous workplace: Google. Around the same time, of course, Google also sued Uber over alleged theft of trade secrets.

And then just before that, in mid-February, we have the event that seemingly kickstarted this whole comedy of errors: Susan Fowler, a former engineer at the company, wrote on her blog that Uber suffers from institutional sexism.

What calamity will befall Uber next? Tune in next week to find out.|||

Rough month for Uber, with top dogs leaving and allegations of theft and sexism.