Even with the non-rodent navigation, you’ll often be thinking “wait, I really have to indicate that I know , and , and , and ”?

Well, yeah. And here’s why, grasshopper: maybe I guess that everyone knows that there’s padding left, right, top, bottom.

I might be right, but maybe there’s someone out there that didn’t know that is shorthand, just like you thought was always a shorthand.

And I might think everyone knows there’s , and , and and maybe ? ? ?

The point is, I don’t know what you already know; even you don’t know what you don’t already know. So the safest bet is to go through the whole list, one by one. And frankly, m’dear, I took the time to type all this out for you; it’s the least you could do.

As my final rebuttal to your complaints of copious clicking: don’t think you need to do this all at once. Just set aside some specific recurring time and bite off one little chunk at a time. Take the 10 minutes you normally spend every Monday morning asking people how their weekend was (“oh just a quiet one” means they don’t want to talk to you), and instead spend it going through this list. Or sneeze slightly quicker and use the time you save to go through this list.

And do you really need to spend time preparing completely different meals for you and the dog?

C’mon. Sands through the hourglass, people. And candles in the wind.

There’s thousands of items in this list; I don’t want you to spend a bunch of time going through them all and then your phone ends up at the bottom of the garbage chute when you throw out a pair of jeans because you spilled spaghetti sauce all over them and didn’t realise that your phone was in the pocket and now you feel naked and alone because you don’t have your phone or your pants.

Or your know it all scores.

So please be aware, your scores will be saved locally to the device. They are safe there, but not transportable (yet) to other devices.

Even though I wrote the list, I’m still going through it myself, and I’ve chosen to do it on my desktop because I like the keyboard shortcuts and the computer is nowhere near where I eat dinner.

Know it all works offline (in super modern browsers) so once you’ve loaded the site you can safely use it with or without a connection. You can add it to your homescreen for easy access (and if you’re on Android, it will look and feel like a native app).

You’ll notice some items have ‘old’ or ‘new’ tags.

It’s quite subjective but I had to do something. If you live in a world of supporting IE9 and see no way out, you can safely ignore anything flagged as ‘new’.

There are some things that are flagged as ‘new’ that are only in Chrome, but have reached W3C Candidate Recommendation and are under development in Firefox/Edge. So they’re on their way.

‘Old’ items are anything that is deprecated. Although even here there’s some subjectivity. MDN flags as ‘deprecated’ and says “This feature has been removed from the Web standards”. But it’s still in WHATWG and W3C so methinks they’re telling a fib to stop newbies using userAgent.

SVG is a bit of a mess, too. Some SVG 1 things are marked as deprecated, but SVG 2 isn’t really here yet, so we’re in a bit of version limbo. (Ooh, I wonder if they’ll go straight to SVG 4?)

But none of this should worry you because know it all is not a teaching tool, it’s a discovery tool. If it works as intended, it will help you find new things to learn, but then it’s over to you to go and learn them.

Including whether or not they’re worth learning.

This is the sort of thing I would love to read about someone else’s project. And since I’m the epitome of normal I assume everyone else is the same. So here’s some behind the scenes action for you…

I spent a bit of time experimenting with the best way to get all of this data into one place. I wanted to type it all out (the goal of all of this is to learn, after all — hitting some API would have missed the point) so there were going to be many hours spent typing.

I looked at a few different tools, and discovered that the best software for entering hierarchical data, complete with shortcuts for indenting/outdenting and easy drag/drop to rearrange trees was…

Microsoft Word (outline mode with the nav open and split windows).|||

Ladies and gentleman, I would like to introduce you to Know It All, a tool to help you discover what you don’t yet know about web development. A few months ago I was lucky enough to come down with a…