I focused on five medium sauté pans. One was made of seasoned cast iron, one of heavy copper top-coated with stainless steel, one of aluminum sandwiched between two layers of stainless. Two were aluminum top-coated with new non-Teflon coatings: a ceramic material called Thermolon, and a silicone-based material called NP2. Like most Teflon pans, the NP2 pans come with instructions to use low heat, but Thermolon is said to perform well up to 870 degrees. That’s charring, pizza-oven heat.

The prices ranged from $25 for the new aluminum nonsticks to as much as $480 for French copper.

First I wanted to see what difference the kind of metal makes in how the pans heat up. Copper conducts heat twice as fast as aluminum, and five times faster than cast iron. But the copper and iron pans each weigh more than five pounds, while the thinnest aluminum pan weighs barely two. Is lots of expensive copper better than a little cheap aluminum?

I started by timing how long it took the pans to bring a cup of water to a boil over the maximum gas flame on my stovetop. The copper and the cast iron each took 3 minutes, the aluminum-stainless combination 2.5, and the thin nonstick aluminum just 2 minutes. Light and cheap win for speed.

Then I put the heat-tolerant all-metal pans and the Thermolon on a high flame until their temperatures reached around 600 degrees, measured with a hand-held, point-and-shoot thermometer. I dropped a cold steak on the surface, then checked the pan temperature under the steak after a few smoking minutes. All of them stayed up around 575 degrees, replacing the heat lost to the steak and browning it deeply. Light and cheap held its own with the heavyweights.

But would these pans evenly distribute the heat? In a good conductor, heat will flow quickly throughout the pan; with a poor conductor, the heat should build up into a hot spot in the metal just above the burner. To make the pans’ heat landscapes visible, I put a round of parchment paper into each pan, weighed it down with pie weights and put the pan on a medium-high burner. When I saw or smelled the paper browning, I removed the parchment.

The heavy copper and the light aluminum pans produced evenly toasted heat maps. The stainless-clad aluminum did pretty well, too. But the cast-iron pan scorched a small area, and the pattern was familiar. For years I made risotto every week or two in my favorite enameled cast-iron pot, and always found a solid brown ring of stuck rice grains right above the flame.

Still, I was surprised, because I’d always heard and thought that cast iron was a slow but even conductor. I wondered if it would perform better if I heated it more gradually over a low flame, or on an electric heating coil, which would contact more of the pan bottom than the gas flame. I was wrong. The low flame caused even browning over a small area at the center of the pan, and none elsewhere. The electric burner gave a pattern much like the flame’s.

When I spot-checked the cast iron with my thermometer, there was a consistent 100-degree difference between the pan center and an inch from the edge. That’s easily enough to make the difference between browning and scorching. My cast-iron pan makes a much better potato galette in even oven heat.

Sticking isn’t a problem when you’ve browned the food and want to harvest the stuck-on flavorful brown bits by deglazing with some wine or water. In fact, it’s good. It is a problem, though, if you’re frying an egg or fragile piece of fish. It’s especially likely if you’ve used the least oil possible and put the flame on high to heat up quickly. Oil plus high heat plus maximum exposure to air quickly produce oxidized, gummy residues that stick to the pan surface and to the food.

TO see which pans are more likely to stick, I fried dozens of eggs, pounds of flaky white fish, and a dozen or so potato galettes, which are disasters if the spiral of potato slices doesn’t release when you flip the pan over.

The nonstick pans released with a minimal wipe of oil, a hardened Teflon type most reliably. The Thermolon needed more lubrication after its steak-searing ordeal than it did before, but its surface didn’t mar as easily as the Teflon and NP2, which had tiny nicks and scrapes after just a few uses. All the other pans, metal-surface or enamel, behaved much like each other. They released foods reliably if they’d been greased with nonstick sprays or with butter, and usually — but not always — if they’d been oiled.

Why does butter release foods better than other fats and oils, clarified butter included? After going down a couple of blind alleys, I realized that whole butter carries emulsifiers, substances that coat the droplets of butterfat in milk, separating them from direct contact with each other and from the milk’s water. And emulsifiers, lecithin and others, are the active ingredient in nonstick sprays. Clarified butter and vegetable oils, meanwhile, contain few if any emulsifiers. I found that, by dispersing a pinch of soy lecithin in a little water and then whisking the mix into some canola oil, the resulting oil released foods easily.

The problem with nonstick sprays and butter is that they all begin to break down at relatively low frying temperatures, around 350 degrees. To get a good deep brown on many meats and vegetables, the temperature needs to get up into the 400s. And it’s the combination of a hot surface, oil and food that can get sticky.

I was baffled by the occasional sticking of eggs and fish and potatoes that I saw in all but the nonstick pans, so I decided to go back to square one and think about the hot pan and the oil. I scoured a stainless surface clean, added some oil, turned on the heat, and just watched. I saw something I’ve seen many times before, but I saw it for the first time.

As the temperature of the pan surface rose above 350 degrees, the oil began to move and form thick ridges and thin troughs, a stage that some recipes refer to as the oil “rippling.” As the temperature kept climbing, the thin areas spread out and the ridges became fewer and higher. The pattern reminded me of the long drops that run down the inside of a glass of wine or spirits. Eventually the thin areas seemed to run completely dry, and most of the oil had collected in a ring around the pan edge.

With some research, I soon learned that I had been observing Bénard-Marangoni convection, which is related to Marangoni convection in a wineglass. Uneven temperatures at the pan surface cause regional differences in the oil’s surface tension, and this causes the oil to get pulled toward the cooler areas.

I saw the same thing happen on each pan. The hot areas near the pan center end up with thinner and thinner coatings of oil. And the combination of high heat and thinning oil means food is more likely to stick. But the thinning and sticking are unpredictable: they depend on the burner heat, how the pan is placed over it, how much oil you start with, how much you even out the oil by stirring and scraping.

What can we do to work around the curse of Bénard-Marangoni convection? Here’s what I came up with, and if you have a pan that sticks at high heat, you might try it.

Add enough oil to coat the pan surface and the food completely. As little as a half-teaspoon of oil will coat a medium sauté pan (for fat watchers, that’s just 20 calories) for cooking eggs and pieces of fish; for chopped vegetables, triple that to coat the additional surface area of the little pieces. Heat the pan until the oil ripples. Then turn the heat down, tilt the pan to even out the troughs and ridges, and wait until it cools just enough that the oil layer stays mostly flat. Then add the food, and let it cook for some time before turning the heat up again. If possible, keep the food and oil moving around.

And another thing: clean pans gently, with enough pressure to remove stuck and gummy deposits, but without scouring down to bare metal. I noticed that as my experiments wore on and I got lazier about cleaning between tests, the pans were less likely to stick. This seasoning effect may be the kitchen version of the “hygiene hypothesis” in medicine: just as extreme cleanliness may leave people more susceptible to some kinds of illness, it may make pans more susceptible to malfunction.

So what to do about getting pots and pans that work best? Choose the ones that you like, for their heft or their lightness, for cachet or economy, for finickiness or ease. Mind the rippling oil. And cook with them often.|||

When it comes to pots and pans, metals and surfaces matter, and so does heat management.