Tech giants and upstarts alike are piling into a technology with huge potential

IN 1981 Richard Feynman, a visionary physicist, had a clever idea. Could the odd properties of quantum mechanics, he wondered aloud in a lecture, be used to carry out simulations of physical systems that computers of the time could not cope with? Others took up the question. In 1985, David Deutsch, now at Oxford University, showed how quantum systems could be set up as a “universal” computer—that is, like current computers, able to run any program. Though fascinating, at that point it was all rather theoretical, involving hardware that no one knew how to build.

What made the world sit up and take notice was a paper published in 1994 by Peter Shor, then at Bell Labs. Dr Shor showed that a quantum computer would be capable of working out the prime numbers that, multiplied together, make up an exceedingly large number. The fact that this “decomposition” is mathematically very hard is the basis of cryptographic protocols still used today.

Since then, researchers have come up with a rich variety of problems for which quantum computers should be superior to the best supercomputers—and a number of algorithms, or sets of steps, to break down problems in such a way that quantum computers can crunch through them. This evident utility started an international competition to build one that was, for many years, confined to quiet labs and the academic literature. These days, big business is seriously interested, and blue-chip companies including Intel, Hewlett-Packard, Google and Microsoft all have research programmes. Last year IBM released Quantum Experience, which lets all comers play around with a crude quantum computer over the internet. Governments too are putting money into academic efforts, both directly and via defence contractors, and a growing band of startup companies are striking out on their own.

A computer big enough to do what Dr Shor envisaged would also be useful for all manner of currently intractable problems. Although that remains a distant prospect, steps towards developing one could have big benefits; for many applications, a much simpler or special-purpose computer will do.

What makes the idea of quantum computers so attractive is not so much that they will work faster than traditional computers—they may for some applications but not for others—but that they will work fundamentally differently. Three intuition-defying concepts play a role. The first is superposition. Today’s computers depend on bits taking one of two values, 0 or 1. Qubits, their quantum analogues, can be arranged in “states” that are best thought of as some mixture of both 0 and 1. To carry out a computation using one of these strange beasts is to act on both the 0 and the 1, in a sense to create within the calculation the potential outcome of either at the same time.

The power of this indeterminate state is unleashed through the second quantum-mechanical effect, entanglement. A standard computer depends on the complete isolation of one bit from the next to prevent a computation from going awry or a document from getting corrupted. For a quantum computer, the entangling of multiple qubits is paramount; in the best case, all of a given device’s bits are entangled with one another. Again, to operate on one qubit is to operate, to varying degrees, on all the entangled ones. It is therefore impossible to describe such a machine in strict terms of its constituent parts. There is a need to consider how one qubit is connected to its neighbour, and to the next-but-one, and so on through all the cross-correlations. To describe all the states of a 50-bit standard computer requires 50 bits of digital memory; a description of a 50-qubit computer would require a quadrillion.

It gets weirder. Whereas it is easy to imagine an equation that predicts a low or even zero probability of a given event, it is much harder to reckon with what are called probability amplitudes in quantum mechanics, which can actually be negative. In the course of a quantum computer’s crunching, these amplitudes can (again like waves) interfere, positive with positive and negative with negative—in essence, to reduce the probability of the wrong answer and boost that of the right one.

Posing a question starts with choosing an algorithm suitable for the problem. This algorithm is actually manifest as the starting states of the qubits: 0 here, 1 there, a bit of a mix over there. The calculation is then just a matter of letting quantum-mechanical laws play out on this system of superposed and entangled qubits. Changing states, shifting qubit couplings and so on represent a vast cross-multiplication of all those states and combinations, with probability amplitudes reinforcing and diminishing until the system settles into a final state that represents the answer. It is a matter of setting up the problem, and the machine, so that all the possibilities are sifted through at lightning speed.

Efforts to make qubits often centre on the use of tiny loops of superconducting wire, arranged like the “gates” of standard computers. Single charged atoms, trapped by electric or magnetic fields, can also do the job; in February an international consortium of researchers published an open-source blueprint for a trapped-ion machine. Several groups use single photons as qubits—an approach that looks easy to integrate with existing semiconductor-fabrication techniques. Microsoft’s planned “topological” quantum computer uses something else entirely: “anyons”, particles that would be more easily tamed than other qubit candidates but which have never been seen outside the pages of theoretical physics textbooks.

Setting up a qubit is no longer difficult. The problem is looking after it. Quantum states are notoriously delicate, requiring complete isolation from the actual stuff of the experiment. But isolation can never be complete, and errors creep in; for a calculation to succeed these must be noticed and corrected. It has become clear that as computers scale up, the number of logical qubits (the ones actually doing the calculation) will be dwarfed by an “overhead” of perhaps thousands of times as many error-correcting and command-and-control qubits. The kind of machine required to implement Shor’s famed algorithm on the sort of large numbers used in encryption will need to contain something like a million qubits.

Such machines will, to put it mildly, be an engineering challenge. But in a clear indication that quantum computing is getting closer, names familiar from traditional computing are increasingly getting involved. Hewlett-Packard is trying to build its own machine. Intel’s global quantum investments include $50m going into work at QuTech, the Netherlands’ national quantum-technology hub. Microsoft’s topological quantum approach, if it works, will be much less error-prone. The quantum-computing startup scene is also becoming increasingly vibrant. Researchers from Yale and the University of Maryland have spun off companies, and physicists who had worked at IBM and America’s Department of Energy have started their own firms.

Governments are getting in on the action too. Australia’s has invested A$26m ($20m) in a laboratory at the University of New South Wales in Sydney (and the Commonwealth Bank of Australia and Telstra, a telecoms firm, have together chipped in about the same amount). A lab at the University of Sydney down the road is being funded as part of LogiQ, a programme of the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity, an American government defence outfit. Leaked documents have revealed that America’s National Security Agency has been exploring “if a cryptologically useful quantum computer can be built”. Experts now reckon it can. But when?

Very few in the field think it will take less than a decade, and many say far longer. But the time for investment, all agree, is now—because even the smaller and less capable machines that will soon be engineered will have the potential to earn revenue. Already, startups and consulting firms are springing up to match prospective small quantum computers to problems faced in sectors including quantitative finance, drug discovery and oil and gas.

Perhaps the most interesting early applications will take the form of “quantum simulators”: computers that mimic real physical systems. This is what Feynman had in mind, imagining in his lecture “that the computer will do exactly the same as nature”. Quantum simulators might help in the design of room-temperature superconductors allowing electricity to be transmitted without losses, or with investigating the nitrogenase reaction used to make most of the world’s fertiliser.

Quantum simulation has its fans in industry, too. Michael Bolle at Bosch foresees using simulators to design batteries that will supersede the current lithium-ion technology. Paolo Bianco, who heads the quantum-technology research team at Airbus, a big European aerospace firm, says that quantum-simulating a new material such as a stiffer or lighter alloy for use in aeroplanes or satellites would be much faster and cheaper than manufacturing and then testing the material itself. “The promise of quantum technologies”, he says, “is in engineering terms a step up in performance—not of 20%, but of a couple of orders of magnitude.”

For some applications and classes of problems that may well be true. But the experience of D-Wave Systems, a Canadian company that began selling the first commercially available quantum computer in 2011, shows how little is known about what future machines will be able to do. D-Wave makes what is known as a quantum annealer, a special-purpose quantum computer (as opposed to a universal one) that works best on “optimisation” problems, such as finding the shortest possible route for a travelling salesman. The firm’s customers include Lockheed Martin and a consortium including Google and NASA. In January Temporal Defense Systems, a cyber-security firm, bought one.

For years experts questioned whether the devices were actually exploiting quantum mechanics and whether they worked better than traditional computers. Those questions have since been conclusively answered—yes, and sometimes—but only by exhaustively testing the machines’ mettle directly. The current best supercomputers are able to simulate only what more general-purpose quantum computers of about 50 qubits can do. Tantalisingly, it is difficult to tell at what problems bigger machines will excel.

Google is aiming to use its own machinery, a so-called gate-model quantum computer of the sort most groups are pursuing, to achieve “quantum supremacy”, whereby a quantum computer performs a calculation faster than any known computer could. Google researchers have laid out an ambitious plan which may let them achieve that feat this year. D-Wave has hinted it has already done so, but has made similar claims in the past; their current numbers are still to be checked.

Whenever, and by whomever, this is accomplished, it will launch an era of small-scale machines offering quantum-enhanced solutions and services. The first publicly accessible one, IBM’s Quantum Experience, may be an indication that the machines’ future will be in the cloud. Most users have no more need for one at home than they have for a supercomputer.

But some do. In 1982, a year after Feynman gave his quantum-computing lecture, he was touring the supercomputer facility at Los Alamos National Laboratory, where he had worked on the first atomic bomb. Talking to Bo Ewald, then in charge of the lab’s computing efforts and now running D-Wave, Feynman said, “You know, young man, one day all of these will be replaced by quantum computers.” One has already moved in.|||

The Economist offers authoritative insight and opinion on international news, politics, business, finance, science, technology and the connections between them.