If used creatively — snapchat geofilters could be your best alternative to reach your audience effectively.

Snapchat’s revenue is reported to be $400 million in 2016. That should give you the idea about how corporates are betting on Snapchat for promotions. With 10 billion views daily, it’s not too hard to understand how they’re making big numbers.

Not everyone could afford to promote their brand on Snapchat. Geofilters made this possible. Geofilter for businesses are on the rise now and is very well adapted in the US and UK among others.

Of the 160 million daily active users, a majority belong to the 16–35 age group. If your customer’s belong to this age group and you don’t have a geofilter yet — you are missing a great opportunity to head start and overshadow your competitors.

Not much. If you’re an independent business and wish to have a geofilter for your shop, the pricing starts at $5 for 20,000 sq ft. However, the price goes up to hundreds of dollars if you’re in a popular location.

But in most cases, it’s around $ 5– $10 for a day in most towns.

Forget Google and Facebook ad campaigns that make you spend a ton spread over a period of time. Promotion with geofilters is an easy job. You submit your geofilter and people will use in on their snaps. When you create a geofilter for your business, the moment it goes live — you have started to reach out people in your vicinity. People near you will be discover your business and just might decide to drop by. Simple as that.

If you are a business or franchise whose potential customers are teenagers and young adults, geofilters is what you should be looking at. More than 70% of the daily users belong to 16- 36 age group.

If you are a sports merchandise company — a geofilter with business branding at a soccer stadium will allow you to reach thousands of potential audience in a matter of hours. Every time a geofilter is used by a user, that is viewed by their friends. Thus, allowing you to tap into their social circles as well

Launching a new brand, or a new line of products is a hard job unless you are willing to spend a lot on advertising and creating a hype. Franchises have already adapted to snapchat marketing when launching new brands and/or products. Most celebrity events are sponsored by a corporation that promotes a brand. As it goes without saying that, with right strategies, audience can be easily influenced even if it is a newly launched product.

Geofilters have proven to be not just an effective way but also a faster way to market products. So, get your geofilter now and start reaching out to more potential audience faster. Snapstudio lets you create geofilters easily and effortlessly.|||

If used creatively — snapchat geofilters could be your best alternative to reach your audience effectively. Snapchat’s revenue is reported to be $400 million in 2016. That should give you the idea…