Well, if you think pair programming has to do with two programmers, you’re on the right track! To break it down, pair programming is two programmers working together on the same project, at the same time, at the same workstation. One as the driver and the other the observer – think, pilot and co-pilot. The roles aren’t set in stone and they switch back and forth. This dynamic programming duo is great because, it means double the experience, information and problem solving.

So why is pair programming so important now-a-days?

We know what you’re thinking, why hire two programmers to do a job that one programmer can do on their own? Well, pair programmers are twice more likely to stop defects in their tracks—saving companies money. How much money? Well, IBM reported spending “$250 million repairing and reinstalling fixes to 30,000 customer-reported problems” so, pair programming puts that $250 million, back into the company.

There is no “I” in Team

Pair Programming is becoming popular, but it’s not the right job for everyone. Some expert coders have a hard time with teamwork, and are commonly taking over. So instead joining forces, the expert programmer intimidates and takes over – defeating the whole purpose.  It’s a guessing game for companies when they hire and select their pair programming teams: Will their programmers work well together? Can they communicate, stay involved and work as a team?

That’s where TalentAccurate comes in!

At TalentAccurate, we are working on a pilot program that will analyze team members pair programming skills and abilities right at the get go—during the interview. Breaking down not only their programming skills, but their communication, engagement, critical thinking and, problem solving in a team environment.  Companies can take out the guess work, and focus on the big picture.

 

 Time to give pair programming a whirl, create a dynamic team and put money back into your company. Contact TalentAccurate, and we can help you find the perfect team.|||

