There’s no cooler biz on the planet than startups, and there’s no denying Silicon Valley is the startups capital of the world… for now.

Cities all over the world are vying to knock the crown off this tech king. And Startup Genome has all the cities doing their best to keep up with San Fran sultan in its new Global Startup Ecosystem Report and Ranking 2017.

Who knows — maybe one will be home to the next Mark Zuckerberg or Elon Musk.

The 150-page report is based on a year’s worth of research, spanning a whopping 10,000 startups and 300 partner companies. This is Startup Genome’s third comprehensive report, based on speaking with entrepreneurs and massive amounts of data on startups.

Startup Genome examined how cities help growing and sustaining vibrant startup ecosystems through eight major factors: funding, market reach, global connectedness, technical talent, startup experience, resource attraction, corporate involvement, founder ambition and strategy.

It may not come as a great surprise but this year’s top three startup ecosystems are Silicon Valley, New York, and London. However, there is a lot more to the report than the top few places. We at TNW wanted to take a closer look at each of the four regions detailed in the report.

We reached out to JF Gauthier, CEO of Startup Genome, to discuss the report and to give us a clearer view of noteworthy cities in each region.

The biggest news for the Americas is perhaps that the US is losing dominance to Asia and Europe. Los Angeles and Chicago, for example, had the biggest drop of the top 20 cities, mainly due their lowered scores in ‘global connectedness’. However, the US is still prominent within the Americas (and the world), with seven US cities in the top 20.

Silicon Valley is still number one in most categories; however, the tech mecca has been ousted by Singapore when it comes to talent. High salaries are one of the main factors why Silicon Valley has lost first place, along with the difficulties of early-stage startups to attract experienced talent.

Despite two cities in the Americas having lost their seat in the top 20, Montreal and São Paulo, there are a lot of interesting startup ecosystems outside the US to look out for. Gauthier especially points out the Toronto-Waterloo innovation corridor.

Toronto moved up on place and is now number 16 in the rankings. According to Gauthier, this is mainly because of how well Toronto-startups are connected to the global community. The main challenge in Toronto is that early-stage startups have some difficulties with accessing experienced technical and growth talent.

One of the people that are especially happy with Toronto’s startup scene is Salim Teja, Executive Vice President of Ventures at MaRS Discovery District, one of the world’s largest urban innovation hubs. Teja feels that the city’s startup ecosystem has matured over the past decade and today it’s reached a tipping point:

Teja also points out that there is a rich pool of graduates for startups to choose from. University of Toronto and the University of Waterloo are two of the top schools for engineering and entrepreneurship in Canada and most their students’ top choice for employment is working locally for a startup.

Europe has six representatives in the top 20 in this year’s report: London (#3), Tel Aviv (#6), Berlin (#7), Paris (#11), Stockholm (#14), and Amsterdam (#19).

After all the Brexit-mess of 2016, it is interesting to see that London’s vibrant startup environment hasn’t been destroyed. In fact, London moves up three places since the last report, improving in categories such as funding and startup experience since 2015.

London is still Europe’s tech capital with 4,300 to 5,900 tech startups and has the fourth highest startup output in the world. Gauthier says that the London ecosystem is far from stopping to improve:

However, when it comes to Europe the big news is Stockholm. For Gauthier, Stockholm had the most impressive upward movement this year by jumping into number 14, making its debut in the top 20:

Its about time that one of the cities in the Nordic countries reach the top 20, because as we already know, Scandinavia has great work culture. One of Stockholm’s greatest strengths is the outwards looking of its startup scene. The domestic market consists of less than 10 million, so it’s considered common sense to get straight into global expansion.

The forward thinking of the Swedes has paid off as the startup ecosystem in Stockholm is in the top ten for the subcategories of global connectedness, funding quality, and exit values. This is evident by the huge success stories out of Sweden, such as Spotify and King, the company behind the crazy addictive Candy Crush.

Asia and Europe are gaining on the US when it comes to thriving startup ecosystems. Many governments in Asia and Europe have set clear goals to support growth of their innovation ecosystem, while the US has trusted in its private sector to maintain growth.

Singapore is one of the places where the government had an active role in creating a startup-friendly environment. This year, Singapore ranks number one in talent which is an amazing feat. This can be accredited to Singapore’s innovative policies that began in the 1990s.

This long-term thinking has been the key to Singapore’s success as a great startup city. The government has been patient and kept its support, but Singapore only appeared in the top 10 ranking for the first time in 2015.

China is also making headway in leading the charge when it comes to startup ecosystems, according to Gauthier:

There are certainly a number of cities to look out for in the Asia/Pacific region when it comes to startup ecosystems. Gauthier also mentions Sydney’s ecosystem for its balanced scoring.

We’re organizing the StartupCity Summit during TNW Conference in Amsterdam. It’s an initiative focused on connecting startup cities with their international counterparts to share insights and discuss the current and future role of local governments in rapid developing startup ecosystems. The Summit takes place on day two of TNW Conference, May 19th, from 12:30 until 17:00. Don’t want to miss it? Book your one day ticket or schedule a call for more information.

Read next: Brogrammer scraped and uploaded 40,000 Tinder pics of 'hoes' online|||

Global Startup Ecosystem Report 2017 ranks tech scenes in cities around the world, Silicon Valley is still number one but it has strong contenders