This is according to the latest Economist Intelligence Unit IoT Business Index, published in February this year.

“These are significant percentages, and they signal that IoT is starting to emerge from the boardroom and now being integrated into businesses and industries. This is evident in the ARM mbed ecosystem, with several commercial shipping products already based on mbed OS 5, and more in engineering sample and volume testing phases of their design and certification.”

Other analysts, including ABI Research, have examined the range of protocols within IoT and they believe that “it might not be a case of either Bluetooth or ZigBee or Thread, but rather utilising a combination of these technologies in a single device.”

The Thread Group has recently opened testing and product certification for devices taking advantage of Thread connectivity. It results from the first set of software stacks also completing interoperability testing. This enables developers to start creating applications aimed at residential buildings.

ARM mbed OS 5.4 makes the recently certified mbed Thread 1.1 stack freely available to developers, and includes solutions for building both end nodes and border routers based on Thread.

A Linux-based Access Point to connect Thread networks to the cloud that utilizes the Thread border router is also available.

OpenAIS, a consortium of European lighting manufacturers, is creating a standard for Internet-connected lighting with a defined system architecture and open interfaces. Funded by the European Union, this initiative will deploy mbed OS in its demonstration system showcasing both Ethernet and Thread connectivity for smart lighting with leading lighting systems and controller manufacturers, opening a vast volume of devices for developers to build IoT applications.

An on-demand facilities management demonstration using the LoRA stack that has been integrated into mbed OS 5 will be on display at the ARM booth (Hall 3, booth 342) at Embedded World in Nuremburg (March 14 to 16).|||

One in five companies has begun rolling out internet of things (IoT) services and products, and half of those surveyed say IoT will be an important part of