EMF protection is a modern requirement. As a species we tolerated 50 Hz / 60 Hz power frequency from our walls pretty well, however radiofrequency RF from cell phone masts, cordless home phones and WiFi are a completely different and far more insidious story. PEMF at our range of frequencies (1 – 14.1 Hz) is diametrically opposed to EMF at power and radio frequency RF.

Watch the first 5 minutes of this video The Cooking of Humanity and you won’t be able to stop. Former Royal Navy Microwave Weapons Specialist discusses WiFi in classrooms cooking your daughters’ eggs and the wave of birth defects we should expect around 2020-2030. Here’s a good resource about smart meter protection.

Early studies of RF showed distinct detrimental non-thermal effects. It wasn’t until the “wireless revolution” that money trumped science and precautionary principals in one fell sweep. EMF protection is unfortunately now required particularly if living in urban settings due to high-frequency wireless signal density. International EMF Scientist Appeal.

Oxidative mechanisms of biological activity of low-intensity radiofrequency radiation. PEMF is known to neutralise oxidative electrons. We believe EarthPulse™ PEMF reduces production of oxidative electrons due to the metabolism of oxygen during oxidative phosphorylation. At the very least it helps mitigate somewhat the oxidative effects of the EMR. If you factor in that EarthPulse™ PEMF provides a relatively strong interruptive signal to the room, it’s more than likely that the EP provides quite a bit more benefit in regard to avoiding oxidative mechanisms caused by EMR.

The Definitive List of Peer-Reviewed EMR Research including those showing no effects. Each one designated as finding or not finding biological effects. 10:1 or close, finding biological effects.   BigTelecom sponsored studies can’t keep up.

The billions or Trillions of WATTS of RF being pumped into the Earth’s atmosphere every day has now morphed Schumann Resonance that has been stable for eons. Now even if you live off the grid, you’re now trying to sleep well in a 20+ Hz Schumann Resonance field. Nearly impossible.

EarthPulse™ or something like an EarthPulse™ is now required for optimum health and vitality.  EarthPulse Sleep on CommandTM provides nighttime EMF protection while entraining brain toward deeper sleep counteracting this Schumann Morph. Over days and weeks, you’ll become far more resilient to unfriendly EMFs during the day.

These detrimental effects are primarily due to EMF at high frequency (out of the normal range of our stress-free brain-wave rhythms). Additionally the brain’s frequency following response causes brain to pace these high frequency fields disrupting sleep. These detrimental fields tend to raise brain frequency to unnaturally high Beta-rhythm thereby negatively affecting brain’s ability to reach adequate duration of Delta-rhythm at night. Even the Schumann waves are changing due to the influx of Gigawatts of RF and microwave fields. Everyone needs an EarthPulse™ to protect them.

If you use cell phones regularly, 900 MHz – 2.4 GHz cordless phones, are exposed to WiFi all day at work or in school, or live next door or on adjacent floors to WiFi, live in a smart-meter grid, work or go to school near cellular masts (especially members of police, military), or are an IT professional; you owe it to self and family to read the precautionary studies in the EMF-protection bibliography below linked directly to NIH confirming detrimental psychological and neurological effects including sleep disturbance (or full-blown insomnia), migraine / headache syndromes, depression, disorientation, confusion, muscle twitch or full-blown neurological disease and reproductive issues.

You should not live, work or go to school within 1000 feet of cellular base stations. Children should not attend school where WiFi has been adopted. Particularly young girls where their eggs will be irradiate for a decade before attempting to have healthy children of their own.

You can protect from and reverse detrimental EMF effects with EarthPulse™. The infrasonic (under 14.1 Hz) stepping up and down EarthPulse™ fields acts particularly well as a disruptive field to help mitigate the negative effect of both power and radio frequency magnetic fields.

During the day, our stepping up and down ALERT-MODE pulsed electromagnetic field keeps you entrained to Low-Beta Rhythm and any of our SLEEP-MODE programs at nighttime entrain you to sleep while acting as a disruptive fields to EMF. Regular nighttime use provides your cells better resiliency to EMF exposure all day.

EarthPulse Sleep on Command™ Is the best EMF protection money can buy. It not only provides an interruptive signal turning most harmful electromagnetic radiation into background noise, it re-tunes your mitochondria to metabolize oxygen far more efficiently.

Electromagnetic noise inhibits radiofrequency radiation-induced DNA damage and reactive oxygen species – due to EarthPulse™ constant stepping up / down EarthPulse™ is the perfect interruptive field for nighttime (or alert daytime use).The ultimate in EMF protection. About the only hurdle it won’t get you over is a “smart” utility meter within 25 feet of your bed.

EarthPulseTM provides your cells an electronic-tune-up that vastly improves cellular energy production for better detoxification, nighttime repair, hormone production, memory consolidation and immune function.

Reverses much of the detrimental effects of EMF on the mitochondria and psychey ; rest assured the mitochondria are crippled by EMF causing premature aging and old age diseases in the young. Guaranteed to greatly improve sleep & vastly improve daytime performance in less than 90 days or return for refund.

Electromagnetic Field EMF Pollution, Electro-pollution, Electro-smog and Radio-frequency RF pollution; each one another insidious layer of invasive short – micro wave RF permeating every cell of every living thing on the planet; over the course of lifetime exposure…a killing field.

You absolutely must prevent cumulative health effects from radio frequency RF electro pollution as well as power frequency (AC) EMF to reverse cellular effects caused by daily exposure to cell phone, cordless home phone, cell tower down the street or WiFi network exposure.

EarthPulse Sleep on CommandTM pulsed electromagnetic fields are designed to provide better sleep, and an ‘interruptive’ signal thereby protecting and balancing the neurological and endocrine tissues after a full day of RF saturation; while user sleeps.

EMF protection should be employed by urban residents world-wide. Cell phones should always be used in speaker mode and never held to the head. If using wired headset you must shield it as shown here -> shield the headset. Keep handset as far away from body when in active call mode as practical.

Barry Trower former Royal Navy microwave weapons expert warns that female children and embryos of pregnant teachers at schools with WiFi are frying their the only eggs they’ll ever carry. Peer reviewed animal studies point toward high levels of miscarriage and birth defects of those eggs when fertilized 10 or 20 years from now. WiFi is a delayed soft-kill / eugenics program. High enough degree of accuracy if you’ve got a female child in a WiFi school, and want healthy grandchildren, you need to take action. Homeschooling and wiring your home computer network is the only sane thing to do.

Free Report: Why We Don’t Sleep Well Anymore; Sleep and RF fields

For serious EMF protection this company in the Netherlands sells quite a nice selection for the RF sensitive. Here’s a EMF shielded clothing line with a bit more utility.

Resolved 1 That CMA supports efforts to reevaluate microwave safety exposure levels associated with wireless communication devices, including consideration of adverse non-thermal biologic and health effects from non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation used in wireless communications; and be it further

Resolved 2 That CMA support efforts to implement new safety exposure limits for wireless devices to levels that do not cause human or environmental harm based on scientific research.

Whereas there are over 6 billion active cell phones worldwide and dependence of wireless communication networks is rapidly expanding including cell phones, cell towers, wireless routers for home use, medical devices and utility smart meters; and (1)

Whereas scientists are increasingly identifying EMF from wireless devices as a new form of environmental pollution with a growing body of peer reviewed scientific evidence finding significant adverse health and biologic effects on living organisms with exposure to low levels of non-ionizing microwaves currently approved and used in wireless communication, and

Whereas peer reviewed research has demonstrated adverse biological effects of wireless EMF including single and double stranded DNA breaks, creation of reactive oxygen species, immune dysfunction, cognitive processing effects, stress protein synthesis in the brain, altered brain development, sleep and memory disturbances, ADHD, abnormal behavior, sperm dysfunction, and brain tumors; and (2-55)

Whereas there is a long latency period of years to decades to study and identify adverse health effects such as brain cancer, neurodegenerative damage and autism; and

Whereas children’s brains are developmentally immature until adolescence, their skulls are thinner and the brain is considerably more vulnerable to toxin exposure , and (23,24)

Whereas the World Health Organization in 2011 designated wireless communications including cell phones to be a possible carcinogenic, and (63)

Whereas many scientists, researchers, public health officials and agencies conclude that wireless electromagnetic frequency (EMF) standards established by the Federal Communications Commission are outdated as they are based only on heat effects which damage to the organism and not biological effects of non –ionizing EMF microwave radiation which are scientifically demonstrated at levels hundreds of times less than current safety exposure limits and thus current standards are inadequate to protect public health; and (49-51)(57)

Whereas the American Academy of Pediatrics in 2013 has asked for reassessment of exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields limits and policies that protect children’s health and well-being throughout their lifetimes and reflect current use patterns (58)

RESOLVED; that the CMA understands that existing public safety limits for microwave EMF devices are outdated and inadequate to protect public health thus endorses efforts of the Federal Communications Commission to reevaluate its safety standards to include consideration of adverse non thermal biologic and health effects from non ionizing electromagnetic radiation used in wireless communications; and be it further

RESOLVED; that the CMA supports efforts to implement microwave safety exposure limits to levels that do not cause human or environmental harm based on scientific research, and be it further

RESOLVED; that the CMA set up a task force to determine adequate precautionary recommendations for the use of cell phones and wireless devices for schools and children

WATCH THESE VIDEOS TO FULLY UNDERSTAND THE INSIDIOUS NATURE AND NEED FOR PROTECTION FROM EMF CAUSED BY YOUR SMART PHONE AND WIFI



 (A short video that gets to the very heart of the matter)

To read the original source, use Pubmed and search for Title of the citation

See complete EMF Protection, RF and Cellular Microwave peer-reviewed study bibliography immediately below.

All urban areas of the planet contain layer, upon layer, upon layer of electromagnetic pollution.

Close-field sources of radiation significantly distort the homeostasis of your brain wave and cellular communication system.

See also; Sandyk R, Anninos PA , Jacobson JI; three pioneers of electromagnetic field therapy to treat Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s and epilepsy.

Pulsed electromagnetic field therapy research bibliographies and videos are for informational purposes only and not to be mistaken as promotional material for EarthPulseTM BioMagnetic Field Supplementation / Sleep on CommandTM

Frequency Specific Pulsed Electromagnetic Field (PEMF) Therapy Research: Historically peer reviewed literature finds pulsed magnetic therapy (pulsed electromagnetic field therapy or PEMF therapy) and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS or TMS) highly effective and absent expected or unexpected adverse reactions. The reason you and your doctors don’t know much about it is because it renders chemical intervention obsolete.Over one thousand pulsed electromagnetic field therapy citations are contained in our research bibliographies, most are linked directly to PubMed a service of the U.S. National Library of Medicine and the U.S. National Institutes of Health.

By bathing body in pulsating magnetic field of extremely low amplitude and frequency, one can not only overshadow detrimental EMF effects, but reverse them.

Are your mental faculties as sharp as you want them to be?

If you use a cell phone, a prudent person should become familiar with what close field microwave radiation does to your brain.

We have found that EarthPulse kept under your bed or in proximity to your body during work enhances concentration, linear thinking, and greatly reduces fatigue.

PubMed is a search and retrieval system that integrates information from databases at National Center of Biotechnology Information, the National Library of Medicine and the National Institutes of Health. To read the original source, use Pubmed and search for Title of the citation

This concludes our bibliography on EMF protection and the detrimental biological effects of EMF pollution.|||

Anti-EMF Pulsed ElectroMagnetic Field therapy for protection against EMF Pollution, Electropollution, Electrosmog, Radio Frequency (RF) radiation.