One format we use at Medium to critique and improve our design output is called Tactical Design Critique (TDC). It’s based on one of the tools provided by Holacracy , which is an “operating system” Medium as a company is using. We found our TDC meetings to be both useful and fun, and wanted to share this approach with you.

It does! The name looks misspelled (why not “holocracy”?), there are weird words like “energizing” and “tensions,” and at times it all seems vaguely cultish. But the strange veneer aside, Holacracy delivers a set of thought-through tools that are not only useful and efficient out of the gate, but have also proved themselves to be easily customizable.

Our design team took and customized one of those tools — a tight and efficient meeting type called tactical meetings — and came up with Tactical Design Critique, or TDC. We call it this way because we really enjoy our PFT.

TDCs allow us to quickly get a shared sense of how we feel about an existing design, what might need to be done about it — and also grow stronger as a team while we’re at it.

Sure! At one of the TDCs, we took a look at what we internally call the highlight menu — a contextual menu tied to a selection, with a few different modes. It’s one of the designs we’re proud of, and many of us miss it when using other platforms. (If you are reading this article on the web, highlight any passage to see the highlight menu in its full transient glory.)

For that one particular TDC, the facilitator prepared a set of most common states of the menu, including the most useful edges of that design:

Exercise for the reader: If you want to try, look (and/or use) all the above, and come up with your tensions before reading ours. What don’t you like about these? What could be done better?

In our meeting, these are the tensions that were raised:

At this point we ran out of time. There might have been more tensions, but given that people are likely to start with things that bother them most, we probably went through all the important ones anyway.

In the TDC sessions, we don’t specifically focus on the good things, although some usually come up. In the highlight menu session, there were a few: adding to someone else’s highlighted passage is satisfying, the menu fast and always close to where the action is, and we felt it still actually is a good design, despite all the problems we have with it.

But by talking about what is wrong with a given UI, we implicitly also focus on what could take it from good to great. Or, at least, what wouldn’t allow it to deteriorate too badly. Because good design doesn’t stay good forever. It needs constant attention. Atrophy breaks everything over time — new options quietly make things complicated (Hick’s Law), new code and design contributors can result in inconsistencies, and code or markup changes can result in visual or interaction bugs. And even if the UI itself doesn’t change, the interface or concepts around it might, rendering the UI problematic in the new context.

Welcome to design. We’ll be here all week.

After a TDC session, we often spend some informal time just chatting about what happened, and those originally involved in the design process can provide more context about design decisions, bugs, etc.

Ultimately, airing grievances might be therapeutic, but it is not terribly actionable. If the tensions and their scope during TDC point to some sort of redesign effort being necessary, it’s good to have concrete next steps that happen after such a critique. (For example: “Marcin will file some UI clean-up issues and work on fixing them with a front-end engineer” or “Brad will talk to product design leadership about a redesign being part of next quarter’s effort.”)

TDC allows us to capture a list of tensions around the current design that the team can then tackle either tactically (incorporate improvements as we touch this design during subsequent updates), or strategically (schedule a bigger effort around a more serious redesign).

The scripted format of TDC allows that list to be captured quickly and effectively, and it gives everybody a chance to voice their opinions.

Not quite. A big part of TDC is actually about improving the team as much as it is about improving a given design:

All of the above make TDC sessions useful even if nothing obviously actionable takes place.

Not really! Try it yourself: run a TDC session if you want, or customize it. And let us know how it works.|||

One format we use at Medium to critique and improve our design output is called Tactical Design Critique (TDC). It’s based on one of the tools provided by Holacracy, which is an “operating system…