So I am starting my second year as a remote paramedic; this year we are in the same area but a little south and west of where we were last year; yeah it is still cold…when I landed at Kuparuk it was about -50 with windchill…tonight it is about the same. However, just an hour ago, I was privileged to see the Northern Lights for the first time.  I highly recommend this if it is ever possible for you.

This has been a whole new adventure.  I had about a week and a half to plan this trip out all while trying to maintain good standing with my full-time paramedic employer upon my return as this will likely be a short season for me.  Not that being away from my loved ones for about 4 weeks is short, nor easy.  That’s the only problem with working remotely; it’s very dependent on variable factors that we just cannot control like weather and tundra conditions.  However, I am grateful to be here; most people don’t understand how you can be grateful to be in this weather and so far away, but until you do it, you’ll never know the thrill of it and how rewarding it can really be.

The flights from Denver to Seattle to Anchorage and to Kuparuk were usual; 737s full of passengers. Where it gets interesting is the flight from Kuparuk to camp and landing on an ice runway; yes, you read it correct; a Twin Otter with 12 passengers and 2 pilots and one helluva view and anticipation of the landing.  Probably one of the smoothest I’ve ever had and I racked up close to 30,000 miles collectively last year.  The 40 minute Otter flight beats a 3 hour Tucker/SnoCat ride any day.  The lack of snow means a bumpier ride.

This year is already different; I have a new partner and we are doing the day and night shift thing.  I am a night rat by nature so I am fairly happy so far. I do miss having someone to talk to like on the ambulance butIi can also do a lot of reading, learning, and reflecting in these hours.  I’ll also be sending a lot of late night emails so be ready.

The safety meeting has been cool and it was so nice to be remembered, greeted and thanked for care provided last year.  I hope no one is ill nor injured here; but I do enjoy when people just come into the clinic to say hello, welcome back or just need to vent.  Plus we have a good stock of amazing coffee… Not much else; hope to see the Auroras more prominently this trip, but even just seeing them once is an amazing thing.

It’s not easy leaving a decent paying full-time gig, at an agency and a chief and assistant chief and coworkers you really like working for and with; it’s not easy saying goodbye to your kids for a month especially going into dangerous areas of the world we go to.

It is definitely not easy leaving the comfort of your home and loving arms of your significant other (to whom I still owe a huge amount of gratitude for getting me ready for this trip last year…the last minute pep talks, programming my phone with music, making sure I had all I needed and was packed and got to the airport… thank you T… and I love you beyond forever…if it wasn’t for your help last year, I wouldn’t have made it to this year) Your parents, friends and just the easy comforts of living in the city where I live.  Nobody said it would be…but it has been an amazing ride and I am again fortunate to come to a place where I love my employer as family. The people I provide care to are amazing and I get to see things a majority of you never will.

They never said it would be easy, but they also never said it would be so much fun…|||

Nobody said that it would be easy, but I am starting my second year as a remote paramedic and it starts with a flight from Kuparuk.