Being a Headhunter within the areas of Analytics, Data Science and Machine Learning, I am experiencing two challenges that employers are having at the moment specifically when it comes down to hiring Data Scientists. The first is that the term Data Scientist is increasingly used as a catch-all for anyone who works with any form of data and because it is the "Sexiest job of the 21st century," according to that famous article, employers are keen to give the title out at the earliest opportunity so as both to stay relevant but also to repackage jobs of existing employees to keep them engaged and enthused. As a result, I believe there are many companies out there who are unclear as to what a Data Scientist actually does and also what they expect them to do and be realistically capable of doing.

Then there is the second issue, and that is surrounding the salary expectations that organisations feel are realistic when going out into the market to find the very best people. In this post, I wanted to try and address this and focus on why some employers need to adjust their expectations or spend the foreseeable future window shopping for someone that does not fit their budget.

The problem is that in a talent market where there is such a shortage of Data Scientists, firms are consistently overlooking or ignoring the fact that they are going to have to offer salaries that are at least an improvement than what any potential candidate is on right now, or offer something that is markedly different (stock options, flexible working, etc.)

"But if the person is solely interested in money, we are not interested."

So I hear this one a great deal. More often than not it is because that the potential employer does not have the budget to hire that person and they are more than likely in for a long and disappointing wait for their dream candidate to present themselves. As the majority of experienced Data Scientists have significant financial & family responsibilities like many of the rest of us, they will not move position (unless very unhappy which does not happen often), unless they are given a reasonable increase on their salary. I would like to add that the vast majority of the time, these people don't have outlandish expectations and I always ask the employer themselves if they would leave their current job for the equivalent or less than they are earning right now.

Simply put, if you are one of the many, many companies looking for experienced Data Scientists who have relevant experience and who can hit the ground running, you are up against a mountain of competition and as such, in-demand candidates now have that very same mountain of job opportunities to choose from. They are also being bombarded by Headhunters, Internal Recruiters and via multiple communication channels (LinkedIn, Twitter, Email, Phone, etc.) I should state that I am not referring to someone who calls themselves a Data Scientist when realistically there has just been a reframing of their job description by their current employer. I am talking about genuine top notch Data Scientists. The kind of people who are well respected, well known and have a proven track record in doing what they do.

What if I can't afford/am unprepared to pay those kinds of salaries?

Being open, companies have to readjust their expectations or prepare to go through multiple rounds of interviews culminating in probable disappointment (and significant amounts of time wasted) at the end for both them and the candidate. The reality is that it is the demand for these types of professionals that is driving the salaries up and that means that candidates (quite rightly) are enjoying their moment in the sun. As with any trend, this will not last forever and for the time being the market and in this instance, employers, need to live in the real world concerning what is possible and what is not. There are however viable alternative options if hiring managers are prepared to be open-minded and reevaluate their expectations accordingly. These being;

Hire people who have a great attitude and are hungry to learn

﻿With the term "skills crisis," banded around so frequently at the moment, it is important to remember that although employers typically have a wish list that they are looking for, they should also be clear in what minimum criteria candidates need to have to get started. In reference to my point above, sometimes clients are not even looking for a Data Scientist but feel the need to cobble all of the skills required together and put them under this relevant and dare I say it, fashionable job title. Once the key responsibilities are clearly defined and if a current or future employee has a skill shortfall, then there are a multitude of courses that employees can take and, given the chance and if they are hungry and willing to learn, these people can prove to be excellent "Data Scientists," in the long term. It is a bit like looking for the next superstar in any sport, whether that be in the NBA, NFL or Premier League. The reality is, if you want to pay the money for the finished article, it is going to cost big money, but if you are prepared to work with someone who has a great attitude and is hungry to learn, you can unearth some real gems, and they are out there. Give someone a chance, and they are likely to seize the opportunity given the right levels of support and training to help them along the way.

In summary. Do I agree with the salaries that top Data Scientists are commanding? Are they fair? The answer is that it is irrelevant what I or anyone else thinks, they are what they are and companies have to start facing up to the realities of the current supply vs. demand predicament. However, I do firmly feel that if employers take a step back from the hype, decide what type of person (not job title) they want to hire and are prepared to go into their hiring processes with an open mind and realistic expectations, there are plenty of great candidates out there who could prove to be every bit as successful albeit with a bit of investment and patience.

My name is Richard Downes, and I specialize in helping companies hire experienced Analytics, Data Science, Machine Learning and NLP professionals in Europe and the U.S and have over 15 years of Recruitment / Staffing experience. If you are considering your next career move or are a company needing to make an experienced hire within any of these areas, please feel free to get in touch and take a look at my video introduction embedded below.|||

