To meet the 2018 National Broadband Plan (NBP), which seeks to achieve 30 per cent penetration and 80 per cent growth in Internet activities in Nigeria, the Federal Government would need to achieve three things before the end of 2017.

   

 These, according to search giant, Google, include bridging the infrastructure gap in the country; stimulating online demand and ensuring increase in capacity building among Nigerians.

  

 When the NBP is fully implemented, services would improve greatly in the country because the broadband is a faster medium to get access to the Internet as compared to the dial-up. It is faster in terms of data transfer, upload and download, and the connectivity is much better with files, images, and data are transmitted much faster.



Noting that some sectors already had such facilities, Shittu argued that the ICT sector equally deserved one, as it “is a very promising one for investors, where when you invest, you will definitely get bountiful rewards. The market is in Nigeria and there would be investible funds at much lower interest rate.”

Furthermore, he said the Ministry is inviting lots of foreign investors to bring in their money to the sector so as to be able to collaborate with Nigerians towards achieving those goals.

  

 “We believe that in another six months we would have attained more percentage. Right now, we have about 20 per cent penetration. We recently visited Kenya and Rwanda to see how they were able to achieve much more broadband penetration in their countries. What baffled me most was that they don’t have as much resources as we have in this country.

    

 Shittu further said that government is also building lots of private centres where there will be free WIFI connectivity; and a number of polytechnics are also being connected.

   

 He added that a number of technological hubs will also be coming up this year, stressing that the ministry is already working on the modalities to get things done appropriately in that regard.

|||

To meet the 2018 National Broadband Plan (NBP), which seeks to achieve 30 per cent penetration and 80 per cent growth in Internet activities in Nigeria, the Federal Government would need to achieve three things before the end of 2017.