It takes a while to get in the zone. To get into the rhythm of writing tests and code that completely is in sync with your requirements. You have to fully understand the user story, be comfortable with your approach, grok all the surrounding interactions and side effects, and then finally you’re ready.

And then, of course, the phone rings or someone walks in your office, asking you something about stuff completely unrelated to what you were working on. Poof, your mindset is blown, and you spend 15 minutes dealing with whatever it was, and then you might not be in the zone again for another 15-30 minutes.

Interruptions can be very expensive.

For a more visceral demonstration, see also: http://heeris.id.au/2013/this-is-why-you-shouldnt-interrupt-a-programmer/

So to improve the performance of your tech teams, you want to give them an environment that minimizes interruptions. I once worked at a place that put the developers in between the marketing team and the break room. Really? They were being interrupted all the time, often for no reason at all. It was horrible. Developers begged to work from home just so that they could concentrate on their work.

Sometimes people simply walking by or having a conversation nearby is enough to be a distraction. This is why open floorplan layouts are so horrible. Some managers like them because they seem to maximize floor space or “encourage collaboration”. They refuse to recognize that they’re making a difficult environment for their developers.

Some distractions are virtual. A funny cat video makes the rounds and everyone has to waste time on Slack talking about it. Normally occasional moments like these are fun, but they can often turn into a frequent problem. Keep an eye on it.

Some people have distractions when they try to work from home. Working from home isn’t for everyone. If the spouse and/or children are constantly interrupting the employee, they won’t be able to focus and concentrate. When you’re working from home you really need to make it clear that you need to be left alone so you can focus on work. Or you might be one of those people who come to work as a refuge from the distractions at home…

Anyway, the important thing is to minimize distractions. Close the Facebook tab. Save the YouTube videos for later. Try not to have people moving around in the background. Reduce noise. Wear headphones. Encourage people to send questions via email, where you can look at them later. The more you’re able to stay in the zone, the more great code you’ll be able to write.|||

Tech Team Tuesdays: Minimizing Interruptions Nothing kills developer productivity like interruptions. [[MORE]]It takes a while to get in the zone. To get into the rhythm of writing tests and code that...