AngularJS is an open-source Front-end JavaScript framework. Its goal is to augment browser-based applications with Model–View–Controller (MVC) capability and reduce the amount of JavaScript needed to make web applications functional. They also call this applications as Single-Page applications.

Before diving into reasons why you should use AngularJS in your apps, I would like to share some informations about AngularJS with you guys.

AngularJS is an open source web application framework. It was originally developed in 2009 by Misko Hevery and Adam Abrons. It is now maintained by Google.

Definition of AngularJS as put by its official documentation is as follows −

AngularJS is a structural framework for dynamic web apps. It lets you use HTML as your template language and lets you extend HTML’s syntax to express your application’s components clearly and succinctly. Angular’s data binding and dependency injection eliminate much of the code you currently have to write. And it all happens within the browser, making it an ideal partner with any server technology.

So the important thing here is, with AngularJS, you can do lots of stuff without tiring server.

And here is the official site of Angular for you to read documents of it, or download and take a look at its features by yourself.

Anyway, here are the reasons why you should use AngularJS.

I can nearly hear you saying that, what the heck, should I use Angular because of the feature that almost every other languages has too?

No, not like that.

Angular is doing MVC right.

Most frameworks implement MVC by asking you to split your app into MVC components, then require you to write code to string them up together again. That’s a lot of work. Angular implements MVC by asking you to split your app into MVC components, then just let Angular do the rest. Angular manages your components for you and also serves as the pipeline that connects them.

Because Angular acts as the mediator, developers also won’t feel tempted to write shortcuts between components that break abstractions just to make them fit easier.

RESTful actions are quickly becoming the standard for communicating from the server to the client. In one line of JavaScript, you can quickly talk to the server and get the data you need to interact with your web pages. AngularJS turns this into a simple JavaScript object, as Models, following the MVVM (Model View View-Model) pattern.

Models talk to ViewModel objects (through something called the $scope object), which listen for changes to the Models. These can then be delivered and rendered by the Views, which is the HTML that expresses your code. Views can be routed using the $routeProvider object, so you can deep-link and organize your Views and Controllers, turning them into navigable URLs. AngularJS also provides stateless controllers, which initialize and control the $scope object.

Everything in the MVVM pattern is communicated automatically across the UI whenever anything changes. This eliminates the need for wrappers, getters/setters or class declarations. AngularJS handles all of this, so you can express your data as simply as with JavaScript primitives, like arrays, or as complex as you wish, through custom types. Since everything happens automatically, you can ask for your dependencies as parameters in AngularJS service functions, rather than one giant main() call to execute your code.

What is this?

This is the place where Directives came to the game.

Imagine a world where HTML has so many rich elements that we never have to manipulate the DOM to simulate them. All that our app needs to do is to assign attributes to elements to get any functionality out of the box.

Directives achieve this by enabling us to invent our own HTML elements. By putting all our DOM manipulation code into directives, we can separate them out of our MVC app. This allows our MVC app to only concern itself with updating the view with new data. How the view subsequently behaves is up to the directives.

This part is my favorite. As you (may) know, unit testing is very important for a developer to examine in his/her code to be sure that code is working clearly – as expected. Now, you may say that,

But the thing is, if you want to work for Google, Facebook, Amazon etc. firms, or as even better argument, if you want to be a better developer, you need to write Unit Tests for your code. I would suggest for you guys to take a look at this Unmit Test thing deeply by Googling it.

Anyway, we were saying..

What description of Angular would be complete without talking about it’s unit testing readiness? The whole of Angular is linked together by Dependency Injection (DI). It’s what it uses to manage your controllers and scopes. Because all your controllers depend on DI to pass it information, Angular’s unit tests are able to usurp DI to perform unit testing by injecting mock data into your controller and measuring the output and behavior. In fact, Angular already has a mock HTTP provider to inject fake server responses into controllers.

This beats the more traditional way of testing web apps by creating individual test pages that invoke one component and then interacting with it to see if it works.

I’ve used Karma – Jasmine once, and I liked it veeeery much. It is very easy to write Unit Test with it.

Lastly, I would like to present you..

On top of everything, AngularJS applications can run on all major browsers and smart phones including Android and iOS based phones/tablets.

Though AngularJS comes with lots of plus points but same time we should consider the following points −|||

In this post, some key reasons have been listed to understand why to consider using AngularJS in your apps.