ARM, which designs the chips that power virtually every smartphone in the world, is anticipating a world where artificial intelligence will be running on every device.

Devices are requiring more and more computing power, but AI software is expected to push those demands even further. To address this shift, ARM is launching a major update to its chip architecture with what it calls DynamIQ.

ARM's new central processing unit (or CPU) architecture will cluster multiple different processing cores together with each one tailored for right software, including a dedicated processor for handling AI algorithms. Chipmakers will be able to develop CPUs with up to eight cores. ARM will also be releasing software libraries to better run the most popular AI techniques on its processors.

ARM claims this approach will boost AI performance 50 times compared with its current chips over the next three to five years.

Every new ARM chip design -- dubbed the Cortex-A series -- will be based on this new architecture.

John Ronco, vice president of product marketing at ARM, said the first smartphones with the DynamIQ architecture will start showing up in the market sometime in early 2018.

DynamIQ is an evolution of ARM's last big shift in architecture with the 2011 introduction of so-called big.LITTLE, where two sets of big and small processing cores power the appropriate application to reduce battery consumption. The big.LITTLE design has been implemented on all the major smartphone chips, including Qualcomm's Snapdragon processors for Android smartphones and Apple's latest iPhone chip, the A10 Fusion.

AI -- and in particular a type of AI called deep learning (also known as deep neural networks) -- has recently been exploding in the tech world. Right now, however, most of these AI applications exist in the cloud and are being routed down to devices through internet connections via cellular or WiFi networks. Running the AI software on the device will likely become more important over the next few years. In areas like self-driving cars, the processing needs to happen fast and can't always rely on a good cellular connection. And even in phones, AI will increasingly be handled locally for features like speech and image recognition for privacy concerns.

ARM recently passed a 100 billion milestone of ARM-based chips shipped. The company expects another 100 billion ARM-based chips will ship by 2021. ARM and its chipmaking partners have been trying to push its chips into areas outside of phones, including autonomous vehicles, drones and the data center. Ronco said DynamIQ will help ARM better address these non-mobile markets.

ARM was acquired by Japanese tech giant SoftBank last year for $32 billion. SoftBank CEO Masayoshi Son saw ARM as a key component in implementing his idiosyncratic vision around AI and the Internet of Things. Son is currently putting together a $100 billion fund — called the Vision Fund — to invest in technologies around his ideas of the future.

“I think the next big paradigm shift is coming,” explained Son to group of journalists in October at ARM’s annual developer conference. “The biggest theme in my view is the singularity, a computer super intelligence that will surpass mankind. That is my long-term thesis, which I have had an image of since I was 19 years old when I first saw a semiconductor chip. Now it’s really coming into reality in the next 30 years.”

Follow me on Twitter @aatilley or send me an email: atilley@forbes.com|||

Your next iPhone could be thinking for itself.