The world’s first anti-ageing machine, The EarthPulse™ PEMF sleep & performance enhancement system is the world’s first anti-aging machine. It represents nothing less than a breakthrough in the science of mitochondrial support and anti-ageing. EarthPulse™ reverses symptoms of ageing and NASA research points to potential reversal of aging markers all the way down to the DNA level. Had they gone further, we believe they’d have found changes in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) as well.

This novel anti-ageing machine provides methods that expose the entire body to night-long sessions of very-weak, pulsed DC electromagnetic fields through your mattress, at frequencies mimicking those in the bottom-end of the Schumann scale (particularly at 9.6 Hz) that have been shown to promote deep sleep while greatly enhancing levels of naturally derived ATP.  More-ATP!

After nearly one year of experimenting (December 2014 – Oct 2015) it seems as if the lower harmonics of 9.6 Hz, i.e. 4.8 Hz, 3.2 Hz, 2.4 Hz, 1.2 Hz has much if not all of the same effects. For those who are familiar with sonic or sound frequency therapy, there is a remarkable correlation between them and the frequencies listed above. See the Magic of 9.6 Hz for more detailed information on harmonics and sound healing frequencies.

Curiously the same psychoactive frequencies that entrain humans to sleep via well established process known as brain-wave entrainment, have been shown in several separate physiological and neurological studies to stimulate cell mitochondria, subsequently resulting in enhanced cell respiration / oxydative phosphorilation including the Krebs cycle (citric acid cycle) whereby increased enzyme levels known to be associated with oxygen metabolism provide more-ATP with less oxidative waste known as reactive oxygen species (ROS).

After weeks of nightly stimulation, cells are so well detoxified and producing such high levels of ATP (known by the body to be associated with youthful levels), that the cells actually revert from mature to developmental DNA signature as proven by NASA.

This study from 2012 at 10 Hz -> Mechanism of functional recovery after repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS at 10 Hz) in the subacute cerebral ischemic rat model: neural plasticity or anti-apoptosis? shows that 10 Hz is anti-apoptopic.

Aerobic metabolism becomes so efficient after night long stimulation at frequencies between 2 & 10 Hz that during intense athletic performance, it prolongs aerobic metabolism and minimizes (or eradicates) time spent in anaerobic metabolism; thereby minimizing lactic acid production, lost performance & exercise induced pain.

Enhancing sleep while synergistically turbo-charging cell respiration over months and years is a concept I refer to as More-ATP. More-ATP is quite literally the Mitochondrial Theory of Aging…but in reverse.

You’re not getting any younger…but you could be.

Visit our YouTube channel for videos on a number of other examples of more youthful performance.

In 1982 experienced anthropologist and pharmacologist Francis Ivanhoe published the first of multiple studies in which he would catalog an important discovery for evolutionary science. Surveying all known Paleolithic human skulls, he witnessed a correlation between ancient increases in magnetic field strength and sudden brain size increases in humans, as well as cultural/evolutionary revolutions such as the widespread utilization of fire as a tool. These periods of increased geomagnetic field strength (recorded geologically) occurred during the ice ages we call the Mindel and the Würm. He discussed this finding in articles over the course of 30 years, publishing in both the Journal of Bioelectricity and the Journal of Human Evolution.

Ivanhoe proposed that the upper section of the hippocampus called Ammon’s horn – an arch with one-way nerve traffic driven by a strong current – might be acting as a transducer which feels the strength of Earth’s magnetic field and sends impulses to other brain structures to affect growth hormone production (prolactin specifically). The hippocampus also contains magnetite, but more on that later.

The idea that humans are biologically connected to the Earth’s field is certainly not new to science, and there is more evidence to suggest the connection than there is to suggest otherwise. Perhaps the most important series of experiments to investigate that topic was led by Rutger Wever of the Max Plank Institute in Munich, utilizing two sensory-isolation bunkers made to house human residents for prolonged periods of time.

Those deprived of electromagnetic frequencies not only lost any semblance of a circadian rhythm but also began to slip towards a critical loss of healthy timing between various bodily systems. One particular electromagnetic frequency which was key to such biological timing is the 10 hertz micro-pulsation in the Earth’s field.

The Mitochondrial Theory of Aging is Denham Harman’s 1970’s sequel to his popular and generally accepted Free Radical Theory of Aging which dates back to the 1950’s. It can be deduced from Harman’s work that if one could stop free-radical production, then aging could be slowed (or possibly halted). If one could restore mitochondrial integrity simultaneously with a reduced oxidative load, then true age reversal would be possible.

The anti-aging product we call EarthPulse™ Sleep on Command™ sleep machine, literally ‘tunes’ down thought processes, decreasing sleep onset and prolonging Delta-rhythm sleep. Increase in Delta rhythm sleep should provide linear increases in energy conservation during nighttime. Simultaneously your cell mitochondria are being turbocharged so cells produce more energy with far-less oxidative waste.

During deeper sleep the synergistic gain in cellular energy from both conservation and mitochondrial output is immediately sequestered for improved memory consolidation, hormone synthesis, cellular repair and immune function. Over weeks, months and years our standardized client feedback forms show synergistic changes in wellbeing and athletic performance in hundreds and hundreds of clients. More or less they match those identified personally by the author and can be described as nothing less than true age-reversal.

In citations below, 10 Hz is described by NASA asproducing 4x baseline tissue regeneration & cell DNAswitching from mature to developmental in experimentaltissue culture at between 17 and 21 days (5 Hz and 15 Hzproduced 2x baseline regeneration and no DNA changes -prior to study being sanitized of 5 and 15 Hz data);Hood study showed increase of 3x baseline oxygenmetabolizing enzymes at 10 Hz, 10 Hrs per day, at 30days; and Tong showed 2x baseline increase mitochondrialdensity & 3x baseline ATP levels at nerve synapsewithin 7 minutes of 10 Hz stimulation. Knowing this, the reader shouldn’t be surprised to hear that the same 10 Hz frequency produced the most efficient and repeatable healing effects as reported in 5 decades of peer-reviewed pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF) research. Soviet research focused on 10 Hz for years leading up to the end of the Soviet Union and studied 10 Hz effects on opitic nerve regeneration among many others.

The Holy Grail of ANY medical paradigm is a way to directly boost integrity of the mitochondria, thereby enhancing cell membrane potential and reducing oxidative stress. Oxidative stress damages mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), resulting in detrimental effect on mitochondrial integrity long before detrimental effects are felt by the cell or cell DNA. The device and methods described herein as Sleep on Command™ is the aforementioned Holy Grail.

Search PubMed.gov or Google scholar for “mitochondrial dysfunction” (in quotes) AND (uppercase) plus any disease term; in 9 out of 10 (or more) disease states you will find relatively convincing evidence of coexisting mitochondrial dysfunction. Take a moment and try it with some diseases that touch your life and see that I am correct. Mitochondrial dysfunction causes these disease states in the tissue at the site of the dysfunction be it endocrine, cardio-pulmonary, neurological, physiological or psychological.

We disclose herein, a very simple technique that systemically up-regulates mitochondrial integrity locally and systemically, thereby increasing excess ATP for repair and detoxification, subsequently lowering oxidative stress and restoring much, if not all of the cells’ function over weeks, months and years.

We propose that once the anti-aging process is complete (this is a years long process), the natural aging process again proceeds but at greatly reduced rates. We set up a relatively standardized test called the RBH or Resting-Breath-Hold Test to nearly-objectively measure the length of time the body can sustain itself on the oxygen contained in one deep breath of air. The test is done for baseline, then once per week for the first month and once per month for remaining two months during the 90 day trial period. RBH test is performed total of 7 times in 9 weeks so little effect can be due to practice. RBH times increase 20% (athletic clients) to 100% (debilitated clients) in all clients who return the questionnaire after 90 days.

This is a very simple principal that is not dissimilar to electronically tuning an internal combustion engine. The engines of our cells (thousands of trillions of mitochondria) can literally be ‘tuned’ like a mechanical engine via external stimulation to produce better mileage, more power, reduced toxic emissions and prolonged engine life. Think of it as an Electronic-Tune-Up for every cell in your body. Reducing the amount of free-radical oxidative stress and increasing ATP production is the preposition More-ATP, i.e. Harman’s Mitochondrial Theory of Aging in REVERSE!

I offer video evidence of Anti-Aging Machine’s reverse-aging effect with Gizmo a 16 year old Yorkie-Maltese (17 y.o. 14 Sept ’11) that had been on EP for 9.5 years who barked at and played with her food like a puppy. At 8 years old she had cloudy cornea that comes in old dogs. After 3 years of EP (and up to her death at 2 weeks shy of 18 y.o.) her eye’s were nearly clear-black. The videos include the author at 53 y.o. explaining some of the dramatic effects of  long-term nightly use since the first prototype May 2002. We’re trying to attain video evidence of an 18 year old cat on EarthPulse™ 4 years every night sleeping next to its master. The owner says he’s had to take the cat toys down from the attic because the cat is clawing the furniture again. People think she’s 5 years old, where at 12 years old she was starting to get a bit “slow”.

UPDATE on Gizmo: Gizmo nearly died March 2011 as a result of a cortisone-antibiotic shot given by the veterinarian that resulted in kidney failure with subsequent congestive heart failure. After 3 weeks of IV therapy she was sent home with a 25% chance of survival with kidney function that had not been restored above 35%. 17 y.o. video of her walking briskly on the beach in Florida shows a hump in her back she didn’t have in last years video (where a reasonable person would swear she was between 4 and 5 years old.

While the science of “longevity” and anti-aging fans world-wide are searching for the next miracle phytochemical, or nutricutical anti-aging miracle-molecule, or stem cell therapy, or the safest, most-affordable injectable HGH or hormone replacement therapy, you’ve just stumbled across a very ‘simple’ Fountain of Youth right here.

“When the solution is simple, God is answering.” ~ Albert Einstein ~

Anti-Aging Machine’s More-ATP theory is based upon the simple preposition that if one were able to sustain the body longer on a fixed amount of oxygen (one full inhale), then body would be extracting more usable energy out of that breath of air with less oxidative waste. It is well established that reducing oxidative stress can slow aging. Enhanced cell respiration is the ONLY plausible explanation for the amount of change we see in the RBH-test (20% to 100% increase in 90 days).

Here I provide a cohesive method to radically extend healthy human and animal lifespan & explain precisely why 5 decades of peer reviewed pulsed electromagnetic field research (utilizing frequencies between 1 Hz and 15 Hz) have shown such reliable / repeatable healing and regenerative effects with no negative side-effects. By default, More-ATP provides a simple explanation for much of the documented effect of repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS / rTMS) as it is nearly always applied at 1 Hz – 20 Hz.

This range of frequencies provide roughly the same effect regardless of whether the stimulation is magnetic or electric in nature. However this paper will deal with pulsed electromagnetic fields as they are easier to control and since electric currents limit effectiveness by following the path of least resistance, such that homogeneous and systemic electrical stimulation of mitochondria is virtually impossible.

The More-ATP preposition remains cohesive at frequencies as low as 1-2 Hz and as high as 20 Hz, regardless of tissue type (even in plants), and particularly where tissue is damaged or debilitated and suffering underlying mitochondrial dysfunction; which I propose is the rule rather than exception in most disorders.

The FDA has refused approvals for novel uses of pulsed electromagnetic fields hiding behind heretofore vague explanations to FDA regarding how the efficacy is achieved. For instance “raising cell membrane potential”. Raising cell membrane potential is the end result of raising mitochondrial performance!

In high frequency therapeutics however, the raised cell membrane potential is unexplainable but for some Alternative Cellular Energy (ACE) pathway, whereby cells ‘pick up energy’ by some undisclosed mechanism as the pulses pass through the cells. This paper rectifies the dilemma by making it relatively easy to explain to the FDA in the minutest detail (at the mitochondrial level) how PEMF stimulation between 1 Hz and 20 Hz upregulate cell mitochondria and raises cell membrane potential organically, from within. More-ATP relies on organically produced excess ATP. The body heals itself as a result of this flood of energy.

This alone should kick-open the door to many new PEMF approvals by FDA and similar agencies worldwide should the patent holders of the several effective devices in this frequency range be wise enough to study this information and use it. Although these several patented technologies are effective, none are designed for long duration sleep-enhancement sessions. Shorter sessions during the daytime with any of these will never cumulatively have the same effect as regular, night-long sessions nor will it have a statistically significant anti-aging effect as duration of stimulation is simply not long enough. It took 8 hours stimulation per day for 30 days to peak the level of enzymes responsible for oxygen metabolism, 24 hours per day for 21 days for NASA to change DNA signature; yet only minutes for 10 Hz to triple nerve synapse energy.

I’ve chosen the name of this 10 Hz stimulation mechanism More-ATP  because nearly all the effects of PEMF at this frequency range are due very simply to excess production of organic ATP that is synthesized naturally in the cell mitochondria via the cell respiration process albeit at amplified or accelerated levels.

It must be so efficient, that NASA scientist Goodwin (see below) found over 175 Genes associated with cell maturity switched -OFF- and 150 genes associated with cell development switched -ON-. This is not theory at all, but applied – evidence based science as data has been collected on hundreds of clients showing vast improvements in oxygen metabolism within 7 days.

We test oxygen metabolism through a very low-tech, yet accurate and objective means called the resting-breath-hold (RBH) test. Free divers call it the “static” breath-hold. Very simply, it is how long you can hold your breath at rest;….providing a very reliable objective method to measure oxygen consumption rates. Draw oxygen from the blood slower and saturated blood oxygen (SAO2) goes up.

We’ve seen SAO2 go up 3% over 3 days in a 68 year old woman and 5% in a 55 year old distance runner living at 6000 feet altitude who had never previously achieved 99% SAO2 at that altitude. Holding breath longer at rest, means your mitochondria are burning the O2 contained in that breath more efficiently than it had previously.

As the breath-hold goes up, cellular energy is going up in (at least) linear fashion. One could arguably attain the same effect through years of meditation, yoga or practice; albeit with infinitely more effort. This takes none. An interesting and important point is this effect is amplified under-load. Two Olympic swimmers with 100% baseline SAO2 increased their RBH test by 19% & 20% respectively yet swam 49% and 50% further underwater on one breath. Three years ago one of these swimmer went undefeated during FINA World Cup at 3 distances (50M, 100M, 200M) in 7 cities. That is 21 Gold medals out of 21 races.

He was nearing retirement age and only one of two swimmers to ever complete the World Cup undefeated. He almost retired due to lost performance prior to use of EP in 2006. I should also add here that he never competed in 200M distance since college and only began training for it at my suggestion in pre-season training the year he went 21:21 in FINA World Tour Championships.

Power lifters see between 10% and 20% peak strength (in range of anabolic steroids) w/no weight gain in a matter of weeks. See our page on Athletic Performance Enhancement via Pulsed Electromagnetic Fields.

Very simply, exposure to 10 Hz  (or close enough; between 5 and 15 Hz) has an immediate and direct effect on the mitochondria as demonstrated in the studies immediately following. While 5 Hz and 15 Hz have been found to produce DOUBLE the rates of tissue regeneration, 10 Hz produced tissue regeneration at FOUR times baseline according to NASA.  At power frequency (50-60 Hz) and higher, you are crippling your mitochondria. At 20 Hz or more, stress hormones are produced so better to not use PEMF therapies under influence of higher than 15 Hz for prolonged periods. The Anti-Aging-Product known as Sleep on Command™ operates at 14.1 Hz maximum frequency in ALERT-MODE or during wake-up phase from 6 of its programs.

Key 10 Hz Pulsed Magnetic Anti-Aging Research:In 1989 David Hood found chronic 10 Hz stimulation (30+ days 10 hours per day) TRIPLED two CRITICAL enzymes used during final stages of cell respiration. Citrate-synthase the regulator of the Krebs cycle and cytochrome-c-oxidase, the last enzyme in the electron transport chain. Hood concluded this was due to similarly increased mitochondrial ribonucleic acid (mtRNA). Hood’s finding is consistent with our finding of improved oxygen use in every one of our satisfied clients. Testing systemic oxygen consumption via RBH testsince 2005 we have found routine improvements in more than 94% of our clients (96% since 2008 after last technical upgrade).Since these enzymes control critical steps in oxygen metabolism it would make sense that oxygen molecules are being utilized more efficiently.

In 2003 (nearly a year AFTER EarthPulse™ began commercial sales utilizing DC pulsed electromagnetic field @ 9.6 Hz)  NASA-Goodwin found a 10 Hz pulsed electromagnetic field caused neural tissue regeneration @ 4x baseline w/ improved 3-D orientation (pg 17); while causing cellular DNA to revert from mature to developmental (more than 175 maturation genes switched -OFF- and 150 developmental genes switched -ON- pgs.15-18). The implications on longevity are staggering!

NASA didn’t dig deep enough to explain why cell regeneration QUADRUPLED under 10 Hz pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF) or why the genetic effects occurred ONLY at 10 Hz pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF).  This effect can only be due to immense amounts of energy being generated by the cell. See Tong immediately below. Very plainly the cell is detoxified with all this extra energy and literally “tricked” into believing it is young again. It is not outside the realm of possibility that it will be found genetic and chromosomal repair, and lengthening of telomere is accomplished also.

In 2007 James Tong DOUBLED mitochondrial density at nerve synapse junctions but TRIPLED nerve synapse energy utilizing 10 Hz stimulation.  These synergistic changes took only 5 minutes to manifest. It is prudent to consider Tong first stimulated at 1/2 Hz for just two minutes and both mitochondrial density and nerve junction energy parameters fell by 20%. However within 5 minutes at 10 Hz both measurements soared and remained static at increased levels even after subjected to 1/2 Hz again at end of the study.

In the chart linked above, compare mitochondrial DENSITY in  ‘unpotentiated’ mitochondria (white circles) w/ 10 Hz ‘potentiated’ mitochondria (black circles); compare TOTAL ENERGY at synapse junction ‘unpotentiated’ (white circles) w/ 10 Hz ‘potentiated’ (black circles). Mitochondrial density change = 2x+  &  total Synapse Energy change = 3x+ so each mitochondria increased its energy production by nearly 50% within 5 minutes. Also keep in mind that Hood’s samples took 30 days, 8 hours per day 10 Hz stimulation to peak enzyme production and NASA took 17-21 days; yet we find in human subjects improvement in resting-breath-hold (RBH) test takes YEARS to peak even if measured just once every year or two (where no practice can be associated with its rise).

We have relied upon 9.6 Hz in our Sleep on Command™ pulsed-magnetic sleep-machine since 2001 because it was reported (in an obscure journal circa 1972) by Bob Beck to emanate from the molten core. It rises perpendicular to the horizon (to be distinguished from Schumann resonance which flows parallel to horizon). Beck discovered this 9.6 Hz resonation in the early to mid 1970’s by driving metal stakes 20 feet into the earth, attaching an amplifier and measuring the frequency of the signal. Although Beck continually worked on the BT (Brain Tuner) series for 20 years until his death, he neglected to mention that experiment and tuned his BT to Schumann 7.83 Hz.

Historically speaking, if we were bedded-down on the ground every night w/ no radiofrequency microwave telecommunication we would be entrained predominantly by the naturally occurring 9.6 Hz and what probably was a well designed biological law on the order of biblical creator or evolutionary design depending on your viewpoint; explaining why 10 Hz stimulation works as well as it does. Probably why it is so widely known that people sleep well on camping trips too. It is NOT the fresh air and exercise.

While our neurological system is known to be “paced” by the Schumann waves it is clear that the mitochondria are tuned by the Earth’s core resonation at or around 9.6 Hz; particularly while lying horizontal and preferably when sleeping in contact with the ground. This is the primary reason camping is known to produce such remarkable sleep and why earthing technologies are gaining popularity.  But, EarthPulse™ is earthing on steroids!

In Gizmo’s Summer 2010 video clip (where she’s 80+ human years old) she moves as fast and quick as a 5 year old dog. Her mind state is definitely puppy-like. She’s currently on the device for more than 1/2 her lifetime. During the day she spends hours in her favorite perch (on the top of the couch arm-rest) where she sleeps for hours (1/2 inch above the 200 G inductor at 9.6 Hz) plus nighttime exposure at under 1 Gauss with the inductor under her master’s mattress. She still stalks her food like a puppy; and if you turn up the volume in the 8 second video #2, you’ll hear her digging her nails DEEP into the carpet. No arthritis or joint pain in her whatsoever. Please take the time to check out some of the other life changing videos while at our YouTube channel.

In 2001 at 43 years old I built my first device for a fellow with Parkinson’s disease. I discovered the sleep effect the very first afternoon it was completed. I quickly found that regular nighttime use of the EarthPulse™ DC pulsed electromagnetic fields at 9.6 Hz quickly and reliably enhanced sleep and daytime mental & physical performance. Recovery even from old sports injuries was phenomenal. 12 years later my destroyed left rotator cuff is still 99% perfect.

My left rotator cuff (suffered 22 dislocations during 14 years 1986-2001) became completely resolved sleeping within the EarthPulse™ field in 3 months. Previously I nearly quit surfing in 1999 as i could barely paddle and residual sharp pain for 3 days after a surf-session was unbearable; by 2002 I was barely able to swing nor grip a golf club due to shoulder, and numbness and weakness in the cooresponding left hand. I stayed in shape with a bowflex and worked the bad shoulder constantly with low resistance and high reps. Lots of joint formula. Within days of my first prototype at 9.6 Hz during the nighttime, the numbness in my fingertips was resolved, ringing dull pain down the arm resolved in 3 weeks; and by month 3 for the most part the shoulder was back to normal. No more popping, grinding, snapping sounds.

Currently my grip strength is comparable to my right-hand. I can surf 3 hours per day for 4-5 days in succession with no pain or sunburn (3 day limit in my 20’s); hit 300 golf balls at the range or walk 36 holes of golf. I smoke a pack of natural tobacco non filtered cigarettes per day (sometimes more), and don’t surf or play golf nearly as much as I’d like to. My SAO2 is 99%, I can hold my breath for 2:30 seconds, swim 50 meters under water (diving off one end) and mostly I’m chained to this desk much of the time.

For the record it is advisable to consume a good quality joint supplement during these rehabilitative connective tissue goals as regenerating these tissues need their nutritional constituentfor maximum effect (I personally recommend GLC2000 for joints and BoneUp for bone mass increase). I took joint formulas since 1990 but still my shoulder eventually failed (continued joint formula for a couple of years, and now take nothing but Organic Sulfur and my shoulder is better than it’s been since the first accident, not even maintenance doses of joint formulas are use. My right ankle and knee that where problems almost every morning (H.S. pole vaulting accident) completely resolved (right ankle in days, right knee over several years). I used to have to “pop” my right knee several times per day since college days, less and less thoughout the first 7 years of nightly EP use, up until about 5 years ago when that necessity passed. Strength and stamina gains are easily explained by my more-ATP proposition, as are recovery / regeneration effects.  So are reported elevation of hormone levels by clients who have checked them (mitochondria reside in your endocrine tissues as well).

It took 7 full years for my RBH to double with no effort (7 ears for the knee to fully resolve) no practice or aerobic physical conditioning but for sporadic surfing and rounds of golf. It is my propositon that 9.6 Hz every night could have resulted in taking 7 full years for a complete turnover of cells in the body, that older cells had revived and lingered for years.

Earthpulse.net’s pulsed magnetic field therapy bibliographies  contain several hundred peer reviewed pulsed electromagnetic therapy study abstracts spanning nearly 6 decades, organized by disorder, most linked directly to the U.S. National Institutes of Health & National Libraries of Medicine. You will find many, if not most of the successful pulsed electromagnetic therapy research used frequencies under 20 Hz.

Robert O. Becker MD proved optimum cellular repair at stimulation periods 8 hours – ON – / 8 hours – OFF -; using minute, microampere DC electric current. He regrew a human finger tip from the 1st knuckle with tactile sensation, fingerprint, nail and nail-bed fully intact.

His mouth to my ears… “The cell can only absorb so-much energy at a time and create only-so-much change over 24 hours. Your 8 hours during the nighttime is the next best thing.” This being the classic example of ACE pathway (alternative cellular energy), and the one explanation that the FDA finds inadequate enough to HIDE behind, even in the case of fresh fracture healing at 200% – 300% faster rate, spinal cord repair or stroke rehabilitation. Click here to see a synopsis of Robert O. Becker’s work.

At the time I had been unable to discuss mitochondrial effects with Bob as I hadn’t been aware of the NASA research until late 2005 and the Tong and Hood studies until late 2008, and although feeling better “winded” I had not noticed my RBH increase as I had not checked it for some years. My several conversations with Bob prior to his death were relegated to ACE pathways discussion as I was yet unable to discuss mitochondrial stimulation. Other topics of our converstions were DC “microcurrents” with or without conductive silver nylon fabrics; the electrochemical treatment of cancer tumors using silver electrodes (rather than tungsten or platinum); and of course EarthPulse™ PEMF entrainment for sleep. We did discuss the incrontravertable 10 Hz pattern in the peer reviewed research, the fact his long-time friend (and one-time student) Andrew Marino, PhD had done research with 10 Hz and the discovery of the 9.6 Hz “resonation” discovered by Bob C. Beck. However without knowledge of the NASA, Tong or Hood studies, I was unable to discuss these effects with Becker.

This link to Becker & Marino’s Electromagnetism and Life (takes a bit of time for the pdf to load so be patient) is probably the most well documented essay in existence on the detrimental effects of power and microwave telecommunications frequencies as well as some of the earlier works using electric and magnetic stimulation techniques. Far, far ahead of their time, but very relevant today.

The end effect of night long sessions with enhanced ATP production and reduced oxidative stress allow cells to detoxify and repair over weeks and months to become healthy normal functioning cells again. Old injuries heal remarkably well during this several months process. Cells that are healthy now have extended life-time. Over time, the technique literally stops aging, reverses it for perhaps as much as a decade; once repair process is complete and ‘normal’ aging process resumes, it does so at much slower cell turnover rate.

Not just age reversal on one current cell generation but over weeks and months you realize those new cells then went on to produce new cells next to it and so on, in attempt to reverse all age related degeneration. Over time you realize old nagging problems like knees or hips or shoulders haven’t been bothering nearly as bad as before, knees, hips, lower back, shoulders and neck feel looser, digestion is better, energy levels much higher and more stable, and you begin to feel in most cases healthier than ever in lifetime. “Wind” under-load changes noticeably going-up steps or in athletic endeavors within the first week or two. Age related dis-repair takes several months or more to improve as much as possible while oxygen metabolism can improve apparently over years. Once that process is complete, it then freezes user in that condition for proportionately as long as cell turnover rate is slowed (barring any health catastrophes).

Dr. Robert O. Becker, MD and Paul F. Becker, Esq. in 2004 (age 46) “You sure have come up with something that helps me sleep” ~ R.O. Becker ~ the Father of Electromedicine

After 9 years of sleeping nightly in RECOVER-MODE 9.6 HZ program most nights results in distinct anabolic effects…. few days prior to turning 54 after 9 years of EarthPulse™ very weak nighttime PEMF and no nutritional supplementation but organic sulphur.

I was training prior to this photo after a 2 year long multi year layoff from BowFlex system i’d had since 1996; using a elastic resistance band type training system called Body by Jake Tower 200 (I highly recommend it). I was 45 days into a 15 minutes per day 6 days per week 100 – 125 reps per day spread over 4 body parts. One movement palm down pull-ups done on an Iron Gym (also a door apparatus). Both break down and fit into luggage and travel everywhere (like my EarthPulse™, Sota.com colloidal silver maker, electric stim & magnetic pulser units). The Lazy Man’s way to fitness.

I always say, practice what you preach. Try and find another PEMF manufacture that’s not grey haired, and / or overweight at 50+ and send us a link if you can find one. The equation is simple, a healthy diet, some exercise and sleeping on the EP and you’re sure to slow your ageing to a crawl

Check this paper particularly the comment by Aubrie de Grey about reduced ROS production and its affect on cell longevity. See this study by YH Wei  et al. and then go back to the 1989 David Hood study where enzyme activity responsible for oxygen molecule metabolism increased 3 fold (by 10 hrs per day for 35 days stimulation). It would figure there would be less electron (oxygen) ‘leakage’ when there are 3x’s more enzyme responsible for oxygen molecule metabolism.

In summary: moreATP induces anti-aging effects through more organically produced ATP; resulting in upregulation of cell membrane potential; increased nerve synapse potential; improved ion transport; reduced ROS production; improved ROS neutralization; improved cell detoxification; reduced cell inflammation; thereby synergistically enhancing cell survival and longevity at the mitochondrial (potentially mtDNA) level.

Who wants to live forever?~ Freddie Mercury & Queen

The Resting-Breath-Hold (RBH) tests prove phenomenal increases proving better oxygen metabolism in about 95% of our anti-aging / anti-ageing machine clients.|||

Anti-aging machine reverses aging by enhanced mitochondrial ATP synthesis, lowering oxidative stress, detoxification, thereby reversing aging; Mitochondrial theory of aging in reverse.