Mass Effect: Andromeda review: A sprawling space epic that some will love In a vein similar to everything from Star Trek to Contact, Forbidden Planet to Eve Online, Mass Effect: Andromeda begins with the grand conceit that there exists opportunity and possibility as far beyond the horizon that we care to dream. The game's opening is as inspirational as it is aspirational, full of excitement and promoting the embrace of bold-spirited open-mindedness.

The promise of moving through the universe as a "Pathfinder," akin to intrepid explorers like Sir Francis Drake or Lewis and Clarke, is one that conjures up just the right blend of excitement, fear, and responsibility. Thanks to the exploration efforts of our ancestors, the low price of jet travel, and the speed and ubiquity of Internet access, our Earth has given up most of its secrets. It is no surprise, then, that any opportunity to penetrate a new frontier, fictitious or otherwise, is deeply alluring.

A certain character, one who is important for setting Andromeda’s early tone, sums up the idea:

So far so good, then. Mass Effect: Andromeda’s problem, however, is that it tells you there’s potential greatness and majesty all around you, but it falls well short of actually delivering such an experience. Where the opening premise is set out in a way that seems boundless, your interactions place you on a course that typically feels predetermined and lacking in spectacle.

The root cause of this glib grandeur is the way in which you interact with non-player characters (NPCs). As protagonist Sara/Scott Ryder, the dialogue, your available conversation options, and the topics and questions you’re asked to respond to leave almost no room for ambiguity. Without ambiguity there’s little space for personal interpretation of events, and that makes this supposedly infinite universe feel very small indeed.

Even the dialogue quoted above, for instance, represents a case of you being told how you should be thinking about your position as opposed to setting a scene that you can interpret for yourself.

Important alien characters that you meet early on, for instance, are so direct in their initial interactions with you that it’s impossible to come to anything but the most clichéd understanding of their existence. There's the aggressive one who kills first and asks questions later, the suave one with a knack for using her quick wit to get her way, and the cold, logical one with no time for sentiment or subjectivity.

Here we are in a previously unexplored galaxy and yet we’re still surrounded by the same character tropes, presented in the same way that big, dumb blockbusters have relied on since Commando made it hip to enjoy trash. This approach to character presentation isn’t a way to foster expansive, open-minded thinking about the future of humanity.

The dialogue, and your position within it, is at its worst when you need something specific from someone. The writing team seems unable to marry a believable conversation with the gameplay needed to give the player the chance to achieve a certain outcome.

There’s an exchange that occurs within the first few hours on the planet Eos, in which you come across a small settlement that is deserted save for a single guy, Clancy Arquist, holed up in a building for his own protection. He’s incredibly afraid of turning on the power and attracting aggressive aliens to his position.

From behind his locked door, Clancy responds to your request for the settlement’s power to be turned backed on.

And that’s it. A single line of questionably written Socratic irony sways a guy who was seconds ago adamant that the best course of action was to stay locked up in isolation, with the power off.

It makes you feel as though Clancy only exists as a functionary to get you from one point in the mission to the next; a node to be switched on so that you can continue your journey.

That’s exactly what he is, of course. However, so often in games of this sort it’s possible to determine the quality of the writing by how well it masks the fact that you’re simply interacting with numerous NPC nodes on your way to the finale.

All of these characters have specific roles to fill when it comes to pushing you towards your goals, but it’s up to the writing team to skilfully make it seem as though these individuals have a history and a reason to exist beyond your interaction.

Just providing the sensation that you’re talking to someone with their own life is enough to make you perceive them as a sentient entity as opposed to an artificial one. Bring enough believable characters into your world and your world suddenly feels expansive, as though the universe and its occupants aren't just simply waiting around for you to interact with it.

Far too often that doesn’t happen in Mass Effect: Andromeda. And worse yet, it often feels as though there hasn't even been an attempt to make it happen. Nothing in the game stops you suspending your disbelief more than this.|||

Mass Effect: Andromeda's lack of player trust limits its psychological impact.