ON JANUARY 9, 2007 Steve Jobs presented the iPhone. From that day on we have been inspired as never before by sublime technology products from all over the world.

You can also read this article in Italian.

But there is an untold story. The story of how Steve Job’s masked an incredibly complex technology behind a very simple object.

Today, 10 years later, Apple Store alone counts more than 2,7M apps, and the same goes for Google’s Play Store.

We all appreciate the stunning simplicity of famous apps. We all dream of the incredible products we could build if we just had the time.

At Moze we help entrepreneurs and managers to transform ideas into digital products. We design and code products such as web platforms, sites or apps.

Not all of our clients possess technical skills. Maybe they come from marketing or business. They are entrepreneurs and managers, and usually looking for an “IT” (Information Technology) contractor.

A part of our job is to help take consciousness about the fact that building an App is much more than what it seems.

We believe building the right product requires to form a strong partnership relationship based on the values of Agility. We summoned up five lessons learned especially valuable for non-technical founders.

Sometimes we get Request For Proposals (RFP) with a long list of requirements and a requested go-live date.

Cody Simms from Techstars, a startup accelerator, explains in a recent article how 12-month roadmaps are characteristic of the pre-Internet era, when product cycles required long lead time to ship the physical product—while today Internet software, instead, must adapt rapidly in order to survive.

Sharing a vision on the general roadmap is good when choosing a contractor because it allows both parties to agree on outcome (what to build). But when it comes to implementation (how to build) we do not think it is good to lock down detailed requirements upfront: simply because you don’t know it all yet.

Many companies know that the most effective timeframe for execution is a period of 6 weeks. Intercom, a SaaS company, perfectly pictures the theory by correlating accuracy and efforts of planning.|||

ON JANUARY 9, 2007 Steve Jobs presented the iPhone. From that day on we have been inspired as never before by sublime technology products from all over the world. But there is an untold story. The…