But then, a few months ago, something happened. Something extraordinary. Defying all expectations, Federer won this year's Australian Open. His 18th major title (the most ever for a man in his sport) and his first Grand Slam in five years. Among the 18, this one was special. “Perhaps the most special,” he told me. It came after he'd taken a months-long break, his first significant time away from tennis since he was a teenager, in part because of a knee injury he'd suffered during the last Australian Open (while drawing his daughters a bath, of all things), but also because he'd been feeling worn out. So to return at his age, after no competitive matches for months, and triumph over his greatest rival, Rafael Nadal, on one of the sport's grandest stages… The feeling was ecstasy.

“Winning Australia, it solves so many problems,” he said. And so, feeling generous, perhaps a little insulated by success, he extended an invitation for a visit. High up at his retreat in Switzerland, just five days after the final, to talk about tennis and not-tennis, at this beginning of yet another chapter in his career. He didn't just quiet the hecklers by winning—he changed the narrative. Millions of fans got to feel a story line shift under their feet, and Federer felt it, too. So who is he? What is he? I went to the mountains to find out, at the same time equipped with the single question he'd least want to answer, the one that keeps his fans twitching like so many addicts between hits: After all these years of pulling off the impossible, how many more could we really expect?

To start, Federer looked relatively normal when we met, and definitely Swiss: dark turtleneck sweater, crisp wool pants, black boots. Hiking is Federer's favorite hobby (his only hobby), but snow was falling and his legs were tired from Australia, so we went out to lunch, for raclette (at his suggestion), a traditional Swiss dish for après-ski, basically a plate of melted cheese. Not what I expected. But what did I expect, really? On the court, Federer is known for almost inhuman focus. Humorless determination. A steel-cut perfectionist with a stevedore's nose, the finest forehand of all time, and the coiffure of James Bond circa Timothy Dalton. In the stiffest of all countries, why should he be any different? But frankly, he was so easy going from the start, so relaxed, for a second I thought he was stoned. (He wasn't stoned.) He drove us to the restaurant in his Mercedes. We chatted about our families. I wound up telling a story about the time I did heroin by accident—look, it was in South Africa, and Federer's mother is from South Africa, and I was trying to find some common ground out of the gate, the way you do when you're riding in a gargantuan vehicle with a global celebrity you've just met—and he barked out laughing. Federer, a big laugher, who knew? Though it got to a point, by mid-meal, where I started to get suspicious—was it for show, to play the Everyman? Who likes melted cheese like the rest of us? (Maybe he was stoned?) This is a guy, I'd learn, who still makes reservations at a nearby public tennis facility rather than build his own private court. Think about that. Consider the fact that Federer has made over $100 million in career prize money, never mind endorsements. Now imagine being the local dude who has to kick Roger Federer off a tennis court because his practice session goes a little long.

Above all else, though, Roger Federer: loves his family, with “family” being a widely inclusive term. Mirka is his rock. She's a former professional tennis player herself, and they got together in 2000. “Here we are, 17 years later, and we did it all together,” he said with wonder. His parents, he's very close to. They still get so nervous watching him play they can't sit next to each other at tournaments. (At home his mom tells the TV before every serve, “Hit an ace! Hit an ace!”) Moving outward through the rings of affection, next comes his team, who might as well be family, and then the tour, “a second family,” he said, meaning the other players (who've given him the tour's annual sportsmanship award 12 times), and then their teams, and finally the tournament directors, the organizers, the hired hands, the ball boys and girls.

Halfway through lunch, a guy with an envelope nervously approached our table. Federer seemed confused. Earlier, in the car, we'd passed a pair of horse-drawn carriages, and Federer stopped to hail one of the drivers. He knew him; they'd taken the kids for sleigh rides before. The guy at our table turned out to be the carriage driver's friend, the driver of the other carriage, and he wanted to present Federer with a gift certificate for a free carriage ride. Federer smiled, thanked him profusely, even comforted him, made the man feel more at ease. I saw this several times: that Swiss people, approaching their hero, needed to be reassured it was okay to encroach. “We respect people's privacy; we don't intrude,” Federer explained. “If you see somebody else do it, then it's so much easier to tag along. But for the first guy to do it and break the ice, it's hard. They say in Switzerland it's not so easy to make friends.”

People rarely know why or how they do things, their true motives. Athletes even less, in my experience, especially when it comes to explaining how their bodies achieve those complicated mechanical sequences that render, to our eyes, as so much grace. But we all know where we come from. And from the land of clocks and chocolate, where order and sweetness are equally celebrated, what better makeup for a human to rule a sport so rigid with customs, so precise in play—a game that demands at the elite levels an almost superhuman flawlessness, where a win can come down to making the right decision, hitting the right shot, just one or two more times in a five-hour match—than a man who finds his form inside constraint?

Friends of mine, hitting partners, are Federer fans for real. They own his racket, his sneakers, the hat with his RF logo. When he loses, they're wrecked; when he wins, it's only slightly less painful, because it's one fewer win they get to witness. Federer fans admire not only the game but the gestalt, what he represents. Integrity. Class. Flawlessness on and off the court. Whereas my problem's always been with that same idea of perfection, the absence of blemishes. As a fan, I need some grit to grab. More for me are Andy Murray's self-defeatism, Stan Wawrinka's sourness, Nadal's nervous mannerisms. Basically, men who are capable of tragic mistakes, who demonstrate, physically and noisily, what it takes to beat back their own worst tendencies—or, just as often, fail in trying. And then there's a side of my vanity—and I'm not proud to say this here—that's occasionally thought that being a Federer fan is just too easy.

In 2001, Federer beat Pete Sampras in the fourth round of Wimbledon. Federer was only 19 at the time, still unformed. But he'd just reached his first Grand Slam quarterfinal at the French Open, and fans were starting to learn his name. And here, in England, he faced the great one, the seven-time defending Wimbledon champion—the player he'd be most compared to later, the man who held nearly all the records that Federer would someday claim. “Look, I was able to experience the highest level of tennis,” he said. “It was my first time on Centre Court at Wimbledon. My first and only time I played Pete. I was in a match where I won 7–5 in the fifth—very similar to what we just went through with Rafa. I was 19 years old. I realized, Oh, my God. There's so much more to tennis than just practice in a cold hall somewhere in Switzerland. This is what tennis could be about. I realized, I want to be back on that court one day, I'd love to compete with these guys on a regular basis, I'd rather play on the bigger courts than on the smaller courts.… And all of a sudden it started to make sense. Why you're doing weights. Why you're running. Why you arrive early at a tournament. Why you try to sleep well at night. We just started to understand the importance of every single detail. Because it makes a difference.”

Federer remembered the games point by point; as with many players, his memory for matches is off-puttingly photographic. One of the keys to his success was an aggressive, flatter backhand. His one-handed backhand, among the most elegant ever seen, had long been a weakness facing Nadal's high-bouncing shots; the one-hander simply has difficulty generating power at shoulder level, as compared with the two-handed hammers of guys like Andre Agassi, Kei Nishikori, Nadal. But with a slight recalibration, both in attitude and in form, Federer found new angles, new holes in Nadal's game. Then the wheels came off the bus. Nadal took set two. Set three went to Federer, set four to Nadal, back and forth while tension rose, until it was the fifth set and Federer was down again. Rafa had the momentum. It looked like he had it in the bag—but then the momentum shifted once more. The crowd screamed for Federer to win. And this wasn't surprising: Anywhere Federer plays, by force of so much winning and charisma and lack of scandal and who knows what, it's always a home crowd. As Cahill told me, “Roger is the most popular and loved athlete that I've ever seen.” But it was still neck and neck until the very last points—which got decided by line calls. Unbelievable. Worldwide, everyone was freaking out.

What is Roger Federer? Roger Federer: is Swiss. Very normal, laughs a lot. On some level he's a product of the '90s—he used to have bleached hair, he had posters in his bedroom of Shaq, Michael Jordan, Stefan Edberg, Boris Becker. (Also Pamela Anderson. “I remember that one,” he said, chuckling. “She was on my door.”) He's polite, he's fastidious. He's a family man who loves movies. In private he's goofy, earnest about his interests, and he seriously doesn't mind getting excited when he tells a story. Basically, Roger Federer is kind of a dork, in the very best sense—and, newly converted, it didn't take long for me to order a hat with an RF logo once I got home. But forgive him if he keeps his dorkiness concealed from us a little longer. After all, to do his job, Roger Federer must become “Roger Federer.” The gentleman warrior. The leading man. He said at one point, “I put a poker face on.” For gamesmanship as much as anything. “You don't want to give anything away to your opponent. I used to do that all the time when I was little. Throwing rackets, shouting, all that stuff. You give an edge to your opponent if you do that. Eventually, you develop your demeanor. Rafa has his tics. Stan has his look. I have my look. You become this shield.”

Federer laughed. He thought about it. “Let's say I have a tournament,” he said. “I ask myself, how happy am I to be leaving home? Because it'd be so nice to stay. So am I happy to pack my bags, and walk out the door, and put them in the car, and get in the car, look to the house and say, Okay, let's do this—am I happy in that moment? Or do I wish I could stay longer? Every time it's been: I'm happy to go. I'm still doing the right thing in my heart. It's a test. If that moment comes and I'm like, ‘Hmm…' I've heard other players say the same thing. A friend went to the airport and turned around—he couldn't go play that tournament; he needed to see his family. That's probably the end of a career.” He paused. It sank in. He smiled. “We like it so much here, but nevertheless I'm still happy to keep moving.”|||

Roger Federer was supposed to be finished. But then he won the 2017 Australian Open. Just after, he spoke about life off the court and how long he can pull off the impossible.