Relationships, in many contexts, can be defined as compilations of dynamic and complex interactions, which form a mutually existing history between two or multiple parties. The relationships formed between purchasing entities and their suppliers, in regards to the definition above, are no different. Buyer-supplier relationships are typically complex and take time to develop. Just like all relationships, those of buyers and suppliers typically face turmoil throughout history and are forced to find dynamic solutions to continue collaboration or end the relationship all together. Read more...

Is it better to jump into a relationship head on, or thoroughly understand the person/entity/company down the other end of the aisle first, before tying the knot? One thing is certain; well-structured, mutually beneficial buyer-supplier relationships only occur when there is engagement and effort put into the collaboration by both parties. Read more...

Can Machine Learning shape the future of Supply Chain Optimization? Have you ever wondered how Netflix knows exactly what kind of TV series you want to watch, or how Facebook recommends all the right people to send friend requests to, or how Google Doc’s search bar randomly pops up with the document you were going to search; before you even typed anything? Read more...

Digitization of the Supply Chain: The future is now. Innovation and automation are running rampant in the current digitized global marketplace. The market is larger, and smaller than ever, all at the same time. It’s exciting and and frightening, and frankly, I love it. Read more...

About 2 months ago, during a night out in the city, a friend of mine suggested grabbing a hotdog from a KorvKiosk. Considering my soft spot for processed meat, I half-reluctantly agreed. Approaching the Kiosk he asked me what I wanted and proceeded to order us two “korv med räksallad” (hot dog with shrimp salad). Read more...

SaaS is the new Black.

Supply Chain Management in style. Providers typically supply their software services, via installation, cloud, or web solutions to various clients in need. SaaS solutions and tools are usually, but not always, on a pay-for-use basis defined by yearly, monthly or one-time subscriptions. Read more...

5 New Year’s Resolutions.

For your Business and Mine. One thing that’s certain about the tradition is that individuals, worldwide, will make New Year’s Resolutions and break New Year’s Resolutions. Tomorrow Michael will start smoking again, in 2 weeks Janice will break down on a bag of Lay’s Original, and by December 31, 2017, I too, will have broken my New Year’s Resolution. Read more...

Supplier Relationship Management: For Dummies. And You! 3 words and 32 letters that hold a lot of meaning for businesses and their supply chains. I’d dare to say, few individuals really understand the interworking of SRM or the implications a Supplier Relationship strategy can have for a corporation and it’s supply chain. Read more...

Trends in 2017 for your Supply Chain.

Stay ahead. With the turn of the year brings the beginning of Q1. Executive officers have ramped up their team- amidst the drunken escapades of holiday office parties, Salespeople are reevaluating their pipeline- hoping for a good quarter, and Marketers are tapping into the newest trends- that will set their content apart in 2017. Read more...

CO2, and its presence in our atmosphere, is a known entity by a majority of the complex, diverse and semi-intelligent beings- that are- the human race. What CO2 does to our environment, I believe less individuals know. How much is in our atmosphere, I believe, even fewer individuals know. Read more...

4 Trends in the Supply Chain.

Now and hereafter. Trends, especially in fashion, come and go like a common cold. Sometimes they hit hard, nestle into our culture, and spread epidemic. Other times we’re over them in a week, or month’s time. Read more...|||

Supplier Relationship Management solution built to enhance Sustainable and Strategic Sourcing. Creating Transparency and Traceability starts with Supplier Relationship Management.