Chimera-framework is a nodejs based framework that let you write any task in any language, and combine them for a greater good.

Perl, python, php, ruby, haskell, javascript, c, java, pascal, R, and even matlab (See http://stackoverflow.com/questions/6657005/matlab-running-an-m-file-from-command-line) are supporting command line interface (CLI). Through CLI, different programs can communicate to each others. Chimera-framework provide mechanism to store global variables and to orchastrate the programs into a single flow.

Some programming languages are better at some cases while other are excelled at other cases You might love PHP from the bottom of your heart, but it doesn't change the fact that doing heavy-statistic computation in R is easier. Rather than trying to make PHP do what R do, it is more easier to just use R instead.

Unix has a great philosophy. It encourage programmers to build a single program to do a single task. Nowadays, people try to make one thing to rule out everything. This might sounds good at first, but the effort will be futile. It is better to keep everything simple and combine those simple process to achieve a greater good.

By creating independent simple programs, you can make a lot of possibility. There is a hero in DOTA named Invoker that can combine his orbs to activate 10 different abilities (http://dota2.gamepedia.com/Invoker#Invoked_abilities). Rather than building a monolithic program that won't scale, it is better to make simple programs, and combine them as you need.

Sometime you need a certain feature that is only available in an esoteric-new-programming-language. You learn the language, convert all your old projects into this new language, and loosing the meaning of life. Just never do that anymore. Chimera framework goal is to let you write any task in any language, and combine them to achieve a greater good.|||

Chimera-framework is a nodejs based framework that let you write any task in any language, and combine them for a greater good.