This Kaggle InClass competition is part of the OpenDataWeek organised by European Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) on 28 February - 5 March 2017.

The air quality data used in this competition is freely available from Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS) which is managed by ECMWF on behalf of the European Union.

Your goal is to predict mortality rates (number of deaths per 100,000 people) for each English region using daily means of ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), PM10 (particulate matter with diameter less than or equal to 10 micrometers), PM25 (2.5 micrometers or less) and Temperature.

In order to build your statistical model, you should use the training dataset (train.csv), which contains a random sample of historical mortality rates, daily means of the above mentioned pollutants and temperature.

Do not worry if you have no experience with machine learning! Sample scripts in Python and R will be provided in the competition forum to get you started quickly.

Once your model is trained, use it to predict mortality rates for the test dataset (test.csv). Save the predictions in a CSV file similar to sample_submissions.csv.

Your submission file should have only two columns: Id and mortality_rate. Each value in the Id column should have a corresponding row in the test dataset. Value of the mortality_rate in your submission file should be calculated for the region, date, time and average values of air pollutants provided in the corresponding row of the test dataset.

Next, you need to submit the file with your solution. To do so, click Make submission in the dashboard. Short time after uploading the submission file you will see your result on the public leaderboard. The result is Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) calculated for the difference between what you have submitted and the ground truth - real values of mortality rates of the test set, which are a secret kept on Kaggle server.

You can only submit two submissions per day. This is to prevent participants from overfitting to the public leaderboard. It is best to use a form of cross-validation to asses your model rather than rely on the public leaderboard score.

The test dataset is divided into two halves and only one of them is used for calculating your score on the public leaderboard, the other half is used to calculate scores on the private leaderboard. Once the competition is finished the private leaderboard will be revealed. Positions of teams on the private leaderboard will be their final position.

Mortality rates for the English regions were calculated using data provided by the UK Office for National Statistics.

Started: 6:15 pm, Monday 13 February 2017 UTC 

 Ended: 11:59 pm, Friday 5 May 2017 UTC (81 total days) 

 Points: this competition did not award ranking points 

 Tiers: this competition did not count towards tiers|||

allows instructors to host data prediction competitions for their students. Competitions are a great way to engage students, giving them the opportunity to put into practice what they learn in class