Before you decide to invest in a living wall garden, you need to think about its maintenance costs. The initial cost of installing an indoor living wall is high enough already, but the maintenance required to keep it looking great adds up as well. This is one of the main reasons why people choose an artificial vertical green wall rather than deal with living plants. No matter which option you are considering, here are some of the maintenance requirements you should take note of.

Living green wall plants require water and fertilizer to survive. Its water consumption depends on its size and whether it’s indoors or outdoors. However, you can certainly expect to see a significant jump in your water bill on an annual basis. Plus, you have to fertilize the living wall garden frequently if you want it to remain in great shape. When you install an artificial green wall, you don’t have to worry about either of these factors. With fake plants, all you have to do is dust the leaves occasionally.

If you have a fairly large living wall garden, you may have to set up an irrigation system. Without an irrigation system, you won’t be able to water the plants as much as they need. You can expect to spend several hundred dollars on the irrigation system alone, not to mention the water and maintenance the actual system will require over time. If this sounds like an excessive amount of upkeep, you may favor an artificial vertical green wall, since you won’t have to install any equipment to keep the plants looking in top shape.

Plants will die occasionally for a variety of reasons. Even with the proper amount of water and sunlight, some plants just can’t survive for a long time. This will require you to spend extra money and purchase replacement plants. Otherwise, you will have a patch of brown plants or an open hole and create an unsightly view. With an artificial vertical green wall, the only reason you would ever need to buy replacement plants is if you got tired of seeing the same ones every day for a long period of time.

Cost considerations aside, a living wall garden requires more man-hours to maintain than an artificial green wall. Weeds can grow even in an indoor living wall, so you’ll have to remove them regularly. You also may have to treat the plants with a pest management spray in order to prevent bugs from dining on your plants. Neither of these are issues when you have an artificial vertical wall garden.

Living green walls require a lot of maintenance, and the costs can add up over time. If that’s not an attractive option for you, be sure to contact us for artificial alternatives that look just as great without the maintenance requirements.|||

A living wall garden requires a lot more maintenance than an artificial vertical green wall. Read our blog to learn about all the maintenance requirements.