Update, March 29, 12:45pm: Article 50 has been triggered. Theresa May is live on Parliament TV right now, discussing what comes next for the UK and its constituent nations.

Update, March 29, 11:25pm: Brexit is finally upon us. On Tuesday evening Theresa May signed the letter that, when it is received by the president of the European Council in Brussels, will begin the official process of removing the UK from the EU.

The letter, which is reportedly a few pages long, will trigger Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty—and will also likely contain some negotiation starting points. The letter is expected to be delivered to the president of the EC, Donald Tusk, at 12:30pm today; hopefully he won't be in another meeting or out getting coffee.

Concurrently, prime minister May will speak in UK parliament about the triggering of Article 50, and then spend a few hours discussing the process and fielding questions from MPs. Tusk is expected to talk to the press at around 12:45pm UK time, and within 48 hours will present draft negotiation guidelines for the UK's exit from the union.

And then... the Brexit process begins in earnest. Over the next few weeks diplomats from the UK and the 27 remaining members of the European Union will meet behind closed doors to thrash out deals, or at least try to find some common ground. On April 29, leaders from those 27 nations will get together for a summit, to begin more formal proceedings. Soon after, we should find out just how good or bad Brexit will be for the country.

The UK will begin official divorce proceedings with the European Union on March 29, prime minister Theresa May's spokesperson has announced.

Tim Barrow, the UK's envoy to the EU, informed the bloc's president Donald Tusk on Monday morning that May will invoke Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty—the official mechanism by which a member state withdraws from the union.

Donald Tusk, the current president of the European Council, says he will present draft Brexit negotiation guidelines to the other 27 members of the EU within 48 hours of Article 50 being triggered by the UK. So, we might know sooner rather than later what leaving the EU will entail.

Article 50, which has never been used before, is quite simple and only consists of five short paragraphs. Basically, it gives the UK two years to negotiate a "withdrawal agreement" with the 27 remaining member states of the EU. During this time, the UK will still be part of the union; EU laws will still apply here. The UK won't be privy to internal EU discussions pertaining to our withdrawal, though.

On the EU side of things the European Commission will lead negotiations, but the final agreement will require consent from European Parliament, which consists of hundreds of MEPs from every member of the EU. Furthermore, if the final Brexit agreement is "mixed"—as in, it affects nation-level policy, which seems likely—then it will also have to pass through all 27 national governments.

Notably, the UK doesn't get to vote on the EU's withdrawal agreement—though of course we're not forced to accept whatever deal the EU finally hands down.

PM on Brexit: UK to quit single market, parliament gets vote on final deal The next two years, then, will involve lots of wheeling and dealing between the UK and its soon-to-be erstwhile bloc buddies, in the hope that a good deal for Blighty can be struck.

Theresa May signs up to unitary patent, accepts supremacy of top EU court “We are on the threshold of the most important negotiation for this country for a generation,” the UK's Brexit secretary David Davis said in a statement. “The government is clear in its aims: a deal that works for every nation and region of the UK and indeed for all of Europe—a new, positive partnership between the UK and our friends and allies in the European Union."

The UK voted in a referendum on June 2016 to leave the EU. Nine months later, on the eve of trotting over to Brussels and bashfully delivering our divorce papers, no one yet knows what will happen when we actually leave. The good news, I guess, is that we're now about to find out.|||

Letter will be delivered to Brussels at 12:30pm today; EC's response expected soon.