Risk management is not exactly the hottest of topics. Just thinking about it reminds me of Ben Stiller in “Along Came Polly.” In the movie, Stiller plays Reuben Feffer, a life insurance underwriter that just broke up with his longtime girlfriend and fiancé. Influenced by his work as a risk analyst and his rash of bad luck in relationships, Reuben is so worried about what could go wrong that he forgets to enjoy himself most of the time. Enter Polly — a girl with a completely different lifestyle and personality. She’s totally laid back, likes to eat with her hands and has a pet ferret. Polly is a disruptive force in this guy’s life, but after a “risk assessment” he finally gives in and starts embracing the unexpected.

Starting a company is pretty much as disruptive as going into a relationship with someone that’s drastically different. But for entrepreneurs, anticipating risks and preparing for them can make the difference between failure and success. The key is to quantify risks and come up with some contingency measures. And, of course — just like Reuben — you first have to accept that things will rarely go exactly as planned.

The short answer is: if you’re thinking of pouring your hard-earned money and time into a new idea, you better understand what your challenges will be and how you can overcome them. Looking at risks from a traditional enterprise model is based on estimating liability. This is different for startups. For startups, the total amount of cash caps the total liability. So when you’re calculating risk for a startup, you need to estimate the probability of failure.

In other words, when you’re starting a company you already know you’ll have a fixed amount of investment up front, so you know what the total cost of failure would be. Having a proper risk management model will help you convince investors that you’re in it for the long run and you’re prepared to minimize this chance of failure. After all, what investors are interested in is getting a >10x ROI and understanding what the chance of losing all their money is. If you don’t analyze risks, you’ll risk looking like a gambler instead of a real entrepreneur. As Squads’ Iwein Fuld would say: “a gambler typically fails to understand that the game is rigged: the more money they put in, the more money they will lose. A clever entrepreneur looks at risk systematically, running experiments and playing it by the numbers instead of basing their hopes on a single draw.”

Having a proper risk management strategy is not only a plus to convince investors. It also breeds team confidence. It proves to your colleagues that you’re committed to your company’s success and prepared to get them through the rough times.

If you’re set on preparing a risk mitigation strategy and you’re wondering where to start, it helps to look at the top sources of risk for startups. These are:

Depending on your market, you may face other sources of risk. For instance, changes in legislation. One you identify these sources, you can start ranking different risks for your company.

Assuming you have a clear outline of your business idea, you can start listing associated risks and the chance of failure according to the probability of occurrence. The next step is to list mitigation strategies for each risk. The guys at Squads made a handy spreadsheet that you can use for this purpose. You can download it here.

Let’s look at an example. Let’s say you’re planning to start a software company. You have a co-founder as CTO and you’re the expert in commercial matters, but neither of you has entrepreneurial experience. You make up for this by knowing the market inside-out and having a broad network in the industry. Your risk estimation will probably look like this:

Now, the odds are probably stacked against you. But surely you already knew that. After all, 9 in 10 startups fail. How you define failure will also depend on the goals you’ve set forth. What’s interesting about this exercise is that you’ve also forced yourself to think about mitigation tactics you could employ to overcome these risks. These mitigation tactics will probably look something like this:

Of course, this exercise is largely based on assumptions. So it’s important for you to have some knowledge of the industry you’re targeting. Experience is even better. The key takeaway here is that you’ll have a better overview of the costs you’ll be facing as you encounter certain risks. Moreover, you’ll be better equipped to make some difficult choices. For instance, if you assume that you’ll need to hire additional developers to mitigate the risk of failure, you’ll want to take your time to hire the right ones. Otherwise, you risk losing valuable time on-boarding someone that won’t stick around for long, not to mention budget. Taking your time to decide will slow down growth. In that case, you’d be trading potential growth for more certainty. Another strategy would be to work with freelancers. That way you get the expertise you need on demand.

This approach to risk management works pretty well with lean startup practices. As an entrepreneur, you should be able to anticipate risks. Risks are assumptions. Mitigations are also assumptions. In the end, these assumptions will help you identify which experiments you need to scale. How you choose to prioritize these experiments may vary, but you should focus on testing less expensive ones first and trying the more costly ones as your level of certainty increases.

Download our free risk management sheet here. Need help using the sheet for your startup? No problem. Feel free to contact us.

Thanks again to Iwein Fuld for his input.|||

Risk management is not exactly the hottest of topics. Just thinking about it reminds me of Ben Stiller in “Along Came Polly.” In the movie, Stiller plays Reuben Feffer, a life insurance underwriter…