Whenever you start a new git repo, pop an empty commit onto it before you do anything else!

I first encountered this idea in Tim Pettersen’s 2016 blog entry, Lesser known Git commands.  I’ve since traced this idea’s lineage back to Kevin Deldycke’s 2010 post, How I Initialize My Git Repositories, which makes a passing reference to an appendix in the 2008 version of Ben Lynn’s git manual, Git Magic.

This idea has been around a long time, but the reasons people cite for doing it don’t make sense.

Let’s look at those reasons.

But things have gotten better as of git version 2.5.2:

I tried switching my computer to Korean to see if that makes a difference:

I cannot read or understand Korean, but seeing ‘master’ in there suggests that even in Korean the message is now less terrifying.

Stackoveflow doesn’t appear to know this trick yet, but you can do this from your repository’s root directory:

Run the commands above (once per repo), and from then on the void is just a quick 46 keystrokes away: “git reset –hard origin/primordial_ nothingness”. Unless of course some jerk goes and commits against your primordial_nothingness branch. But if that ever happens, you know how to get the void back! Run the same steps above, but end with a force-push.

It does look funny on commit graphs:

If you are profoundly unhappy with your first few commits, you could just refuse to push them.  Sweep them under the rug via “rm -rf .git” and never tell a soul.  Here’s an example:

Not happy with those initial three commits above? Blast away the “.git” directory, re-init, recommit:

Et voilà, the commit exactly as you dreamed it.  Sure, it’s a little bit of typing, but it uses vanilla git commands that any beginner should know.  The only trick is deleting the “.git/” directory.

Now, if the current date is after July 25th, 2012, then there is another way.  You can take advantage of git’s very own commit “7b9f29c4”:

The trick here is to remember to use “–root” instead of “HEAD~N” or “@{u}” or however it is you typically reference the commit you’re rebasing to.  So instead of this:

Nonetheless, I still try to initialize my repos with empty root commits. I just have different reasons.

I only have one for you this time. I haven’t tried it myself yet. But I’ll post a solution in a couple weeks. My solution will probably use a combination of “git log –reverse –pretty=email” piped into “git am”. Here’s the exercise:|||

