Egypt is set to adopt a new national e-commerce strategy which has been developed by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) together with Egypt’s Ministry for Communications and Information Technology (MCIT). It is hoped that this new strategy will spur growth of the e-commerce sector in the country.

"The strategy is a solid foundation for stimulating e-commerce in Egypt, and I'm looking forward to the strategy's execution," said Yasser ElKady, Egypt's Minister of Communications and Information Technology.

UNCTAD’s National E-commerce Strategy for Egypt outlines seven sub-strategies, thirty recommendations aimed to strengthen Egypt’s performance in key policy areas, and six megaprojects. The new strategy report is supplemented by an action plan to support the implementation of the strategy.

"We had a fruitful cooperation and collaboration in working together on the national e-commerce strategy, in sharing knowledge, analyzing findings and learning from each other," said Dr. Nagwa El-Shenawi, Under-Secretary for Information and Strategic Planning at Egypt's Ministry of Communications and Information Technology.

It is stated that UNCTAD produced the strategy in response to a request from the Government of Egypt. Its development benefited from partnership with the World Bank on e-payments, as well as substantive contributions from the International Labour Organization, Universal Postal Union, International Trade Centre, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and European Commission. The Head of Rural Taobao of the Chinese e-commerce giant, Alibaba, also served as advisor on rural e-commerce development.

Egypt's full national e-commerce strategy, including other strategic measures identified by UNCTAD to help galvanize e-commerce, will be presented internationally during the UNCTAD E-Commerce Week in Geneva, Switzerland, in the presence of HE Minister Yasser ElKady.|||

