Video and television intensively migrate to cloud computing. Modern technology allows distribution of video content combined with advanced video analysis and functions for recognition of face, emotions and products in an image.

By creating Plastream™ platform, we will make it possible for you to effectively earn money not only from sharing content but also from derivatives of content analysis. In-video commerce, on-demand t-commerce, contextual advertising – these are the examples of models which will be provided by Plastream Cognitive™. Plastream Back-end™ and Plastream Player™ already allow you to automate the processes of managing video content and its monetization. The use of machine learning and big data analytics for better monetization of video content is a logical response to the rapid increase of the amount of video and its value for the content owners. This is one of the biggest trends in the current world of the Internet.

Brands create stories in order to successfully sell their product. Televisions and portals are thinking about the ways to maximally personalize the service so that viewers watch as many videos as possible, pay for the premium offer and buy on the related e-commerce websites. This is not an easy process – it poses a great challenge both of the technological and the business nature. Production of content is expensive – anyone who has it wants to make money on it, share it in the greatest possible number of various formats and models, and what is more, minimize the costs associated with processing and management. Simply – to automate the process of management and monetization of video content. This will be ensured by the SaaS Plastream™ family.

Many professionals know this from personal experience: they want to show their clients thousands of videos and start making money on them.

The consumer is now in front of dozens of categories, countless descriptions and Google search engine, which is unable to find the video that you are currently looking for. Very often, video files are not even tagged. When designing the SaaS Plastream™  family of solutions, we decided to change it. At the heart of our platform we used advanced big data analytics, which looks into the context in which your image is presented, and cognitive services give the ability to recognize objects in an image.

Plastream™ is able to analyse behaviour in social networks, current location and platform used – e.g. smartphone. All this information is processed by the built-in Plastream™ self-learning mechanisms supported by the computing power of Microsoft Cognitive Services and Microsoft Azure.

As a result, your clients will receive the content that they are most interested in at the right time and in a way optimized for the platform they are using (4K, HD, SD, Mobile). For the first time, they will also be able to make a purchase based on what they saw in the video – thanks to contextual e-commerce and on-demand queries.

Plastream™ will take monetization of your video content to a whole new level. It will turn your files into an invaluable big data database – the key to new revenue, products, and deeper relationships with clients.

Contact me on LinkedIn or via our website. Let’s talk about what we can achieve together.|||

