This week, we’ll have Sidarth Gupta and Hong-Seok Kim from Samsung on the show to talk about their Tizen OS and its support for .NET Core. The show won’t be live this week, because of the time difference with Korea, but you may still send us your questions on Gitter’s dotnet/home channel and on Twitter. Please use the tag.

Mads Torgersen is the Principal Program Manager for the C# Language. He maintains the language specification and runs the language design process for C# in the open at https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang. We caught up with Mads at the .NET 15th anniversary party where he shares his thoughts on the past, present and future of .NET.

Coypu is a robust .NET wrapper for browser automation tools such as Selenium WebDriver, that eases automating ajax-heavy websites and reduces coupling to the HTML, CSS & JS. It implements an intuitive DSL for interacting with the browser in the way a human being would.

Łukasz Pyrzyk and Piotr Gankiewicz are going on a three months tour across Poland to present live demos of ASP.NET Core and .NET Core. The tour begins today in Wrocław, and will end in June. Check out the planning on Łukasz’s blog and register!

Check out F# Weekly for more great content from the F# community.

And this is it for this week!

As always, this weekly post couldn’t exist without community contributions, and I’d like to thank all those who sent links and tips. The F# section is provided by Phillip Carter, the gaming section by Stacey Haffner, and the Xamarin section by Dan Rigby, and the UWP section by Michael Crump.

You can participate too. Did you write a great blog post, or just read one? Do you want everyone to know about an amazing new contribution or a useful library? Did you make or play a great game built on .NET?

 We’d love to hear from you, and feature your contributions on future posts:

This week’s post (and future posts) also contains news I first read on The ASP.NET Community Standup, on Weekly Xamarin, on F# weekly, and on Chris Alcock’s The Morning Brew.|||

A first-hand look from the .NET engineering teams