Reddit is the home to the most amazing content creators on the internet. Together, we create a place for artists, writers, scientists, gif-makers, and countless others to express themselves and to share their work and wisdom. They fill our days with beautiful photos, witty poems, thoughtful AMAs, shitty watercolours, and scary stories. Today, we make it easier for them to connect directly to you.

Reddit is testing a new profile experience that allows a handful of users, content creators, and brands to post directly to their profile, rather than to a community. You’ll be able to follow them and engage with them there. We’re excited because having this new ability will give our content contributors a home for their voice on Reddit. This feature will be available to everyone as soon as we iron out the kinks.

We’re testing a new profile page experience with a few Redditors (alpha testers). They’ll be able to post to their profile and you’ll be to follow them. Send us bugs or feedback specific to the feature on in r/beta!

Q: Why restrict this to just a few users?

A: This is an early release (“alpha”) product and we want to make sure everything is working optimally before rolling it out to more users. We picked most of our initial testers from the gaming space so we can work closely with a core group of mods that can provide direct feedback to us.

Q: Who are the initial testers and how were they selected?

A: We reached out to the moderators of a few communities and the testers were recommended to us based on the quality of their content and engagement. The testers include video makers, e-sports journalists, commentators, and a game developer.

Q: When will this roll out to everyone?

A: If all goes well, over the course of the next few months. We want to do this roll-out carefully to avoid any disruptions to existing communities. This is a major product launch for Reddit and we’re looking to the community to give us their input throughout this process.

A: Users can still be pseudonymous when posting to their profile. There’s no obligation for a user to reveal their identity. Some redditors choose not to be pseudonymous, in the case of some AMA participants, and that’s ok too.

Q: How will brands participate in this program?

A: During this alpha stage of the rollout, our testers are users, moderators, longtime redditors, and organizations that have a strong understanding of Reddit and a history of positive engagement. They are selected based on how well how they engage with redditors and there is no financial aspect to our initial partnerships. We are only working with companies that understand Reddit and want to engage our users authentic conversations and not use it as another promotional platform.

We’re specifically testing this with Riot Games because of how well they participate in r/LeagueOfLegends and demonstrated a deep understanding of how we expect companies to engage on Reddit. Their interactions in the past have been honest, thoughtful, and collaborative. We believe their direct participation will add more great discussions to Reddit and demonstrate a new better way for brands and companies to converse with their fans.

Q: What kinds of users will be allowed to create these kinds of profiles? Is this product limited to high-profile individuals and companies?

A: Our goal is to make this feature accessible to everyone in the Reddit community. The ability to post to profile and build a following is intended to enhance the experience of Reddit users everywhere — therefore, we want the community to provide feedback on how the launch is implemented. This product can’t succeed without being useful for redditors of every type. We will reach out to you for feedback in the r/beta community as we grow and test this new product.

Q: Will this change take away conversations and subscribers from existing communities?

A: We believe the value of the Reddit experience comes from two different but related places: engaging in communities and engaging with people. Providing a platform for content creators to more easily post and engage on Reddit should spur more interesting conversations everywhere, not just within their profile. We’re also testing a new feature called “Active in these Communities” on the tester’s profile page to encourage redditors to discover and engage with more communities.

Q: Are you worried about giving individual users too much power on Reddit?

A: This is one reason that we’re being so careful about how we’re testing this feature — we want to make sure no single user becomes so powerful that it overpowers the conversation on Reddit. We will specifically look to the community for feedback in r/beta as the product develops and we onboard more users.

Q: The new profile interface looks very similar to the communities interface, what’s the difference between the two?

A: Communities are the interest hubs of Reddit, where passionate redditors congregate around a subject area or hobby they share a particular interest in. Content posted to a profile page is the voice of a single user.

Q: What about the existing “friends” feature?

A: We’re not making any changes to the existing “friends” feature or r/friends.

Q: Will Reddit prevent users with a history of harassment from creating one of these profiles?

A: Content policy violations will likely impact a user's ability to create an updated profile page and use the feature. We don’t want this new platform to be used as a vehicle for harassment or hate.

Q: I’m really opposed to the idea and I think you should reconsider. What if you’re wrong?

A: We don’t have all of the answers right now and that’s why we’re testing this with a small group of alpha users. As with any test, we’re going to learn a lot along the way. We may find that our initial hypothesis is wrong or you may be pleasantly surprised. We won’t know until we try and put this front of our users. Either way, the alpha product you see today will evolve and change based on feedback.

Q: How do I participate in this beta?

A: We’ll be directly reaching out to redditors we think will be a great fit. We’re also taking direct applications via this survey or you can nominate a fellow redditor via this survey.|||

Hi Reddit! Reddit is the home to the most amazing content creators on the internet. Together, we create a place for artists, writers,...