“People are making millions in passive income with online courses.”

If you’re reading this report, you’ve probably heard these statements before.

If you haven’t, you should know that there is a new type of online entrepreneur. One that has achieved incredibly high levels of success within a short period of time. These entrepreneurs are making five to seven figures a year teaching others every kind of skill, from English as a second language, to mobile app development, to how to fly a drone.

But how do successful online teachers do it? What steps should you actually take to teach online courses that earn you a full-time income?

As of February 2017, over 100,000 online schools hosted on Teachable have collectively made over $36 million in course sales. So we thought we’d look into our data to learn exactly what steps are necessary to create a successful online course.

We’ve put together the most comprehensive, in-depth report available on how to teach online by analyzing data on the most prolific online teachers in our platform in terms of both revenue and number of students.

This report will give you:

On to the good stuff.

For this report, we did two important things: (1) compiled data from more than 100,000 online schools using Teachable, and (2) grabbed a sample of our top performers (we call them our “top schools”) to run a deeper analysis.

Top schools are those whose sales make up 80% of all of the revenue generated by Teachable schools since the company started in late 2013.

This allowed us to find out how the best instructors in the world make a living from teaching online, and present it to you.

Data says that our most successful instructors here at Teachable are very successful. If you are still not sure that you want to teach online, these high points might change your mind:

Note: Copy the code above to embed this infographic in your site!

It’s safe to say these instructors know what they’re doing.

What does success look like? What numbers should you aim at if you want to teach successful online courses?

If you want to join the elite group of top schools, this is what your goals should look like:

To get started, let’s look at how much money is made by top schools. We grouped schools in terms of total revenue generated since their creation.

The largest group of schools (39.4%) has made between $25,000 and $50,000. It might surprise some people that the highest level of success was not confined to a small group of people–the second largest group is composed of schools that have sold over $75,000 in online courses.

Why does this happen?

As many experienced entrepreneurs will tell you, it’s much harder to get your first five customers than it is to get Customer Number 1,000. Once your course has been validated by early adopters, it will be easier to identify pain points, figure out acquisition channels, and improve your product–all to attract a larger audience.

At this point, you might be saying:

“I can’t even imagine hitting these numbers. Isn’t it crazy for me to set such high goals?”

You might be right...but only if you’re talking about immediate goals. Here’s why:

Our top schools are just 15 months old on average. Moreover, the difference between a school that makes $25,000 and one that earns over $75,000 is just three months on average. In other words, you shouldn’t expect to wait many years for your course to become highly profitable.

The next question we asked was this: how many students should be enrolled in an online school to reach these levels of revenue?

More than half (55%) of the schools in the sample have fewer than 1,000 students enrolled in total. (These include students enrolled in free courses, but we’ll talk about that later.) Also, 36.2% of those schools have less than 500 enrolled students.

A few hundred customers sounds far more attainable than thousands of customers, right?

It’s all about focusing on a specific niche, but we’ll let one of our most successful instructors explain.

By now, if you’re familiar with course marketplaces, you might be thinking:

“Online teachers in this report must be course-creation machines. I don’t have that much time to invest in creating dozens of courses.”

It's true that most marketplace instructors tend to grow their businesses by launching scads of new courses during the year (which is a completely valid way to grow revenue). However, that’s not the case with most of our top schools.

More than half (51.2%) of top Teachable schools have between one and five courses in total. Plus, if you had any doubts about the success level of this group, it generates 44.9% of all sales from top schools.

Online courses are the prime example of monetizable evergreen content.

Evergreen content remains relevant and valuable even as time passes.

For example, online courses on “How to learn watercolor lettering” or “How to become a card magician” can potentially attract students regardless of the year or season.

The previous chapter proved that financial success with online courses is not only possible these days, but truly accessible.

If you’re excited to get started and thinking:

“How can I do this myself?”

This chapter will show you exactly how the top schools on Teachable sell their courses.

One of the hardest things to do when you’re just getting started is to set goals.

How many enrollments per month should you set as a goal? How much monthly revenue should you aim to get?

These are the numbers our top schools are reaching for revenue creation.

As shown by the charts above, most top schools make up to $5,000 per month (64.1%) and enroll 100 or fewer students per month (61.8%).

Question: Why is this important?

Answer: It allows new online teachers to determine growth goals in the short term.

Setting monthly goals allows you to prioritize and focus all of your efforts on reaching milestones that will build up to long-term success.

For example, let’s say you usually email limited-time coupons to potential students to purchase your course, and you get 10% of recipients to purchase. Next, if you want to add 50 new students per month, you should research ways to add 500 new people to your email list each month. Determine what you can do to grow your email list by 500 every month, and focus on that.

Check out what one of our top instructors said about the channel where she chose to focus.

One of the most important reasons why the best online teachers in the world choose to host their own courses is this idea of having complete control over their businesses.

Specifically, these teachers want the freedom to define the amount they charge for their content.

Not surprisingly, most of our top schools have premium-priced courses, with an average price per course of $177. Furthermore, if a weighted average is calculated based on revenue generated (hence increasing the importance of schools that make more money) the average price rises even higher - to $187 per course.

This is how Teachable’s top schools price their courses:

Even though the course prices are somewhat evenly distributed, the smallest group charges $50 or less.

It’s also worth noting that these are average selling prices, which means that the listed prices are actually higher, but you’ll understand this when we discuss coupons.

Moreover, when we analyzed the amount of revenue and transactions that were generated by each price group, this is what we found:

The majority (58.2%) of the revenue generated by top schools came from courses priced above $100, and these schools only needed to process 12.6% of the total number of transactions.

At Teachable, we’ve always told our instructors to use premium pricing for a number of reasons:

One of the most common tactics, used by top instructors to get potential students to purchase their courses, is to run promotions by offering coupons.

Almost every school (93.5%) uses coupons to sell its online courses.

For the same reason people collectively spend billions of dollars on Black Friday:

Premium pricing allows online teachers to set a high value on their course (a strategy called price anchoring), and promotions make it harder for potential students to resist the opportunity to get a high-value course for a special price.

But just how much of their sales happen because of discounts?

Most top schools (61.6%) used coupons on less than half of their total number of transactions, and the largest group (36.5%) used coupons on fewer than a quarter of their transactions.

In other words, most online teachers sold their courses at full price on a majority of occasions.

Even more interesting is the average selling price for these groups.

Schools that use coupons in less than 25% of their transactions, and those that use coupons in more than 75% of transactions, have very similar average selling prices.

These numeric indicators show that even if schools rely heavily on discounted prices, that does not necessarily translate to lower selling prices. Schools that process over 75% of their transactions with coupons are either setting higher list prices as anchors before discounting their courses, or offering discounts at a lower percentage (for example, offering a 10% discount instead of a 25% discount).

This is how one of our top instructors thinks about promotions:

At Teachable, we’ve found that an excellent way to grow an audience and get people to purchase a premium-priced course is to offer them a free mini-course first.

So we asked ourselves:

How many of our top schools offer free courses? How do they perform compared with schools that don’t?

Numbers are pretty evenly distributed. About half of the top schools (48.8%) have published free courses, and those same schools have generated about half (50.7%) of the total revenue.

However, when we assessed the numbers of student enrollment for these two groups, the results looked differently.

Schools offering free courses concentrated the large majority (87.4%) of students among the total population of students in our top schools.

As expected, some schools choose to use free courses as a method to attract massive numbers of people who are interested in their content, to whom they can upsell at a later time.

However, this doesn’t restrict other schools from marketing their courses to large audiences.

Schools that don’t offer free courses already have other methods of attracting potential customers: content upgrades, blog posts, YouTube videos, etc. The only difference is that, instead of free students, their potential customers are in the form of YouTube subscribers, Facebook group members, social media followers, podcast listeners, email subscribers...the list goes on and on.

For those schools offering free courses, we wanted to find out the rate at which free students were converted into paying customers.

It turns out these schools do very well at conversions.

Even though a large group of schools has a percentage of paying students under 25%, the majority of schools (51.6%) with free courses convert users to paid courses at a rate above 25%.

To provide a benchmark, the highest average email click-through rate reported by MailChimp across 46 industries is 5.1%—and that’s not even a monetary transaction, just a click. If non-paying students convert to paying students at a rate of 25%, that blows the industry standard out of the water.

Free courses are a great (if not the greatest) way to start a customer acquisition funnel.

Now, how will you decide on the amount of your content that will be made available for free? Let’s take a look at how these online schools balance out their paid and free offerings.

Most schools that list free courses (77.1%) show an average rate of up to 10 paid courses per free course, with a large group (51.2%) showing only 5 paid courses per free one. The revenue generated by this group is also proportional to its size (78.6% of all top schools.)

Of course, this result is skewed by the fact that, as we saw in the first chapter, most of our top schools list fewer than 10 courses. But it still gives us a sense of the distribution of free versus Paid courses in a single school.

We’ve covered how the best online teachers in the world sell their courses.

So, by now, you’re probably wondering:

“But what about the courses themselves?”

Of course, none of these schools would have been this successful with just the right pricing and goals.

These courses sell well because the content is superb.

This chapter will cover the how these schools teach online and provide a superior learning experience to their students.

This is a question we get asked continually:

“How long should my course be?”

Many new online teachers believe they have to create a massive course curriculum to charge a premium price.

This is the number of lectures shown by our top schools' courses.

Note: Teachable schools denote each lesson in their online courses by lectures. A lecture is a structured unit of information made up of text, files, video, images, and/or quizzes. The curriculum in an online course is composed of a series of these lectures.

Most of our top schools (73.2%) hold an average of 11 to 50 lectures per course. Moreover, that group is more or less evenly distributed above and below 25 lectures per course.

Do schools with longer courses make more money?

Over 90% of the revenue generated by Teachable’s top schools corresponds to those with fewer than 50 lectures per course on average, with 52% of the total revenue associated with schools showing fewer than 25 lectures per course.

The best online teachers understand something about this industry–that the value of their courses is determined by their ability to compress years of experience into programs that will allow students to learn a skill within a short time frame.

Next, we looked at the difference in length between paid and free courses.

While paid courses have a similar distribution to the one we just saw (which makes sense considering that there are significantly more paid than free courses), the free courses are clearly shorter in length, with more than half of them (58.4%) containing 10 lectures or less.

This section has a twofold bit of advice:

In just a few years, video has become the trending content format across the web.

Just think about it:

Facebook is overrun with short news clips, more and more companies are hosting webinars, and YouTube is currently the second largest search engine in the world.

Online courses are not the exception—students like video.

Almost 96% of all of our top schools use video on their courses.

There is a simple reason behind this.

People are more willing to pay for a course that is engaging and easy to consume, and that is what video offers.

Moreover, our best online teachers are exceptionally good at delighting their students.

Example: The average completion rate for Teachable’s top schools is 20.4%. That’s 410% higher than the average completion rate for massive open online courses (MOOCs.)

Note: We don’t believe in completion rates as a measure of the effectiveness of online learning. (For example, an online course with a completion rate of 10% can be incredibly valuable to its students, for reasons we explained in our post about the relation between success rates and completion rates). Nevertheless, for this report, we are using relative differences between completion rates as a measure of engagement.

This is how top schools use video:

A majority of schools (54.9%) use video in more than half of their lectures. Yet, hardly any schools use videos in all of their lectures.

If you’re camera-shy or believe it would take too long to produce video for your school, this is good news.

The best online schools use a mixture of formats to deliver content: text, slides, images, downloadable worksheets, etc.

How many hours of video are necessary to create an outstanding online course?

Most top schools that use video (65.6%) upload a total average of five hours or fewer of video to their courses.

These numbers are further proof that you don’t need to create lengthy online courses to either:

Now, what is the length of the videos clips uploaded by these schools?

Most online video experts agree that shorter videos are conducive to a higher engagement rate.

The same holds true for online courses, as our data shows.

66.7% of Teachable’s top schools upload videos that are under 10 minutes in length.

Using short video lectures allows online teachers to:

Our best instructors are great at delivering high-quality video content, but that is not always how they got started:

When I started recording painting videos on YouTube back in 2012, I never dreamed that through this first step I'd be building a career as a watercolour instructor, with thousands of students all over the world enrolled in my courses on Teachable. My first videos were TERRIBLE. Cheap camera, awkward camera angle, and an internet connection so poor I had to stay up til midnight just to get enough bandwidth to upload! My children were toddlers, and I tried to film during naps, although you can hear them playing in the background of some of the videos (their favourite game was screaming!). I didn't have a big objective, other than an inner urge to share what I was learning: my light bulb moments. I had no idea that how I was sharing my insights would resonate with viewers. I think that inner urge is my teacher's heart, and online teaching has fulfilled me in so many wonderful ways. Yet, I think sometimes it's more intimidating to share my videos now that I have a big audience than it was as when I was unknown. Knowing that many people will view my videos makes the responsibility greater, and the number of critics higher. The likelihood that someone will challenge my words can feel like a burden, but the amazing supportive community of students has far outweighed the critics, and this sense of community is what I love most about teaching online. My advice to anyone looking to get started is to be genuine; your brand is built on YOU, and there are people who are going to connect with your personality and method of delivery - believe that, and give your tribe the access to you that they need to build trust. It's not about one video, one sale, one course; it's about YOU, giving what you have and trusting that there is a place for you and that someone will hear your voice amid all the noise. Keep focused on your goals, don't get distracted by all the conflicting advice out there. Think of what YOU would want, if you were your own customer, and make meeting those needs and communicating them clearly your first priority.”

When you think about traditional education, tests probably spring to mind.

We wanted to find out how this translated into the area of online education among our top schools.

Fewer than 20% of schools in the sample use quizzes within their courses.

The main reason why this happens is because Teachable schools do not tend to follow traditional classroom models. They cover topics such as self-publishing or card magic, that don’t require testing to assess learning.

Moreover, online schools that use quizzes don't tend to use them for the same reason as traditional educators. Since online courses often aren’t attached to grades in online courses, instructors tend to use quizzes as a tool to keep students engaged and provide a more interactive experience.

As a result, schools with quizzes were 43% more engaging than schools without quizzes (based on relative course completion rates.)

To get this effect, schools don’t really need to constantly quiz students.

The majority of schools that use quizzes (56.3%) only place them in 5% or less of all the lectures in their courses, or about once every 20 lectures.

Online courses are a great way to build a community around your business.

Some people say, “online education is too impersonal,” but we see our best schools foster communities of thousands with whom they interact on a daily basis.

They just don’t do it in a traditional classroom environment. The best online instructors in the world have huge Facebook groups, Slack communities, social followings, etc. In these spaces, their students can not only reach them but also interact amongst themselves.

Another great way to establish a line of communication with students and spark discussions between them is to use forums within online courses.

For the 22.1% of schools that use forums, the engagement rate on their courses was 21.6% higher than for those schools that don’t use forums (again, based on relative completion rates.)

Moreover, discussion forums are used more frequently across the course’s lectures than quizzes.

Discussion forums appear every two lectures or fewer for 40.6% of the schools that implemented them.

One of the core beliefs that Teachable was built around and that we continue to grow is this idea:

“The most successful online teachers of the future will be entrepreneurs, because entrepreneurs are the most motivated people in the world.”

The data we used to create this report gives us confidence that we were right in believing this and hope that it will inspire you to start or grow your online teaching business.

These are our main takeaways from the analysis:

Convinced? Excited? Found this useful, or not at all? Let us know in the comments!

Thanks to our amazing instructors (all thousands of them) for making it possible for us to compile all of this information.

And a special shoutout to those who contributed to this report, in order of appearance:|||

The most comprehensive and in-depth report ever created on how to teach online by analyzing data from the most prolific online teachers across 100k+ schools.