I'm sorry; your browser doesn't support HTML5 video in WebM with VP8/VP9 or MP4 with H.264.

After signing up you can login to your dashboard and click the menu item 'integrations'. There, you can click on the 'Add to Slack' button and then follow the onscreen instructions.

TWO NEW HIRES ARE ON US

Luckily, ordering tasks and spreading them over the next days / weeks is easy. Onboardingbot will update your new hires every day at 8 AM with the tasks they need to complete that day.

Yeah, it happens a lot. People forget about meetings. Onboardingbot will make sure you never miss a meeting again.

If your new hire cannot find the answer in the resources then they can get in touch with the person they need. They can pull up the contact information from the people that they can reach out to.

Lack of instruction is a real problem within every company. Remember when your new hire made mistakes that could have been avoided with proper instruction? Yup, that's what I am talking about.

Can I use this bot without the website?

Short answer: no You will need to setup tasks, resources, appointments etc through our website. You cannot create those through Slack. Once you have done this you can leave the website for what it is and onboard your new hires through the app. We have seen cases that people used our app for months without the need of having to login to our website.

Do I need to create an account in order to use this?

Yes, you do. You can signup through here

This looks awesome, but can I try it before I buy it?

Yes, absolutely. We have a free package that lets you onboard two new hires. This package doesn't expire. Once you have onboarded two people, you will have to buy more spots through one of our two packages.

How should I do... ?

For all other questions, please email us at [email protected]. We answer most emails within 6 hours. You could also hop in our chat when we are online.|||

ChiefOnboarding build in Slack. Get an even more awesome experience and onboard your new hires quicker.