standard is now fully supported in Chrome, making it simpler to work with large data sets in the browser. IDB 2.0 features new schema management, bulk action methods, and more standardized handling of failures.

The structure of a site’s database has large performance impacts and can be difficult to change. To simplify updates, can now be renamed in-place after a refactoring. Sites can also use more natural keys without worrying about a performance penalty thanks to , which allow compact representations for custom keys.

Data retrieval is easier with the methods, which also provide better performance when only a database key is needed. The new cursor method makes it easier to divide large data access across transactions and page loads without worrying about duplicate primary keys. The methods allow bulk recovery of entire datasets without the need for a cursor.

Third-party content, such as advertising, that automatically redirects the page can annoy users and create security issues. Because of this, developers are able to put third-party content inside sandboxed to prevent this behavior. However, in some cases this type of content needs to navigate the top-level page when clicked, like a standard advertisement. 

 To address this, Chrome 58 now supports the new the ability to navigate the top-level page when triggered by user interaction, while still blocking auto-redirects.

(PWAs) are launched from the Android Home screen, they launch in a standalone app-like mode that hides the . This helps create an engaging user experience, and frees up screen space for content. However, for even more immersive experiences like games, video players, or other rich content, other mobile UI elements such as can still be a distraction.

A PWA launched from the home screen (left), launched from the home screen in mode (middle), and launched from the home screen in

have been deprecated as they are non-standard CSS classes. attributes now use case-sensitive matching rather than to better align with spec. Sites must now use HTTPS when requesting notification permissions or creating non-persistent local notifications with the To better align with spec, is now considered an alias to when set to true, and does not do anything when set to false. , have been removed from the spec and are therefore being removed from Chrome. URLs have been deprecated to further protect users from spoofing and phishing attempts.   can no longer be called as a function, since the legacy caller has been removed. Pre-standard ChaCha20-Poly1305 ciphers have been removed following the standardization of these algorithms at the , and the subsequent shipping of the standard versions in Chrome 41. now ignores an additional range if it overlaps with an existing range, rather than merging the two ranges.   ure origins has been deprecated per Chrome's around powerful features and in compliance with the spec. argument, simplifying the interface and emphasizing that has been deprecated in service workers, as the service worker spec requires all types of synchronous requests to be initiated outside of a service worker. elements now have a dotted underline by default to align with the HTML standard. CSS properties have been removed in favor of the new versions: when it would have thrown an Rather than silently clamping offset values that were too large, the to better align with spec. Rather than silently failing for to better align with spec. To better align with spec, interface has been removed as it was not part of the WebAudio spec. attribute has been removed as it was not widely adopted.|||

