AI, Machine Learning and Deep Learning what Is the difference? These words have firmly worked their way into business language when the conversation is about Artificial Intelligence (AI), Big Data and Analytics. Most of those professionals aren’t still by the way able to distinguish and define them because there is not already a widely agreed vocabulary; everybody uses the above terms (and other associated terms) differently. In addition, the commonly understood meaning of some of these terms has evolved over time.

Parallelly, we have also seen the emergence of systems such as IBM Watson, Google’s Tensorflow, and conversational assistants such as Apple’s Siri, Google Now and Microsoft’s Cortana which all use different methods to act intelligently. Mixed into all the crosstalks around, they have just brought one thing: noise.

This is the first of three articles aimed at putting a light on these concepts and tidying up the confusion media have brought during these years.

When Google DeepMind’s AlphaGo program defeated South Korean Master Lee Se-dol in the board game Go last year, the terms AI, machine learning, and deep learning were used in the media to describe how DeepMind won. And all three are part of the reason why AlphaGo trounced Lee Se-Dol. They are not quite the same thing but, the perception that they are, can sometimes lead to some confusion.



The easiest way to think of their relationship is to visualize them as a set of Russian dolls nested within each other, beginning with the smallest and working out. Thus, deep learning can be roughly thought as a subset of machine learning, which becomes a subset of AI.

Let’s walk through how computer scientists have moved from something of a bust — until 2012 — to a boom that has unleashed applications used by hundreds of millions of people every day. 



When we speak of artificial intelligence we refer to all those initiatives and efforts to create machines that behave intelligently. Back in the summer of ’56 , a fair number of computer scientists dreamed of a complex machine — enabled by emerging computers — that possessed the same characteristics of human intelligence. This is the concept we think of as “General AI” where those fabulous machines have all our senses (maybe even more) and think just like we do.

As technology, and our understanding of how our minds work, has progressed, the concept of what constitutes AI has changed. Rather than increasingly complex calculations, work in the field of AI concentrated on mimicking human decision making processes and carrying out tasks in ever more human ways.

Nowadays, new terms like weak (or narrow) AI and strong AI entered the Artificial Intelligence arena. We will explore them in depth in the next articles but, these terms depict in short whether the system applies the intelligence in general or in very specific tasks.Machine Learning —  How to Achieve Artificial IntelligenceMachine Learning is a current application of AI based around the idea that we should really just give machines access to data and let them learn for themselves.The phrase “machine learning” dates back to the middle of the last century where Arthur Samuel in 1959 defined machine learning as “the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed.” The emergence of the internet helped the software engineering to pursue this theory, rather than teaching computers and machines how to do everything. Thus, the internet becomes the source of all the information in the world at any time while machines use algorithms to parse data, learn from it, and then make a determination or prediction about something in the world.

Deep Learning is a new area of Machine Learning research, which has been introduced with the objective of moving Machine Learning closer to Artificial Intelligence.

It relates to study of “deep neural networks” in the human brain and, under this perspective, the deep learning tries to emulate the functions of inner layers of the human brain, creating knowledge from multiple layers of information processing. Since the Deep Learning technology is modeled after the human brain, each time new data is poured in, its capabilities get better.

Under the deep learning paradigm, essentially the machine is “trained” using large amounts of data and algorithms to give it the ability to learn how to perform the task. This data is fed through neural networks which ask a series of binary true/false questions or numerical values, of every bit of data which pass through them, and classify it according to the answers received.

Today, image recognition by machines trained via deep learning, in some scenarios is better than humans, and that ranges from cats to identifying indicators for cancer in blood and tumors in MRI scans. Back to some lines ago, Google’s AlphaGo learned the game, and trained for its Go match —  it tuned its neural network —  by playing against itself over and over and over. 



In the reality, deep learning, machine learning, and AI are still far from being really intelligent; artificial neural networks still need a human being to make them start learning. Even more, they have discrete layers, connections, and directions of data propagation that set them apart from real brains.

During the past years however, artificial intelligence has moved fastly from science fiction to scientific facts. Google AI recognizes voices and images, Netflix and Amazon decide what you want to watch or buy next, The IBM supercomputer Watson is now predicting patient outcomes more accurately than physicians whereas, MIT researchers are trying to predict the future.

Did you like this article? Want to know more regarding the difference between AI, machine learning, and deep learning?

Stay tuned because we are going to explore soon the concepts, the techniques, and the experiments that big or small companies are running in front of our eyes. AI has a bright future for sure!|||

AI, Machine Learning and Deep Learning what Is the difference? AI, Machine Learning and Deep Learning what Is the difference? These words have firmly worked their way into business language when the...