BEST is an Master IPC Certification  and Solder Training Center offering Instructor and Operator courses for IPC-A-610, IPC J-STD-001, IPC-A-600, IPC/WHMA-A-620, and IPC 7711/7721 as well as customized classes to meet your specific standard or criteria for solder certification. Our IPC Training Division employs some of the most experienced soldering instructors in the industry. We offer customized classes for SMT, Advanced SMT, and BGA Rework classes on site at your facility or at our headquarters near Chicago, Illinois. We also have a Mobile Training Center that contains all the materials for the solder certification training. All classes are taught by certified instructors who not only know the material, but have also performed the soldering techniques thousands of times on our customer's boards to prove their "real life" effectiveness and reliability.

Mobile Training CenterBEST has performed IPC Certification and Custom Solder Training Courses for customers throughout the United States such as Motorola, Nokia, IBM, Solectron, Flextronics, Erricson, Tellabs, Plexus, 3COM, GE Medical, Siemens, Sanmina, Rockwell, Northrop, and mangy more.



BEST is a leader in IPC training technology. BEST has trained thousands of soldering technicians with a long list of satisfied customers. Whether you send one student or one hundred to our solder training, we take the time to determine what you want from the training experience, and then deliver it. BEST has developed courses that emphasize "hands-on" work, and students are evaluated on the quality of that work. BEST is the only IPC Certification Center to offer the Mobile Training Center...a fully equipped, mobile soldering lab available at your door to teach the latest IPC standards and techniques. BEST brings the soldering training classroom to you!

We're glad you asked, because we're proud of what people that we have trained are saying about us...



Click the image!We're better...at providing solder training in the format you need; at our facility, your facility, or using our Mobile Training Center. In fact, we are the only training center who can bring the entire solder training experience to you. The BEST Mobile Training Center is a cost-effective way to have practical, comfortable solder certification and training at your site using modern tools while not being directly inside the plant.

We're better...at providing more practically-oriented soldering instructors. Both our full time solder instructors and trainers are not just "book learned", they have practical experience as well. This experience has been gained by working on rework/repair projects at BEST as part of the rework/repair division. They have worked on hundreds of different projects, giving them a vast experience base to draw upon. In addition, BEST instructors have worked at either OEMS or contract manufacturers, meaning they can speak your language and bring practical examples into their solder certification instruction. We're better...at making sure that our solder instructors can follow US DoD protocols, whether that be on a base, a ship, or at a contractor's location. We have military-trained 2M instructors that know the materials. We're better...at providing a variety of options for delivering solder certification and wire harness training services, including having Spanish-speaking master trainers available. For high quality training and equipment, there is only one that is BEST|||

BEST offer IPC Certification and Solder Training Courses throughout the United States. We also offer Instructor and Operator courses for IPC-A-610, IPC J-STD-001,IPC/WHMA-A-620 etc.