You’re just getting started with influencer marketing, and you have a lot to learn. Or maybe you’re already familiar with it, but you still want to improve your tactics.

While influencer marketing may be complicated, you don’t necessarily have to take a class to get better at it. You just need to find and use the right resources to guide you through the various aspects of an influencer marketing campaign.

In this post, I’ve compiled 10 of the best resources to help you become better at influencer marketing. Check them out:

If you’re new to influencer marketing, there’s probably a lot you don’t know yet. So you’ll need a comprehensive guide to help you gain a better understanding of this powerful marketing channel.

That’s why Hootsuite’s, “Influencer Marketing 101,” would be perfect for you. In this guide, you will learn all about the biggest mistake you should avoid when launching an influencer marketing campaign. It will teach you how to focus more on the target audience, instead of only on the influencers.

The guide also takes you through the process of identifying the right influencers to work with. And finally, you’ll also find out how to measure the ROI of the campaign.

Overall, “Influencer Marketing 101,” is just what you need when you’re launching your very first influencer marketing campaign. It teaches the basics of influencer marketing in ways that even the most novice marketers can understand.

Like every marketing channel, influencer marketing evolves every year. The channel was a huge trend in 2016, and practically every marketer was vouching for it. But with more and more brands jumping on the bandwagon, you’ll need to make some adjustments in order to make it work for you in 2017.

That’s why the, “10 Influencer Marketing Predictions for 2017,” from TapInfluence is such a valuable resource.

The TapInfluence team carefully observed the influencer marketing landscape and its evolution in 2016. Based on their findings, they have come up with an infographic showcasing the 10 most important predictions you need to watch out for this year.

For example, micro-influencers will play a bigger role, and there will be more focus on the audience than on the influencer.

You can adjust and recreate your influencer marketing campaigns based on these predictions.

While, “Influencer Marketing 101,” covered the basics of influencer marketing, there’s still a lot you need to learn. For instance, you might not yet know how to come up with an effective strategy to pull off your campaign. Or you might be unable to yield the desired results from your outreach efforts. Whatever the case may be, Insightpool’s, “Master Influencer Marketing Done Right,” can help you out.

The ebook is part of Insightpool’s Age of Influence Series, which in itself is also a valuable influencer marketing resource. The tips in this book are a little more advanced than basic influencer marketing. It provides you with a guide to creating your influencer marketing plan, and engaging influencers more effectively.

It also gives you insights into how you can earn your influence instead of just paying for it. The goal of this ebook is to help you understand influencer marketing for the long run. So it covers a number of aspects to help you optimize your existing influencer marketing campaigns.

For an influencer marketing campaign to be successful, you first need to convince influencers to work with you. It’s important to remember that influencers aren’t just another advertising tool, even if you pay them to promote your brand.

You have to make them want to work with you, so you have a genuine relationship with them, and your campaign becomes more authentic. This is where IZEA’s guide on, “How to Get Creators to Want Your Social Sponsorship,” enters the picture.

This ebook helps you understand how leveraging your brand name will help you attract better influencers. It will guide you through the process of making your brand more inviting to work with for influencers.

It talks about how your brand reputation can affect an influencer’s reputation, which could affect their desire to work with you. You will also learn all about creative freedom and its impact on the quality of your influencer’s content.

Sometimes, the best way to learn is by example. Even with influencer marketing, you can learn a lot from brands that have already implemented it into their strategy and succeeded.

Based on these examples, you can understand what works, and what doesn’t. And you could even develop some ideas for how to execute your next influencer marketing campaign.

You can find some excellent examples of influencer marketing in the collection of case studies from HYPR.

The HYPR case study collection can give you actionable insights into how you can use influencer marketing to boost your sales. For instance, one of the case studies is about a brand that managed to increase sales by 200% with the help of brand advocacy groups. You could take a closer look at what worked for this brand, and how you can experience similar (or better) outcomes with your own campaign.

You may already be familiar with influencer marketing, and have launched several campaigns that proved to be successful. But you still want to take it further, and drive even better results from your next influencer marketing campaign.

If that’s the case, you can learn a lot from, “Influence 2.0,” an in-depth study conducted by TopRank Marketing and Traackr. The report is a result of a survey of 102 brand leaders from reputable companies such as American Express, Adobe, and Amazon Web Services.

The report provides you with a comprehensive insight into the future of influencer marketing. Through, “Influence 2.0,” you’ll discover new ways to align your strategic content with influencer engagement. You’ll learn how to reshape your customer journey to yield more productive results from impressions and behaviors. You’ll also gain a better understanding of what influences customers’ decisions, and how to integrate this knowledge into your own campaigns.

“Influence 2.0,” also covers the budget and resources aspect, helping you make a better strategic investment. And it provides you with a step-by-step guide on how to implement the strategies covered in the report.

What’s more is that the report provides readers with examples of, “Influence 2.0,” in action, wherein companies or brands have successfully implemented the strategies for their benefit. So you’ll be able to gain thorough insight into how you can advance your influencer marketing game plan.

As mentioned earlier, influencer marketing is constantly evolving. So naturally, there will be new insights every now and then. If you plan on advancing your influencer marketing efforts, you need to stay updated with those insights.

Maybe it’s an insight about generating greater ROI through long-term influencer collaborations, or how authentic partnerships can be the key to your success. You can find all of these insights on the, “Influence Pros,” podcast by Convince and Convert.

“Influence Pros,” is a weekly show where you can get regular updates on the latest success stories and tips to help you boost your influencer marketing ROI. You’ll get fresh and actionable tips that will help you adapt to the changes in influencer marketing.

And you can find out how to improve on your current strategies – whether it’s building trust and lasting relationships with influencers, or developing your core values before working with an influencer.

If you’re a marketer, you already know the importance of content marketing, and its role in promoting a business. It’s also important to note that influencer marketing and content marketing can be blended together to create a highly effective marketing campaign.

To better understand the developments in these two channels, you can read up on IZEA’s, “2017 State of the Creator Economy.”

This study helps you gain a better understanding of influencers’ perspectives on influencer and content marketing. You can find out useful insights, such as the platforms content creators are leaning towards, and how you can use this for your benefit.

You’ll also understand the perspectives of influencers and marketers on various marketing approaches. And find out which techniques seem to win the majority vote. The study also determines the overall usage of various social media platforms by U.S. consumers.

You can use all of these insights to change or optimize your influencer marketing strategies.

Brands choose influencer marketing because it’s likely to be less promotional and more authentic than traditional advertising. At the same time, many brands tend to overlook the fine print because they’re trying too hard to take the soft-selling approach.

For example, a brand sends out samples of a product to an influencer, and additionally pays them to promote the product. The influencer promotes the product on social media but fails to mention that the post is sponsored by the brand.

Failing to disclose sponsorships or incentives in an influencer’s content could land you in serious trouble with the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). So if you need some more information and tips regarding FTC disclosures and sponsorship rules, you can check out a Business Grow article on the topic.

The article illustrates the danger of failing to heed the FTC guidelines with a real-life example from Lord and Taylor. The brand previously got into trouble with the FTC for sponsoring influencer content in which there was no disclosure about the sponsorship.

And the article further provides you with tips that will help you launch an influencer marketing campaign that’s in-line with the FTC guidelines.

You already know that your relationship with an influencer plays an important role in the success of your influencer marketing campaign. And to build a strong relationship with an influencer, you’ll need to understand them better.

Although influencer marketing has shifted focus from the influencer to the audience, the influencer is still a major aspect you need to understand. To develop that understanding, you can check out the TapInfluence and Altimeter report.

This report is based on an in-depth study of marketers and influencers. You can learn all the basics, like the challenges marketers face with influencer marketing, and how marketers measure ROI. But what’s unique about this report is that it also helps you understand influencers better.

Through this report, you can learn more about influencer marketing from the point of view of an influencer. You can find out how influencers measure the effectiveness of campaigns, and the value of influencer marketing to them. You can also learn what kind of mistakes brands make when working with influencers, so you can avoid those mistakes.

These are some of the most useful resources for improving your influencer marketing strategy. But as a bonus, you can also use the Influencer Marketing Blueprint, which I’ve prepared as an ultimate guide to the channel. In this ebook, you will get a step-by-step guide for executing your influencer marketing campaign. You can find out how to identify, and then select the best influencers to work with.

You’ll also learn a better way to engage with influencers, and build lasting relationships with them. You can even download some ready-made templates for free, which you can use in your outreach emails. This guide also lists some of the best tools you can use for your influencer marketing campaigns.

You now have a complete set of resources to guide your next influencer marketing campaign, and improve your existing strategy. These influencer marketing resources cover pretty much every aspect of influencer marketing. You can learn a great deal from them, whether you’re new to the channel, or you’re an expert in it.

Any questions you have, feel free to ask them in the comments section below. Or you can directly reach out to me, and I can help you upgrade your influencer marketing in ways you can’t even imagine.|||

Need help improving your influencer marketing campaign? Use these 10 influencer marketing resources for actionable ideas and tips on influencer marketing.