The United States and United Kingdom have banned laptops, tablets and other electronic devices in the cabins of some flights from airlines operating in parts of North Africa and the Middle East.

Federal officials, requesting anonymity, said intensifying threats from terrorist groups against commercial airlines and airports prompted the new rules. Officials from the Departments of Homeland Security and Transportation imposed the change, officials said in the conference call.

“Evaluated intelligence indicates that terrorist groups continue to target commercial aviation, to include smuggling explosive devices in various consumer items,” said a DHS fact sheet released Tuesday. “The record of terrorist attempts to destroy aircraft in flight is longstanding and well-known.”

“As you can imagine, I can’t talk about the intelligence that we have,” Spicer told reporters. “I can just tell you that the steps that are being taken are commensurate with the intelligence we have.”

Authorities referred to the recent downings of commercial planes by terrorists and the attack at Istanbul Ataturk Airport that killed 45 people last June in justifying the electronics ban. They declined to say whether they’d uncovered new information that led to the tightened rules.

Canada’s transportation minister, Marc Garneau, said Tuesday that he’s reviewing the electronics bans, but gave no indication of whether such a policy would be adopted by his country’s government.

One security expert said it’s possible the departments behind the ban are concerned with the size of an electronic device rather than how much information is stored on it.

“My assumption would be that if there’s a security basis for the ban, there’s some new means of masking explosives in a device that can’t be detected by X-rays,” Jake Laperruque, senior counsel at The Constitution Project, told The Huffington Post. “I can have a phone that can hold 10 times more information than a laptop. ... This seems to be a ban based on size of a device and implies that it has something to do with hardware and what you can put into hardware.”

The company said that starting March 21, passengers could no longer bring cameras, DVD players and electronic games with their carry-on items and that such items must be checked on flights to and from New York, Chicago, Detroit and Montreal.|||

The airlines have 96 hours to implement the change.