Firstly, take your Philips Hue lights, connect them and turn them on.

Once you have done this the Philips Hue bridge will be able to discover and connect to them.

By default, all Philips Hue starter kits contain a Philips Hue bridge. This is the device that will control all your lights.

When you use your phone to control the Philips Hue lights you are communicating with that bridge and then it will tell lights what to do (change color, turn on/off…)

Connecting the bridge to your network is as easy as taking an ethernet cable and then connect it to your bridge and your router.

Once you have connected your Philips Hue bridge to your router you will see some lights start blinking and turn on:

1 - First light means your bridge is getting power. If this light isn’t  on, make sure your bridge power adapter is plugged in.

2 - Second light means that your Philips Hue bridge is connected to the home network. At the beginning, it will start blinking but it must be fixed. That means it has been successfully connected to the network

3 - The third light means that your Philips Hue has internet connectivity. As the one above it must be fixed meaning it has the internet connection. Internet connection is not necessary if you don’t want to control your lights through the cloud.

4- This is the sync button. You have to press it to allow apps to control your lights. This is a security system to avoid rest of people controlling your lights without permission. If you use Yeti - Smart Home Automation app, it will let you know when you need to press that button.

Open the Philips Hue app. We will use it to connect your lights to your bridge. After this, you can use Yeti - Smart Home Automation to control your lights.

If you have bought a Philips Hue starter kit all lights will be synchronized and connected with the bridge automatically. So that, you don't need even to download the Philips Hue app, you can directly get Yeti and start controlling your lights with it.

In case you buy new lights or the bridge doesn’t recognize all your lights, follow these steps to add the lights to your bridge:

4 - Click on the + button and then search

5 - It will search for your lights automatically. Lights must be turned on

If the app says that there are some lights “unreachable” it means that they are turn off. Please turn them on or you won’t be able to control them through the app.

If the app is not able to find all your lights please go to the common issues section

Now all your lights are connected to your Philips Hue bridge you can use a third party app to control all of them. Check Yeti - Smart Home Automation!|||

This time we will show you all common problems you could have with your Philips Hue and how to solve them. We will also explain how to set up your Philips Hue lights from the beginning.