The VENONA project represents one of the most successful counter-intelligence attacks of the Cold War. It revolved around an encryption system, called the “one-time pad scheme,” that was completely unbreakable, but required generating a new, random encryption key for every message. This was hugely inconvenient, and prone to human error. And error is exactly what happened. Someone on the Soviet side (it is still not known who) began to reuse keys, allowing the decryption of about 3,000 top-secret messages by the west.

The story teaches us that security needs not just strong codes, but an easy-to-use and secure implementation. To this day, attacks rarely break the encryption algorithm (cryptographers have done their job very well!), but usually find ways to avoid it entirely instead, by discovering some unexpected weaknesses in the implementation. The modern computer security age has therefore relied on a reduction of the “cryptographic overhead”—cutting fat from the system and eliminating avenues for unexpected attacks—as much as it has been about codes per se. This has meant inventing new systems, as well as improving existing ones.

In a seminal 1949 paper, Claude Shannon defined the notion of perfect encryption­: It is achieved when an encrypted message, or cipher, becomes entirely independent of the original message. He also defined its cost: The encryption key needs to be at least as long as the message. Encrypting a streaming movie in real-time would require a movie-length key. This suggested that cryptography had a limited future, at least outside of espionage.

Fortunately, cryptographers eventually realized that overhead requirements could be drastically reduced, in exchange for what was, in effect, only a theoretical reduction in security. These reductions came in the form of two reasonable assumptions: An attacker cannot carry out an arbitrarily large number of computations in a given time, and that attacker has a tiny, but non-zero, chance of actually breaking encryption.|||

The VENONA project represents one of the most successful counter-intelligence attacks of the Cold War. It revolved around an encryption…