LAS VEGAS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--At Adobe Summit today, Adobe (Nasdaq:ADBE) unveiled Adobe Experience Cloud, a comprehensive set of cloud services designed to give enterprises everything they need to deliver exceptional customer experiences. Comprised of Adobe Marketing Cloud, Adobe Advertising Cloud and Adobe Analytics Cloud, Experience Cloud is built on the Adobe Cloud Platform, leveraging Adobe Sensei’s machine learning and artificial intelligence capabilities. And because it’s from Adobe, Experience Cloud integrates with Adobe Creative Cloud and Document Cloud.

Digital has disrupted every industry. Massive amounts of data, the proliferation of devices and sky rocketing customer expectations are forcing enterprises to rethink their customer experience: Be personal. Be consistent. Be elegant. Be everywhere. Companies that meet these requirements will forge stronger connections with their customers, resulting in brand loyalty and growth. Forward-looking enterprises already know that a great customer experience is the differentiator that separates market leaders from market laggards. An exceptional experience is the most important step in a long-term relationship with a customer and requires deep intelligence and amazing design.

“At Adobe, we believe experience is the great differentiator, the make-or-break attribute to ignite life-long customer advocacy and growth,” said Brad Rencher, executive vice president and general manager, Digital Marketing, Adobe. “Leveraging deep customer intelligence, Adobe Experience Cloud gives businesses everything they need to deliver a well-designed, personal and consistent experience that delights customers at every touchpoint.”

Built to Work with Creative Cloud and Document Cloud

Adobe’s Creative Cloud is the one-stop shop for a company’s creative needs and Adobe Document Cloud provides the most comprehensive tools for digitizing document workflows. These enterprise offerings are integrated with Adobe Experience Cloud through the Adobe Cloud Platform, Adobe’s engine for cross-cloud integration. Together, these integrated offerings provide brands with everything they need to design and deliver standout experiences. Today’s largest brands, including Coca-Cola, Condé Nast, Hyatt Hotels, Grainger, Major League Baseball, Mastercard, Royal Bank of Scotland and the NBA are cross-cloud customers.

As part of today’s announcement, Adobe revealed several new integrations between Adobe Experience Cloud, Adobe Creative Cloud and Adobe Document Cloud:

Adobe is changing the world through digital experiences. For more information, visit www.adobe.com.

© 2017 Adobe Systems Incorporated. All rights reserved. Adobe and the Adobe logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.|||

LAS VEGAS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--At Adobe Summit today, Adobe (Nasdaq:ADBE) unveiled Adobe Experience Cloud, a comprehensive set of cloud services designed to give enterprises everything they need to deliver exceptional customer experiences.