It has been a month that I didn't blog because I was looking for an awesome open source project on which I could contribute and apply some of my knowledge on both ASP.NET Core and .NET Core. First, I went to github and did a lot of research about CMS projets built on asp.net core.

Among my criteria, the project which I'm looking for should be freshly started that I can easily embrace it. Fortunately, I find SimplCommerce! You can see code here :

You can chat with the developers of SimplCommerce in the gitter channel :

The technologies that are used to build it include:

SimplCommerce is cross-platform (Windows, Mac and Linux) and available on docker (simplcommerce/nightly-build).



 which I suggest to present you in this blog post that I hope make other developers eager to learn by doing ASP.NET Core have also their chance to fork it and hack it.

The first screenshot shows the categories of products. The end user can easily search for any product of the catalog. He can specify searching in all categories or among a specific category. 



SimplCommerce supports now 4 languages : English, French, Portuguese and Vetnamese. We need the help of the community to add more and more languages to the project.

Here below you can see the full description of the selected product. 



The following picture shows the result of searching all the products that contain the word "Samsung" among all the available categories. 



In the latest products widget, the visitor of the Web site can purchase by clicking on "Add to cart" of the chosen product in order to place it in his shopping cart. 



You can navigate to the shopping cart view to process to checkout. 



It is very straightforward to manage the product list. 



The catalog is organized through a list of categories. Category List view shows how to create a new category. 



Page List view represents the CMS feature of SimplCommerce where you can personalize the front-end. 



Widget Instance List view is where we create our widgets for instance : Home Carousel, Lastest Products and Administration. These widgets are used to compose the GUI of the front-end. 

 

 Let me know what you think!|||

