Many experts are calling foul play on the recent security announcement banning large electronics on flights from ten airports in the Middle East.

"This electronics ban is absurd," says Gary Leff, aviation industry expert and founder of View from the Wing. "If there were an imminent threat it would apply immediately, and to all flights to the United States. Anyone originating in Dubai could connect elsewhere - Europe, Cape Verde, Uzbekistan - and carry electronics on a flight to the United States."

The ban - which prohibits bringing electronics like tablets, computers or cameras onto the plane - was announced early Tuesday morning. Passengers can still bring smartphones in the cabin, but larger devices must be checked on flights from the ten major airports across the Middle East. The only hub in the region that was not named is Israel's major airport in Tel Aviv.

The ban does not affect U.S. carriers like Delta Air Lines, American Airlines or United Airlines, so many industry experts surmise that this could be a way of protecting the American aviation industry, as it will encourage travelers to fly on the legacy carriers.

This news comes after the American airline industry was pressuring President Donald Trump to re-write the Open Skies agreement, which allows international airlines to have direct flights to the United States, among other things.

"The CEOs of the major carriers just met with Trump and this could have been something President Trump agreed to enforce in order to level the playing field," said Brian Kelly, airline expert and founder of The Points Guy. "This could be in retaliation for the U.S. carriers perceived disadvantage in the global marketplace due to the Open Skies agreement."

Founded in 1992, Open Skies are bilateral agreements between the US and other countries to provide rights for airlines, liberalize the aviation market and protect free trade. Since its inception, the US has achieved Open Skies with 120 foreign partners. For the past few years, the legacy airlines, lead by Delta, have been petitioning the American government to restrict three Middle Eastern airlines - Etihad Airways, Emirates, Qatar Airways - direct routes to the U.S.

"The largest U.S. airlines - the most profitable in the world - have been seeking government protection, higher fares, and fewer consumer flight choices for two years. So far they have been unsuccessful," said Leff. "Previously rebuffed, the effect of this ostensible security policy may be to give them what they were after all along."

In a statement, the Department of Homeland Security said that the ban is based on"evaluated intelligence"  that "indicates that terrorist groups continue to target commercial aviation, to include smuggling explosive devices in various consumer items."

Is targeting these airports enough?

Others wonder why these ten airports were targeted, as some of them boast the most advanced security measures in the world, including U.S. Customs pre-clearance.

"Doha, Dubai and Abu Dhabi have some of the most sophisticated security screening processes of airports globally and their governments are huge allies in the war on terror, so I'm concerned that those airports in particular are now under this new plan when other airports, like Lagos, Nigeria are not," said Kelly. "If airports like Abu Dhabi that have incredible security and US Customs pre-clearance are not sufficient, this should spark a larger probe into whether airport security in general is effective."

“One potential problem with this approach where you single out countries is that you ignore the extent to which the terrorist threat is kind of state-less,” said Paul Schwartz, professor at the University of California, Berkeley law school, to the Guardian. “The terrorists have cells throughout the entire world.”

Others wonder if checking electronic devices might actually be more dangerous, as battery fires would be harder to detect in the hold. "There would be a huge disadvantage to having everyone put their electronics in checked baggage," said Jeffrey Price, aviation security expert, to the Associated Press.

Fear of theft and damage to electronics

For those traveling between the Middle East and the U.S., there are concerns about damages to personal property. How will airlines ensure that costly equipment will be safeguarded?

"Are my things are going to get destroyed or damaged?" asks Tabitha Jackson, an American businesswoman living in Dubai. Jackson estimates she travels between the United States and the Middle East about four times a year, always bringing her Nikon camera and laptop as carry-on.

Jackson is planning on traveling to the US this summer, and for now, plans on flying Emirates as it is the only direct carrier. Pointing out that flights between the US and the Emirates are around thirteen hours long, she asks, “What am I going to do on the flight?"

For Gulf airports in the United Arab Emirates and Qatar, which were designed as international hubs to connect Asia, Africa and the Middle East to the Americas and Europe, this ban could be a logistical nightmare as many travelers to the US from these countries are in transit. Dubai's airport is the world's busiest international airport.

As airports scramble to comply by the March 25th deadline, it will be interesting to see how the electronic travel ban is implemented.

The following airports are effected:

Alexandra Talty is a columnist and writer, with a tendency for nomadism. The founding Editor-in-Chief of StepFeed in the Middle East, she is also on Twitter.|||

The electronic travel ban comes a few weeks after the American legacy airlines unsuccessfully tried to re-negotiate the Open Skies agreement.