Enough disclaimers?  Let's do this!Start with a disposable TEST VM with the following minimum requirements:Run the script with sudo privileges:Please read through all the WARNINGS and DISCLAIMERS and ONLY proceed if you agree.The script will take at least 10 minutes depending on the speed of your hardware and Internet connection.After a minute or two, you should be able to access Kibana via the following URL:https://localhost/app/kibanaYou should see our new Security Onion login window.  Enter the same credentials that you use to login to Sguil and Squert.  This login window will provide single sign on for both Kibana and CapMe to allow seamless pivoting to full packet capture!Once logged into Kibana, you will automatically start on our Overview dashboard and you will see links to other dashboards as well.  These dashboards are designed to work at 1024x768 screen resolution in order to maximize compatibility.As you search through the data in Kibana, you should see Bro logs, syslog, and Snort alerts.  Logstash should have parsed out most fields in most Bro logs and Snort alerts.Notice that the search panels at the bottom of the dashboards display the source_ip and destination_ip fields with hyperlinks.  These hyperlinks will take you to a dashboard that will help you analyze the traffic relating to that particular IP address.UID fields are also hyperlinked.  This hyperlink will start a new Kibana search for that particular UID.  In the case of Bro UIDs this will show you all Bro logs related to that particular connection.Each log entry also has an _id field that is hyperlinked.  This hyperlink will take you to CapMe, allowing you to request full packet capture for any arbitrary log type!  This assumes that the log is for tcp or udp traffic that was seen by Bro and Bro recorded it correctly in its conn.log.  CapMe should try to do the following:Previously, in Squert, you could pivot from an IP address to ELSA.  That pivot has been removed and replaced with a pivot to ELK.We're releasing this now because we want to get your feedback as early as possible in this project.  Please try it out and send your feedback to our mailing list:What do you think?What works well?What needs to be improved?Any questions or other comments?Thanks in advance for any and all feedback!UPDATE 2017-03-16 Fixed link to Justin Henderson's github repo|||

