This is my writing environment:

Note: Text editing is done using Vim. Please don’t stop reading, I promise you can quickly learn to work efficiently with Vim.

What you need:

Note: If you don’t already have a machine running Linux, please contact me and I can provide instructions on alternatives. I will also aim to publish a post soon explaining how to carry out these instructions if you have Windows or MacOS.

These are the steps to follow to create your own distraction free writing environment on Linux:

The USB stick will likely be sdb or sdc or similar. Please be confident you know which device it is before continuing.

For the purposes of this guide, I will use sdb to represent the USB stick. If yours differs, please substitute sdb in all cases below. For example your USB stick might be sde, in which case sdb will become sde and sdb1 will become sde1.

The process will be similar to:

The results will be similar to:

I have decided to install the 64 bit (amd64) version of the stable release.

Note: You could also use the i386 architecture, or choose stretch (currently testing) or sid releases. For what we want to achieve though, which is a light and stable distraction free writing environment, Debian stable is best.

Debootstrap will take some time to run, and will result in something to this:

When debootstrap has finished, mount our paths and chroot into the new system:

Source the file so that our changes are active:

Add your login user (writer), set a password and add the user to the sudo group

NOTE: Make sure to install grub to /dev/sdb (replace with your sdb/sdc) so that you don’t wreck your main system.

Find out the UUID of the drive we are installing to:

Edit /etc/fstab (we mount the tmp directory in RAM to minimise USB disk access):

The results should be similar to:

We do this so we have basic hardware and network access for updating the system, regardless of what hardware we are running on.

This section is coming soon. For now, you can use Vim with its defaults. But I will add a post soon that describes how to set some better defaults for writers.

Everything is now installed, so we can unmount the USB stick:

You can now insert your USB stick in to any computer, use the BIOS to boot from the USB stick, and have your own distraction free writing environment!

If you build this USB writing environment, please let me know how you go.

How to configure SSH on your VPS|||

Brendan Ingram: Husband. Writer. Teacher.