If education and common-sense cannot convince you on how stupid racism is, maybe science can do the job for you. Findings taken from numerous research projects strongly indicate that prejudice, racism and intolerance are more likely to be present in individuals with greater cognitive rigidity, less cognitive flexibility and lower integrative complexity.

In a recent research conducted by two scientists from Brock University in Canada, the authors have proposed and tested several mediation models. With such models they have proven that lower cognitive ability predicts greater prejudice, an effect mediated through the endorsement of right-wing ideologies (social conservatism, right-wing authoritarianism) and low levels of contact with out-groups.

In sociology and social psychology, an out-group is a social group to which an individual does not psychologically identifies as being a member. For example, people may find it psychologically meaningful to view themselves according to their race, culture, gender or religion. Having low levels of contact with out-groups may be therefore correlated with forms of racism.

Even though one can easily agree with it, such a theory is rather innovative in psychology, since, in spite of their relevance for interpersonal behaviors and relations, cognitive abilities have been largely ignored as explanations of prejudices.

In order to prove the result, the research has been developed through an analysis of nationally representative United Kingdom data sets. In such analysis the authors found that lower general intelligence in childhood predicts greater racism in adulthood, and this effect is largely mediated via conservative ideology.

Moreover, a secondary analysis, carried out with a U.S. data set, confirmed a that poor abstract-reasoning skills determine anti-homosexual prejudice, a relation partially mediated by both authoritarianism and low levels of intergroup contact.

Science has finally proven the connection between racism and stupidity.

Reference: Hodson, G., & Busseri, M. (2012). Bright Minds and Dark Attitudes: Lower Cognitive Ability Predicts Greater Prejudice Through Right-Wing Ideology and Low Intergroup Contact Psychological Science, 23 (2), 187-195 DOI: 10.1177/0956797611421206|||

Connecting Science and Society