Near the beginning of 2005, the merging of the four-level page tables patches for 2.6.10 was an early test of the (then) new kernel development model. It demonstrated that the community could indeed merge fundamental changes and get them out quickly to users — a far cry from the multi-year release cycles that prevailed before the 2.6.0 release. The merging of five-level page tables (outside of the merge window) for 4.11-rc2, instead, barely raised an eyebrow. It is, however, a significant change that is indicative of where the computing industry is going.

A page table, of course, maps a virtual memory address to the physical address where the data is actually stored. It is conceptually a linear array indexed by the virtual address (or, at least, by the page-frame-number portion of that address) and yielding the page-frame number of the associated physical page. Such an array would be large, though, and it would be hugely wasteful. Most processes don't use the full available virtual address space even on 32-bit systems, and they don't use even a tiny fraction of it on 64-bit systems, so the address space tends to be sparsely populated and, as a result, much of that array would go unused.

The solution to this problem, as implemented in the hardware for decades, is to turn the linear array into a sparse tree representing the address space. The result is something that looks like this:

The row of boxes across the top represents the bits of a 64-bit virtual address. To translate that address, the hardware splits the address into several bit fields. Note that, in the scheme shown here (corresponding to how the x86-64 architecture uses addresses), the uppermost 16 bits are discarded; only the lower 48 bits of the virtual address are used. Of the bits that are used, the nine most significant (bits 39-47) are used to index into the page global directory (PGD); a single page for each address space. The value read there is the address of the page upper directory (PUD); bits 30-38 of the virtual address are used to index into the indicated PUD page to get the address of the page middle directory (PMD). With bits 21-29, the PMD can be indexed to get the lowest level page table, just called the PTE. Finally, bits 12-20 of the virtual address will, when used to index into the PTE, yield the physical address of the actual page containing the data. The lowest twelve bits of the virtual address are the offset into the page itself.

At any level of the page table, the pointer to the next level can be null, indicating that there are no valid virtual addresses in that range. This scheme thus allows large subtrees to be missing, corresponding to ranges of the address space that have no mapping. The middle levels can also have special entries indicating that they point directly to a (large) physical page rather than to a lower-level page table; that is how huge pages are implemented. A 2MB huge page would be found directly at the PMD level, with no intervening PTE page, for example.

One can quickly see that the process of translating a virtual address is going to be expensive, requiring several fetches from main memory. That is why the translation lookaside buffer (TLB) is so important for the performance of the system as a whole, and why huge pages, which require fewer lookups, also help.

It is worth noting that not all systems run with four levels of page tables. 32-Bit systems use three or even two levels, for example. The memory-management code is written as if all four levels were always present; some careful coding ensures that, in kernels configured to use fewer levels, the code managing the unused levels is transparently left out.

Back when four-level page tables were merged, your editor wrote: "Now x86-64 users can have a virtual address space covering 128TB of memory, which really should last them for a little while." The value of "a little while" can now be quantified: it would appear to be about 12 years. Though, in truth, the real constraint appears to be the 64TB of physical memory that current x86-64 processors can address; as Kirill Shutemov noted in the x86 five-level page-table patches, there are already vendors shipping systems with that much memory installed.

As is so often the case in this field, the solution is to add another level of indirection in the form of a fifth level of page tables. The new level, called the "P4D", is inserted between the PGD and the PUD. The patches adding this level were merged for 4.11-rc2, even though there is, at this point, no support for five-level paging on any hardware. While the addition of four-level page tables caused a bit of nervousness, the five-level patches merged were described as "low risk". At this point, the memory-management developers have a pretty good handle on the changes that need to be made to add another level.

The patches adding five-level support for upcoming Intel processors is currently slated for 4.12. Systems running with five-level paging will support 52-bit physical addresses and 57-bit virtual addresses. Or, as Shutemov put it: "It bumps the limits to 128 PiB of virtual address space and 4 PiB of physical address space. This 'ought to be enough for anybody'." The new level also allows the creation of 512GB huge pages.

The current patches have a couple of loose ends to take care of. One of those is that Xen will not work on systems with five-level page tables enabled; it will continue to work on four-level systems. There is also a need for a boot-time flag to allow switching between four-level and five-level paging so that distributors don't have to ship two different kernel binaries.

Another interesting problem is described at the end of the patch series. It would appear that there are programs out there that "know" that only the bottom 48 bits of a virtual address are valid. They take advantage of that knowledge by encoding other information in the uppermost bits. Those programs will clearly break if those bits suddenly become part of the address itself. To avoid such problems, the x86 patches in their current form will not allocate memory in the new address space by default. An application that needs that much memory, and which does not play games with virtual addresses, can provide an address hint above the boundary in a call to , at which point the kernel will understand that mappings in the upper range are accessible.

Anybody wanting to play with the new mode can do so now with QEMU, which understands five-level page tables. Otherwise it will be a matter of waiting for the processors to come out — and the funds to buy a machine with that much memory in it. When the hardware is available, the kernel should be ready for it.|||

