Of all the advice I have given founders over the years, one of the most important ones is to make sure they do reference checks on their prospective investors. When founders do their homework on investors, they make informed choices about who they will be working with for many many years to come. As the saying goes, you’re literally getting married to your investors. Well, here’s the rub, some marriages can be dissolved more easily than getting rid of an investor you may not like or have soured upon over time.

I’ve seen and heard of enough cases of when founders didn’t do their homework and ended up committing themselves to an investor relationship that was in some cases either a drag on the company or the board dynamics, or best case a net neutral. The real value of having a positive investor/board relationship is very hard to quantify. In fact, a lot of first-time founders don’t really recognize if they have good investors or not as they don’t really have enough data points over the life of the company to compare working with different types of investors.

If you’re looking at raising a round of financing, you have a choice. You could either go with the highest offer on valuation that gives you the lowest dilution, or you can choose the partner who you’re going to be working with. I always recommend to my portfolio companies that they should be focusing on the latter, as getting the right partner and firm behind the company can make a massive difference in how much time the founders spend on managing their board or on everyone working together and focusing on optimizing for the success of the company.

Here are some tips for founders when making this tough choice:

But how do you conduct a investor reference call? What questions should you ask? Here are some of my favorites. Your mileage may vary.

These are just some of the questions I can think of, but I’m sure there are many more. If you have any good ones that you really like to use, please add them in the comments below.|||

