In the enough strong electric field ,transformers and other high voltage electrical equipment discharge in a local range. Partial discharge will cause the insulation between the conductors to be locally shorted but not to generate a conductive channel.This kind of discharge exists only in local position ,and will not form the whole through breakdown or flash over. Partial discharge is divided into slight partial discharge and strong partial discharge, the former has little influence on the insulation strength of the device, while the latter has a greater impact on the insulation medium. Therefore, in the long-term work of the high voltage electric equipment, we must reduce the strong partial discharge. For the running electrical equipment, we must monitor. When the discharge reaches a certain level, we need maintenance timely to avoid accidents.

However, partial discharge is very weak, people can not feel directly, so it is necessary to use professional equipment to detect , and then determine whether there is a strong partial discharge.

The internal insulation of transformer and high voltage equipment run in a long time in the high voltage working state. And now the development of technology lead to improve the voltage level of the transmission line. Insulating medium have to endure higher voltage. So in some weak positon about insulation, it is easy to happen partial discharge.

The reasons for partial discharge of HV equipment include the following:

1. Electric field concentrates in a certain point. Or the electric field intensity is too high.

4. There is a serious electric field distortion at the interface.

Partial discharge in solid insulation often leaves only a small spot or branch shaped burn marks. In the oil, then a number of small bubbles differentiation. Though the time of partial discharge is short, and energy is small, it have a great risk. Its persistence will occur a greater role in the destruction of the insulating material. One is to make the insulation material closed partial discharge undure the direct bombardment to result in insulation damage. The second is by the discharge of heat, ozone, the chemistry of the reactive gas such as nitrogen oxide, which make local erosion insulation aging, conductivity increased, leading to thermal breakdown.

1. Electrical measurement. The characteristic waveform of the discharge or the level of radio interference is found by using the oscilloscope or the radio jammer.

2. Ultrasonic method. Detection of the acoustic waves in the discharge, and the sound waves into electrical signals, recorded on the tape for analysis, electrical signals and acoustic signal transmission time difference can be obtained from the detection point to the distance of the discharge point.

3. Chemical method. Detection of various types of gas in the oil content and changes in the discipline. The test method can be found in the composition of the oil, the proportion and the number of changes, so as to determine whether the partial discharge (or local overheating).

In addition, the development of partial discharge Tester can automatically detect partial discharge in transformer operation.

The article is powered by Shanghai Himalayal Co.,Ltd

Himalayal,high voltage test equipment expert; we will always by your side.|||

