I very much enjoyed this lab for the time that we spent outside naming things -- I think being able to name species in a wood allows for a different kind of woods appreciation; it's getting to know the area on a personal level. At the risk of waxing too poetic I'm highly convinced that once we know things (or people) on name basis, we attach meaning to them in a way which we couldn't before. Long story short, I'm really excited about being on a first name basis with Morris.

What really got my wheels spinning in the bit of discussion that we had at the end of lab was the idea of native vs. non-native. The definition for native given by Wil was: a species that has evolved in that location (from what I could tell he was using and interchangeably). But isn't this dependant on the time-scale as well? (as all things seem to be). For example, say plant A originates in location A, then somehow spreads to location B. At this point, plant A is still to location A, even though it's in location B. But after enough time, plant A could evolve while in location B (it can now grow in the shade as well as the sun, for example). If it's still similar enough to its original form A (I realize this is a big grey area...speaking directly to species differentiation), but has evolved in some way in location B, couldn't you say that it's native to both location A and B, since it evolved in both places? Perhaps another way to put it: it all things are continually evolving, isn't their location changing as well? Keeping one part of the equation stagnant while allowing the other to evolve doesn't make much sense to me. 

 So I searched around Google for a bit of clarification, as per usual. Unfortunately, definitions vary, but here's one I found intriguing:

An individual or species that is endemic to a region; Native to a particular area or culture; originating where it occurs; Peculiar to a particular area or region; not found in other places; Prevalent in a particular area or region (wiktionary: endemic)

This definition seems to be presenting two different ideas: 1) native to a particular area or culture 2) peculiar to a particular area or region; not found in other places. So what about a plant that in location A, travels to location B, then a natural disaster hits location A and it can't grow there any more. So now is it to location A or B -- it only grows in B now, but that's not where is started! And to throw the time dimension in the mix...if enough time has passed since it stopped growing in location A, why not consider it to location B?

I realize there are more than a million and that every single case/organism is different, so I think more than anything this drives home the importance of making a clear and well-thought-through set of definitions before trying to discuss anything, otherwise, going in circles is ...|||

