There’s no surprise that India tops the chart, since it’s a huge outsourcing provider and also a very populated country with a thriving workforce. Our main headquarters is in Romania, which has risen 5 positions, to no. 13, from the previous study conducted in 2014. The outsourcing industry here focuses more on BPO and IT related business and less on voice services.

India, mostly Bangalore, dubbed the Indian Silicon Valley, is the leading IT exporter and the second fastest growing major metropolis in India. Its population has doubled over the last 15 years due to the increase in the outsourcing field, it’s home to countless outsourcing companies that provide a vast array of services related to technology development. Besides tech, India is the former world capital of call centers, overtaken by the Philippines in 2015, which also has a boosting outsourcing industry that has revitalised its economy in recent years.

The Philippines are second only to India when it comes to global outsourcing, but they slip in the software development department, focusing more on BPO activities. Since 2014 they gained ground in fields like infrastructure, environment, and tax and regulatory costs proving to be a more attractive location for western companies.

When it comes to Asian countries and outsourcing software development, India remains the most obvious and popular choice. Bangalore even has a startup culture brewing, with Startup Warehouse, a government funded incubator for startups. Their goal is to have 10.000 startups in 10 years, a noble initiative meant to push India beyond the service sector into a more self sustained software development economy.

But this is just a drop in the ocean, as the software development/ product development industry in India has a lot of catching up to do. There is a massive number of developers in India and most of them have a very different upbringing and lifestyle from western or even eastern european programmers. Their code quality can be questioned at times (with exceptions of course) but at one point you have to stop looking for the silver lining and realise that this is what the Indian tech environment provides right now. Some may break out and be able to create awesome products, maybe even better than a western team, but in a country where millions are getting in the outsourcing business, how likely it is that they’ll stand out or that you’ll be able to find them?

They seem to be working in a system where getting a task done is more important than how it is done and why it is done. This in large is caused by their outdated and overwhelmed higher education system that teaches more to memorize than to actually learn. This systematic workflow can be very damaging to software development.

“In India, importance is given to marks than to practical learning, students just cram the things and get score but practically they know nothing..”

Vasu Kulkarni is an entrepreneur from India, educated at the University of Pennsylvania. He also points out that a major set back for Indian developer is the way they’ve been trained at the university level.

“I think the Indian education system as a whole is greatly flawed in that it does not urge students to think, but rather to memorize, or ‘mugging’ as they say in India. Essentially if you can stay up all night before an exam and cram as much information as possible into your head, you will do pretty well on tests.”

But that doesn’t mean that the only bad developers you’ll find are Indian or that all Indian developers are bad at what they do. Each country has their own share of them, including the U.S. or the U.K., countries that tap into outsourcing the most.

“…the massive number of developers in India, most of whom have not been taught the right concepts, end up skewing the perception of everyone else about the quality of work that comes out of India vs. the U.S.”|||

It doesn’t really matter where you are in the world, you’re probably going to collaborate with someone from another part of the world. I work for a software development company, an outsourcing…