LaTeX has been the ultimate publishing tool when it comes to scientific papers. LaTeX, pronounced lay-tek is an open source domain specific language. It was initially released in 1985 so it’s been around for a very, very long time. The norm is to usually author the papers in LaTeX and then convert them into PDFs where they will be consumed by the general readers.

There are several efforts going in the direction of interactive papers. Some consciously and some just evolving naturally by the sheer need of whoever is playing around with them.

MarkDown (MD) is a “text-to-html” conversion tool authored by John Gruber. MarkDown is widely used in the software development community (ex: README.md docs) and now slowly creeping into the statistics community with RMarkDown. Its syntax let’s you write in simple plain text and then converts it into a robust HTML page. Its very simple to learn and very convenient to use, thanks to it’s simplicity.

Finding a way to add animations/visualizations, not just GIFs to MarkDown might make sharing — at least drafts — a bit more pleasant and understandable.

PDBF is probably the most interesting out of all of these. It’s three things at the same time. It’s a PDF document, an HTML page and an OVA file. What you get depends on where you open the file and what extension you give it. If you save it as a PDF, you get the static part of the document. If you save it as an HTML doc and open it in a browser, you get the dynamic and static part of the document. Meaning you can interact with the visualizations etc… And lastly, the OVA part of it let’s you add an entire virtual box to it so you can run an entire operating system out of it.

Some new blogs, non-official publications and pre-print hubs are also starting to allow users and/contributors to add custom visualization by allowing them to write in HTML and add D3.js visualizations. The only thing with these is export and sharing beyond the Internet-connected browser. They are only viewable in the browser and good luck saving them into a single file. Crazy enough, I think they are the future. An Internet connection is as available as electricity (might be a stretch in some places) these days, so should you really download and save the research paper? Can’t you just read it in your browser, bookmark it and come back to it again if you need to, while enjoying the visualizations?

Edit: check out distill.pub, a publication that let’s you submit interactive articles on machine learning.|||

From the days of actual research papers (before the digital age), to now where research papers are posted online first, not much has really changed in the way we communicate. We still use static…