Update: There’s been a lot of progress. For more, and to see the project’s documentation, go here: https://www.digitalsecurityexchange.org/

Last week, I wrote that I’m moving on from Access Now to focus on a project helping the U.S. digital security community be more responsive to the needs of civil society groups and high-risk communities. While many of these groups know they need digital security assistance, they often don’t know who to turn to or who to trust. We’re calling this project the Digital Security Exchange.

In the aftermath of the 2016 election, U.S. organizations big and small have realized they’re at risk of being hacked, surveilled, trolled, and otherwise attacked online — risks that this week’s WikiLeaks dump detailing the CIA’s hacking abilities have driven home. So much infrastructure is vulnerable: Vast databases of constituent information sit in the cloud, state surveillance is eradicating privacy and chilling free speech, and the devices we depend on to communicate have been weaponized against us.

At the same time, existing recommendations can be dizzying. For many users, blog posts on how to install Signal, massive guides to protecting your digital privacy, and broad statements like “use Tor” — all offered in good faith and with the best of intentions — can be hard to understand or act upon. If we want to truly secure civil society from digital attacks and empower communities in their fight to protect their rights, we’ve got to recognize that digital security is largely a human problem, not a technical one. Taking cues from the experiences of the deeply knowledgeable global digital security training community, the Digital Security Exchange will seek to make it easier for trainers and experts to connect directly to communities in the U.S. — building trust and sharing expertise, documentation, and best practices — in order to increase capacity and security across the board.

This project is just getting off the ground, but we already have a stellar working group overseeing its development. It includes:

Here are the core components of the project:

How you can help:

As we get started assembling these building blocks, we also want to be able to address users’ needs as soon as possible. Here are a few ways you can help:|||

Update: There’s been a lot of progress. For more, and to see the project’s documentation, go here: https://www.digitalsecurityexchange.org/ Last week, I wrote that I’m moving on from Access Now to…