Making the best food and wine pairings can be a daunting task, especially if you are a novice. Although there are specific guidelines and recommendations for learning the art of food and wine pairing, it can be quite easy and the best part is that you do not have to always go by the rules. In case if you do not like a particular wine, you have the option of replacing it with another one.

But when it comes to indulging in a classic wine and food pairing experience, Napa Valley specialties are the best to start with. And, if you are a beginner to all this, no need to think much as we bring to you, some of the delicious and world famous pairings from the valley to keep your passion for the wine going.

Located just a few blocks away from St. Helena, Merryvale Vineyards offer unique food and wine pairing experiences. If you are on a wine tasting tour, head straight to the bar for a daily tasting to indulge in the artisan cheese and wine pairing. It mainly focuses on blending special Merryvale wines and current releases with family owned products that are locally sourced. On your way back home, you can buy and carry the latest variety of wine.

Ever thought of wine and food pairing in a vintage train? Then here it is- Napa Valley Wine Train which brings to you an ultimate way to explore it. You will be welcomed by a Private label wine with freshly made special gourmet foods. Enjoy these delicacies prepared in the gourmet restaurant which resembles a train’s coach. It takes a stop at two famous wineries of the Valley where you will be taken through all the great wine and food experiences.

At  Chateau Lane, one of the Napa’s newest wineries, food comes second to wine. You will get to enjoy three pairing experiences. Some of the popular food and wine pairings include Tortellini Amatriciana with New York Style Italian Sausage and Frank’s Italian Sauce served with 2012 Chateau Lane Merlot wine, Roasted Vegetable medley and Whole Filet Mignon with Asiago Potatoes au gratin served with 2011 Chateau Lane Reserve Cabernet Sauvignon. Your meal is incomplete without the special dessert. It is a combo of New York Cheesecake or Dark Chocolate Cake paired with Raspberry compote and served with 2012 Chateau Lane Petit Verdot.

Not one, but Peju Napa Valley winery offers you with several unique tasting experiences and that too in an unusual way. On your wine tasting tour, you will be invited to sit in Rutherford Room or Peju Kitchen to indulge your taste buds in their small-farm cheese paired with current wine releases. If you want to explore a stronger wine and food pairing, you have the option to attend a farm-to-table luncheon for a 3-course meal while chatting with Chef Alex and knowing more about the culinary experiences at the Peju.

Get ready for a private and intimate wine and food pairing experience at Signorello Estate. The indoor tasting area offers its current and reserve wines served with a guided 5-course meal inspired by Italian cuisine. Don’t forget to try its Snake River Farms Kobe Wagyu beef paired well with Cabernet Sauvignon. The tasting lasts for good 120 minutes and is a fantastic opportunity for indulging your palate in a memorable experience.

World-renowned winery in the Napa valley, The Hess Collection boasts of its wine and culinary events along with an extensive Art Museum. The Shirtail Collection which involves two primary varieties of wines- Shirtail Creek Vineyard Chardonnay and Shirtail Ranches Cabernet Sauvignon that are crafted to complement all types of cuisines. However, the main options include a wine and cheese pairing, Garden Service Tasting outside and Chocolate Indulgence pairing.

A family-owned winery offers three tasting rooms to choose from. It has a selection of salads, sandwiches, and pasta dishes that are freshly made on a daily basis. When it comes to food and wine pairing, the winery offers you with a cheese counter serving more than 200 varieties of cheeses from around the globe. On weekends with favorable weather, expect a huge barbeque with delicious wood-fired oven pizzas. The duration of wine and food pairing lasts for 90 minutes where you can enjoy special wines.

A three in one- Round Pond estate is a winery, farm and an olive mill which is known not just for wines but also for amazing olive oils and unique tasting experiences. You will be offered a guided tour where you will get to explore handcrafted olive oils, citrus syrups, and red wine vinegars. Tastings of this winery involve local cheese varieties, breads, meats and season’s fresh vegetables and fruits freshly picked from their garden.

While there are so many destinations in the world famous for wine and as must-have wine destinations, but Napa Valley has something different to offer. From the most stunning vineyards to the most incredible food and wine experiences in the world, this is the perfect place to visit. Whether you are a first-timer or a wine connoisseur, the wineries in the Napa will never disappoint you.

Have a specific wine destination in mind? Tango Tours will help you design your own luxury wine tours.|||

Napa Valley is already a popular name among world’s top wine destinations.But for beginners, it's the best place offering amazing food and wine combinations