In our development days in Kollegorna we build various of stuff and fluff.

One of those is rack-reqorder, a multi-functional rack middleware, targeted (mostly) during the development of APIs. It allows you to:

But let's first see what is Rack and why such a tool could be useful.

Rack provides a modular and adaptable interface for developing web applications in Ruby. By wrapping HTTP requests and responses in rack request/response objects, it unifies the API for web servers and web applications (or frameworks) so that developers can focus on the development.

Rack allows us to have a 'common protocol' between various middleware. Each middleware in the rack stack takes the request, processes it if it's needed and forwards it deeper in the stack. In the deepest level there is, usually, the application code (like Rails controllers). On the way back each rack middleware takes the response, processes it if needed and forwards it in the next middleware.

For instance, the simplest rack middleware could look like:

Foobar middleware only needs to be injected in the Rack middleware. For instance, in rails:

Foobar middleware will run in every request and in every response. Whether it does work on request, on response or on both depends on the middleware itself.

So in essence, Rack is the place from which you can control everything. Wouldn't be great to record a request or a response if you wanted to?

That's how rack-reqorder was born. We are developing some code on our machine, tests are green, we deploy on staging but the client (EmberJS in our case) seems to get an error. To debug the error when the code has been deployed it's challenging most of the times.

Rack-reqorder provides 2 mechanisms to investigate what has happened to the backend:

First it records all errors that happen in a middleware below (even the application code is considered a middleware for Rack). So you don't have to check the logs all the time:

Once an exception takes places, rack-reqorder will record both the request that caused the exception and information about the error, like the exact lines that it happened, the application trace etc.

The developer can mark filter the exceptions based on environment and status (solved, unsolved), see other instances of the same exception and change the status, like marking it to solved.

You can think of it as yet another exception monitoring tool :)

While tracking exceptions could also be done by other tools or logging, tracking bugs on production could become quite tricky. When something is not working right for a specific client, but no error is raised, how would you track all its requests/responses ? During the development of an App, especially when the front-end team is different from the backend team a tool like that could become quite handsome.

Rack-reqorder allows you to start reqording all requests/responses instantly to see what's going on, why the error happened, based on a header and its value.

The header could be a custom one (like X-Custom-Header), or just the authentication token of the client that complaints for the bug (like Authorization header along with the api token of the client). By enabling this feature, rack-reqorder will record all requests and responses in a continued timeline for better understanding of the flow.

You have a clear view on the requests flow (which came first, which came last) along with the request and their associated responses objects.

As a bonus, rack-reqorder records various statistics about the requests/responses by categorizing in route paths. A route path is a requested url combined with the request action (so GET /users is different from POST /users).|||

