Instagram is known to many as a mobile social platform. But, it has never been identified as a platform to promote businesses, until recently. The fact that Instagram, at present, has about 80 million users and the count will increase in the coming years is making businesses go on a marketing spree on Instagram.

 Though the idea seems nice, you might be thinking where to start. Here are few tips to promote your business using Instagram:

1. Create an Instagram account

 You may already have personal Instagram account. But, for promoting your business, it’s always essential to have a separate account. Your prospective customers are not interested in knowing your personal details. All the information they need is about your business. You can modify your Instagram business account in the following ways to increase customer engagement:

2. Flaunt what you’ve got

 Usually, people tend to remember visuals than text. Instagram, being an image-centric platform is the perfect spot for showing off the photos of your products. Posting images of what you offer is the best way to gain people’s trust and improve your sales. Check out the following tips that you must keep in mind while posting photos of your products to gain users:

3. Show the working of the products

 The users may be aware of only one or two ways to use your products. Be innovative and showcase different ways in which the products can be used. This will definitely boost customer engagement.

4. Show what’s happening behind the scenes

 It may not be a pretty picture, but, behind the scenes images of a product launch or a photoshoot attracts followers. They will be excited to see what’s happening there and it’s going to get you closer to your future customers.

5. Try lifestyle photos

 Lifestyle photos come with real world backgrounds and models to create a scenario for your products. It helps the users relate to the product as the photos help them visualize how well the products work if they use it. Life style photos convince the audience that this product is what exactly they were searching for. Big brands like Nike and Adidas have already given it a try and succeeded. They have seen the interaction on social media boost up to 8 times more.

6. Provide offers and discounts

 Majority of Internet users agree that they tend to follow a product page depending on the freebies and discounts the page offers. Therefore, do not think twice before giving away incentives as they will help you improve customer engagement.

7. Hold events and invite your followers

 You can hold events, let it be anything related to your product or anything your business is sponsoring for and, promote them through Instagram. Then, let your followers know where the event is happening by geo-tagging and invite them over. The geo-tagging tool in Instagram is rarely used mainly because its benefits have not been recognized yet. But, posts with geo-tagging is said to receive 79% more customer interaction.

8. Wrack your brains for the best strategies

 Remember, people are not always going to fall for the images you post. Though you get a lot of followers in the beginning, the numbers will eventually decrease. You’ll have to come up with something new by then that wiill compel the followers to stay. Think, discuss, do whatever you can and come up with strategies to broaden your audience and earn customers.

9. Connect to your customers

 You are not in Instagram just to let the world know about your business; but, you seek to find at least some potential customers amongst the users. This, you can achieve by boosting customer engagement.

10. Analyze your successes and failures

 Keep track of how well your brand is doing on Instagram. This will help you understand where you have gone wrong and rectify it. Also, it gives you an understanding of what works and what does not. It also helps to identify the followers who often engage in a conversation with your brand. You can then devise strategies to turn those followers to your loyal customers. Also, it is important to keep track of the timings when customer engagement is maximum in your feed. You can then schedule your posts accordingly.

10 Awesome Ideas to Boost Your Business Using Instagram was last modified: by|||

In this blog you will learn about the various kind of tips that you must need to follow to promote your business using Instagram