Media is broken. And we need to fix it.

I’m super passionate about this. Though we’ve changed our approach recently, this has been Medium’s mission from day one. We saw the feedback loops for publishing content to be a major problem, and we set out to build a new model. We’ve come a long way since — establishing ourselves as the platform for thoughtfulness, depth, and insight from independent thinkers. But the greater challenge — changing the incentives that drive our consumption of media online — has become even more pressing. It’s time to double-down.

I speak to many publishers and media organizations who are doing important work, but still find themselves trapped in a system that incentivizes the wrong behaviors. It’s time to establish a real solution to the distorted feedback loops that cause misinformation, noisy feeds, and a general lack of understanding. All of this is pushing our society to become more insular, close-minded, and unscientific, despite living in the most powerful information revolution of all time.

But how does this lead to you paying Medium $5 a month?

It’s simple. Corporate advertising budgets become the primary funders of our information providers. No matter how skilled or well-intentioned, ad-driven publishers are rewarded on their ability to capture attention and even, at times, to weave a particular corporate-driven narrative. Not to provide informed perspectives, be thorough, or even be factually correct. But to capture attention. As cheaply as possible. For a few fleeting seconds. Click, click, scroll…

There is no way to fix this dynamic until we demand better — and decide to pay for it. We need a system that funds stories and ideas not just based on their ability to attract attention, but on their value to readers. This is the system that Medium is building, and as a founding member, you’ll get to help tell us what’s most valuable and how we spend that money.

This feedback cycle will start small. Most of what you enjoy on Medium will be the same great stuff you’re used to — from an array of publishers and individual writers who are funding their efforts in a variety of ways. In addition, you’ll start seeing stories — some exclusively for members — funded via our Medium Partner Program.

Through this partner program, which we’re also kicking off today, we’ll be working with independent writers and publishers to fund stories you wouldn’t otherwise see — on Medium or, likely, anywhere else. That’s the goal of creating a new economic model for content — to enable the creation of even better work. We’re planning to accept a limited set of contributors to start, and we’re particularly looking for those with expertise in key topic areas. (If that sounds like you, read more and apply here.) Over time, we plan to open up new revenue opportunities for as many creators as possible.|||

I’d like you to be among the first to become a Medium member, a new subscription program we’re launching today to a limited number of people. Over the next few weeks, we’ll be rolling it out to…