Hearkening back to our kick off piece on gaining visibility and optimizing for that visibility, this post is about growth; it also builds upon the necessity of listening to one’s audience because many of those skills are required because it is important to not see yourself as a lonely product review stuck on a deserted island. You are a part of a community, and you can lean on that community to improve and expand.

What is this community you speak of?

Let’s pretend you’re a travel writer. Been anywhere awesome lately? Care to share your itinerary with the world?

The travel world is big; really, really big. There are many very large companies that are extremely interested in hiring travel influencers to describe in detail a variety of travel-related items. While you may travel extensively, is it possible that you’re an expert on Munich museum attractions, where to get the best street tacos in Guadalajara, which are the hidden gem hotels in Jabalpur, and how to maximize airline points using mall gift cards? If you actually can do all that, I tip my invisible hat, but the point is to express how deep the industry is. The deeper an industry is, the more likely there is specialization, and therefore the more important it is that as you seek to become an expert in your specific niche, that you cultivate relationships with other tangential experts. This is the community that you need to become a part of, whether your motivations are selfish or altruistic.

In a way, yes. There’s a lot of different words for this. steve blank of Startup Grind would refer to such network relationships as frenemies, though I think in this case that might not be the best analogy because that relationship probably more closely mirrors being an embedded influencer on ongoing brand campaigns where one party is clearly working for another and both want to ensure that maximum value extraction takes place from their own personal perspectives. Instead, I would view your niche industry community to be more the coopetition; in this approach as described by Dan Brown in his post on creative couples. I’m not suggesting you get romantically involved, but if a wedding occurs because of Intellifluence I sure want to know about it so I can retweet your registry. Instead, it is about the “infinite game”, where the point is to keep moving the game forward for everyone in a way that ensures everyone succeeds at least enough to keep playing. You want to help your peers to keep playing the review game.

Why should you help potential competitors grow? I ran across something from Evan Carmichael that sums it up. I’m not a big Tony Robbins guy, but this is accurate. The theory goes that you are the average of your 5 closest peers. The better your peer group is doing, the better you’re doing.

How can you help your community?

If you’re convinced now that it is generally in your best interest to help the sum total of your niche industry, the next question falls to how to get that done. There’s quite a few ways:

Where are these mythical communities?

I’m not a travel influencer, but on some quick searching, I found a great number of places that travelers hang out — if you’re in the space, maybe consider them (or leave me a comment below with better ones so I can update this section):

 http://www.travbuddy.com/forums

 http://www.travellerspoint.com/forum.cfm

 https://www.reddit.com/r/travel/

 http://www.wanderlust.co.uk/mywanderlust/

Be sure to also join this community while you’re at it too. :)|||

Hearkening back to our kick off piece on gaining visibility and optimizing for that visibility, this post is about growth; it also builds upon the necessity of listening to one’s audience because…