“People, processes, and tools” is a feedback loop in which each part is prone to failure. Just like the systems we are creating for business, on-call is yet another system in our organizations that needs to be engineered with proper appreciation. Failure to do so only contributes to a burdensome, destructive spiral.

Ambivalence and resentment toward on-call is so incredibly dangerous to morale that it will ultimately affect the velocity at which people do their daily work. This can feed each piece of the puzzle in increasingly negative ways, eventually resulting in things like tarnishing the reputation of individuals when encountering failure — the worst thing a bad process can do.

Failing to develop ways to deal with failures in the on-call system will only perpetuate further failure.

It is paramount that senior management give significant appreciation to the prevention of getting people called and understanding why they were called when a major incident does occur. This goes so much further than a postmortem. To begin with, incident handling needs to be in a mature enough place where incidents that are being raised are truly exceptional, alerting only because they could not be handled. And the people working those incidents should be uninhibited in making decisions and contributing to the improvement of the system.

If mundane things are causing lots of on-call commotion, then building reliability into the business needs to be more of a focus on principle. During an incident, this should come in the role of a “Duty Manager” — not to call out people at fault or coerce status updates, but to examine all aspects of the incident and the very process itself to come to a critical conclusion about what can be improved with regard to its systems, why certain actions made sense at the time, and how they may have been conclusively wrong.

If unavailability of key individuals, remote working, or on-call participation are causing pain, it is indicative that an organization is not effectively implementing DevOps practices.

Maybe you’re having trouble crossing the chasm from a business value perspective on this.

Is getting to three nines and focusing on reliability going to sell even one more copy of $product?

How much do your major incidents cost to run?|||

Not to pretend like there is some decidedly “good” on-call system. It is easily the toughest work/life balance problem we face. But for sake of argument, let us do pretend it isn’t going away anytime…