The next assistant in many offices could be named Alexa or Cortana.

In 2016, Silicon Valley obsessed over how text-based bots in apps like Slack could make employees more efficient, turning complicated tasks or forms into conversational texts. Now, following the success of Amazon Inc.’s AMZN 1.45% Alexa and Alphabet Inc.’s GOOGL -0.08% Google Home, people in the technology industry are increasingly thinking about how such voice-activated devices can be made useful in the workplace.

The products aren’t quite ready for office prime time yet. The workplace offers challenges that experts say intelligent assistants built for home use so far haven't effectively met, mostly in the area of voice recognition.

Still, some potential customers aren’t waiting. Workers at Goodwinds Inc. in New York City, for example, have used an Amazon Echo attached to the office ceiling for such tasks as adding events to their calendars and setting reminders for meetings, says Vinay Patankar, chief executive of the workflow-management startup.

And sometimes they use it just for fun. When someone makes a big sale, they say, “Alexa, play the money song,” Mr. Patankar says. Then “Cash Machine” by Big Baby D.R.A.M. begins to play. Each day, the speaker also reminds everyone it’s time for lunch with the voice of rapper Missy Elliott.

Whether for work or home, intelligent assistants are part of a trend that has brought voice-control capabilities to such devices as cellphones, connected cars and certain home appliances. Apple Inc. AAPL 1.40% introduced voice-recognition technology to customers’ pockets with the release of iPhone 4s with Siri in 2011.

Roger Lee, a general partner at global venture-capital firm Battery Ventures, believes that technology for the workplace has been following consumer trends, and he thinks voice-enabled intelligent assistants will be next.

Mr. Lee is an investor in Workfit, a startup that is developing an office assistant and meeting facilitator it calls Eva. Relying on voice controls and artificial intelligence, Eva aims to make meetings more efficient by, among other things, creating a searchable record of what is said, highlighting decisions and performing tasks on command such as sending slides or documents to specific participants.

Market research has shown that many workers say they are ready for an AI-based office assistant. In a 2016 survey of workers’ attitudes toward technology conducted by Dell Inc., Intel Corp. and consultants Penn Schoen Berland, 30% of employees around the world chose “digital helper” as the potential use of artificial intelligence that they would be most excited about in their jobs.

In a survey last year of more than 560 IT professionals from Spiceworks, 52% of those who are using intelligent assistants on company-owned devices said they use Apple Siri, followed in popularity by Microsoft Corp.’s MSFT -0.12% Cortana and Alphabet’s Google Now. Only 4% said they are currently using Alexa.

These products meet some office needs with varying degrees of success. Like Alexa and Siri, Cortana can help manage a schedule. It goes a step farther by integrating with a line of Microsoft business apps, such as a suite of data-visualization tools. For example, users can ask Cortana to pull up data and charts to show average customer spending per city.

Most experts agree, however, that existing products, which were mostly designed for home use, tend to fall short of the workplace’s more robust needs.

For starters, the voice-recognition software has to be more accurate, says Omar Tawakol, chief executive of Workfit, because the stakes in business are so much higher than they are at home.

If an intelligent assistant for the home plays the wrong song, “it’s not too great, but it’s also not too bad,” Mr. Tawakol says. But in business, he says, “you can’t afford to have that amount of an error rate.”

Workfit’s Eva transcribes meetings with an accuracy rate slightly above 90%, Mr. Tawakol says, but it is incrementally improving as the company also tries to make Eva’s processing time faster. Most human transcription services are 98% accurate, he adds, but are very costly. Most machine transcription for phone calls today is about 60% accurate, he says. Mr. Tawakol says his goal is for Eva to provide a more accurate transcription than currently, but at a cost near what people pay for machine transcription.

Mr. Lee, the venture capitalist, agrees that the business market has different needs that so far consumer devices haven’t met. The complex vocabulary used in business situations, for example, is not something that home-based assistants are designed for. Intelligent assistants for the home have no idea what a sales force or product pipeline is, he says.

Devices for home use also aren't designed to track who is speaking. Mr. Patankar, for his part, says he wishes Alexa could do that, and have user profiles for each of his workers as well. The employees at his company, which does business as Process Street, use Alexa to add jobs to a task-management application. But it’s difficult to follow up, Mr. Patankar says, because the device doesn’t keep track of who added which task.

Another issue is that interacting with such devices can be loud and disruptive to other employees. In an office, it can be difficult to talk to Alexa, for example, without everyone nearby hearing. Mr. Patankar also says employees sometimes accidentally trigger Alexa to start talking. It’s only supposed to turn on when she hears “Alexa” or “Echo,” but sometimes it is activated by a similar word, he says.

Finally, there are issues of privacy and security—because intelligent assistants are always listening. Some security experts say such systems could pose a risk of being turned into eavesdropping devices. In a workplace, meanwhile, there is an additional concern that everyone must agree to being recorded. Even nonemployees who enter the office may need to opt in to being recorded. Mr. Lee says he thinks everyone in a workplace using such technology should be made aware that an intelligent assistant is present.

Privacy also has been a major focus for Mr. Tawakol, the Workfit CEO. The company announced it raised $5.5 million in seed funding last month to further develop Eva, its meeting facilitator.

To protect privacy, Mr. Tawakol says, people can turn Eva off at any point in the call by saying “Eva earmuffs” or “Eva go away.”

Ms. Zakrzewski is a reporter for The Wall Street Journal in San Francisco. She can be reached at cat.zakrzewski@wsj.com.

Appeared in the Mar. 13, 2017, print edition as 'Workers Talk, Their Devices Listen.'|||

Voice-activated assistants with artificial intelligence are moving from the home to the office.