In the CRM market many players fall into temptation to turn their software into a “swiss army knife” in order to satisfy all the possible needs. This often leads to monstrous solutions with intricate navigation and abundance of features half of which are never used. Luckily, this is not the case with the CRM tool we are speaking of today. That being said, we do not mean it has poor feature set. It’s just that its UX allows you focus on the things that are most important to you. Meet SalesSeek!

 Our sales team has long been looking for a CRM solution that would be efficient and would have an amazing UI — to let us focus on the daily sales activities without an urge to shut down the system straight away, like it often happens with big corporate CRMs.

First thing that immediately strikes the eye when getting acquainted with this service is its unconventional, as compared to other CRM tools, design. Generally, in their visual aspect CRM’s have got no further than an improved excel look. But SalesSeek is like the embodiment of Edward Tufte’s principles of presenting information. If you shift to it after having worked with several other customer management systems, you may feel a bit awkward at first, but it passes quickly: the thing is you have to switch your mindset from previous experience and discover that this new design is much more natural.

What is important to know about the deals? Their status, their value and how long it takes to process them — and preferably all of this at once, to be able to take rapid decisions. SalesSeek dashboard allows you get the fool view of your clients’ condition at a glance. You can switch between the funnel view and the “sink or swim” view. The funnel lets you see all the deals at once in relation to their stages with a total revenue shown for each stage. The “sink or swim” presents the deals according to the time they’ve been in process. So the longest ones will be in the bottom and the least long-drawn — at the top. The visual size of the deal on the dashboard depends on its revenue size. So if the manager sees some large circle drowning — this will be a signal to intervene.

The contact card in SalesSeek contains all the information: the initial source of the lead, his contact info, the deals he is involved in with the revenue size shown. Activity history from Intercom chat is also presented on the side, and salespeople can create tasks related to this lead right here and assign them to colleagues, thus creating a clear task-flow. So the interface is super intuitive which spares the employees a lot of time on special trainings. Besides, when it’s easy to use the overall team adoption goes smoothly.

Where does marketing end and the sales start? This question is a rock on which many and many companies stumble. These two departments are often in the state of competition or hidden conflict. SalesSeek product logic sets things right by making the process of turning leads into deals indiscrete. The sales start with marketing, and all the marketing activities should be measured by revenue — a metric which traditionally is related to the sales department. SalesSeek provides clear reports which help to see which channels are more successful, have the best ROI and what deals they lead to. 



Web analytics for salespeople is precious. Not only can you see the sources and referrals of the visits, but also identify the visitors thanks to IP tracking: if the user is new, you’ll at least know the company and never miss a Big Fish. Also you can measure their interest by the number of visits and see what content attracts them most — and this knowledge can be of great help as an icebreaker for a business conversation.

SalesSeek allows to integrate your company’s accounts with Facebook and Twitter and automatically turn requests made there into leads. As for the email marketing, you can use SalesSeek for onboarding, follow-ups, offers, etc. with all the stats on opens and clicks provided. Besides, you can filter the clients by their email behaviour triggers. If you are already using Mailchimp for your campaigns, it can be easily integrated and you can manage and schedule these campaigns within SalesSeek. This brings us to one more advantage of SalesSeek.

Living in the post-Slack world has set a high demand for integration versatility within SaaS. In this aspect SalesSeek seems to be way ahead of its rivals. We’ve already mentioned some social and email products which can be easily used within SalesSeek. There is also an easy way of connecting customer support sytems like Intercom, Zendesk and 8x8, and accounting systems — Xero and Quickbooks to name just a few. Zapier and Slack are also available, and for those not available there’s an open API. We’d like to mention separately SalesSeek extension for Chrome which makes it easier to save contacts from your LinkedIn profile and Gmail connections.|||

ServerMonitoring.me provides server monitoring as a service tool called CloudStats. Best for Linux Server Monitoring, Network Monitoring etc.