For years there was a lot of talk about the end of SQL, and in some ways it made a ton of sense. Google and internet giants were growing and managing data at a volume we previously couldn’t even imagine. And they weren’t just storing it, they were running a ton of statistical models, visualizations, and more.

Crunching that many numbers at once didn’t make sense with SQL technology at the time, so the big data pioneers built out technology that was highly distributed (can run on multiple servers), but looked like nothing else we had seen before.

Worse, it spoke in a language that was foreign, and dramatically more complicated than the standard SQL we knew and loved.

New consulting firms exploded into massive enterprise technology players overnight, as they saw the coming wave of new infrastructure technologies, and showed big companies how to integrate these technologies into their workflow.

But it’s 2017, and handling massive data sets at almost every enterprise is a nightmare. So, like many others, we’re working on a sliver of this problem. One we really like to think about.

So this is what BlazingDB offers your company. Put as much data as you want into it. Seriously, as much as you want. The catch is it has to be structured, don’t go crazy. Then, ask any question in the best known query language ever, SQL, and it will come back fast.

How fast? To be more descriptive,

Fast enough to look over a billion individual sales orders in less than a second, or every ATM transaction on the planet in the blink of an eye.

For starters we took a hard look at the current state of technologies, and what these different big data tools have done well. We took a lot of great ideas from these tools, it’s a little technical, but the highlights are listed below:

Then we added the coolest thing a nerd could find, a video game… graphics processor. That is a graphics processing unit, or GPU for short. And it’s a whole heap of power. It’s so different than how a normal central processing unit (CPU) works that we have many over the top, and frankly confusing, analogies that try to describe the differences, such as this:

So in order to complicate matters further, here is our attempt to describe the differences.

CPU’s are speedboats. They’re super fast. They can pick up a package, and take from point A to point B in no time at all.

GPUs are not speedboats, they are container ships. They may move slower, but they move dramatically more volume, in this case the volume of data.

That’s the key premise to how our GPU database works on, it can can move massive amounts of data at once, and it works, very well. So well that we offer one of the most high performance SQL alternatives to well known products such as Amazon’s Redshift. In fact our customers have seen up to 20 times faster queries with BlazingDB over Redshift!

We’ve been working on this engine for almost three years, it’s not a trivial project, yet we’ve only scratched the surface of the speed it can offer. So if you are looking for the next generation of SQL, check us out. We now have a “Launch with 1-click” solution on Amazon Web Services. In a matter of minutes your team can have access to a massive and powerful GPU cluster running BlazingDB.

We handle the scale of today and tomorrow, at speeds you never dreamed of. Check it out.|||

For years there was a lot of talk about the end of SQL, and in some ways it made a ton of sense. Google and internet giants were growing and managing data at a volume we previously couldn’t even…