The latest cybersecurity threat is a Star Trek themed attack. If attacked by Captain Kirk Ransomware, it will demand payment in Crypto-Currency.

Ransomware is nothing new but a captain Kirk ransomware is the latest.  Cyber criminals have hidden it as a Low Orbital Ion Cannon (LOIC) network stress test tool which measures a website’s capacity to deal with traffic load.

If the attack is successful, they hackers will demand 50 Monero to unlock your data.  Monero is an open-source cryptocurrency which was created in April 2014. It focuses on privacy, decentralization, and scalability.

Kirk ransomware may attack your business and it will use an increasing crypto-currency payment demand. As stated, it starts with 50 Monero ($1,100) and if not paid within two weeks, it moves up to 500 units ($11,000).  Failure to pay at all within a month will result in the encryption key being deleted.

If the victim decides to pay the ransom to the cyber criminals, they will receive the password file and it is called “Spock”.

At the moment, there have been no cases reported, however, many of these ransomware cases go unreported. The interesting part of the new ransomware is that cyber criminals are taking an aggressive stance and demanding more money if not paid according to their schedule.

Captain Kirk Ransomware may attack your business however you can protect yourself. Check out article Focus on business and stop worrying about Ransomware on how to protect your business.

Our complimentary network and security assessment can put your IT infrastructure and business to the test.

365 iT SOLUTIONS is a leading IT consulting and managed service provider (MSP) boutique in Toronto.

We offer industry leading IT solutions with our Canadian team delivering Managed IT Services, IT Support Services, IT Outsourcing Services, Tech Support Services and Cloud Services.|||

The latest cybersecurity threat is a Star Trek themed attack. If attacked by Captain Kirk Ransomware, it will demand payment in Crypto-Currency.