The word “platform” doesn’t just mean “an ambitious product” — products and platforms differ, not merely by degree, but by kind.

When someone makes a product, they go after product-market fit: they do lots of smart things to predict it and act on these predictions.

On the other hand, to make a platform, a person must have the discipline and patience *not* to act on their predictions about market-fit. This is because, in a platform business, product-market fit is an emergent phenomenon: a product is a plan, but a platform is a heuristic.

Meanwhile, the analytical tools of the venture capital world are ill-equipped to detect platform potential, as they are plan-dependent.

But traditional business thinking is all about *increasing* predictability at all costs. This sort of thinking clearly predates software.

One way software businesses increase their predictability is by disempowering + disbelieving their users. (“You’re not using it right!”). But a platform business does the opposite: it hands the users a bunch of Legos, then says, “We can’t wait to see what you build!”

A platform business intentionally creates disorder, because it knows how to gain from the disorder and its product competitors do not.

What a product company sees as distraction, a platform sees as adaptation. Inconsistency -> diversity. Redundancy -> fault tolerance.

Product companies emerge from an individual’s need to control. Platforms, from a collective’s need to empower.

The paradox in VC is that platform companies need a lot more capital to start moving, but have a harder time raising it.

One big reason for this is the attempt to make an apples-to-apples revenue comparison between product and platform companies.

But a dollar earned by a platform is far more valuable than a dollar earned by a product, because it is diversified across use cases.

A true platform is not merely diversified across the use cases that exist today, but across the unbounded set of what will emerge tomorrow.

A product company must continue to innovate — internally — at an ever-increasing rate in order to grow.

Minecraft will be increasingly fun and drive increasing revenue, even if the game’s creators stop creating things, because it users will not.|||

The word “platform” doesn’t just mean “an ambitious product” — products and platforms differ, not merely by degree, but by kind. When someone makes a product, they go after product-market fit: they…