Used with well-defined and explicit Return On Investment success in corporations worldwide, Six Thinking Hats is a simple, effective parallel thinking process that helps people be more productive, focused, and mindfully involved. A powerful tool set, which once learned can be applied immediately!

 Used with well-defined and explicit Return On Investment success in corporations worldwide, Six Thinking Hats is a simple, effective parallel thinking process that helps people be more productive, focused, and mindfully involved. A powerful tool set, which once learned can be applied immediately! You and your team members can learn how to separate thinking into six clear functions and roles. Each thinking role is identified with a colored symbolic "thinking hat." By mentally wearing and switching "hats," you can easily focus or redirect thoughts, the conversation, or the meeting. The White Hat calls for information known or needed. "The facts, just the facts." 

 

 The Yellow Hat symbolizes brightness and optimism. Under this hat you explore the positives and probe for value and benefit.

 

 The Black Hat is judgment - the devil's advocate or why something may not work. Spot the difficulties and dangers; where things might go wrong. Probably the most powerful and useful of the Hats but a problem if overused.

 

 The Red Hat signifies feelings, hunches and intuition. When using this hat you can express emotions and feelings and share fears, likes, dislikes, loves, and hates.

 

 The Green Hat focuses on creativity; the possibilities, alternatives, and new ideas. It's an opportunity to express new concepts and new perceptions.

 

 The Blue Hat is used to manage the thinking process. It's the control mechanism that ensures the Six Thinking Hats® guidelines are observed.

 

 

 

 Using Six Thinking Hats®, you and your team will learn how to use a disciplined process which will... 

 Use Parallel Thinking as a group or team to generate more, better ideas and solutions Make meetings much shorter and more productive Stimulate innovation by generating more and better ideas quickly Create dynamic, results oriented meetings that make people want to participate Go beyond the obvious to discover effective alternate solutions Spot opportunities where others see only problems Think clearly and objectively View problems from new and unusual angles See all sides of a situation Keep egos and "turf protection" in check Achieve significant and meaningful results in a less time 

 Significant Applications for the Parallel Thinking Process of Six Thinking Hats Wherever High Performance Thinking and Action is needed 

 Two highly engaging de Bono Group resources bundled together for optimized team learning 

 Maximize your training and impact at work with the combination of: One of our face to face public two-day courses: Six Thinking Hats, The New Thinking Leader™ or The Course in Creativity and 



 The Six Thinking Hats Online program is used as a support and supplement technology for those you lead, manage or work with. Now we offer a more integrated approach for your training dollar via The de Bono Group Leaders Package. The Leaders Package is a way to more effectively connect your face to face classroom learning experience with your organizations leadership, creativity and productivity needs. 



 To participate in and purchase The Leader's Package Make an advanced commitment to new thinking leadership development. Simply register with The Leaders Package for your program choice and receive a $349 discount off the regular public program fee. The Leaders Package includes a minimum purchase of 10 Six Thinking Hats Online tickets at $99 each. This package provides front end dollar savings and in-depth competency development given your two-day program of choice. Providing example of how this works, the usual public program price for the two day Course in Creativity or The New Thinking Leader is $1,449- less the discount of $349=$1,100 for the program cost. Add the $99 cost for the ten Six Thinking Hats Online and you have a total cost $2,090. 



 Two key benefits of your advanced commitment to leadership development and The de Bono Group Leaders Package: 

 1. Jump start your leadership effectiveness at work as you include others in this powerful process, and 



 2. Immediately save $349. 

 An alternative option: 

Let your commitment to new thinking leadership development evolve: Register and complete the Course in Creativity or The New Thinking Leader and pay the usual program fee, then at a time of your choosing purchase the Six Thinking Hats Online @$99 each on an as needed basis.



 Bottom-line; choose leadership...

New Thinking Leadership, Creativity and Innovation Leadership. Take intentional leadership steps to be more creative, productive and effective utilizing methods 

 The de Bono Group Leaders Package is part of a new initiative toward our commitment to develop New Thinking Leaders and Creativity and Innovation Leadership. Be on the lookout for other programs and processes. Who Should Participate in The Leaders Package: 

Managers, group leaders, principals and leaders of small companies, entrepreneurs, internal and external consultants/trainers, any person who has decision making responsibility or who provides leadership to groups or teams. 



 Read more about Six Hats Online Here 



 Click here for Return on Investment results! 



|||

