Firebase is an astounding tool. Hundreds of millions of people use Firebase -powered apps. The company started as backend-as-a-service for app developers that made real-time functionality simple for Shazam, NPR, SeatGeek, and hundreds of thousands of other apps. Since being acquired by Google in 2014, Firebase has expanded to become Google’s app development platform and an indispensable developer tool. The company that does so much to simplify developer’s lives began its life as something completely different.

Firebase co-founders James Tamplin and Andrew Lee were building a company called Envolve that offered real-time chat tools as widgets that could be embedded in a website. It was a technically impressive project, but the commercial uptake was slow. As such, Tamplin and Lee listened to their mentors at Y Combinator and got closer to their customers where they learned just how far hackers would go to solve a problem.

“Our biggest, most interesting customers were doing strange things,” says Tamplin. “Their use cases were beyond our scope, but they did weird ju-jitsu to make it work.”

For instance, a game company was using Envolve’s widgets to track a player’s positional data and game commands, then scraping the screen to use that info in their app. That solution was clever but had all the elegance of a Rube Goldberg contraption.

Tamplin and Lee saw an opportunity. They sensed the market craved a general purpose abstraction to handle the arcane art of XHR requests, timeout management, and other tricky technical feats that make real-time a really hard problem. So they scrapped Envolve’s front-end, salvaged the back-end code, and got started on what would ultimately become Firebase.

One of the more impressive pieces of Firebase history is that the product shipped in approximately seven months. Here are the key dates:

This quick time-to-market was possible because of smart prioritization and previous battle scars. Tamplin and Lee had wrestled with some of the thorniest technical challenges during the development of Envolve, but how they sequenced their work was particularly impressive.

The team focused on things that would appeal to developers, before building features that would benefit themselves. “We launched the thing without building an account system, there were no email or passwords, we just added people to a whitelist,” says Tamplin. A hobbled account feature made life harder, but it allowed the Firebase team to get unbelievably helpful user feedback much faster.

Firebase didn’t try to do everything at once. Instead, they focused on a few core problems and executed brilliantly. “We built a nice syntax with sugar on top,” says Tamplin. “We made real-time possible and delightful.” It is a reminder that entrepreneurs can rapidly add value to the ecosystem if they really focus.

“The first thing we did was create a group with the 20–30 best hackers we knew in San Francisco,” says Tamplin. This wasn’t any group; it was a collection of carefully curated luminaries who possessed keen insights and large followings.

With a group like this, it’s not enough to pay lip service or play to people’s egos. If you want the best engineers to adopt your tools, you must be responsive to their needs. Tamplin invited these engineers to come to his office where they built widgets using Firebase’s latest tools. Tamplin videotaped these sessions, and most importantly, used the insights gleaned from them to iterate on the product.

Tamplin and Lee took feedback on functionality, usability, even naming — The project was originally codenamed “Plankton,” not the most desirable branding! This process went on for months with the founders recruiting more users along the way so that the test groups could be staggered and prevent burnout among the volunteers.

“We designed the product alongside them, they loved the product, and felt ownership in it since they had contributed to it,” says Tamplin. “As a result, when it came time to launch they were willing to help spread the word far and wide.”

It’s not enough to recruit great beta testers; they absolutely have to be regularly engaged.

Digitally this took the form of a selective Google Group and regular status updates to keep everyone abreast of the latest developments.

“You have to devote resources into tending it,” says Tamplin. “Knock spam out, ban users who are overtly self-promotional, make the forum a true tool for users, not a customer acquisition channel for the product.”

With regard to the newsletter, Tamplin advises startup founders to choose their words, and sales copy carefully. “Developers are significantly different than normal consumers, after all, they spend their days looking for missing semicolons in code,” and Tamplin goes on to describe them as almost allergic to marketing fluff. “If you say a product is ‘Amazing,’ they’ll want to know how you define and quantify amazing.”

● No Fluff: Deliver value in every piece of communications. Ask yourself how your audience will be able to do more after reading it.

● Be Honest: Even the best software has warts, don’t paper over them. If you highlight both what works well and what doesn’t, users will trust you more.|||

Firebase is an astounding tool. Hundreds of millions of people use Firebase -powered apps. The company started as backend-as-a-service for app developers that made real-time functionality simple for…