The primary goal for majority of websites is to convert. Whether that be purchasing a product, signing up for the email newsletter, or downloading a document, most websites are designed with a desired action in mind.

That is where UX comes in. The UX, also known as user experience, is incredibly important to ensure the user can easily and smoothly navigate through a website.

In order to get to the point of conversion, the user needs to have easily navigated to that particular point. Poor usability or design can easily result in the user leaving the site without even noticing the points that emphasize CRO.

The objective of both a UX design service and a conversion rate optimizer is to get the customer to convert in the easiest way possible. They are both an aspect of this yellow brick road to the emerald city of conversions.

A UX designer wants to ensure the user has a seamless and effortless journey through the website. Essentially the UX is the yellow brick road that is bright and easy to follow, a smooth path without potholes or dents.

The below graphic does a great job showing how the combination of technology, user needs and business goals make up the UX design.

This smooth path is built by extensive testing and research the UX process undergoes various forms of prototyping, interviews, focus groups, surveys, and a/b testing to ensure the optimal site is developed; a site that does not hinder the user’s ability to convert.

In a similar sense, the goal of CRO is to convert the user in the quickest and most effective way possible. Keeping with the analogy of the yellow brick road, a CRO would include signs and maps to help guide the user to the emerald city.

On a website, these conversion rate optimizers can include utilizing push notifications, assisting the user with chat boxes, or effective use of CTA’s.

UX is the Foundation for CRO

The three ways that UX greatly improves the overall CRO of the site is by knowing the user, optimizing the converting features to be less annoying, and providing superior design.

Since a large portion of the UX process is spent discovering, researching and testing, there is a great deal of data about the user that emerges. It is this information that is extremely valuable to use in order to create the most effective CRO’s.

For example, it is found that 85% of users are only getting a third of the way down a specific page before that number drops to 22%. By having this information, the website can be designed in a way that the call to action is near the top of the page, rather than towards the bottom like it may traditionally be placed.

The below image shows how the J.Crew site incorporates a number of different CTA’s before the user has to scroll down the page.

Getting the user to the page of conversions is only the first step of the process. It is critical to make sure the user actually completes the conversion and to do so is through optimal UX.

One example is filling out a form or payment information. This process tends to be traditionally long and tedious and sometimes leads to frustrations if not designed correctly. Improving the easy of use, such as having auto fill boxes, will help the user is following through with the conversion.

Gone are the days that a website is all you needed to establish an online presence. With the growth of mobile, especially on e-commerce platforms, users are choosing to shop through their mobile device.

Thus, if you don’t have a mobile friendly website or mobile application, you can kiss a lot of those potential conversions goodbye. If you don’t have a website that is mobile friendly, hiring a mobile app development agency with a focus in UX is the way to go.

As an e-commerce site you need to convert. The ways to improve your conversion rate is first improving the overall UX of the site or app and then focusing on CRO’s. It is the combination of both that results in the highest conversion rate.

This is a guest post by Tory Darling.|||

The primary goal for majority of websites is to convert. Whether that be purchasing a product, signing up for the email newsletter, or downloading a document,