Some of a developer's most powerful tools call the command line home. Source control like git and cloud services like Heroku are mainstays in an engineering workflow—and they're the tools we use daily to manage the code that runs Zapier.

So we got to thinking, shouldn't you be able to build Zapier integrations from the command line, too? Starting today, you can: Zapier's brand new CLI tool lets you ship code directly from the command line, so you can build integrations in a way that fits your workflow.

Since we launched our Developer Platform in 2012, thousands of people have built integrations on Zapier. Why? Because with that single integration, developers can connect an app to more than 750 complementary tools. More connections means more possibilities, and more staying-power in someone's workflow.

This CLI tool is a new, powerful way to plug into Zapier's ecosystem. You can write, test, and deploy your own Node JS apps directly from your machine. Collaborating on an integration is simple when you mix in a tool like GitHub.

And, as always, hosting an integration on our developer platform is free. We won't charge you an admission fee to join the club.

Want to see our CLI tool in action? Here's our CTO, Bryan Helmig, walking through the setup for a new integration:

Note: This new interface is geared towards programmers. But if you're looking for a low- to no-code option, try our Web Builder. Not sure which to choose? We put together a page to help you compare the two interfaces.



Why use Zapier's new CLI? You can keep your favorite development tools, build an app for any audience, and bring your teammates along for the ride.

Integrating with Zapier doesn’t need to change the way you work. The new CLI to Zapier's Developer Platform meets development teams where they already spend their time. We’re making it easier than ever for engineering teams to build on Zapier.

The best way to get a feel for the CLI is to follow this tutorial on GitHub. (Make sure you create a free Zapier account first!)

Got ideas to make the Zapier CLI a better fit your workflow? Let us know!



Zapier apps don’t have to be public. In fact, creating an app just for your company is a great alternative to handcrafted internal tools that require their own hosting, logins, and other infrastructure. We support audiences of all shapes and sizes: one person, a handful, or any of our 1.5 million users. Every public app spends some amount of time in each of these stages.

All Zapier apps—regardless of whether they’re coded in the CLI or crafted with the Web Builder—default to "private". That means the developers working on the app can use it in Zapier's user interface.

You're welcome to leave it that way—sometimes you just need a one-off solution for a personal project. But most apps will move on to the "invite-only" stage. At this point, anyone with a special invite link that you distribute, can use the app with their Zapier account.

The invite stage is useful for:

Every app completes the invite-only stage before going public on Zapier. At that point, we work with your team to launch and market the new integration. Our app lifecycle documentation explains those steps in more detail.

The Web Builder is ideal for once-in-a-while coders who want a more on-rails experience. But there are a few key ways that our CLI stands out for the every-day engineer.

If you're familiar with our Web Builder, these new features solve some of the old gotchas.

How much does it cost?

Connecting to the Zapier developer platform is completely free. We don't charge you to maintain your app privately, or to launch it publicly to all Zapier users.

What happens to my existing app? Do I need to upgrade to this new platform?

Nothing changes with your existing app. You can still update and manage it with our Web Builder, and you won't be required to move to the CLI. We're keeping both platforms as different paths that people can choose for their app development.

Can I make updates to my existing Web Builder app using the CLI?

No. Only apps that were built using the CLI tool can be updated from the command line. For general updates to apps that weren't built with the CLI, you'll need to use our Web Builder tool.

Yes, but it will take some work. To get you started, the CLI has a command that can generate some of the boilerplate needed to define a CLI App from an existing one built in the Web Builder.

From there, you’ll need to fill out the implementation for each Trigger, Action, and/or Search. Remember that apps built in the Web Builder rely on Zapier to make the actual HTTP requests, whereas CLI Apps give you the flexibility and responsibility to do them yourself.

If you’d like to explore the possibility of converting an app, contact us.

Where can I ask my technical questions?

If you have questions about setting up an app or launching it on Zapier, check out the Developer Platform documentation or contact our support team. They'll get you routed to the right person.

Our new CLI to the Zapier Developer Platform makes it easier than ever to integrate your app with the 750+ tools on Zapier. Outside of the basic definition of a Zapier app, you have a blank slate to dream up any way to connect your API or service. If you need to pull in your own helper libraries from npm or write advanced logic to post-process multiple API calls in a single function, it can be done. The CLI deploys your code to Zapier, and you decide what goes into that code. So, get started now for free.|||

Some of a developer's most powerful tools call the command line home. Source control like git and cloud services like Heroku are mainstays in an engineering workflow—and they're the tools we use daily to manage the code that runs Zapier. 
So we got to thinking, shouldn't...