Widely considered one of the world’s leading e-commerce events, eTail hosted its 2017 Asia conference from 7–9th March at the spectacular Marina Bay Sands hotel in Singapore. A one-stop shop for everything multichannel and eCommerce; eTail is an event where one learns, gets inspired, finds innovative business solutions and builds lasting friendships. This year it hosted 80+ keynotes, panels, workshops and social gatherings to make it a highly memorable event.

Like all of their previous events, this year too, the sessions covered all possible areas impacting a business — customer centricity, personalisation, attribution, delivery, offline/online data, mobile engagement, content marketing and everything in between. All of these sessions helped discover new ways to boost your revenue and optimize your business in the best possible ways.

The event began on Tuesday, 7th March with the Technology Evaluation & Benchmarking Focus Day. After a sumptuous networking lunch & post completion of the registration formalities, we attended the welcome address after which the Chairperson, Akira Mitsumasu, Vice President, Marketing & Strategy of Japan Airlines delivered his opening remarks. Following the remarks, there was an interesting Retailer Perspective Panel Discussion, the topic for which was: Determining your wish list for partnering with new technologies. This was followed by the Technology Partners Perspective: A 5 minute introduction to each solution involved today — What is their USP and what benefits do they bring to help you create winning customer experiences? Then it was time for the 3X technology Roundtables to evaluate the newest technology offerings with your peers to establish who best meets your business needs and the day was finally wrapped up with the Chairperson’s closing remarks. Overall, it was a day full of learning and networking.

Wednesday, 8th March was Day 1 of the Main Conference and it started early with some speed networking and the Chairperson’s opening remarks, post which we were treated to some very interesting keynote speeches an All-Star panel discussion involving eminent industry thought leaders. This was followed by the eTAIL ASIA AWARDS IN PARTNERSHIP WITH iPRICE GROUP (iEMA). A brief networking break later, we had a few rounds of debates and ‘powering cross border expansion’ keynote speeches. After another hearty lunch, we were witness to some rounds of interviews and case studies presented by industry stalwarts throughout the end of the day, after which we attended the amazing eTail Asia after party. For us at Gamooga, it was a highly learning experience too. As one of the event sponsors, we were allotted a kiosk to showcase our product and reach out to a large number of attendees who took a keen interest in knowing about what we had to offer.

Day 2 of the Main Conference on Thursday, 9th March saw yet another round of highly educating keynote speeches such as the one by Ander Orcasitas, General Manager, APAC for DYNAMIC YIELD about Omnichannel Personalization for the Modern Shopper that was of particular relevance to our own industry. At our display kiosk, this final day of the conference saw a lot of activity and we met some really keen attendees with some of whom we had already set up prior meetings.

Overall, our team had a good experience throughout the conference and we met many interesting people representing their businesses or were there just for the learning itself. We look forward to being a part of such amazing events in the future as well.|||

Widely considered one of the world’s leading e-commerce events, eTail hosted its 2017 Asia conference from 7–9th March at the spectacular Marina Bay Sands hotel in Singapore. A one-stop shop for…