Tesla, Inc. (TSLA) CEO Elon Musk fits the perfect definition of a 21st-century visionary, pondering high concepts on space travel, electric cars, and renewal energy. However, he may not be the right person to run the high-tech auto manufacturer, which still looks and acts more like a start-up than a high-priced Nasdaq-100 component incorporated more than 13-years ago.

The company has routinely failed to meet production goals while insisting it will eventually complete with General Motors, Co. (GM), Ford Motor, Co. (F) and other mainstream manufacturers. The recent SolarCity acquisition adds enormous complexity to an already complex business plan that might benefit from a full-time hands-on CEO while freeing up the cerebral Musk to plan space travel and make his mark on the world stage.

The stock has failed to reward shareholders in the last three years, stuck in neutral despite endless table pounding by Wall Street’s talking heads. The repeated failure to meet production goals has now triggered a cash crunch, forcing the company to raise $1.15-billion through offerings that further dilute the earning power of current shares. While Musk advises the capital is needed for the Model 3 launch, it could quickly evaporate in another round of delays.

The stock came public at $19 in June 2010 and got stuck in a trading range between $14.98 and $30.42. It broke out in November, but the rally impulse stalled quickly at $36.42, giving way to narrow range action that persisted into the second quarter of $2013. The subsequent breakout triggered a powerful trend advance, lifting in two vertical buying impulses that stalled at $265 in February 2014. Keep that price in mind because the stock traded at that level in this week’s market.

A pullback got bought near $175 in May 2014, giving way to a failed September breakout that reinforced long-term range resistance, ahead of a secondary decline into range support in April 2015. A second bounce yielded a second failure in July, ahead of four months of testing at range support, followed by a February 2016 breakdown that dropped the stock to a 2-year low at $141.05.

It returned to range resistance in April 2016, yielding another failed breakout attempt. Price action since that time has shown greater resiliency, printing a December higher low at $178.19, followed by yet another test at resistance. It’s currently trading about 25-points below that level, after bouncing at the 50-day EMA. Weekly Stochastics has crossed into a buy cycle at the same time, perhaps supporting another rally above $280.

The 50-week EMA (thick blue line) marks the average stock price at different times in the last five years. It highlights shareholder frustration, peaking near $235 after the August 2015 mini flash crash and descending in a gradual series of lower highs that ended near $210. The indicator turned higher in December 2016 and has now reached $225, still well below the 2015 peak. This tells us many buyers remain underwater after holding the stock for several years, despite a bull market that’s lifted the Nasdaq-100 to an all-time high.

The long-term technical outlook will improve greatly if the moving average lifts above the red line at $235. Keep in mind that could take months to happen, even with daily upside, because the indicator moves slowly. However, keep in mind that line has acted like a mean reversion magnetic repeatedly in the three-year correction, making a swift decline toward $230 more likely than a long overdue rally above $300.

Elon Musk’s world stage obsession may be impacting Tesla performance because the company needs highly skilled production managers and executives to meet aggressive business plans rather than a vision or a visionary.

<Disclaimer: the author held no positions in aforementioned stocks at the time of publication. >|||

Telsa needs a hands-on production guru to meet aggressive business plans rather than 21st-century visionary. (TSLA,GM,F)