Beware of Amazon’s "Just Launched" third party sellers offering great prices. Third party sellers are Amazon’s answer to Ebay’s “Buy It Now” program. But unlike Ebay, Amazon’s program includes new sellers with no ratings offering deals that are too good to be true.

See 6 More 'Too Good To Be True' Deals That Are Tarnishing Amazon's Brand for more examples.

In "The Market Is Underestimating Amazon," Rex Jacobsen and I reviewed Amazon's initiatives that had the potential to substantially increase Amazon's stock price. But, when analyzing a stock, you also have to factor in the initiatives that are not working. In my view, the problems with Amazon's third party marketplace have the potential to undermine their brand which is arguably their most valuable asset.

Let me explain with an example. I recently added this LG 32-inch monitor to my wish list.

Amazon sells this monitor for $199, but notice that there are 32 other sellers offering the same item starting at $4.89!  Can that possibly be right? Clicking on the link brings up this page.

I notice that the seller, Angela Waden, has “Just Launched” and that the monitor would ship from Korea at a cost of $14.99 taking about a month to arrive.

So the monitor is a little less than $20 delivered, $180 less than Amazon charges, and I don’t need it right away. As good as this deal seems, I don’t buy it. Here’s why.

Late last year, I ordered this Ubiquiti Unifi AC Pro Access Point from a different Amazon third party seller. After waiting 6 weeks for a delivery that never came, Amazon refunded my money and I put the item back on my wish list. Here’s what I saw yesterday (March 20, 2017).

Notice that Amazon’s price is $129.95, but someone is offering the same product for $4.89! Lets see who that is.

Well look at that, the seller is Angela Waden again. Since Angela Waden doesn’t have any reviews, let's look at the next seller Jeniannyi who is offering the product for $13.98 + $5.99 shipping. Jeniannyi wants almost 2x Angela Waden’s price, but a delivered price of about $20 is still great compared to Amazon’s $130 price.|||

Beware Of Amazon’s "Just Launched" third party sellers offering great prices. Third party sellers are Amazon’s answer to Ebay’s “Buy It Now” program. But unlike Ebay, Amazon’s program includes new sellers with no ratings offering deals that are too good to be true.