, /PRNewswire/ --  (NYSE: GDDY), the world's largest cloud platform dedicated to small, independent ventures, today announced it has entered into an agreement to purchase Sucuri, a leading provider of website security products and services. Financial details of the transaction were not disclosed.

Sucuri is a security platform offering business owners a suite of security tools designed to protect website owners from emerging online threats. Nearly 75 percent of all legitimate websites have unpatched vulnerabilities1, and websites that have been blacklisted due to a hack can experience an 80 percent reduction in traffic for more than 48 hours2. Sucuri's suite of tools provide website owners the solution they require to respond to hacks when they occur, while also virtually patching vulnerabilities.

Sucuri is deeply involved in the WordPress community.  The company provides an industry-leading security plug-in for the WordPress platform, and actively works to advance the security awareness and management of WordPress websites.

"The vast majority of our customers aren't website security experts, nor should they need to be to secure their websites," said , Senior Vice President and General Manager of Security, . "Combining Sucuri with scale will advance digital security for our customers by making it effortless, timely and affordable. We'll continue to invest in Sucuri and jointly develop products that propel security solutions forward."

Known for its research and analysis, Sucuri is a thought leader in the security industry. The Sucuri team is comprised of developers, analysts and researchers all focused on different parts of security attacks. This approach has enabled it to develop a system that provides a seamless flow of information between internal teams and the greater online community. This process has been key to Sucuri's product evolution and its ability to stay ahead of emerging threats. Like , Sucuri provides its customers with always-on customer service, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.

"Since our inception we have always had a single goal of protecting our customers' websites. We achieve this with two very simple approaches: build things that deliver value and that stay ahead of emerging threats," said Sucuri Founder . "We now have the opportunity to take this same philosophy from a few hundred thousand sites to millions of sites. From our conversations with it became clear that we share the same customer-first philosophy and commitment to helping customers be secure online."

"Sucuri is going to continue to deliver great products and services to our customers as we always have," said Sucuri CEO . "Passion for customers and dedication to innovation is why there's such a strong cultural fit between the two companies. We can't wait to get started with and help customers around the world."

Sucuri will continue its normal operations of business.

and Sucuri plan to deliver new security products in the near future.

To learn more about Sucuri, visit: https://sucuri.net/

For more information about , visit www.GoDaddy.com.

About 

 powers the world's largest cloud platform dedicated to small, independent ventures. With more than 14.5 million customers worldwide and more than 63 million domain names under management, is the place people come to name their idea, build a professional website, attract customers and manage their work. Our mission is to give our customers the tools, insights and the people to transform their ideas and personal initiative into success. To learn more about the company, visit www.GoDaddy.com.

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/godaddy-acquires-sucuri-to-advance-digital-security-for-customers-300427537.html|||

