The Global Startup Contest “FIA Smart Cities Startup” is launched by Digital Leaders Ventures (DLV) and the Fédération Internationale de l’Automobile (FIA) with support by Enel, Michelin and Julius Baer. Next pitch events will be held early June 2017 in Berlin Germany and end of July 2017 in Montreal Canada.

Digital Leaders Ventures is partnering with the FIA to host a $1,000,000 global startup competition for early stage startups who build a disruptive and scalable business with the potential to change the world. DLV will invest 100,000 USD / Euro in the winning company at each pitch event. We will be hosting a minimum of ten pitch events globally during the three-year partnership, the first three pitch events have been announced already – Mexico City, Berlin and Montreal.

Additionally the finalist companies will get positive PR, get access to the FIA and DLV network during the conference and get invited to the Formula E Raceday.

You can join the FIA DLV Global Startup Contest today. Just send us some more infos about your company here. We are looking for companies with a scalable product, who are coming out of an accelerator program or with previous funding. No regional limitations.

Application Deadline for Berlin Germany is May 29th at 11:55 pm CET. Pitch Day is on June 8th 2017 in Berlin, Germany.

 Application Deadline for Montreal Canada is July 19th at 11:55 pm ET. Pitch Day is on July 27th 2017 in Montreal, Canada.

The FIA High Level Panel for Road Safety has been established with the goal to raise new resources and awareness for road safety in response to the global road safety crisis. DLV is supporting the Road Safety 2030 Initiative and the High Level Panel lead by Mr. Jean Todt to make change happen. We believe that the Global Startup Contest can accelerate innovation and make our roads safer.

FIA Smart Cities was launched to encourage the relevant stakeholders to address the pressing concerns of urbanisation, such as pollution, congestion and road safety hazards. The Global Startup Contest is one pillar of the FIA Smart Cities Initiative and is calling all Entrepreneurs to find solutions to turn our current cities into smart cities.

The FIA Formula E platform provides a unique arena for the Global Startup Contest along with the FIA’s expertise in its complimentary pillars of Mobility and Sport. This urban-focused fully electric championship is hosted in city centres around the world, one of the objectives being to promote interest in sustainable motoring and showcase the use of innovative clean technologies. We will be hosting the Contest, including the jury workshop and the presentation of the finalists at the Formula E hospitality area – right next to the race track.

Digital Leaders Ventures is a Venture Capital Fund headquartered in Luxembourg. DLV invests in some of the most promising tech-companies globally. We are looking for companies who are coming out of an accelerator program or with previous angel funding, a working product and a international scalable business model.

At the Global Startup Contest we are focusing on

We look for Startups with a strong founder team, a working product, a highly scalable business, who are coming out of an accelerator programs or with previous angel funding.

We will review all applications and we will select 10 Startups who will be invited to our quarterly pitch days. Our jury will then select three Startups Finalists who will present to a larger audience and one winner who will receive a signed term sheet right away.

As a Startup you will get

We are often working with simple equity investment agreements or this standard Y-Combinator SAFE agreement, all publicly available to download and review. SAFE is short for Simple Agreement For Future Equity. More infos can be found here.

We are not limited to any location or region. As long as you can join us in Berlin Germany, you should join and send us more information about your company.

We are not limited to any location or region. As long as you can join us in Montreal Canada, you should join and send us more information about your company.

You can join the FIA DLV Global Startup Contest today. Just send us some more infos about your company (here).|||

