Do you love the look of succulents but can’t seem to keep them alive? Do you typically have a green thumb (or not!) but succulents just don’t appear to be your thing? It sounds like you need a little Succulents 101!

There are several reasons why succulents just don’t make it, and by making a few tweaks, you can get some amazing results. Take a look below at 7 reasons your succulents are dying so you can give your succulents the care they need for success!

Succulents don’t need to be watered like your ordinary or typical houseplant. They are a type of cacti after all, so they can get by with less water and enjoy well-drained soil. The soil should feel cool and damp to the touch, but never saturated or watered down and NEVER muddy. You might want to mist the ground instead of feeding directly for best results.

Did you find a cute tea cup or flower pot for your succulent? Sure it looks nice, but does it give the roots the room it needs to grow? Probably not. The depth of the container should be twice as deep as the roots of the plant, while the width should be at least three times as wide. Doing this gives the plant plenty of room to spread out!

People love planting succulents in cute containers, cups, boots, and all sorts of other containers, but the truth is if they don’t have proper drainage they will never work. Your container should have several drainage holes where water can escape. A piece of net over the holes can help dirt from escaping in the process.

Succulents love warm weather. They don’t want to be near a drafty window or out in cold weather. Keep them in a space where they can be warm and stay warm. They won’t do well if the weather is always changing on them.

Allow for your succulents to fill out naturally and avoid stuffing them closely in the planter. There should be several inches between plants, so they have room to grow and won’t smother each other. Let growth happen naturally and allow for a natural filling instead.

Succulents love nutrient rich soil. Stir in some organic matter or try a planting mix when planting succulents. This way they get the feed they need to be healthy and look beautiful.

If your succulent has been in a container for several months and seems to be thriving, you need to re-pot it into a larger pot. By doing so, you will give it more room to grow, and it won’t get cramped and smothered by its roots.

Are you ready to enjoy more healthy, vibrant, and ALIVE succulents? Give these 7 reasons your succulents are dying your consideration, make the changes needed, and enjoy the succulents you have always dreamed of.

Double or Triple your succulent garden in no time! Check out these tips on How to Regrow Succulents!

You could have also purchased your succulents from a bad source. Check out the best place to buy succulents.|||

Give these 7 reasons your succulents are dying your consideration, make the changes needed, and enjoy the succulents you have always dreamed of.