We invite all hackers, designers and forest machine enthusiasts to hack the harvester. We will take you to a visit to the Ponsse’s manufacturing factory, show harvesters in action and provide you with different APIs and data sets from the forest machines and the maintenance process. Now, Ponsse wants to build a community of tech startups and talented developers with whom co-operation can be continued.

Ponsse is one of the world’s leading manufacturers of forest machines for the cut-to-length method, and its customer-oriented operations are still guided by the wishes and needs of forest machine entrepreneurs. Read more from: www.ponsse.com

The harvester collects data from sensor modules and puts the data to a bus. Ponsse Opti handles the bus together with wireless and wired devices like USB and internet modems.

There will also be professionals who operate harvesters, manage fleet, develop software for information systems and are training operators. They will help with any questions about the challenges and resources.



 Video of Ponsse’s current Fleet Management system. Video shows what data is already in use.

The winning team will get 3000 euros. Prices are paid either as salary or invoice.

Apply with a team of 2-3 people. All applications will be reviewed after the deadline and all applicants will be informed one week after the deadline.

The goal is to develop such prototypes or ideas that help Ponsse’s customers and Ponsse’s service personnel to be more productive in their everyday work. The goal is to create innovative ideas that could someday make working easier, fast and keep customers smiling. The goal is to use harvester’s data so that has never been done before.

Ideas are free for everyone to use but the IPR for any software codebase or documents produced during the competition will stay with the participating team. The host has the first right of refusal to negotiate further collaboration with the team to purchase or continue working on the project initiated at the hack.

Ville Riikkala, former Coach and Screening Team Lead at AppCampus

 Pekka Sivonen, founder of Digia & Director of Digitalization at Tekes

1. Innovativeness and new approach

 2. Commercial potential

 3. Team’s capability to finalize the project

 4. Wise use of given resources (Data, APIs, Devices)

We will have a free bus connection to Vieremä from Oulu city center and Oulu airport in the morning of Friday 18th, and back in the evening on Sunday 20th. If you come by plane, we suggest to take any of the morning flights on Friday, a hotel for Sunday-Monday and a morning flight back on Monday. Flights and hotel in Oulu are not covered by Ponsse.

All accomodation, food and drinks are covered by Ponsse in Vieremä.

You can ask questions related to participating by emailing us at info@industryhack.com.|||

