People keep asking the NCSC if it's OK for them to use password managers (sometimes called password vaults). If so, which ones? Who should use them - private citizens, small businesses, massive enterprises? And how should people use them? Is it safe to put all your crucial passwords into a password manager, and forget trying to remember any at all?

This is a big topic, so we're chunking it up. This blog explains what I think about password managers in general, and how I use them myself. This might be helpful if you're an individual deciding whether and how to use a password manager for your personal use. If you're looking for business use, this blog post won't hold all the answers you need (look out for more from the NCSC on this soon).

They give you huge advantages in a world where there's far too many passwords for anyone to remember. For example:

All these things are full of win. They reduce security friction - making security easier and more convenient.  If security is difficult, tedious, appears to add no value or gets in the way of the main task we're trying to do, then we tend to find (insecure) ways around it. And then we end up less protected.

You might be thinking "If password managers are this good, why haven't you recommended them before now?"

Well, they do have some drawbacks:

Many web browsers now come with password managers built in, and they can be a very good choice. They are very convenient to use, as they are fully integrated with the web browser - so they know when you're on a website that needs a password, and they just pop up and do their thing. You don't even have to remember a separate master password. So feel free to use the built-in password manager, provided that:

One drawback with browser-based password managers is that your passwords may not automatically sync between all your devices if these use different operating systems. So, if you have a Windows laptop, an iPad and an Android smartphone, your passwords may not follow you around everywhere - unless you use the same web-browser on all your devices and log into it. Also, if more than one person uses a device on the same user profile, they would all have access to the same password-protected content. You may not want that.

Compared to browser-based managers, standalone password managers tend to do a better job of keeping your passwords available to you on all your different devices, no matter what platform they're on. They give you a little more control over when and where you use your passwords, as you get to press a button to say 'I want to use the password please', rather than the web page in the browser requesting one when it feels like it.

Importantly, with a standalone password manager you do have to create and remember a long master passphrase (unlike with a browser-based one). Standalone password managers may also include more advanced features, such as:

As with many things, there are lots of different ways of going about this. This is what I do myself:

Finally, think about how important each password is to you for each account. If someone discovered this password, would it result in

If the answer to either is 'yes', then I wouldn’t put it in a password manager. For these cases, a password shouldn't be the only thing that the security of your account rests on. So look at extra defences such as multi-factor authentication.

For other, less important accounts, having the password stolen might be massively inconvenient, but there would be no real permanent damage done. Passwords for these accounts should be OK to go into your password manager.

Some accounts have very low value. For instance, an online forum that requires a password, but doesn’t actually hold any personal information you care about. These passwords can be stored in a password manager without a second thought.

Long-term, I think the success of password managers shows  - yet again -  that password-based authentication has outstayed its welcome. Passwords are supposed to be 'something you know', but now we’re saying the best way to manage them is not to know them (because your password manager knows them all for you). Passwords have taken us a long way, but now it's really time to move on.

The NCSC is working to help us all reduce our reliance on passwords, and to move towards a future where we make greater use of better, more secure, more usable authentication mechanisms instead. In the meantime, we're also working on some guidance on how best to use password managers in organisations - look out for this soon.

Password managers are a good thing - for now. But we hope not forever.

*  We normally recommend against regularly changing passwords where there is no indication or suspicion of compromise - if you are trying to memorise them. The costs are greater than the benefits. However, remembering new passwords that are very different from the previous one isn't a problem for a password manager.|||

Emma W discusses the question everyone keeps asking us.