The S3 Static Website Generator is a script to set up hosting a secure and scalable website on Amazon's AWS S3.

Websites are needed for just about everything these days. The problem is hosting a simple, secure, and scalable website is not as cheap and easy as it should be.

Amazon's AWS S3 service enables you to host a website that's cheap and scales well, but configuring this yourself is still not that simple. You still need to be familiar with AWS and know about provisioning SSL certificates and DNS hosting, and even if you are familiar, you still have to manually do it each time you want to host a new website.

The S3 Static Website Generator was made to make launching a secure and scalable website on S3 as simple as possible. Running the script will handle everything from setting up your DNS, providing your site a SSL certificate, and creating a S3 bucket for your website's code.

First, you'll need an AWS account. If you don't already have one, you can sign up for one here.

This script also assumes you have created an IAM user with admin access permissions (here's how to do this) and have stored that user's credentials locally under the directory or have set those credentials as environment variables (read more here).

Second, you'll have to have Ruby 2.0 or higher installed on your machine (how to install Ruby).

Once you have AWS and Ruby set up, all you have to do is clone this repository:

go into the directory:

install the AWS SDK (if you don't already have it installed):

and run the script (replace yourdomain.com below with your domain name):

The script will run and let you know it's progress. It can take up to 20 minutes to complete. Go grab yourself a much deserved coffee!

When it's finished, it will print the url of your site, the S3 bucket to upload your website code to, and the name servers to point your DNS to. You'll have to point your DNS name servers to these name servers in order to see your site when accessing it's url. This also may take some time before you can access your site.

Released under the MIT License. See http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT for more information.

If you need help with this script send me an email. I'll try my best to help you out.|||

s3-static-site-generator - A script to set up hosting a secure and scalable website on Amazon's AWS S3.