“The release showed the holes in the software of the iPhone, Android, Cisco and many more – and now businesses can address these vulnerabilities,” says Mike Sirius, Head of Development at Metropolis Business Media, “Cisco, for its routers, were one of few to utilise this knowledge.”

The downside of the Vault7 dump is, adds Sirius: “it is a gold mine for hackers. Everyone knew the CIA could do this but now it’s official and we know how it’s been done.”

The electronics industry is now on notice that it has to check out its products to see if they’ve been compromised.

“Vault7 is a Red Flag,” Peter Dakin, Director of Digital Technology at Metropolis (pictured, right), tells Electronics Weekly, “it gives everyone who makes hardware and software the opportunity to take a look at their whole supply chain – especially the chip people.”

Because the West outsources a very large proportion of its chip manufacturing to foreign companies, there is always the potential for foreign interests to put holes in those ICs.

There have been some astonishing revelations about the capabilities of the CIA. “There are cell phone towers which, once you’re connected to them, the CIA can jump in and take over control of your phone,” says Dakin, “and there is malware that knows how to jump the gap when air-gapped computers are run in isolation with no cabling and no wireless or other connection. For example the Stuxnet worm via USB”

There is a very plausible explanation why some airline passengers have been banned from taking laptops into the cabins of aircraft. Avionics experts have been able to hack into an aircraft’s control using a laptop in the passenger cabin.

“They could have been targeting laptops not because they’re bombs, but because they’re weapons – cyber weapons. Malware to trigger an avionics takedown could be introduced, perhaps even in a supply chain attack without the device owner’s knowledge,” says Dakin.

“They also have the ability to control cars,” adds Sirius, “they can accelerate them, block the steering wheel, etc.” (See Car hacked through mobile phone connection)

Hackers specialise in these fields. “If you want to be very good you can’t be a generalist hacker,” says Sirius, “you need to be a specialist hacker in a particular area – say Cisco routers.”

The leak of the Vault7 recipes was likely helped by the CIA’s bizarre decision to declassify it. That made it available to a wider number of people and it eventually it found its way to Wikileaks, who have said in a statement. “The archive appears to have been circulated among former US government hackers and contractors in an unauthorised manner, one of whom has provided WikiLeaks with portions of the archive”.

“Vault7 is a warning,” says Dakin, “like Jurassic Park warning us ‘don’t mess around with DNA’. If an enemy state hacked into a bit of ordnance which was going to be used in a conflict, the ordnance could be used against us.”

Are there solutions? “Is there a way that the hardware can be designed so it knows it’s been compromised?” suggests Dakin.

Sirius thinks not: “There’ll always be an ability to hack anything,” he says, “software can always be hacked.”

With every government in the hacking game, every system vulnerable, companies spending fortunes on IT security and hackers rampant, it seems there is no end to the hacking phenomenon.|||

The Vault7 dump of hacking recipes used by the CIA could be a very positive thing for companies who can now check if their equipment is compromised.