I needed a typeface to display code on this site. That task morphed into this post.

Every programmer at some point chooses a typeface for coding. Perhaps you are satisfied with your editor’s defaults (I envy you). Maybe you are a typophile or perfectionist. Good luck if so: no programming-related domain is complete without endless arguments over implementation details: “X is better than Y”; monospace vs. proportional; ligatures vs. not; bitmapped vs. vector.

My desiderata in choosing a typeface to display code on this site:

Width is an especially important criterion: analytics indicates site traffic is 49% desktop vs 51% mobile. Narrower typefaces fit more code on screen which benefits mobile and paper alike.

Filtering on the above criteria, a number of commercial and free typefaces fit the bill (alphabetical order):

Several otherwise great typefaces lacked one or more of my requirements and did not make the cut:

For Apple fans: Monaco lacks both italic and bold while Menlo is already represented since it’s a Vera Sans Mono derivative.

Triplicate, a font “[u]nlike the usual monospaced snoozefest” , didn’t make the cut for my own arbitrary aesthetic reasons. Sorry Matthew.

Below are the candidate typefaces at 18 points (except Monoid as noted below) rendered on Windows 7 and MacOS 10.12. Please forgive slight color and image size differences.

Given I’m looking for a font more compact than the Courier-sized gang my candidates are narrowed (ha!) to Input Mono Condensed and everything below it.

Cutting to the chase, I picked Input Mono for several reasons:

Kudos to David Jonathan Ross for creating such a flexible font family with simple and generous licensing. I’m excited to integrate it into the site and explore use of the Sans and Serif styles.

A good font is a synthesis of design prowess and technical mastery. Glyphs are art: curves, lines, space. Fonts convey glyphs via complex technical standards (OpenType, TrueType, etc) that inseparably constrain and inform how the glyphs appear.

Being a typophile I knew that making a typeface was not a trivial effort. But my goodness! This search for a code font has completely reset my appreciation of the craft! Take a look at the thought Monoid’s author put into glyph design. Or how about PragmataPro’s >7,000 glyphs?!? Did you know Unicode has this many arrows? How about Info’s clean-slate design philosophy.|||

