Who codes? More people in more places than ever before.

Each month, about 40 million people visit Stack Overflow to learn, share, and level up. We estimate that 16.8 million of these people are professional developers and university-level students.

Our estimate on professional developers comes from the things people read and do when they visit Stack Overflow. We collect data on user activity to help surface jobs we think you might find interesting and questions we think you can answer. You can download and clear this data at any time.

About three-quarters of respondents identify as web developers, although many also said they are working to build desktop apps and mobile apps.

Compared to the rest of the world, the United States has a higher proportion of people who identify as full stack web developers, whereas Germany has a comparatively lower proportion. As for mobile developers, the U.S. and United Kingdom have proportionally more iOS developers and fewer Android developers than the rest of the world.

People other than full-time developers also write code as part of their jobs, and they come to Stack Overflow for help and community. This year, we gave additional occupation options to respondents who are not full-time developers, but who occasionally code as part of their work. These roles include analyst, data scientist, and educator.

A common misconception about developers is that they've all been programming since childhood. In fact, we see a wide range of experience levels. Among professional developers, one-eighth (12.5%) learned to code less than four years ago, and an additional one-eighth (13.3%) learned to code between four and six years ago. Due to the pervasiveness of online courses and coding bootcamps, adults with little to no programming experience can now more easily transition to a career as a developer.

Web and mobile developers have significantly less professional coding experience, on average, than developers in other technical disciplines such as systems administration and embedded programming. Across all developer kinds, the software industry acts as the primary incubator for new talent, but sees a relatively low proportion of more experienced developers. For example, 60% of mobile developers at software firms have fewer than five years of professional coding experience, compared to 45% of mobile developers in other industries.

Among professional developers, 11.3% got their first coding jobs within a year of first learning how to program. A further 36.9% learned to program between one and four years before beginning their careers as developers. Globally, developers in Southern Asia had the lowest average amount of prior coding experience when beginning their careers; those in continental Europe had the highest.

Respondents who indicated that they had worked as professional developers in the past, but now did something else for a living, were asked how long they had coded as part of their jobs.

We asked respondents for their gender identity. Specifically, we asked them to select each of the following options that apply to them:

According to Quantcast, women account for 10% of Stack Overflow’s U.S. traffic. Similarly, 10% of survey respondents from the U.S. identify as women. In our survey last year, 6.6% of respondents from the U.S. identified as women.

Meanwhile, women account for 9% of Stack Overflow’s UK traffic, while 7.3% of survey respondents from the UK were women. Finally, women account for 8% of Stack Overflow’s traffic from both France and Germany, while 5.1% and 5.6% of respondents from those countries, respectively, identify as women.

We will publish additional analysis related to respondents’ gender identities in the coming weeks.

This was the first year we asked respondents for their ethnic identity. We asked them to select each option that applied.

We asked respondents this question to add an important dimension to what we can learn about developers. In addition, public policy researchers and employers frequently look to us for information on how they can reach out to and better understand underrepresented groups among developers.

We will publish additional analysis related to respondents’ ethnic identities in the coming weeks.

Similar to our question about ethnicity, this was the first year we asked respondents for their disability status. Of the 3.4% of respondents who identified as having a disability, we asked them to select each option that applied, and we included a write-in option. We know developers can experience many forms of disability. For this survey, we confined our list of standard options on this question to disabilities that require some physical accommodation by employers.

We will publish additional analysis related to respondents’ disability status in the coming weeks.

We asked respondents, “What is the highest level of education received by either of your parents?” Similar to ethnicity and disability status, this is the first year we asked this question. We asked this question in part because public policy researchers and some employers seek information about first-generation college students to improve their efforts to support them.

We will publish additional analysis on this in the coming weeks.

While the sample as a whole skewed heavily male, women were more likely to be represented in some developer roles than others. They were proportionally more represented among data scientists, mobile and web developers, quality assurance engineers, and graphic designers. The dashed line shows the average ratio for all of these developer roles.

Respondents who identified as White or of European descent were less likely to report being a mobile developer than those who identified as South Asian, Hispanic or Latino/Latina, or East Asian. A higher proportion of respondents who identified as Hispanic or Latino/Latina selected “web developer” as an option compared to those who selected White or of European descent, South Asian, or East Asian.

Important note: We didn't receive enough responses from developers of some ethnicities to include them here with reliable percentages. However, we do see that many developers who identify as Black or of African descent work as web developers and mobile developers, and many developers with Middle Eastern ethnic backgrounds work as web developers and desktop applications developers. Developers who identified as Native American, Pacific Islander, or Indigenous Australian work as web developers at a high rate.

Between respondents who identified as men or women, nearly twice the number of women said they had been coding for less than a year. On average, respondents who identified as White or of European descent and those who identified as Pacific Islander or Indigenous Australian had the highest average number of years experience coding.

Among current professional developers globally, 76.5% of respondents said they had a bachelor’s degree or higher, such as a Master’s degree or equivalent.

More than half (54.2%) of professional developers who had studied at a college or university said they had concentrated their studies on computer science or software engineering, and an additional quarter (24.9%) majored in a closely-related discipline such as computer programming, computer engineering, or information technology. The remaining 20.9% said they had majored in other fields such as business, the social sciences, natural sciences, non-computer engineering, or the arts.

Among current students who responded to the survey, 48.3% said they were majoring in computer science or software engineering, and 30.5% said they were majoring in closely-related fields. Finally, 21.2% said they were focusing on other fields.

Of current professional developers, 32% said their formal education was not very important or not important at all to their career success. This is not entirely surprising given that 90% of developers overall consider themselves at least somewhat self-taught: a formal degree is only one aspect of their education, and so much of their practical day-to-day work depends on their company’s individual tech stack decisions.

However, computer science majors and computer engineering majors were the most likely (49.4%) to say their formal education was important or very important.

Compared to computer science majors, respondents who majored in less theoretical computer-related disciplines (such as IT, web development, or computer programming) were more likely to say their formal educations were unimportant.

Developers love to learn: 90% say they are at least partially self-taught. Among current professional developers, 55.9% say they’ve taken an online course, and 53.4% say they’ve received on-the-job training.

By far, reading official documentation and using Stack Overflow Q&A are the two most common ways developers level up their skills.

Due to the high demand for professional developers, coding bootcamps have exploded in popularity in the past few years. Although commonly perceived as a way for non-developers to transition into a new career, we found that 45.8% of those who said they’d gone through a bootcamp were already developers when they started the program. This is likely because many developers decide at various parts in their career that they need to upgrade their skills or learn new technologies to stay relevant in the job market.

Coding isn’t just a career; it can be a passion. Among all developers, 75.0% code as a hobby; even among professional developers a similar proportion (73.9%) do so. Additionally, 32.7% of developers said they contribute to open source projects.

Want to learn to code but don’t know where to start? More developers say you should take an online course than any other method, followed by getting a book and working through the exercises.

As an important side note, we received great feedback on how we phrased this question, specifically the option, “Get a job as a QA tester and work your way into a developer role.” Although some developers start their careers as QA testers, the phrasing made it sound as if we saw QA as just a stepping stone, rather than a vital function and career option. QA professionals are our heroes (and QA engineers are 3.5% of our respondents this year!), and we apologize for not more carefully crafting our language.|||

Get insights on the world’s developers from the largest and most comprehensive survey ever. Demographics. Technologies. Salaries. Career satisfaction.