Travel is such an important part in many peoples lives. But, travelling sustainably should be just as important too.

Here is a list of the top 10 most visited cities of 2016 (according to Mastercard) and a few things you can do to ensure you travel them in a sustainable and eco-friendly manner.

Unfortunately for South Korea, air pollution is a major problem. This is said to be the result of dust from the deserts in China that pick up industrial pollutants on its way over the border, but the problem also lies within the South Korea’s border too… The country still remains with 43 coal-fired power plants and 4 nuclear plants, all of which contribute to a terrible air quality across South Korea’s land. For you to limit the damage you create in this country that is already suffering, try to do a few of the following:

In recent years, Tokyo has become a very popular travel destination. It’s interesting, unique and incredibly busy.

Due to the huge population of 13 million people that live in Tokyo, it can be very easy for the city to create a negative impact on the environment. To avoid damaging a city that already creates a lot of waste, here are a few things you can do:

Istanbul is a historic Middle Eastern/European city that takes both ancient and modern by storm. It has ranked so highly on the list of most visited cities, as travellers have come to realise how beautiful the city is, with both historic mosques and ‘hip’ sights that would suit all kinds of travellers. To keep the city as clean as possible, especially when the city is often covered in thick, polluted smog, try some of the following:

A major problem in Malaysia is the extreme production of Palm Oil. It damages the environment, is an extreme hazard to wildlife and is a major issue for the country as a whole. It’s important for travellers, and people as a part of society, to prevent the destruction as much as possible. Not only that, but the city suffers from severe traffic congestion and pollution too.

The train system in Singapore is one of the best I’ve ever experienced. It’s the cleanest city you’ll potentially ever come across and is also on the right path to being entirely sustainable. Singapore is striving to be a Zero Waste Nation and the leader in Green Economy, to help them on their journey, there are a few important things that all travellers can do.

New York is America’s largest city. Although it appears to be a concrete wasteland and a damage to the environment on a global scale, that is not entirely the case. Of course, there are major issues in place merely due to the size, population density and congestion that causes havoc, but otherwise, the city is doing quite well to maintain its eco-friendly aspects.

Due to New York being a major shopping capital, there are many stores throughout the city that contributes to major issues such as sweatshops and animal testing, being conscious of your purchases is also very important.

Dubai is an incredibly futuristic city situated in the centre of the desert. It’s becoming increasingly popular for stopover visits due to the huge airport it withholds, and the unusual aspects you won’t find anywhere else in the world. Unfortunately for this city, there are little to no sustainable methods of transportation, and driving is one of the only reasonable options for locals and tourists alike.

Not to mention the enormous amount of energy used to air-condition every building in the city due to the extreme heat the country has. Dubai is a tough one, but there are certainly things you can do to help the city out:

Arguably the most beautiful, picturesque, loveable city in the world, Paris is not only is the 3rd most visited city of 2016, it’s also high up on the list of the greenest cities too. When in the city of love and light, make sure not to contribute to a potential downfall by doing a few of the following:

London has been number one on the list of most visited cities numerous times before, but unfortunately in 2016, the title was taken from them. The city is incredibly popular for tourists due to its common language, historic architecture and buzzing city life. England has been working hard on fighting climate change in recent years, and are heading in the right direction towards a sustainable future – it’s a big task for this city though, due to its huge population of 8.6 million, as well as its 19+ million visitors it receives every year.

Visitors: Bangkok tops the list of the most visited cities in 2016, with a whopping total of 21.47 million overnight visitors!

Although, Thailand is unfortunately not the most eco-friendly on the list. There are many major issues in place for this country that need our utmost attention to overcome. Some things include – deforestation, air pollution, water pollution, habitat and species loss.

Due Thailand’s city of Bangkok being the most popular destination of 2016, it’s only natural that there be a big list of things travellers can do to reduce the countries destruction and carbon footprint.|||

Here's how you can travel sustainably in the world most visited cities - you don't want to contribute to their demise do you?