The Base Code: why you should sell your stock now and put it into cryptocurrencies

Over the last year, if you have been doing exactly what we said in The Base Code, then you would have made a +75% return on your money in the stock market, gaining almost $3,500 on a base of $4,500. To put that into perspective, if you would have invested only $1 million following The Base Code’s very simple strategy of BOSRUP (Buy On Sale, Reinvest Under Performers), you would have made $750,000 in a single year.

This morning, we sold all of our holdings and locked in the gain that we had been building as part of The Base Code’s fund for the last year. Below is a screenshot from our Robinhood account for proof. Read on to understand why.

To make this as easy to read and impactful as possible, we’ll just put all of our observations into a simple bulleted list. Then you can judge for yourself.

Why isn’t anyone noticing and why isn’t the same trigger that happened last time happening? That is, why is no one talking about a bubble or an expected crash? Very simple: the media is distracted with Trump. It’s been on the New York Time’s front page for months. It’s so much noise, and coupled with Bravo TV as an escape, that people are missing it this time.

We’re early. That’s true. We may have another 6 to 9 months or even a year. But when it happens, just like every other crash, it happens fast. And even with your finger on the trigger you can’t react fast enough.

But make no mistake. When people stop buying the core things that make our economy run: food, clothes, entertainment, then it has a massive ripple effect. They are leading indicators of something not so great happening on the horizon.

It used to be that people would put their money into gold when their confidence faltered on a nation’s economy. The reason is that gold has value outside of just a currency like a piece of paper backed by a federal government. It has intrinsic value.

As of this morning (March 2, 2017), a very interesting thing happened. Bitcoin’s price is the same as gold.

For those unfamiliar, Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency. It’s partially decentralized, which means there’s no government that owns it and it’s uncorrelated with other asset classes. But it does have its problems. Even though it’s the biggest, it is controlled by a small group of individuals who are currently fighting over the right approach to take in the future.

So there’s another cryptocurrency that’s worth watching. That’s Ethereum. It has over $1 billion in market value which, as a new startup, is a pretty compelling thing by itself. Growing from $0 to over $1B in a few years time based solely on the value of people using it to build things on.

Even the New York Times announced that big businesses are going to be building new computing systems on top of the Ethereum platform. JP Morgan Chase, Microsoft, Bank NY Mellon.

We’ve also talked to developers who’ve built reference products on the platfrom. It’s stable, a new computing paradigm and everyone agrees that the development team building Ethereum is crazy smart but also morally ethical.

So, as you think of an asset class that wouldn’t also crash in response to the stock market faltering, but rather continue to go up because it’s a safer place to store capital, cryptocurrencies sound like a better solution than gold.

The value is tied to the number of “app developers” building on top of Ethereum, for instance. Use Apple and their apps as an analogy. The more iOS apps you have in the Apple ecosystem, the more it attracts new developers, the more it attracts users, the more valuable Apple becomes. The Flywheel Effect. Only imagine that these apps also act like currency and you can invest in the entire kit-n-kaboodle.

I know a few folks who are getting into Ethereum. And even though they specify that you shouldn’t treat it as a currency or investment class vehicle, the fact remains that you’re ultimately investing in a startup that’s growing quickly, becomes more valuable as more people build on top of it, already have major global companies doing it, and is uncorrelated with the rest of the market.

One last point. China is working on their own cryptocurrency that they will use to take over part of their money supply. As they use more of WeChat and digital payments, this makes a whole lot of sense. Eventually, you should expect The Base Code to keep part of its interest in Chinese cryptocurrency, as it creates a hedge against the American economy. There are over 1 billion people all connected and using a single platform, and single digital currency, enabling the economists in the government to make real-time monetary policy changes in response to consumer behavior happening digitally.

At that point, China will be ahead of America, at least from a currency perspective.

One last point. Imagine the entire global system crumbles. Banks fail. The cash you have sitting in their digital vaults disappears overnight. You’re overseas, you can’t access your cash. The FDIC can’t insure the entirety of American savings, as paltry as it may be. The only safe harbor that allows for 24/7/365 liquidity without being subject to the rampant fraud we saw leading up to the housing market collapse, is a cryptocurrency.

Now, no individual’s personal incentive to deceive or make back-room deals can get in the way of your digital currency. And you can still shift it to a bank to get cash out. Some even have ATMs for these digital currencies.

Again, we’re early. People like to talk as if that’s a sign of failure in the startup industry. But regardless, it’s a sign of Alpha in the investing industry.|||

Over the last year, if you have been doing exactly what we said in The Base Code, then you would have made a +75% return on your money in the stock market, gaining almost $3,500 on a base of $4,500…