Your email address is used to send you a invitation through Apple TestFlight and will not be used for anything else.

View and Review your code. Alone or with your team.

This app is an excellent Git client, and I don't mean just excellent for iOS. It's interface is relatively intuitive, my only minor complaint being that it took me a few moments to figure out that tapping the remote name is where to go to fetch and such. I'm sure the help covers that, but I like to see if an app can successfully be navigated by intuition alone – the classic Apple test. Committing and pushing works flawlessly, gracefully handling conflicts and merges. It's a joy to use. I'd buy an OS X version if one existed; this is a Git UI as it should be. It's remarkable that I can fully work with files, send them to other iOS apps to work on there, then send them back to Working Copy seamlessly, even if I'm working on multiple versions of the same file. In an era of barely-tested, poorly thought-out apps, this is a stellar exception of a well-designed product with distinct marks of a great QA process. Well done!

The app is billed as a "a powerful Git client for iOS 8 that clones, edits, commits, pushes & more". There is nothing in this statement that it doesn't live up to. If you're looking for something to work with GitHub on the move then I can highly recommend. Is it worth the money? Definitely.

I use it daily to review new code in GitHub Enterprise repositories. The best feature for me is that I can use it offline without a need to be connected to the VPN. Viewing of files is easier than on GitHub thanks to better syntax highlighting.

This is truly a full featured git client on iOS. Let's be honest though, you probably won't be writing a full project on your phone or iPad. What has made this app really valuable o me however is checking in on a crash that was just reported by crashlytics while away from my computer. I get the email with the line that crashed, and I can jump straight over and look at the class and see what exactly is going on. It is also really nice to be able to keep up with commit logs or pull requests. As a mobile dev I couldn't live without it

This may be one of the more expensive apps, but this is a tool worth having if you’re any kind of serious coder (or writer, for that matter). The diff and merging abilities are stunning (try a diff on an image. I know, right?). The editing tools build right in to the program are very good, and even rival standalone editors (try markdown and preview it). Integration with apps like Textastic and Editorial make this a serious part of your workflow. The author is very responsive to feedback, fixes and features come regularly. I have switched over from using Dropbox for storing and syncing notes and text to using Working Copy with BitBucket and Editorial. It works wonderfully and has NO recurring payments. Don’t be afraid of the price, this is well worth what Anders is asking. Using this app is one of those times you say “I can’t believe I just did all that on my iPhone”.

Just thank you. I used to see my iOS devices as incapable of anything other than "emergency" edits (usually directly on a server). Not anymore. I can make large contributions to projects, write new features, and with the right complimentary setup, get near realtime feedback on my code through a test server after making a commit. So cool.

The app is so well designed that I prefer it over the GitHub's web-interface when familiarizing myself with a new code-base. And let me tell you: It works extremely well in bed as well. Alas: Working Copy now contains my evening lecture in addition to all the source code I would not want to go missing.

This app is EXACTLY what I've been looking for. I can easily connect to my bitbucket account, clone repos, commit and push changes right from my phone using third party apps that are already a part of my workflow. I use this with Textastic and Ulysses to post to and tweak my Jekyll blog from my iPhone and iPad, wherever I may be.|||

Working Copy is a powerful Git client for iOS that clones, edits, commits, pushes and more.