Adobe and Microsoft have announced the first set of joint solutions to ‘help enterprises transform their customer experiences’, with Adobe’s Experience Cloud combining alongside Microsoft Azure, Dynamics 365 and Power BI products.

Those with good memories will recall an announcement made last September which confirmed Azure would become the preferred cloud platform for Adobe’s marketing, creative and document clouds, with Adobe’s Marketing Cloud doing similarly for Dynamics 365 Enterprise, Microsoft’s enterprise resource planning offering.

Adobe said this latest change builds on the previous partnership. “Bringing together Adobe’s and Microsoft’s sales, marketing and customer intelligence solutions enables brands to better understand and engage with their customers across all touch points,” said Abhay Parasnis, Adobe EVP and CTO.

What this means in terms of product is a combined Adobe Analytics and Microsoft Power BI for the enterprise audience, an integration between Adobe Campaign and Microsoft Dynamics 365 for marketing teams trying to create a single customer view, and the concisely named Adobe Experience Manager Sites Managed Service – web content management, in other words – available on Azure.

“We believe the combined power of our technologies will allow enterprise businesses to harness their data in new ways, unlocking critical business insights and actionable intelligence,” said Scott Guthrie, Microsoft EVP in a statement. “Together, we are delivering compelling and personalised experiences that will drive brand loyalty and growth.”

In addition, Adobe unveiled a series of enhancements to its Cloud Platform product, including a new common data language, XDM, quicker time to market for developers with Launch, and partner integrations with Acxiom, AppDynamics, MasterCard, and more.

The press release summed it up nicely. “Advancements in cloud services have fundamentally altered the computing landscape. The next decade will bring even more disruptive changes in how brands create, immerse and engage their customers in their experiences,” it offered. “A modern experience platform that addresses these expectations needs to be designed with a common data language founded on content and data, an open ecosystem to enable others to build on and innovate, and intelligence at its core with AI, machine learning and deep learning.”|||

Adobe and Microsoft have announced the first set of joint solutions to ‘help enterprises transform their customer experiences’, with Adobe’s Experience Cloud combining alongside Microsoft Azure, Dynamics 365 and Power BI products.