It’s more important now than ever to run a business securely, but with threats becoming more common and complex every day and countermeasures always shifting, it can be difficult to know how to start building an effective information security practice. In order to help, we at Security Compass’s advisory unit distilled the most critical measures into ten security principles that every business should follow. While not an exhaustive list, these represent the most important bases to cover when building a security program and assessing the basic health and comprehensiveness of an existing program.

We encourage you to read this list with a mind to identifying which practices could be improved in your business, and to contact us for a free consultation on how to implement these security principles across your business.

Do you know what is happening in your network as it’s happening? In the event of a security incident, are you able to trace the intrusion to its source? With proper logging, you should be notified when undesired events occur, like hard drive failure, power failure, and data exfiltration, and you should be able to trace back an attack or event to its source.

Are your applications and operating systems up to date? Is the updating process automated? By keeping your operating systems and applications up to date, you can reduce around 99% of technical attacks against your network, short of zero-days, which are rare and expensive if purchased.

Are there any deterrents to on-site physical attacks, or are your doors wide open? Is your server room safe from a rogue USB device? With the right physical safeguards, you can prevent easy theft of data or business interruptions from an unsophisticated attack.

Do your employees know what they may and may not do on your network? Some regulations and compliance standards require this, like PCI-DSS, HIPAA, and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley ACT (GLBA). But a security policy also helps protect the company in case of litigation, as when an employee is fired for browsing inappropriate websites on their work computer or accuses the company of wrongful termination. More broadly, the security policy is also used to align corporate security objectives with high-level business objectives.

Do your employees know enough to protect your company from phishing or social engineering attacks? Do your developers know how to write secure code? Developers don’t know what they don’t know, and training them on various security vulnerabilities in applications helps them learn to create more secure products. Proactive protection via training is crucial, especially against attacks like social engineering and phishing.

Security Compass provides both computer-based and instructor-led training with accompanying certification like CSSLP (Certified Secure Software Lifecycle Professional).

Is your security program effective? Is your security policy actually being enforced? The only way to be certain is through regular audits.

Security Compass specializes in verification work through penetration testing, vulnerability assessments, red team assessments, phishing campaigns, and more.

Do you limit the use of administrator accounts? Do you track account privileges and access across your enterprise? Limiting privileges as much as possible within your company’s operations requirements prevents unauthorized users from accessing sensitive information. As one telling example, 96% of critical vulnerabilities affecting Windows operating systems could be mitigated by removing admin rights.

Do you have separate corporate and guest networks? Are your production servers on the same network as all your employees? It’s crucial to keep your sensitive systems safely separated from other higher-risk systems.

Are your critical assets backed up and stored away from your corporate building? Are backups automated? How frequently are you backing your data up? In order to protect your company’s data in case of disasters, natural or human (ransomware, human error, malicious hacker, etc.), it is important to backup data frequently and keep it in a protected space.

Do you have up-to-date antivirus on all employee computers? Have you implemented host imaging software to regularly restore systems back to a known good state? The most high-risk technical components in an organization are employees’ devices, so it’s important to make it as easy as possible for employees to use their own devices securely.

Security Compass’s advisory and training services can help implement these principles across your business. Contact us for a free consultation to learn how you can get started.|||

It’s more important now than ever to run a business securely, but with threats becoming more common and complex every day and countermeasures always shifting, it can be difficult to know how to start…