My father, John, is an engineer and spent most of his career as an Engineering Manager at what was then the British Steel Corporation in Teesside.

The problems he had to solve on the Steelworks are about as different from my day-to-day, of ensuring people can watch their favourite TV shows, as possible. But how we go about solving those problems has a lot of parallels.

The above quote was always hung on the wall of my fathers office, and had come from one of his previous superiors who he greatly respected. He told me that it formed the basis of his whole career in engineering and management. It - and other ‘war stories’ - that he told me as a youngster, turned out to make a big impression on me too.

Some things - like Total Quality Management (a variation of Toyota’s lean manufacturing practices) - gave me an early feel for agile methodologies before they became widespread in the software industry. While others were almost allegories that stuck in my head and sometimes subconsciously, other times consciously have guided how I approach problems in my own career.

Here, I’ll paraphrase one of those stories, along with some of the lessons I drew from it.

For part of his career, my Dad was responsible for transport at the Steel Works (trains and trucks carrying large cargoes of iron and steel around the site).

In this incident, some consultants had been brought in to design and lay a new road for transporting the huge 100 tonne payload, steel slab carriers between plants. And just a week after the new road was put to use, it had already started to fluidise (ie. the vast weight of the loaded trucks was causing the foundations of the road to move).

The Senior Engineers and others were speculating about what to do - closing the road for repairs would cost millions, and no-one was certain what to do to fix it. Spending weeks more to research the most efficient solution would have been the no-one-gets-fired-for-buying-ibm answer, but would have been extremely costly. And no-one wanted to take responsibility for making a decision that might look badly on them if it failed.

At this point my Dad got involved:

A lot of the challenges we encounter in engineering are timeless, so even though the technologies we use change as the years go by, the underlying tactics for approaching problems don’t seem to.

And I’ll leave you with another great quote - this time one of my Dad’s own:

If you ever get the chance to walk around inside a SteelWorks, then jump at it. They’re one of the most awe-inspiring places. Like standing inside a cathedral with a volcano erupting next to you.|||

Lessons from my father