Metabase was originally built around collaboration. It came from a need to share common database queries, pass reports around and generally have non-technical members of a team figure out common questions on their own. For the past year or so, we’ve mostly ignored the other big form of collaboration, namely with people outside of your company. With this release, we’ve turned our sights onto this broad swathe of analytics.

We’ve provided three different ways to use Metabase to share data with the outside world.

You can now share a card or dashboard with people that don’t have an account on your Metabase instance. This is done via a secure link that can be shared in Slack, email, text or however else you need to share a link. Public cards and dashboards are hosted on your own instance and can be shut when you’re done sharing them. This lets you do things like share reports with vendors, display dashboards on a TV without allowing any kind of other access, and more! Learn more about public links

Additionally, any public card or dashboard can be embedded in a blog post, a web page or anywhere else you can enter HTML code.

With signed embedding, you can embed a chart or a dashboard in a web application. The main difference between signed embedding from embedding public charts is that with signed embedding you will need to sign requests to Metabase from a server. This allows you to have secure per-user stats dashboards, reports, etc in your application without needing to write any additional code. Learn more about embedding

The Metabase team cares a lot about security. We now allow you to encrypt your database credentials at rest, and will be extending this to allow you to encrypt any other information we store on your behalf.

You can download the new version of Metabase at www.metabase.com/start/ To upgrade, see the instructions for your platform. As always we strongly recommend backing up your application database before upgrading.|||

Metabase was originally built around collaboration. It came from a need to share common database queries, pass reports around and generally have non-technica...