If you’re looking for a freelance developer chances are you’ve heard about Upwork – the most popular online marketplace for global software development talent. But just like with offline hiring, finding the right person is not straightforward. This guide was created to help you ace the process of finding a great freelance developer or a team, by showing you exactly how to write the perfect upwork job description.

Upwork is the largest freelance marketplace with 12M registered freelancers and $1B+ billed annually. It has a broad range of providers: from novice freelancers to 50+ person development teams making millions in revenue per year.

Upwork presents itself as a place where you can easily hire a good coder. However, quick googling reveals many posts about negative client experiences on Upwork.

Don’t be discouraged right away.

Inevitably, such a large overall transaction volume produces quite a few failed projects and people are far more likely to share their bad experiences than good. Just be mindful of the fact that Upwork does have some very bad developers. Nevertheless, I believe that majority of the providers on Upwork are genuine professionals caring about their reputation.

There are several components to successful Upwork job posting strategy. First, you need to stand out from the noise to attract serious experienced freelancers. Second, eliminate high-risk candidates during the hiring process. Finally, structure the project in a way that minimizes your risk. Let’s have a deeper look into each step.

I worked on Upwork (when it was called Elance) as a freelance developer for 3 years. Guess what was my least favorite thing to do? Yep, looking for projects. As a developer I’d rather dive into an interesting project that I get paid for than sifting through a never-ending stream of ‘Facebook clone for $500’ job posts.

Bear in mind that you compete for talented developers with other clients, most of whom have a vague idea of what they need built.

At this point I’m assuming that you have a technical mentor, you’ve decided on the technology stack and have a functional specification and/or wireframes. If not, read 6 Important Questions to Ask Before Hiring an Offshore Software Development Company first. Now, in order to attract the best developers you need to write a job post that speaks ‘professionalism’. Besides good grammar and spelling here’s what an ideal post should include:

If a freelancer can’t even read through your entire job post and comply with simple requests – how are they going to follow more complex instructions?

Ask for examples of similar applications they’ve built before, how long they’ve been working with this technology, what is their career history and what is their availability moving forward.

Here is a great template you can use as a guide to write a good job post.

Now that you have proposals pouring in, it’s time to do some elimination.

At this point you’ve gone through quite a process to shortlist and hire your freelancer or team. However, it’s too early to relax and wait for your project to be completed. The initial period is still risky and you should think of it similar to a trial period when you hire in-house. Don’t welcome them into your family just yet. If there’s an issue, your goal is to find out as soon as possible and either resolve it or find another provider – the “fail fast” mantra works well here. Here’s how you can apply it:

As you can see, writing the perfect upwork job description is not rocket science, However, it requires following a process that might seem a little overwhelming for newbies. The good news is that, in my experience, not many clients on Upwork do their homework. Being serious, thorough and prepared will allow you to instantly stand out from the crowd and attract the best developers to your project.

Want me to coach you (for free) through the process of outsourcing the development of your MVP on Upwork? Click here to apply for the TechStarted $2000 MVP Challenge|||

Check out the TechStarted guide on how to write the perfect Upwork job description and hire the best outsourced developers