From OCD to Launching my Fitness Startup and Getting Married (thanks Headspace)

With my 26 years of age, I’m quite the ordinary guy. A violin-student-turned-startup founder, I’ve worked successfully as a self-taught internet marketer, selling affiliate products for a living.

Making a two-person team together with my friend, we’ve been doing this for 4+ years. It pays the bills, allowed me to afford lots of things, and see some parts of the world with my wife (fiancée at the time).

Add to this chronic and casually resurfacing OCD I’ve almost grew up with, and you can understand how anxiety episodes are not particularly outlandish for me, but rather something I’ve known all too intimately over the years.

But there is something that Andy from Headspace helped me understand, and I have since changed the relationship with my mind, and how I react to thoughts and feelings. In lack of better words, it transformed my life.

Sharing this openly seems rather surreal. But then again, once things stop bothering you on a more profound level, you approach them with ease. Talking about everything, all of the sudden, feels eventful enough for you to appreciate it, but otherwise distant enough and not able to bother you.

When I met my lovely wife for the first time, we kind of clicked instantly. The initial 5 or 6 months of our relationship were unicorns galloping across rainbows. And that’s putting it vanilla-free, trust me.

Still madly in love, this affected our relationship nonetheless.

And that’s how I came across Headspace. Cannot remember my initial Google queries that led me to discovering it, but they were probably connected with obsessive thinking. Or how to “get rid of it” (as I used to believe)

I remember falling in love with the Headspace interface, and moreover with the light approach to solving my problem.

Soon enough, I started to cross-learn the patterns of though. By focusing on the breath, or by noting thoughts and feelings, I came to understand how to deal with unpleasant ones, and how to differentiate in the first place so I don’t get caught up in all too familiar patterns.

This wasn’t about crossing things off my list, but rather approaching each moment as a chance to do things differently. To be aware, to allow feelings to come and go, to allow thoughts to come and go.

I learned to recognize resistance, and acceptance naturally surfaced. But putting such processes in words doesn’t do them justice.

The intellectual part is one thing, but the experiential completely another. So much so that a new world of possibilities opens up. The frequency and potency of unpleasant thoughts and feelings shrinks and dissipates till you can hardly remember how miserable you once felt.

For otherwise, you start rolling back. And this wisdom is probably the biggest gift that Headspace has ever gave me. To learn that each moment is a change to train your mind and be at peace with yourself, or return to old habits and decide to be overwhelmed.

It’s how I managed to create the fitness start-up with my friend, while financial worries and the clock of grown-up life were tik-taking behind my shoulder. The same circumstances that would have led to some really unpleasant moments otherwise.

That’s how I managed to stay focused and stick with what works. Instead of chasing every opportunity (like most startup owners do), I’ve kept with my SEO practice for growing the brand with content.|||

With my 26 years of age, I’m quite the ordinary guy. A violin-student-turned-startup founder, I’ve worked successfully as a self-taught internet marketer, selling affiliate products for a living…