Singularity enables users to have full control of their environment. This means that a non-privileged user can “swap out” the operating system on the host for one they control. So if the host system is running RHEL6 but your application runs in Ubuntu, you can create an Ubuntu image, install your applications into that image, copy the image to another host, and run your application on that host in it’s native Ubuntu environment!

Singularity also allows you to leverage the resources of whatever host you are on. This includes HPC interconnects, resource managers, file systems, GPUs and/or accelerators, etc. Singularity does this by enabling several key facets:

Jump in and get started.

We are proud to announce that you can now cite Singularity proper! Our recent publication in PLOS One... Greg and the new SingularityWare LLC. were recently featured on HPC Wire to announce changes to the organizational... Notice to all Singularity users, contributors, and collaborators This is an important announcement from Greg Kurtzer, founder and lead...|||

Singularity                   Previous        Next              Singularity enables users to have full control of their environment. This means that a non-privileged user can “swap out” the operating system on the host for one they control. So if the host system is running RHEL6 but your application runs in Ubuntu, you can create an Ubuntu image, install your applications into that image, copy the image to another host, and run your application on that host in it’s native Ubuntu environment!Register your Cluster Add a PublicationSingularity also allows you to leverage the resources of whatever host you are on. This includes HPC interconnects, resource managers, file systems, GPUs and/or accelerators, etc. Singularity does this by enabling several key facets:  Encapsulation of the environment  Containers are image based  No user contextual changes or root escalation allowed  No root owned daemon processesGetting startedJump in and get started.                         Singularity Manuscript      May 11, 2017      We are proud to announce that you can now cite Singularity proper! Our recent publication in PLOS One...                                     SingularityWare LLC on HPC Wire      May 4, 2017      Greg and the new SingularityWare LLC. were recently featured on HPC Wire to announce changes to the organizational...                                     Singularity Big Announcement      Apr 28, 2017      Notice to all Singularity users, contributors, and collaborators This is an important announcement from Greg Kurtzer, founder and lead...                                                                                                                                                                            Previous        Next                                                                                                                                                 Site last generated: May 12, 2017