The massive and mind blowing Game Developer’s Conference is here, and in the spirit of all things gamey and delicious (like lamb and portobellos) let me tell you about a few super awesome concepts from the world of game design.

This is MY list. If you don’t like it, make your own! If I missed one, add it in the responses!

The Magic Circle is very simple but very big idea inspired by Dutch philosopher Johan Huizinga, who wrote Homo Ludens (the man who plays,) and further developed by Katie Salen and Eric Zimmerman:

“In a very basic sense, the magic circle of a game is where the game takes place. To play a game means entering into a magic circle, or perhaps creating one as a game begins. The magic circle of a game might have a physical component, like the board of a board game or the playing field of an athletic contest. But many games have no physical boundaries — arm wrestling, for example, doesn’t require much in the way of special spaces or material. The game simply begins when one or more players decide to play.”

 ― Katie Salen & Eric Zimmerman, Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals”

Why is this important? It says when we cross the boundaries of the “real world” into the game world, we live by completely different rules.

“Bernard Suits discusses the game of Golf: ‘Suppose I make it my purpose to get a small round object into a hole in the ground as efficiently as possible. Placing it in the hole with my hand would be a natural means to adopt. But surely I would not take a stick with a piece of metal on one end of it, walk three or four hundred yards away from the hole, and then attempt to propel the ball into the hole with the stick. That would not be technically intelligent. But such an undertaking is an extremely popular game, and the foregoing way of describing it evidently shows how games differ from technical activities.’”

Key reading:

 Rules of Play

 Jerked Around by the Magic Circle — Clearing the Air Ten Years Later

This has led to endless debates about whether Minecraft is a toy or a game. Good times!

Richard Bartle studied massively multiplayer game spaces, and discovered that different players enjoyed the games for different reasons. This model has been used and misused by gamification experts and game designers alike. Both the axis and the types are contextual to the game. To translate it to other contexts, it’s critical to consider how those contexts are different. For example, Amy Jo Kim does an excellent job recontextualizing it to social games in the Social Action Matrix.

The original HEARTS, CLUBS, DIAMONDS, SPADES: PLAYERS WHO SUIT MUDS should be read before the many, many, many dance remixes.

This approach came into prominence with the rise to Free to Play games. F2P relies on getting players to return to the game again and again; deepening in the commitment in order to convert the engagement into revenue. The core loop is designed to keep people playing. It has obvious applications in other contexts such as websites and mobile apps (which have notorious low second-time open rates.)

My favorite article about Loops (and arcs, which is the other common game structure) is from Daniel Cook’s Lost Garden.

I wrote an article on Flow, Mastery and Ease of Use, so I’ll just point you at that. If it’s too long, there is always Wikipedia.

tl;dr for fun to happen things can’t be too hard or too easy.

This idea suggests that over time, players wish to assume different roles and partake in different activities.

Amy Jo Kim first talked about it in her book, Community Building on the Weband continues to blog about its power.

From Tracy Fullerton’s Game Design Workshop. (and there is SO MUCH in this book you should go buy it now.)

The formal elements have proven over and over to be a useful game design and analysis tool. The elements are to game designer what anatomy is to doctors.

Of particular usefulness are Players and Outcomes.

Think beyond the obvious.

An aspect of the formal elements that ends up neatly defining game genres.|||

