We felt that the attributes of the above systems didn’t sufficiently meet our requirements. As a result, we defined a new coding system and termed it Open Location Code.

Open Location Codes are 10 to 11 characters long. They can also be used in a short form of four to seven characters, similar to telephone numbers and postcodes, within approximately 50km of the original location. Within approximately 2.5km of the original location they can be shortened further, to just four to five characters.

To aid recognition and memorisation, we include a separator to break the code into two parts, and to distinguise codes from postal codes.

In their short form, Open Location Codes have from four to seven characters. These can be used on their own within 50km of the place, or globally by providing a city or locality within that distance. Full Open Location Codes require no other information to locate them.

There is only one Open Location Code for a given location and area size. Different codes can be generated with different areas, but they will share the leading characters.

The Open Location Code characters exclude easily confused character pairs. There is a risk that "VV" will be confused for "W" in handwritten messages but we consider this to be unlikely, since that would change the length of a code and this should be detected by the user or recipient.

The character set used to form Open Location Codes is not contiguous. This is a result of removing easily confused characters, vowels and some other characters. This does make manually comparing codes difficult, as one has to remember whether there are characters between 9 and C in order to tell if 8FV9 is next to 8FVC. However, we think that this is justified by the improved usability.

With some practice, it is possible to estimate the direction and even very rough distances between two codes. Due to the way the codes are generated, latitudes are clipped to be greater than or equal to -90 and less than 90 degrees, making representing the exact location of the North Pole impossible although it can be very closely approximated.

Open Location Codes represent areas, and the size of the area depends on the code length. The longer the code, the smaller and more accurate the area.

Truncating an Open Location Code increases the area and contains the original location.

The codes are based on a simple encoding of latitude and longitude. The code for a place can be looked up by anyone and does not require any setup or configuration.

Open Location Codes do not depend on any infrastructure, and so are not dependent on any organisation or company for their continued existence or usage.

We are publishing the algorithm and making open source implementations available for anyone to use.|||

open-location-code - Open Location Code is a library to generate short codes that can be used like street addresses, for places where street addresses don't exist.