The recent couple of months brought about great news for secure messaging lovers. In February, Signal started testing a video call feature, and last week Telegram announced testing out voice calling functionality. These are both important steps making online a safer space and safeguarding privacy, which is crucial at the time when messaging apps face tighter regulation in Europe and America.

As a messenger for privacy concerned users and for secure business communications, VIPole offers a broader range of capabilities apart from one-to one voice and video calls. Encrypted group calls in chats for up to 256 users, impromptu calls for 9 users, encrypted file sharing and a built-in simple collaboration tools — all these features will be soon complemented with screen sharing. As a privacy app, it also comprises a list of tools that empower you to form an additional layer of security protecting your personal information. The Pro subscription and solutions for teams provide enhanced security and features if you need more than you get in the free mass market app.

If you’re new to VIPole, here is a short video about the key features of the secure messenger for you to start with. Regardless of device, location and time, your data is safe at all times.

Within VIPole, all calls are free and secured end-to-end. Only authorized users can get in touch with you, and you may additionally protect private information by masking the IP during calls. As a flexible multipurpose app, VIPole provides all means for secure communications combined, and after a business call you may send a follow-up directly to this user in a chat. You can also contact people from your phone book as VIPole offers reasonable rates for calls to mobiles and landlines.

For every video call, as well as for every voice call, a secure network tunnel is established and unique session encryption keys are generated. Conversation participants get these keys in secure encrypted containers. When you finish a call, these keys are deleted immediately. Thus, only authorized people can decrypt the conversation.

During secure video calls, you can select the definition of your camera — LD, SD, HD; choose the front or the back camera; turn off the camera at all and regulate the tone of your voice that others hear and the voice volume of every other call participant. Switch between the encrypted messaging app tabs during a call, e.g. open a chat with another user or make notes as you speak. When you do it, you no longer have to try to recollect who said that.

Conference calls unite startups and enterprises with branched management, and VIPole allows to organize teams while protecting intellectual property. In every chat, the creator and moderators manage permissions and assign speakers. The display of the conversation is customized individually by every secure conference call participant and includes image, voice and security regulations. It is a perfect tool for online corporate meetings, e-education, holding training sessions and consulting multiple clients remotely. Give it a try and send us a note about the features you enjoyed or lacked — probably they are already in development.

Instead of sending a huge file and describing what you wish to change in it, you may prefer to show and discuss all issues directly in the chat window. If you need to market your product to a customer — show it on your screen and select the window of the program. In the update that is almost ready for release, VIPole will allow to share desktop and encrypts the data transmitted from one user to the other or to chat members. We are polishing the delails, and soon the feature will help teams in VIPole to collaborate smarter.

There is so much more in confidential communications than encrypted messages, secure file exchange and calls, sign up today to get your own impression. VIPole helps to handle personal and corporate communications easily and in the secure fashion, ensuring endpoint data protection.

If you wish to be the first one to get VIPole messenger updates — join the testing program for Android users.

Welcome to the community that puts privacy first!|||

Making online a safer space and safeguarding privacy, which is crucial at the time when messaging apps face tighter regulation in Europe and America.