Whatever happened to “ignorance is bliss”? Remember the good ol’ days when you didn’t know the world was falling apart until 5:00 pm? The world news would come on infusing an unpleasant dose of reality and despair to your otherwise enjoyable dinner? After surviving the 2016-always diplomatic, inherently respectful and highly educated-election posts that ran consistently through my Facebook feed, I thought the world of social media was getting brighter. But, alas, my one social media respite from constant opposing news and views-LinkedIn-has joined the ranks.

Here’s what you need to know about what you don’t know:

1. LinkedIn “Trending Storylines” are set up to “Burst Your Bubble”:

According to an article posted this morning on “Business Insider” by Matt Weinberger, the goal is to get you outside of your “filter bubble”.

“’The goal’, explains LinkedIn VP Tomer Cohen, ‘is to expose users to different viewpoints outside of their so-called ‘filter bubbles’”…”‘I don’t want just one point of view,’ says Cohen.’”

I don’t mean to burst Cohen’s bubble, but I don’t want my filter bubble burst. My bubble is remarkably cozy inside. Have you seen what happens to whatever lies inside a bubble when it bursts? Splat!

I don’t know about you, but I’m TIRED of listening to everyone’s opposing views. “Opposing Views” leads to “Opposing Comment Battles”, which makes reading some articles feel like I’m living inside a Kanye West/Taylor Swift tweet battle…minus the star power.

2. LinkedIn “Trending Storylines” are meant to compliment your current news feed:

Thank you. I thought my oversized, covered in dog hair, hoodie, works well with my, “I work from home and have no social life” faded bike shorts.

The goal here is the algorithm will somehow add articles that “compliment” the articles you’re already interested in. Example: an article written by someone wearing flip flops with socks, as well as someone wearing wide legged yoga pants from 2007, would be added to my article wardrobe. THEN, someone writing an article wearing a silk scarf with matching jacket and nude colored heels would be thrown in just to mess with me. (See point #1 above.)

AnyTHING you didn’t know you didn’t know-you can now know. AnyONE you didn’t know you didn’t know-you can now know. Thanks to added, trending, articles. Who knew? So there you go. Now you know. (Grammar/Spelling-I obviously don’t know.)

4. LinkedIn “Trending Storylines” can help you with a full-time job:

This is great news! This is why we are all on LinkedIn. To work. Now, thanks to “Trending Storylines”, you can make sifting through articles, creating content, trying to make new connections, and figuring out how to position yourself as an “expert”, your new full-time job. No benefits or pay. That’s ok. We’re used to it. Most of us are freelancers anyway….

5. LinkedIn “Trending Storylines” has officially conquered my ADHD’s last stand:

The battle between work and productivity for my fellow ADHD’s and I, has officially fallen. White flags in the air, there’s no hope in fighting it any longer. We gave up on Twitter, Snapchat and Facebook. They were way too much fun, which meant no work done. This is why we hide in LinkedIn. It’s boring. Who wants to read about work? Now, thanks to “Trending Storylines”, we’ll be rubbernecking over trending headlines, nasty comments, and random hashtags.  Our full-time job of utilizing LinkedIn to find a full-time job will have been undermined by news, fake news, trending news, expert news, industry news, celebrity in our field news, and opposing “burst your bubble” news. This is bad news. My despair is trending.

Stacy Pede rson is a Colorado based Humorist and Funny Motivational Speaker who is incessantly insecure with a chronic Thai Food / Netflix binge habit.|||

