Many people wonder WHY Sudden Coffee is $3.00 a cup. It costs us $2.34 to make each cup. The best way to think about it is that we do the same work as a cafe to brew a cup of coffee — and then some more, to convert it to a crystalized form. Over 50% of the cost goes into the beans & brewing — so most of your money goes right into the coffee itself.

A general rule of thumb for most packaged goods is that you must mark up the product by 50% to cover your expenses marketing and selling the product. Luckily we don’t follow the rules. If we did, we’d have to charge $4.68 a cup!

The most expensive part of Sudden Coffee is the beans — it’s because we buy the highest quality beans directly from farmers. Our goal is for you to taste (and smell) unique & interesting flavors. We want the coffee to be so good that you don’t have to add cream and sugar. More importantly, we buy single-origin beans that come directly from the farmers. We pay a premium for coffee beans to ensure that they are grown sustainably — in a way that supports the farmers, their families, and the local communities.

The magic in Sudden Coffee comes from how we brew & dry the coffee. We no longer make every cup by hand, but it is fully brewed before being crystalized — just like a regular cup of coffee. My co-founder Kalle and Umeko, our Brewing Manager, two baristas with a combined 15+ years of experience oversee every step of the brewing process. We use a high precision process designed to mimic how a cafe brews coffee — at a large scale. Coffee is tasted and checked for quality at every step of the process.

Believe it or not, the tubes we use aren’t that expensive ($0.06). The labels cost more than the tube. However, the most expensive part is getting coffee into the tube! Crystalized coffee doesn’t flow easily like coffee grounds. Finding a way to measure and pour the coffee has taken quite a bit of effort and comes at a cost.

A quick aside on plastic — we definitely are not fans of plastic waste created by our tubes. We are working on it, but as a small company, we use these tubes because we simply aren’t big enough to get a packaging company to make us biodegradable alternatives (yet). But we are committed to getting there.

When you buy a product, you don’t think of the box it comes in — but for a lot of food, the bag is just as expensive as the item itself. We wanted to give you coffee in a bag that you can reuse or take with you. Sudden is designed to fit your on-the-go lifestyle so it needs to live in an on-the-go place — a bag.

Our production line has a lot of steps that we still do by-hand. As we speak, we have 2 people — Steven & LaToya who work on everything from crystalizing the coffee, packaging it into tubes, and getting it ready for shipping. We like it that way. Doing things by hand allows us to stay flexible and agile. We’ve been able to experiment with new techniques, new packaging, or new coffee on a days notice.

We offer free shipping in the US, but it’s not free for us! Many companies out there would give you a lower price and then tack on a shipping fee at the end — surprise!! That’s not what we believe in. The price you see is the price you get.

Last April, we sold coffee for $6 a cup — and it did cost us that much to make it. We hope to get better and cheaper over time (and one day make enough money to be profitable!)|||

We believe customers have a right to know what our product costs to make. We currently charge between $2.50 — $3.00 for a cup of Sudden Coffee. Our goal at this stage is to be slightly cheaper than…