There are many, many Linux operating systems out there, variations upon a theme. Each one unique in their behavior, and appearance. In this flurry of operating systems however, a few stand out in regards to what they bring to the table. And the word for that can only be described as innovative.

When you think of innovation, the first thing that probably comes to mind is the bleeding edge. Fedora certainly ticks the boxes in that regard, as it changes with the shifting Linux environment. It makes an effort to not only be part of it, but to carve the way for many other operating systems.

Red Hat, the company behind Fedora Fedora 25 Has Arrived: Here's What's Changed Fedora 25 Has Arrived: Here's What's Changed Fedora 25 delivers the latest from the GNOME project, but what's the story with the new display server, Wayland? Is the next generation display server really ready for prime time? Read More , uses this operating system as a test bed for new technologies. It does its best to use the latest and greatest in a fairly dynamic environment. As a result of this, it’s always constantly changing and improving. For example, it was one of the first Linux operating systems to adopt Wayland How To Try Wayland, A New Display Server For Linux How To Try Wayland, A New Display Server For Linux Linux distributions will soon get a new display server called Wayland. Let's take a look at Wayland, and see how you can try it out right now. Read More , a replacement for the X Display server.

One benefit of this is that any new and upcoming things in the Linux world can be all found on it. The latest version of the GNOME desktop GNOME Explained: A Look at One of Linux's Most Popular Desktops GNOME Explained: A Look at One of Linux's Most Popular Desktops You're interested in Linux, and you've come across "GNOME", an acronym for GNU Network Object Model Environment. GNOME is one of the most popular open source interfaces, but what does that mean? Read More for example, ships with Fedora. Another very interesting thing that Fedora provides is the ability to upgrade to major versions Why You Need to Upgrade Ubuntu Every 9 Months Why You Need to Upgrade Ubuntu Every 9 Months It's that time again, when Canonical announce that support for one of its standard Ubuntu builds has come to an end. But what does this mean to the end user? Read More (e.g. 24 to 25) without downloading a new installation disc. Something like this could certainly benefit more static Linux operating systems such as Ubuntu 6 Big Reasons to Upgrade to Ubuntu 16.04 6 Big Reasons to Upgrade to Ubuntu 16.04 A new LTS release of Ubuntu means security and stability. Whether you're upgrading or switching from Windows, let's take a look at what's new in Ubuntu 16.04 Xenial Xerus. Read More .

While it may not be the best for people who want something that’s consistent in its behavior — there will always be some problems for early adopters after all — if you want to know where the Linux desktop is moving, Fedora is your best bet.

When you think of a rolling release What Is a Linux Rolling Release, and Do You Want It? What Is a Linux Rolling Release, and Do You Want It? Read More Linux operating system, the first thing that comes to mind might be Arch Linux Arch Linux: Letting You Build Your Linux System From Scratch Arch Linux: Letting You Build Your Linux System From Scratch For Linux power users, it's highly desirable to be able to completely customize your system. Sometimes, that can be best achieved from the start -- by piecing together the components that you'd like to include... Read More , or many of its derivatives. In many ways, Void Linux is very similar to Arch yet stands out in some unique ways.

But first, a quick primer on what a rolling release is: basically, it’s a way of developing a Linux operating system that leaves it constantly updated. The idea is that you don’t need to upgrade it once in a while using a fresh install disc Install Ubuntu On Your Computer Using a USB Flash Drive Install Ubuntu On Your Computer Using a USB Flash Drive Want to install Ubuntu but don't have a spare blank DVD? Don't worry! After downloadin the ISO file, you can use a highly-reusable USB flash drive to get the job done. Read More .

Like Arch, Void is built from the ground up, meaning that it’s not based on any other Linux operating systems. Contrast this with Linux Mint Linux Mint vs Ubuntu: Which Distro Should You Choose? Linux Mint vs Ubuntu: Which Distro Should You Choose? Linux Mint and Ubuntu are two of the most popular Linux distros, but there are real differences between the two. Which one is right for you? Read More for example, which is based off Ubuntu (which in turn is based off Debian).

While Void also seems to be aimed at experienced Linux users, the installation process is much friendlier. For example, Void has an actual installer program, unlike Arch. It also supplies a live desktop to test it out. There are also some interesting architectural decisions that makes it different from many Linux operating systems.

For example, many Linux operating systems these days use a special piece of software called systemd to boot up the computer they’re running on. There’s some controversy Open Source Software and Forking: The Good, The Great and The Ugly Open Source Software and Forking: The Good, The Great and The Ugly Sometimes, the end-user benefits greatly from forks. Sometimes, the fork is done under a shroud of anger, hatred and animosity. Let's look at some examples. Read More to it (an understatement), but any further discussion would take up pages worth of information. Void uses a lighter alternative called runit.

Because of them, in use, Void tends to be faster and lighter than its counterparts. For example, its start-up time is surprisingly quick, since it uses a different way to boot the system up from the norm. If you enjoy what Linux operating systems like Arch How to Install Arch Linux the Easy Way with Antergos How to Install Arch Linux the Easy Way with Antergos Old PC or laptop need a new lease of life? Thinking about switching to Linux, but don’t know where to start? With Antergos, you can install Arch Linux the easy way! Read More have to offer, you might like how Void goes about it.

Innovation comes in many forms, but the most noticeable comes through presentation. Elementary OS It's Time to Try Something New: Elementary OS Loki It's Time to Try Something New: Elementary OS Loki Elementary OS isn't your typical Linux distribution. Some would say it isn't a distro at all. But is Elementary really a usable alternative to Windows and macOS as its developers claim? Read More does this with flying colours all around. From the start, it was designed with ease of use and uniformity in mind, and it shows throughout the entire operating system. When it comes to looks and intuitive work-flow, it’s one of the best around.

Many of its applications are home grown, specifically designed for Elementary’s Pantheon desktop. From the calendar application to even the email client, everything blends in, with an almost Mac-like aesthetic Make Linux Look Like macOS With These Easy Tweaks Make Linux Look Like macOS With These Easy Tweaks If you like Linux but want it to look more like macOS, you're in luck! Let us guide you through the steps to make your Linux desktop behave and look like Apple's macOS. Read More . Which isn’t a bad thing.

A lot of this stems from Elementary’s strict adherence to a core set of values. It’s these set of guidelines that really makes them stand apart from other Linux operating systems, at least in terms of design. This laser focus leads to a consistent and polished production. A refreshing sight in the Linux world, where its variety is a double-edged sword Why Isn't Linux Mainstream? 5 Flaws That Need Fixing Why Isn't Linux Mainstream? 5 Flaws That Need Fixing Linux market share crossed the 5% mark in late 2010, and sat there for about five years, spiking at 5.9% in June 2015 before settling back down. So why has it failed to grow? What... Read More . While there’s a lot of choice to be had, there are benefits of unity, and Elementary OS is an example of that.

While this Linux operating system isn’t the greatest example of technological innovation, it makes up for it with an unparalleled focus on quality. And that alone is quite a feat, with all the variety that needs to be sifted through.

These days, it’s called Container Linux, but the things it brings to the table still stand, even if its original name doesn’t. It’s a name known more outside of the desktop world, designed for servers and the like. And for good reason: many of their design choices, such as restricting the base system to the bare minimum (hence the name CoreOS), were made around being ideal for that purpose.

This was done to an even further degree by running essential applications inside containers — a way of keeping them isolated from each other, similar to sandboxes What's A Sandbox, And Why Should You Be Playing in One What's A Sandbox, And Why Should You Be Playing in One Highly-connective programs can do a lot, but they're also an open invitation for bad hackers to strike. To prevent strikes from becoming successful, a developer would have to spot and close every single hole in... Read More but more restrictive. They do this with a piece of technology called rkt, a home grown alternative to Docker How to Safely Test Desktop Applications in a Secure Container With Docker How to Safely Test Desktop Applications in a Secure Container With Docker Docker is a popular platform for developing and testing server-based applications. But did you know you can also use it to safely and secure run new programs on your desktop? Read More . Especially helpful for an operating system designed around mass deployment.

Along with this, this Linux operating system is designed around easy management of multiple minimal systems at a time. While the common user might not find this useful, having maybe three computers at most, it’s especially helpful if you, say, own a large network’s worth of them.

Its success has led to Red Hat (creator of Fedora) creating their own, similar operating system called Fedora Atomic. It’s testament to the innovation that CoreOS has brought to the table, and will (hopefully) do so in the future.

You might know about how the Linux file system What Are Those Folders in Your Linux Root Directory? What Are Those Folders in Your Linux Root Directory? Open a file manager on your Linux box and select Computer in the sidebar to display your system folders. But do you have any idea what each of them hold? Let's take a look! Read More and its list of abbreviated folders work. Gobo Linux argues that the current structure, of ambiguously named locations should be done away with. This is expressed through their own, innovative way of sorting programs out: separating each one into their own folder.

Traditionally, programs are placed into different folders, depending on the type of files they have. For example, configuration files might all be stored in one folder (e.g. /etc), with actual programs in another (e.g. /usr/bin). Gobo Linux then, is quite a departure from that norm, placing all these files into their own special place, under the aptly named /Programs directory.

This carries several positive benefits, not really seen in more traditional operating systems. Interestingly, while this may make the file system easier to understand for users new to Linux, that’s only as a by-product to Gobo’s primary goal. Specifically, being able to install applications from source How to Compile & Install TAR GZ & TAR BZ2 Files in Ubuntu Linux How to Compile & Install TAR GZ & TAR BZ2 Files in Ubuntu Linux Read More , and easily manage them.

The operating system does not rely on a package manager Which Linux Package Manager (and Distro) Is Right for You? Which Linux Package Manager (and Distro) Is Right for You? A key difference between the main Linux distros is the package manager; the differences are strong enough that it can influence your choice of distro. Let's look at how the various package managers work. Read More to keep track of everything. As they describe it, the file system itself acts as one, since all the parts of a program are stuck in one place. Removing a program then, is simple as removing the program folder. Another advantage of this is Gobo can easily run multiple versions of different applications. For example, /Programs/Firefox/45.0 and /Programs/Firefox/44.0 could run without a hassle.

While this may seem like a rather novel idea, it certainly has some merit. And while this hierarchy hasn’t really been adopted outside of Gobo Linux, it’s definitely innovative, both technologically and appearance-wise.

Every Linux operating system is based on the same foundations: the system kernel The Linux Kernel: An Explanation In Layman's Terms The Linux Kernel: An Explanation In Layman's Terms There is only one de facto thing that Linux distributions have in common: the Linux kernel. But while it's often talked about, a lot of people don't really know exactly what it does. Read More , and a few other important pieces of software. So those which manage to stand out despite this common ground should be commended and acknowledged. This is regardless of the sort of innovation expressed, be that through appearance or technical ability.

What other Linux operating systems do you think are innovative and why?|||

There are many Linux operating systems out there, each one unique in behavior and appearance -- but only a handful of them can truly be called innovative.