As a Company Builder, we handle all of the HR sourcing and hiring needs for our startups here at Le Studio. We believe the CEO’s time is better spent working on his product rather than sorting through applications and setting up interviews to fill positions. So we step in to alleviate this burden; the CEO just gives us a detailed description of the position and we take care of the rest. Everything from advertising the position to the first interview is handled by Le Studio. Then we hand the vetted applicants over to the CEO for final approval.

As we have three different startups in three different fields, we end up hiring across a very broad range of experiences, fields of expertise, schools, and backgrounds. Beyond our startups, we also have our own hiring needs: Le Studio itself is constantly growing. And we are not just looking for employees but we are also constantly looking for founders to partner with us on new ventures.

So one day we might be looking for a CMO for one of our startups, a CEO for a project in the making, a full stack developer for an existing team of 8, and an operations guy to join Le Studio proper.

As you can see this is a very diverse group of job listings and in order to deal with this and in order to maintain a high standard for hiring, we have had to develop a very adaptable hiring strategy.

In order to maintain flexibility the steps of our process are rather simple and ought to be familiar to most. For jobs at Le Studio itself, most of our hires will take part in the LSAP (Le Studio Associate Program). This is an ‘end of studies’ internship that primarily recruits students who have already had one or two prior internships. For jobs at our startups, especially C-level jobs, the interview processes is a little longer. The process is obviously unique to the individual case and applicant himself but the general outline remains the same:

This process hold broadly true for all of our hiring with one exception: oftentimes tech/dev leads aren’t inbound but rather we proactively search out ideal candidates.

As our spectrum of available jobs varies greatly in terms of field, experience requirements, and compensation, we source from a pretty broad spectrum. Two of our main avenues for recruitment are AngelList and our jobs page on our website. We also make ample use of school jobs pages in searching for developers and some of the lower level positions at some of our startups. For the jobs at Le Studio are generally only advertised on our page in the hope that only people really interested in what we do will apply.

Lastly, referral is always preferable as it offers a means of pre-qualifying a potential candidate.

Regarding what we look for during interviews, Pierre-Olivier (who is responsible for hiring at Le Studio) specifies: “One of the things that is very important to me is that the candidate can precisely explain what he did and what his responsibilities were at his last job. Beyond just having relevant past experience, it is important that we can see that he mastered his past responsibilities and will continue to grow at Le Studio.”

“Further, a very, very good sign is when an applicant can accurately describe what he will be doing here at Le Studio in a level of detail deeper than that of the job advertisement. To me this indicates that he would be a particularly good fit because it shows that his previously experience is broadly aligned with what he will be doing here at Le Studio.”

Lastly, Pierre-Olivier names the awareness of where an applicant has to improve as one of the more important aspects of an interview. “If an applicant can explain where he’ll need to improve to better fulfill his potential role at Le Studio or one of our startups, it is a very good indicator of him having a thorough understanding of the expectations and demands of the job.”

In terms of experience, it is heavily job dependent. But for entry level jobs at Le Studio we want people with at least one or two relevant internships under their belt. The ideal mix is experience at a big brand company as well as some time spent in a startup environment (as many people are more suited to one than the other, it is best that that discovery has already been made). For developers we do not particularly care if the applicant has experience in the workplace or working on commercial project with a given technology. Rather we only care that he is familiar with the technology and has used it before either on personal projects or during his time at school.

For C-level jobs, naturally the requirements are extremely job specific and the experience requirements are much, much more demanding.

Naturally there are some things that are immediate ‘dealbreakers’ or, at least, red flags when they come up in interviews. “The biggest red flag is when a candidate doesn’t really understand the job for which he is applying. If he doesn’t really understand the role then the interview is going to be over rather quickly.”

Another red flag is a general lack of ambition. This being a startup environment, the employee really needs to be really internally motivated and excited about the project because it is going to be more demanding in terms of both workload and time commitment. The upshot is, naturally, the ability to grow with the company from the start. But if the applicant isn’t excited for this, then it could turn something that ought to be exciting into a drag and this could not only have a negative impact on their work but also on the nascent company culture.

Lastly, the inability to structure his speech well. Seeing as there are relatively few employees at a startup and since this is the stage where a solid foundation must be laid for a much larger company, it is absolutely crucial that the applicant be able to efficiently express and structure his ideas.

Misunderstandings can be deadly for a fledgling company.

Medium is always a source of potential hires! Le Studio currently has four positions available.

Le Studio VC is a Paris-based startup studio. Providing seed capital, expertise, and guidance, Le Studio acts as a launchpad for startups. By both investing and participating in the initial stages of development, success is more likely and more rapid.

If you are interested in starting your own company or working with us — let us know at Le Studio|||

As a Company Builder, we handle all of the HR sourcing and hiring needs for our startups here at Le Studio. We believe the CEO’s time is better spent working on his product rather than sorting…