Over the past couple of months I have been discussing the Counterparty platform with the Storj team and community. A consistent theme of these conversations is discontent with the functionality and usability of the platform:

Many community members and thought leaders have suggested migrating SJCX from Counterparty to the Ethereum ERC20 token standard. ERC20 tokens have been issued by a number of prominent projects including Augur and Golem, and have wide support in the Ethereum development community. Use of an Ethereum-based token offers clear solutions to the problems listed above:

Furthermore, the Ethereum platform provides many additional benefits:

In a nutshell, we believe that a simple 1:1 conversion of Counterparty-based SJCX to ERC20 SJCX solves the quality of service issues and allows us to participate in a more active and robust development community. As a result, we will be migrating SJCX to a new Ethereum-based ERC20 token that we feel better serves the Storj ecosystem and its stakeholders.

Over the next few weeks I will be working with the community, the team, and the thought leaders to prepare a clear migration plan. As always, the process will be transparent and public. We understand that there will be lots of questions, so please keep an eye on our announcements for drafts and community hangouts to discuss the process and answer questions directly.

We believe the technical migration process will be straight-forward. Farmers will use a simple tool to convert their tokens from the old to the new protocol, and then change their payment address in the Storj Share application. We welcome feedback, collaboration, and ideas as we go through this transition.

Back in 2014, when the ecosystem was smaller and Storj couldn’t even afford a plane ticket, I drove up to Blacksburg, Virginia with Bo Shen, now founder of VC firm Fenbushi Capital, for a dev retreat. I got the chance to spend a lot of time with Vitalik Buterin, founder of Ethereum, and chat about our crazy idealistic decentralized platforms and where they might lead. A couple of interesting ideas came out of that meeting.

First, on the sage advice of Bo Shen, we both participated in each other’s crowdsales. Considering the growth of both tokens, that was a pretty good move. Second, Vitalik wrote a very insightful post about how one might build decentralized storage called Secret Sharing and Erasure Coding: A Guide for the Aspiring Dropbox Decentralizer M of N which I highly recommend reading. Now that we plan on native Ethereum integration, that post is having a lot of impact. Third, I’ve never been that great at statistics, so Vitalik really helped us in the early days with some math that not only showed that decentralized storage is viable, but also that it could be even more durable than traditional centralized cloud storage platforms. Lastly, he left me with a sense that Ethereum was going to be a really strong and useful platform for Storj. Unfortunately, the Ethereum genesis block was created a year after we had a token and the ERC20 standard didn’t exist until late 2015, so there just wasn’t an opportunity to integrate from the start. But we have been watching Ethereum as it grew, successfully overcame The DAO hack, and launched the Ethereum Enterprise Alliance. Ethereum has clearly solidified itself as a great token platform, as well as highlighted some of the awesome advanced features that the blockchain can offer. We are excited for the future, and even more excited for our future with Ethereum. To Vitalik, a personal thanks. To the whole Ethereum ecosystem: it’s time, let’s go and decentralize the data and the world!

Thank you to Counterparty for supporting Storj throughout its early development stages!|||

Migration from Counterparty to Ethereum Over the past couple of months I have been discussing the Counterparty platform with the Storj team and community. A consistent theme of these conversations is...