Tectonic is built on pure-upstream Kubernetes but has an opinion on the best way to install and run a Kubernetes cluster. This project helps you install a Kubernetes cluster the "Tectonic Way". It provides good defaults, enables install automation, and is customizable to meet your infrastructure needs.

Checkout the ROADMAP for details on where the project is headed.

To use a tested release on an supported platform, follow the links below.

To hack or modify the templates or add a new platform, use the scripts in this repo to boot and tear down clusters.

See the official Tectonic documentation:

In order to successfully build this project, you must first of all place it according to the Go workspace convention, i.e. at . If you don't set , it should by default be at .

To build Tectonic Installer, you will need to install the following requirements:

This project is built on Terraform and requires version 0.9.4. Download and install an official Terraform binary for your OS or use your favorite package manager.

You need the Yarn JavaScript package manager. If you're on OS X, you can install it via Homebrew: .

At a high level, using the installer follows the workflow below. See each platform guide for specifics.

The example below will use but you can set the value to something different. Also, as you configure the cluster refer to the linked documentation to find the configuration parameters.

This will create a new directory which holds all module references, Terraform state files, and custom variable files.

Set variables in the file as needed, or you will be prompted. Available variables can be found in the and files present in the directory. Examples for each platform can be found in the examples directory.

Plan, apply, and destroy are provided as Make targets to make working with the build directory and custom binary easier.

Tests are run for all approved pull requests via Jenkins. See the Jenkinsfile for details.

Tests can be run locally by:|||

tectonic-installer - Install a Kubernetes cluster the CoreOS Tectonic Way: HA, self-hosted, RBAC, etcd Operator, and more