Back in July 2016, Tesla noted that owners of the company’s EVs had driven a combined total of more than 2 billion miles. In an effort to speed up the journey to three billion miles (while simultaneously “showcas[ing] the uncompromised capabilities of Model S and Model X”), the company launched its Electric Road Trip.

A good number of Tesla owners participated in the three-month-long RSVP event during which they had to reach a series of destinations all over the world marked by Tesla charging stations. By the time the event ended in October 2016, the target was reached. Just two months later, Tesla reached three-and-a-half billion miles.

Now, more than eight months after the road trip kicked off, Tesla has hit another milestone. The company’s fleet of electric vehicles all over the world have now collectively covered more than four billion miles of road — and counting!

When Tesla first launched its EVs and started laying down its network of charging stations, the company was met with a lot of skepticism. In 2014, someone even went out of his way to do his own electric road trip and found the whole thing impractical.

Now, times have changed. The EV market has grown exponentially, with about 773,600 units sold worldwide in 2016. That’s a 42 percent increase over 2015’s numbers. Other vehicle manufacturers are developing their own lineups of electric cars, but Tesla is still dominating the market. In fact, Consumer Reports ranked the company as number eight worldwide in its 2017 auto brand report, making it the highest-ranked American brand on the list, and that’s not just amongst EV manufacturers.

But more than just billions of miles, Tesla and EVs are bringing us closer to a cleaner future powered by sustainable energy. As CEO Elon Musk himself mentioned in Tesla’s “Master Plan Part Deux,” “The point of all this was, and remains, accelerating the advent of sustainable energy, so that we can imagine far into the future and life is still good.”|||

Teslas have racked up a lot of miles in a short amount of time.