As you begin networking and interviewing, people are going to ask you to tell your story. Create a story that you can easily say in 3–5 five sentence (<30 seconds) and write it down. Practice with your friends and family.

Since you are making a career change, take the time to think critically about your transferrable skills and be able to articulate them. Remember to never downplay your learnings and experience from your previous career, use them to demonstrate your uniqueness. Check out this article on telling your story.

Some career advisors will advise you to apply to as many jobs as you can. I am more of an advocate for creating focus around your job search by identifying your interests and the characteristics of a company that will provide you the best opportunity to thrive. I have provided a framework below to guide you through this:

Your company profile is more of a summary of the type of company you are looking for. Don’t start thinking about specific companies yet. I found that doing this ahead of time can really help you target your search to companies that align with your needs and interests.

Now use your company profile to start selecting companies. Create a table or list of the companies you are interested in. Have a reason on why you listed each company. If possible, group them into categories/themes (e.g. education, productivity, social, finance, diversity-focused, start-up, etc).

I found by creating themes around what I was interested in (Education and Productivity Tools), it was very easy for me to answer the famous question “Why do you want to work here?” because I pre-aligned them with my interests.

There are many types of engineering positions out there. There was a time that I knew only of full-stack, front-end, back-end engineering roles. As I started researching I realized there is much more variety, coming across titles like Site Reliability Engineer, UX Engineer, Customer Support Engineer, Product Management and more. Read the job posts in detail and find what interests you.

Create a framework to help you track your process. I use LinkedIn to look for connections in my network to companies on my interest list. I looked into my college alumni networks as well as the Hackbright Alumni network. I wanted a place to organize all of this information so I created a detailed spreadsheet, which later turned into a Trello Board (when I found this awesome article.)

If you chose to create a spreadsheet, here is one way you can organize your data. Below I provide context for each of the columns shown in this image.|||

This week I served on a panel at Hackbright Academy entitled “How I Got My Job Alumni Panel.” Before the event, I prepared a list of things I did throughout my job search that ultimately lead to me…