I’m delighted to announce the general availability of R Tools 1.0 for Visual Studio 2015 (RTVS). This release will be shortly followed by R Tools 1.0 for Visual Studio 2017 in early May.

RTVS is a free and open source plug-in that turns Visual Studio into a powerful and productive R development environment. Check out this video for a quick tour of its core features:

RTVS builds on Visual Studio, which means you get numerous features for free: from using multiple languages to word-class Editing and Debugging to over 7,000 extensions for every need:

RTVS includes various features that address the needs of individual as well as Data Science teams, for example:

RTVS integrates with SQL Server 2016 R Services and SQL Server Tools for Visual Studio 2015. These separate downloads enhance RTVS with support for syntax coloring and Intellisense, interactive queries, and deployment of stored procedures directly from Visual Studio.

Use the stock CRAN R interpreter, or the enhanced Microsoft R Client and its ScaleR functions that support multi-core and cluster computing for practicing data science at scale.

Integrated support for git, continuous integration, agile tools, release management, testing, reporting, bug and work-item tracking through Visual Studio Team Services. Use our hosted service or host it yourself privately.

Whether it’s data governance, security, or running large jobs on a powerful server, RTVS workspaces enable setting up your own R server or connecting to one in the cloud.

We’re very excited to officially bring another language to the Visual Studio family!  Along with Python Tools for Visual Studio, you have the two main languages for tackling most any analytics and ML related challenge.  In the near future (~May), we’ll release RTVS for Visual Studio 2017 as well. We’ll also resurrect the “Data Science workload” in VS2017 which gives you R, Python, F# and all their respective package distros in one convenient install. Beyond that, we’re looking forward to hearing from you on what features we should focus on next! R package development? Mixed R+C debugging? Model deployment? VS Code/R for cross-platform development? Let us know at the RTVS Github repository!|||

by Shahrokh Mortazavi, Partner PM, Visual Studio Cloud Platform Tools at Microsoft I’m delighted to announce the general availability of R Tools 1.0 for Visual Studio 2015 (RTVS). This release will be shortly followed by R Tools 1.0 for Visual Studio 2017 in early May. RTVS is a free and open source plug-in that turns Visual Studio into a powerful and productive R development environment. Check out this video for a quick tour of its core features: Core IDE Features RTVS builds on Visual Studio, which means you get numerous features for free: from using multiple languages to word-class Editing...