Four key takeaways after 6 months working in the market of chatbots

Six months ago we took our technology one step further. We realized that we had a competitive advantage with our semantic engine and decided to start using our core AI to build other products. One of the products that we started working on is chatbots using our semantic AI to develop the technology behind the bot.

During these six months we have had the opportunity of working on real projects, speaking with many companies, investors and researchers and I thought it’d be good to share our experience and what we have seen, mostly in the Spanish and Latin American markets. These are my four key takeaways after these six months:

You see the word in every website. Every technology provider seems to offer a chatbot, no matter what their scope is. If it’s a banking app, then they sell a banking chatbot; if they are a text analytics provider, then they offer chatbots as you can use their API to build one. Microsoft, IBM and Facebook all have platforms to build chatbots, and there are end-to-end products that are also sold as chatbots. For example, Medwhat, a virtual medical assistant that comes as a cellphone app, or Julie Desk, a personal assistant which integrates with your email to schedule meeting.

Thousands of startups have raised 140 million dollars in funding since 2010 to build chatbots. There is even a website where you can track every bot company being funded. But what is a chatbot then? And what is behind all this revolution?

Let’s start with the basics — what is a chatbot?

For us, a chatbot is a system that understands language and has intelligence about a certain context in a way that it can interact with the user to solve a problem. There are three key points in the definition: it has to understand language (which doesn’t come from scripted definitions of text), it needs to have intelligence about a context (just speaking is not enough, it needs to have certain knowledge) and it needs to solve a problem (as we are a B2B company sustained by our solutions to our clients’ needs)

So then, trying to sell a deep-tech product to business people (not always tech-savvy), everyone is using the word chatbot. “They already offered me a chatbot”, “X is doing a chatbot with Y” is what you may have heard. Marketing campaigns are all over the place because everyone wants to see what’s happening with chatbots. And we should be professionals and spot the difference between a chatbot and a bot. Maybe a bot chats with two predefined responses, but that’s not a real chatbot, any good engineer can build something like that in a matter of days.

Nowadays most of the companies are just building chatbots because they say: “I have heard that my competition is building a chatbot and this is the next big thing, so let’s build one”.

We consider three types of chatbots, I hope it can help you understand how your organization could potentially benefit from them and see if they can help you meet your goals. This is not a standard, it’s just a division that I found reasonable:

One would say: “every chatbot should be conversational”. This is technically true, but the difference is that the output of this chatbot is a response for the interaction. For example, a customer-service chatbot. In a customer-service chatbot, you don’t have to act (at least at the beginning). You need to give an accurate response to the client.

You could need this bot if there are customer-service processes where:

Your goal is to create a new process your clients can benefit from, by automating with a chatbot in a process where you currently have a standard interface or other means.

For example, a client that buys airline tickets with the mobile app might be able to buy tickets with a bot if the bot is able to understand the context. This is where many people confuse a chatbot with just a “simple” bot. Is the following a chatbot or “just” a script?

One could argue if we can define this bot as a chatbot. It definitely chats, but is it really a chat or “just” a guided script with orders? Is it useful to have a script like this or would the user prefer an interface?

That’s where we have to be careful and it depends on the context and the intelligence of the chatbot. I wouldn’t specifically call this a chatbot as it doesn’t fully understand language context for this use case. It follows a script but the user could speak in a different way, not finding the bot useful, and thus resulting in a terrible user experience.

Transactional chatbots can be very precise when limited to a certain context. A transactional chatbot can be useful for:

Your goal is that you can ask general questions to the bot to inform the user about a certain topic. A fully-informational chatbot holds information about anything, much like you could ask Wikipedia about any topic. An informational chatbot can be used to guide the user to a certain knowledge, as a new way of “content marketing”. Somehow, you are informing a user about a context and you choose the topics that you cover.

For instance, a chatbot that understands about banking can explain how a pension plan works and a user can benefit from that information. The user may ask many questions about this and the chatbot should be able to reply about that certain context.

These bots can be useful as instead of searching for a certain answer on different websites, you can ask an expert about a certain topic. This is one of the most complex use cases because:

A few months back, as a new chatbot provider in the chatbot infrastructure, we had to ask ourselves this question. How much do we charge for this? We had a pricing defined for our NLU API, but how much do you charge for a machine that does the work of a human or that creates a new process that didn’t exist before?

We started with three guidelines:

Not big constraints, right? Now include in the equation that the pricing of some of the competition is being defined too. Check this screenshot of IBM pricing: 10,100 answers of their virtual agent solution is 500USD cheaper than just 10,000 answers.|||

Six months ago we took our technology one step further. We realized that we had a competitive advantage with our semantic engine and decided to start using our core AI to build other products. One of…