Visual Studio Code is a lightweight code editor from Microsoft. It comes with built-in support for JavaScript, TypeScript and Node.js and is available for Windows, MacOS and Linux. Additional functionality can be added to Visual Studio Code by using Extensions. In the following you’ll learn how to setup VS Code and we’ll explore the basic functionality of the code editor.

The installation of Visual Studio Code depends on your platform. First go to the project’s website at https://code.visualstudio.com and download the package which is right for your operating system.

If your platform is MacOS, the installation is very easy. Download the Visual Studio Code archive, double click to unpack the archive and drag the file Visual Studio Code.app to the Applications folder.

If you’re on Windows, you need to download and run the installer (VSCodeSetup-stable.exe). Having completed the installation successfully you can find Visual Studio Code in .

The installation of Visual Studio Code under Linux depends on the distribution you’re using. For a distribution-specifc installation guides take a look at https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/linux.

It’s also possible to use Visual Studio Code from the command line by using the command code. To be able to use that command the following steps needs to be performed first. Open Visual Studio Code and access the Command Palette (⇧⌘P) and start typing shell command and select option Shell Command: Install ‚code‘ command in PATH.

Visual Studio Code offers a Zen Mode which let’s you focus on the code. In this mode all other user interface elements are hidden and only the editor area is visible. To switch to Zen Mode use the key shortcut ⌘K Z. To leave the Zen Mode you need to hit ESC two times.

The Code Editor is a powerful tool. You can open up to three files side by side as you can see in the following:

The code editor has a feature which is called IntelliSense. IntelliSense features could be described as code completion, content assist and code hinting. By default IntelliSense features are available for the following languages: JavaScript, TypeScript, JSON, HTML, CSS, Less and Sass.

If IntelliSense is available, suggestions will pop up as you type. If you continue typing, the list of suggestions is filtered to include only members containing your typed characters. You can press Tab or Enter to accept and insert the current suggestion.



 in the View Bar you can open the Search View in the Side Bar which looks like the following:



 This view can be used to search across files of the current project. You can also open the view by using keys Ctrl+Shift+F. In the open search view you can start typing and the matching results will be shown after pressing enter:

All functions of Visual Studio Code can be accessed via keyboard only. To do so, just make use of the command palette (Ctrl+Shift+P):

You can start typing in the input field of the Command Palette and you’ll receive a list of matching commands instantly.

You can use the Command Palette to open user or workspace settings. Just type in Preferences: Open User Settings or Preferences: Open Workspace Settings and hit enter. The following view opens:



 On the left side you can see all default settings of Visual Studio Code. You can copy and paste the default settings to the right side to override a settings with a new value:

Visual Studio Code contains an integrated terminal, so that you can execute terminal commands from within the application. The terminal is available in the Panels area. You can create multiple terminal instances, as you can see in the following:

Extensions are an easy way to extend the out-of-the-box functionality of Visual Studio Code. You can browse and install VS Code extensions from the Extensions view in the Side Bar. To open that view just click on the Extension Icon in the Activity Bar on the left. The following view will open:



 You can also search for extensions in the Visual Studio Code Marketplace https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/VSCode.

In the extensions view you can search for extensions. The list of results is presented in the Side Bar area. You can select an extension from the list and the extensions’s details page is presented on the right side:

|||

