Last September, we made a commitment to the community to keep Instagram a safe place for everyone and built tools to safeguard self-expression on our platform. This year we will continue to act on that commitment and also focus on fostering kindness.

The first step is to celebrate the kindness our community is already known for. On March 25 and 26, tens of thousands of Instagrammers all over the world will come together for the Worldwide InstaMeet 15 to share their stories and spread kindness in the world. You can find an InstaMeet near you or spread kindness by leaving an encouraging comment, giving an inspiring person a like or sharing a message of support with a friend.

As part of our goal to build a safe environment, we also have some updates to announce. Soon you may notice a screen over sensitive photos and videos when you scroll through your feed or visit a profile. While these posts don’t violate our guidelines, someone in the community has reported them and our review team has confirmed they are sensitive. This change means you are less likely to have surprising or unwanted experiences in the app. If you’d like to see a post that is covered with a screen, simply tap to reveal the photo or video.

Additionally two-factor authentication is now available to everyone. This tool adds an extra layer of security to your Instagram account by requiring a code every time you log in. Tap the gear icon on your profile and choose Two-Factor Authentication to turn it on.

We’ve also developed an additional, easy-to-use site where you can learn about keeping yourself safe on Instagram. There, you can explore tools such as account blocking, comment controls, photo tagging and more. You can also connect with support services in your country and read more about how we’re building a positive community.

Our teams are focused on making Instagram a kind, welcoming place for everyone, and we’re just getting started.

To learn more about today’s updates, check out instagram-together.com and the Instagram Help Center.|||

