It was an odd choice for a SaaS company. But here’s why we’re glad we did it.

A few months ago, we announced that we would be launching a (paid) content marketing course.

We got a lot of positive reactions to the news (much of it extremely positive), and some negative (with a few comments being especially negative).

The course was scheduled to run for six weeks, starting in January, and it cost $799 per person, or $1,999 per person for an Elite version that included personal coaching calls with myself and Len.

The course quickly sold out, and a few weeks ago, we wrapped up the first six-week run.

We got some amazing feedback from students who were thrilled with the course:

As well as some feedback that’s going to help us make the course better for the next run.

We put a lot of work into this course, and while we didn’t use any developer or product team time on it, we tied up our marketing resources for several months working on it.

Today, I want to pull back the curtain on why we created the course, how we built it, our strategy for pricing and marketing it, results from our first six weeks, and everything that we learned along the way.

This guide is going to be transparent: we’re sharing a lot, including the exact numbers, the good, the bad and everything in between.

It’s also going to be long: there’s a lot to share, and for that reason, we’re splitting it into two parts.

This week, we’ll focus on course development: how we built a six-week course from the ground up. And next week, we’ll talk about sales, marketing and execution.

If you have any interest at all in creating an online course⁠—or just want to see how things look behind-the-scenes⁠—then this post is for you, and I hope you enjoy.

On the surface, it doesn’t make much sense for Groove to launch a content marketing course.

And there are a LOT of reasons not to do it:

And those were all reasons that weighed heavily on us, as we debated whether or not to move forward with something that started as a throwaway idea at one of our planning retreats.

But ultimately, there were a few reasons that overcame the cons:

But as we began to lean toward the decision of green-lighting the course, we settled on two important caveats:

With “regular” content⁠—like a blog⁠—you can measure success with numbers like traffic, shares and backlinks.

But with a paid course behind a login portal, other than sales, the only real way to measure your success is by the success of the students.

We knew we’d have to work hard to make the students successful, but putting a high price tag on the course also helped us ensure that the students we got would actually act on our guidance.

In the end, there were five key elements that made up the final course: the overall content strategy, videos, worksheets, bonus content and the online community.

Below, I’ll walk through how we approached these elements, and what went right and wrong with each one, based on the results and student feedback from the first cohort.

While we’ve published hundreds of blog posts, creating a course is very, very different.

The three biggest challenges were clear:

We knew that we wanted to be able to promise something with the course. We didn’t want it to just be “content marketing 101.”

And while we can’t actually promise financial success (that depends on many outside factors), we could promise, based on everything we’ve learned over the last five years, to teach students to build a content marketing “system” from the ground up.

So that’s what we set out to do.

We thought about the different parts of a content marketing machine, and broke it down into five modules. Along with a “welcome” module, we spread the course over six weeks, with one module each week.

What worked: We were really happy with how the modules ended up looking, and the progression made it simple for students to follow a "path" to success, rather than learn a whole bunch of disjointed information at once. Our feedback surveys were overwhelmingly positive on the content strategy. What we could have done better: Just as overwhelmingly positive as students were about the content, perhaps the most common piece of negative feedback that we got was about the pacing. The first 3 modules were nicely timed. However after the 3rd module where we were getting feedback from influencers, editing etc, the 4th module came out which also involved some back and forth. So now module 5 and 6 came out and I'm still working on the home work from 3 and 4. I feel like if they were paced so the homework could get done that would make it a slam dunk. A lot of students struggled to keep up. We had planned for the course to require about five hours of work per week, and we were upfront about this, but we could have done a better job of giving students more time to work. Even five hours per week is tough for someone with a full-time job and outside commitments, so next time, we’ll likely pace the course even more slowly and have it go a bit longer.

We decided early on in the course development process that videos would be the core delivery mechanism for the content.

It’s faster and more engaging than written content, and it’s a lot easier and more digestible to share a lot of information via video than via text.

Out of respect for students who paid for the content, I won’t share the videos here, but after recording dozens of videos, and scrapping dozens more, four key common threads appeared among the videos that went over well, versus those that didn’t.

The best videos⁠—and the ones we put into the course⁠—were:

The videos were recordings of slideshow presentations, with Len’s voiceover, with intro and outro animations at the beginning and end.

Creating the videos was, by far, the most time-consuming part of the course development process (other than actually coming up with the content). It took many, many hours… more on that later.

Accompanying each video module were a set of PDF worksheets to guide students through the module’s assigned tasks.

There was a mix of “fill in the blank” worksheets, and bonus guides that included tips and strategies that we didn’t include in the module.

In addition to the core content, we added a number of bonuses to make the course more valuable for students.

There were two types of bonus content:

We wanted the course to be more than a one-way street; we wanted to create a community of students who would share ideas and help each other out as they traveled the same path together.

To do this, we used Slack to create a private group. We made clear that Slack would be where all of the course discussion would take place, and it worked: 100% of our students joined the group.

Each week, Len would post an announcement when a module was released, in a channel created specifically to discuss that module:

And help each other.

Having the Slack community also meant that when a student’s question was answered, everyone could benefit from the answer, rather than just that student.

It’s never been easier to build an online course.

Here are the tools we used:

We started building the course using a platform that ended up being really clunky and hard to customize, and Coach stepped in and saved us.

Simply put, it’s the simplest and best course software we tried. The product is beautiful, adding and rearranging content is as easy as drag-and-drop, and support is fast and helpful.

We also got a lot of positive feedback from students on how great the platform looked.

The price ($29/month for their cheapest plan, $99/month for the highest tier) is very reasonable, too, and I’m confident recommending this to anyone looking for simple course software.

We used Camtasia to record and edit the course videos. It was easy enough to navigate, though we did run into some trouble with resolution loss during export. This is something that we’ll need to look into further, and it’s enough to make me hesitate before recommending the app.

We used this combination for running and recording audio interviews for our bonuses. Skype is standard, and everyone knows it. Piezo is a Mac app that makes it easy to record Skype calls, it hasn’t failed us in the four years we’ve been using it, and for $19, it’s a steal.

While many online courses use private Facebook groups, we opted for Slack. I’m glad that we did, but it does have pros and cons.

On the plus side, it’s engaging, much easier for live Q&A than Facebook, and far, far simpler for tracking and following discussions.

On the other hand, it does require students to be on Slack, and certainly, fewer people are on Slack than on Facebook. However, Slack continues to grow quickly, and I don’t expect this to be much of a consideration in the very near future. We’re happy with Slack, and will continue to use it.

If you’re considering building an online course, I hope that this post was helpful for you.

Next week, we’ll turn our attention from course development to sales and marketing.

Specifically, we’ll share everything that we did to price, market and sell the course, including the exact tactics we used to make the course sell out in less than a week.

I hope to see you here next Thursday.|||

It was an odd choice for a SaaS company. But here’s why we’re glad we did it.