The dots are made form electro-optically active materials whose size as well as composition controls the photon energy that they interact with, allowing their absorption (and emission) wavelength to be tuned by particle size. They can also be tuned to deliver multiple electron-hole pairs from one photon, which has allowed quantum dot solar cells to operate at 10% efficiency, according to Los Alamos.

“Further progress in this area has been by hindered by the challenge of understanding the mechanisms of electrical conductance in quantum dot solids and the processes that limit the charge transport distance,” said the lab. “One specific and persistent challenge a considerable loss in photo-voltage compared to predicted theoretical limits,” dubbed ‘photo-voltage deficit’.

Now the lab has found the cause: very fast electron trapping by defect-related states.

“The newly conducted studies establish the exact time scale of this problematic trapping process and suggest that a less-than ten-fold improvement in the electron mobility should allow for collecting photo-generated charge carriers prior to their relaxation into lower-energy states. This would produce a dramatic boost in the photo-voltage and therefore increase the overall device efficiency,” said the lab.

Another effect revealed by these studies is the influence of electron and hole spins on photo-conductance.

It is already know, according to Los Alamos, that even weak interaction between spins of an electron and a hole – known as spin-exchange interaction – has a dramatic effect on light emission from the quantum dots.

The lab’s measurements have revealed that these interactions also affect the process of electron-hole separation between adjacent dots in quantum-dot solids. Results suggest that future efforts on high-sensitivity quantum-dot photo-detectors should take into consideration the effect of exchange blockade, which otherwise might inhibit low-temperature photo-conductance.

Measurements on quantum dots were performed using femtosecond laser pulses (see diagram). Effectively it creates a nanosecond oscilloscope – the UK national physical laboratory uses similar techniques.

“Our latest ultrafast electro-optical spectroscopy studies provide unprecedented insights into the photo-physics of quantum dots,” said lead Los Alamos researcher Victor Klimov. “Our new experimental technique allows us to follow a chain of events launched by femto-second laser pulses and pin down processes responsible for efficiency losses during transformation of incident light into electrical current.”

For more information, see ‘Electron-hole exchange blockade and memory-less recombination in photoexcited films of colloidal quantum dots‘ in Nature Physics Journal.|||

Quantum dot solar cells could become more efficient, now that the Los Alamos Lab has uncovered a mechanism that has been holding them back. The dots are ma