On March 22, 2017, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Tencent jointly held "Overseas Travel Benefits from WeChat -- WeChat Version of 12308 & Small Apps Project Conference" at Lanting Hall of the Foreign Ministry, which fulfills the commitment made by Foreign Minister Wang Yi as scheduled, who promised that the WeChat Version of 12308 will be officially launched in two weeks at the press conference of the "Two Sessions" on March 8.

Assistant Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou and Vice President of Tencent Zeng Ming delivered speeches at the press conference and jointly launched the WeChat Version of 12308 and online Small Apps. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Office of the Central Leading Group for Cyberspace Affairs, China National Tourism Administration, the Ministry of Public Security, Foreign Affairs Office of the People's Government of Beijing Municipality and other government departments as well as nearly 140 representatives and guests from Tencent, China Minsheng Banking and other enterprises of cooperation projects attended the meeting. More than 30 media including People's Daily, Xinhua News Agency, China Central Television, China Radio International, Global Times, Phoenix Satellite TV and The Paper reported the press conference.

Assistant Foreign Minister Kong Xuanyou said in his speech that the official launch of the WeChat Version of 12308 and Small Apps marked the seamless synergy of 12308 hotline of "Global Emergency Call Center for Consular Protection and Service of the Foreign Ministry" with WeChat public account of Consular Express and its important achievements and significance are mainly embodied in the following three aspects:

First, implement the principle of diplomacy for the people and earnestly promote the Internet plus government service. Diplomacy for the people is the principal Chinese diplomacy sticks to. With a higher level of opening up and more frequent contacts between Chinese and foreigners, the consular work has become a leading indicator of diplomacy for the people that the people can really feel. In recent years, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has taken the great advantages of information technology and new media communication, and has gradually launched Consular Services of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Government, 12308 hotline, WeChat official account of Consular Express, Headlines for Government Service of Headlines Today and other high-quality consular information and service platforms. On such basis, the launch of the WeChat Version of 12308 and Small Apps is to make better use of new media and high technologies and provide more thoughtful consular service for the people. China's consular protection and services extend to wherever our compatriots go.

Second, thoroughly forge mobile consular service brand in response to the people's actual demands. With an in-depth integration of 12308 hotline function, the WeChat version of 12308 is a WeChat official account of Consular Express with the combination of information, consultation and assistance. It realizes information classification and safety alert grading, and adds historical inquiry, location-based push and other intelligent applications with more affinity and humanity in the interface and function design. The three-tire help mechanism, namely, WeChat intelligent response, online artificial service and one-touch-call 12308 hotline, is convenient for overseas Chinese to choose the most appropriate way to seek assistance according their own situation. The mechanism not only provides the convenient and efficient consular assistance, but also offers a green channel for those overseas Chinese in emergency.

Third, complementary advantages and resources sharing between the government and enterprises create a new model of improving the quality and efficiency of public services. As a bellwether among new social media, WeChat serves as an important platform for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and overseas embassies and consulates to promote the major-country diplomacy with Chinese characteristics and the concept of diplomacy for the people. The WeChat version of 12308 and Small Apps developed by Tencent, whose backstage technologies and staff services are provided by China Minsheng Banking, are good models of high-quality e-government platform jointly created by the government and enterprises.

Kong Xuanyou stressed that overseas livelihood projects are an ongoing process. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will constantly innovate to create more channels to collect public opinions, offer more Consular Expresses to serve our people, and open up more "lifelines" of overseas consular protection with the help of new media, building overseas livelihood projects with all walks of the society.

Zeng Ming, Vice President of Tencent, said in the speech that Tencent is honored to partner with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to provide consular services and assistance to hundreds of millions of outbound Chinese citizens via WeChat, so as to ensure timely reach of consular information and destination safety alerts to outbound Chinese citizens, enabling them to check common information through WeChat Intelligence Response as well as contact and call for help with on-line customer service through voice, pictures, text and even WeChat micro videos in a direct and convenient manner. In addition to upgrading the popular Consular Express WeChat platform, a Small App called "Foreign Affairs 12308" was also released, walking at the forefront of Internet + government service. This indicates that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is providing high quality services, while pursuing outstanding user experience in step with the development of Internet. The core value of Tencent, also the product standard of WeChat team, is Customer-oriented, conforming to the concept of diplomacy for the people of the Foreign Ministry. It is expected that overseas Chinese can feel the care of their motherland. WeChat expects to take this cooperation as an opportunity to get involved in more public services.

After the conference, the staff gave a live presentation and in-depth interpretation on the functional highlights of the WeChat Version of 12308 and Small Apps.|||

