Based on in-depth research & an infographic by Wowza

What happens when there’s an additional 500 millisecond delay in a live streaming game? Users are twice as likely to abandon.

As a hardcore FPS (first-person shooter) gamer, I can tell you that this is no exaggeration. I don’t want some 15-year old noob handing me my ass, simply because of a time delay.

Time delay (or “latency”, in technical terms) affects all kinds of experiences that rely on live streamed content.

Wowza, the streaming engine that powers about 25% of all online video streaming, decided to dig into the user experience of live streaming apps.

Chris Michaels, Wowza’s communications director, has written a performance report on the highest-profile live streaming providers, based on 2 key metrics:

Wowza assessed the performance of user-generated content (UGC) apps, which rely on live streaming, as each was trialled 15 times across:

Chris got in touch this week and kindly let me read the full, yet-to-be published 19-page report. So I’m summarising here key findings and insights from the study.

I’m also sharing a swanky infographic showing which UGC live streaming app provides the best UX, when it comes to TTFF and E2E. The apps assessed include, among others:

You can continue reading the article below the infographic.

You’ve probably noticed a live stream become jumpy (or “laggy”, in geekspeak) as more people joined in.

Considering the technical challenges of beaming large packets of information to large numbers of people, at the same time, in real time… this isn’t surprising.

So, if you’re gonna build a live-streaming feature into an experience to be enjoyed en masse, you may want to introduce an artificial time delay—for everyone.

This was Periscope’s solution to live streams becoming overloaded. Wowza’s report notes that the company introduces “a false delay of up to 10 seconds when the number of viewers for a piece of content surpasses a numerical threshold (e.g. 1000 viewers)”.

This may represent a bizarre scenario where deliberately sub-optimal design is good for UX.

But this approach works only if the content being streamed does not require real-time, two-way feedback. For example, if real-time interaction between viewer and broadcaster is necessary for an authentic experience, then a false delay will harm user experience.

As cited in the Wowza study, “studies show consumers now trust UGC more than any other type of media.”

This is probably why user-generated content drives some of the most popular live-streaming experiences:

Often, the special sauce is the feeling that we’re interacting with people or things we love, in near-real time. It’s like… we’re there.

Adi Sideman, Founder and CEO of YouNow (which led the pack in Wowza’s report), told TechCrunch that although the company archives live video streams when they’re finished, “nobody watches live stream archives.”

On top of this, it’s often not just about streams being live (i.e. seeing something while it’s happening)—it’s also about streams feeling as close to real-time as possible (i.e. having each experience in the same moment everybody else does).

“When it’s an apples to apples comparison, users will always choose the fastest platform,” says @wowzamedia Tweet this!

For example, with YouNow, engagement is key—streamers make money directly off viewer interactions. The highest-performing streamers have earned more than $1 million to date.

Users watching streams will contribute only if they’re having highly interactive and responsive interactions with the streamer—meaning videos have to load quickly and play at high quality.

It doesn’t feel particularly “interactive” if your hero reacts to your interactions with a 10-second delay.|||

This article & infographic, based on research by Wowza, explains how time delays (or "latency") affects the UX of live streaming apps.