The ocean surface surrounding coral reefs in the northern SCS has warmed at a rate of 0.09 ± 0.015 °C/decade (95% confidence) since 1900 (Fig. 1), closely tracking rates of SST rise globally (0.07 °C/decade)20,21, in the tropics (0.08 °C/decade)22, and in coral reef regions (0.09 °C/decade)22 (see also Fig. 1a and refs 14,22, 23, 24 for spatial variability). In spring and summer 2015, weakened surface winds in the northern SCS associated with a developing Pacific El Niño and diminished sea to air latent heat flux25,26,27, were superposed on this secular trend (Fig. 1d,e). The resulting warming of the sea surface culminated in a June SST anomaly 2 °C above the expected temperature for that time of year (Fig. 2e). Nevertheless, the open-ocean SST anomaly was not high enough for long enough to raise NOAA’s Coral Reef Watch “Bleaching Alert” (Fig. 2b), and coral bleaching was not anticipated on reefs in the northern SCS in June 2015 (ref. 28).

Dongsha Atoll is a massive (25 km diameter), circular coral reef emerging from ~500 m water depth on the continental shelf slope in the northern SCS. The living reef flat encircling the lagoon is just 1–3 m deep (Fig. 2d), as is characteristic of many coral atolls, and barrier and fringing reefs worldwide. In summer, water on the shallow reef is heated during the day by solar insolation, but is cooled via advection of offshore water across the reef flat by tidal and wave-driven currents (Fig. 3). Consequently, daily average temperatures on the reef flat typically resemble those of the surrounding open ocean. Indeed, mean temperature recorded by our in situ logger on the reef flat during June-July-August (JJA) of 2013–2015 was 29.7 °C, practically identical to that of the surrounding open ocean (29.6 °C in both NOAA-OI and NOAA Coral Reef Watch) (Supplementary Fig. S1). However, in June 2015, an anomalous high-pressure system reduced wind speeds and surface wave height across the northern SCS (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Fig. S3). As a result, current speeds on the reef flat decreased by 40–60% compared to the previous two years for which we have data (Supplementary Fig. S3), disrupting the local heat budget (Fig. 3). For several days, heating from solar insolation exceeded the advective cooling that would otherwise keep the reef flat at open-ocean temperatures, adding up to 4 °C to the relatively modest 2 °C open-ocean anomaly. Reef-flat temperatures peaked in excess of 6 °C above the climatological mean June SST (Figs 2 and 3). We diagnosed the causes of this transient heating event using high-resolution physical measurements and a heat-budget analysis (Fig. 3). The extreme temperature (36 °C) reached in June 2015 was a result of global (El Niño warming superposed upon a global warming trend), regional (high pressure system and reduced winds), and local hydrodynamic (shallow reef, neap tide and unusually slow currents) factors aligning – at the right time – to drive intense heating (see Supplementary Information for additional details).

Ecological surveys conducted across the reef flat in early June prior to the bleaching event, and again in late July provide a rare quantitative characterization of the response of the benthic community to the extreme thermal stress7. In early June, live, healthy corals on the reef flat covered 22% of the benthic area. Mass coral bleaching was observed two weeks later, coincident with maximum temperatures. By late July, bleaching gave way to mass mortality and the cover of live, un-bleached coral was halved to 11% of the benthic area. Our ecological survey point-counts showed 33–40% of coral points recently dead and 10% still bleached (Fig. 4). The response of the benthic community was unusually rapid. Whereas corals typically bleach – and recover – in response to several months of accumulated heating or cooling28,29, corals on the Dongsha reef flat bleached within one week of peak temperatures and 90% of them were either recovered or dead less than six weeks later.

In contrast to the reef flat, no bleaching was observed on the upper fore reef slope or in the channel north of Dongsha Island, where local amplification of warming did not occur. Large-amplitude internal waves are generated on tidal frequencies in the Luzon Strait to the east of Dongsha Atoll and propagate along the thermocline (70–100 m depth) into the northern SCS17,30. When these internal waves collide with Dongsha Atoll, they deliver deep, cool water up the fore reef slope17,30. As a consequence, temperatures at 7 m depth on the fore reef decrease as much as 8 °C for several hours each day17, and during 6–15 June 2015, eastern fore reef temperatures were on average 2.8 °C cooler than the surrounding open-ocean SST (Fig. 2e). Yet over the same time in the channel north of Dongsha Island, where the internal waves are absent, mean temperature was within 0.1 °C of the open-ocean SST (Fig. 2e). The lack of bleaching in the channel indicates that the 2 °C open-ocean anomaly was insufficient to drive bleaching on its own and that internal waves may not have been necessary to relieve thermal stress and prevent bleaching on the upper fore-reef slope. Rather, the synergy of global, regional, and local drivers of warming was necessary to drive mass bleaching and mortality on the reef flat.

We observed strong species-specific patterns in mortality as a result of bleaching on the reef flat (Fig. 4). Based on visual surveys conducted on 20 June, all colonies of Porites, Acropora, Pavona, and Stylophora, the four most common coral genera on the reef flat, appeared bleached. However, six weeks later, we found only 17% mortality of Porites in our ecological point-count data, compared with 56% for Acropora (Fig. 4). Contrasting bleaching responses have the potential to shift coral reef community composition in favor of the most resistant species31,32. Acropora, though vulnerable to bleaching, has relatively high growth rates and fecundity32,33,34. These traits enable recovery of partially depleted populations, but only over decades and in lieu of reoccurring thermal stress events32. Branching corals, including Acropora, create unique habitat for many other reef taxa5,35,36. Their selective demise, therefore, creates additional problems for the biodiversity of coral reef ecosystems32, which harbor an estimated one quarter of all marine species37.

Mass bleaching-induced mortality of long-lived corals across the Dongsha reef flat suggests that an event of this magnitude is unusual, and perhaps unprecedented over the past several decades. Bleaching was reported in the waters immediately surrounding Dongsha Island in 1998 (ref. 38), but the larger lagoon and reef flat were not monitored at that time. To assess whether past high temperature events in the open ocean drove similar levels of ecological response, we examined skeletal cores from massive Porites corals for evidence of stress banding, discrete anomalously high-density bands of skeleton accreted during bleaching39,40,41,42,43. Colonies that bleach but survive and continue to grow, preserve within their skeleton a high-density stress band visible in computerized tomography (CT) scans39,40,41,42. Recent evidence suggests that Porites stress bands are reliable archives of past bleaching events because their prevalence scales proportionally to community-level bleaching43. Partial colony mortality, indicative of severe bleaching, is also visible in CT scans, and reductions in growth due to slow recovery can be quantified from CT images39,40,41,42.

We analyzed CT scans of cores from 22 Porites colonies on the reef flat ranging in height from 1 to 1.5 m. Each colony was alive and pigmented in early June, prior to the peak temperature anomaly, all appeared bleached by mid-June, and 11 (i.e., 50%) of these colonies died by late July. Average growth rate was 1.5 cm yr−1 (Supplemental Fig. S5), indicating that these colonies were 70–100 years old. This means that each colony had survived prior high temperatures associated with El Niño events in 1983, 1998, and 2007 (Figs 1 and 5). However, our analysis of the skeletal records shows that less than 50% of the colonies had bleached during these events, compared with 100% in 2015 (Fig. 5), and there were no signs of partial mortality and no significant declines in annual calcification rate (Supplementary Fig. S5). This implies that the 2015 bleaching event was the most severe to hit Dongsha Atoll in at least the past 40 years, and possibly much longer.

Reef-building corals typically live near the upper limits of their thermal tolerance7,8. Global climate models project that conditions on the majority of coral reefs will exceed these limits by the second half of this century10,11. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions in an effort to cap open-ocean warming to 2 °C could delay these impacts and may allow some corals time to acclimate and adapt10,11,12. However, most projections of coral reef futures under a 2 °C global warming scenario rely solely on estimates of open-ocean warming without considering the compounding effects of regional climate and local hydrodynamics. Our results indicate that these projections may be overly optimistic for many shallow coral reef ecosystems.|||

A 2 °C increase in global temperature above pre-industrial levels is considered a reasonable target for avoiding the most devastating impacts of anthropogenic climate change.