The automotive industry is undergoing a digital transformation. The technology in automobiles that’s connected to the internet and capable of receiving services from the cloud is ushering in a new wave of innovation. In fact, by some estimates, over the next three years, more than 90 percent of all cars will be connected. From amazing fuel savings, to predictive maintenance and safety features, to self-driving cars, we’re at a critical inflection point that will change how we drive.

Microsoft is working with the world’s leading automotive companies and suppliers to deliver these technologies and services to customers. We don’t make cars, but we have a long history of working with our partners in the automotive industry to deliver great products and services that power the automotive sector. For example, our Azure service is the leading cloud platform for the auto industry.

“The connected car represents an enormous opportunity for the auto industry, and at the core it’s a software challenge,” says Peggy Johnson, executive vice president of Business Development at Microsoft. “Our mission is to empower car makers with technology that allows them to focus on building even better driving experiences for their customers.”

At Microsoft, we strive to deeply understand our partners’ objectives and meet them where they are, and intellectual property sometimes has a role to play in this context.

That’s why we are pleased to announce that we have reached an agreement to license our intellectual property (IP) for connected cars to Toyota, as our first partner in the launch of our new auto licensing program. Learn more here.

As one of the leading auto companies in the world with a deep heritage of innovation and ground-breaking research and development, Toyota is already a valued partner of Microsoft through the Toyota Connected program and an early adopter of Azure IP Advantage. We look forward to deepening this partnership with our IP in connected cars.

Across Microsoft, we are excited about the digital transformation of the automotive sector. Automotive companies and their suppliers are doing amazing work to bring new experiences to customers, and we look forwarding to partnering with them on this journey.

Customers interested in learning more about the connected car licensing program can visit the IP licensing website or contact a licensing executive.|||

