Let’s Code JavaScript is a show about professional web development. Here’s where to start.

If you’re just starting your professional journey, the How To channel is for you. It’s a scripted walkthrough that will teach you what you need to know to code with the pros. Start with the first episode and watch it all the way through to the end.

If you’re an experienced professional, the Live channel is for you. Professional development is all about working with existing code, and that means that our priority is to constantly reduce maintenance costs. We have four main strategies:

The Live channel shows how these strategies play out in real-world development. You see everything—false starts, mistakes, and successes—which gives you the skills you need to apply these strategies to your own work.

The Live channel has over 125 hours of content, but don’t worry, you don’t have to start at the beginning. I suggest starting with one of our most recent seasons. Here’s the whole list:

There’s a ton of great content in the Live channel, so check out the table of contents and pick chapters that look interesting. Most chapters start with an intro to bring you up to speed. Email me any time if you need help finding something specific.

Check out the Lessons Learned channel and The Lab, too. They go out of date quickly, but there’s some gems in there. I particularly recommend our Legacy Code series.

If you’re an experienced developer, but new to JavaScript, the Lessons Learned channel has animated references that will be useful for you.

The first four chapters of the How To channel will bring you up to speed on JavaScript tooling and workflow. They’re meant to be watched in order, but you could probably skip ahead to the chapters that interest you.

It’s hard to keep up when life gets busy. Most episodes are less than 15 minutes long and they can be viewed on most popular mobile devices. Watch an episode during your commute, or take a few minutes during lunch. Each video has a DRM-free download link so you can watch even when you’re not online. (But please limit your downloads to videos you watch while subscribed. It keeps us on the air.)

When you have more time, be an active learner. Read and participate in the comments under each video. Create your own copy of the source code and see if you can repeat or improve upon each episode. Experiment with alternate ways of solving the problems we encounter, and share your ideas in the comments.

Most of all, enjoy the show!|||

