Oracle uses it, LinkedIn and Twitter use it, too. Google helped it to become famous, Intel developed it already before the turn of the millennium – “OKR“. But what is to be expected from that? The abbreviation “OKR“ stands for “Objectives and Key Results“. The “OKR“ method is supposed to make it easier for companies to provide confidence in their employees as well as optimize their orientation of resources. The focus is on the company’s objective. More precisely, the launch of “OKR Leadership“ improves the company’s transparency, provides for a clear task sharing and a more efficient internal coordination and, as a result, for motivation and effective working processes.

The advantage of “OKR“ lies in the fact that it is easy to understand. It hence is not necessary to introduce complicated new technical processes in order to integrate the controlling system. Usual Intranet data bases are sufficient. Nevertheless, you find numerous software tools such as parolu for the application and transfer of OKR these days.

Marco Alberti put the main complex of problems as follows: „The entrepreneur has to know what the company will be like in five to ten years. He also has to know what has to be done within the next three months.“ Hence, a maximum of five quarterly objectives are set which then lead to measurable key results. Four key results are assigned to each objective. It is important to know that the key results have to be measurable and quantifiable in order to be able to objectively evaluate their attainment. The objectives, on the contrary, have to be ambitious and can be further defined as their attainment is evaluated with the help of the key results.

Those five big objectives and four key results are assigned to the employees in an adapted form. Therefore, everyone in the company exactly knows what he has to do and at the same time does not feel overstrained. That leads to an increase of efficiency in the near future and has positive effects on the processes in the distant future, as well. Additionally, OKR is created in a way that makes the entrepreneurs take certain chances as the company sets ambitious objectives. Only by doing so is it possible to leave one’s comfort zone and achieve success which will be as big as possible.

You do not have to expect any consequences if not achieving the objectives drafted. Such a case does only help the company recap their processes for the upcoming quarter. Here, too, it is not necessarily required to transfer those objectives to the employees. Every single employee knows how to serve the company in the best possible way, so that it is not only the entrepreneur who sets the objectives for the next three months. Instead, the objectives in question will be negotiated among each other. Hubertus Bessaus‘ (German company’s founder) ideal conception that leadership becomes redundant by itself is perfectly supported by that. Bessaus understands OKR as a tool that supports his ideal conception.

Using parolu gives you the possibility to copy the OKR Leadership Method in a fast, clear and successful way. The best way to do so is to first create a separate project, for example “OKR Q1 2017”, setting the OKR objectives for the upcoming quarter. Second, you set the respective dates of the beginning and end of the project

The Objectives are created as Milestones, inside the Milestones the Key Results are added as To Dos. That makes it possible to devolve key results directly to the responsible employees.

The project card allows you to reconstruct the process whenever you like. The project view provides detailed information about objectives and key results. Using the additional parolu To Do functionality, such as check list, commentaries and attachments, you can also store all information needed within the Key Results, if required.|||

Google helped it to become famous, Oracle, LinkedIn and Twitter use it: OKR Leadership. Use parolu to implement Objectives and Key results successfully.