First of all, I'd like to apologize for the profanity in the title, but I felt this would be an effective way to catch everyone's attention. My apologies. :)

- I gave my MacBook for repair in Creative Center Ltd. (an Official Apple repair services provider) here in Sofia, Bulgaria; they've done a poor job of it and have damaged the machine in the process. Now CC refuse to take responsibility and don't want to fix it. Apple Support, initially, said they're fixing it (1-time 100% coverage), then they took their words back. So now I am left with a broken machine. This never would've happened in the US, and I would like to get Apple's attention on the fact that we (Apple users from Bulgaria or anywhere else outside the US, for that matter) would like to receive the same level of quality of products and services, as provided in the United States. After all, these products are even pricier outside, than they are in the US and to be treated as I was in the last couple of days is simply wrong.

And now the longer version:

Few days ago I went to pick up my MacBook Pro (15" mid 2012 Retina) from the repair shop (Creative Center Ltd., Sofia, Bulgaria), after I left it there for a display replacement.

I got the machine in my backpack and went home. It was in the shop for the previous 2 weeks, so I anxiously got it out of the backpack and onto my desk, but in the process I noticed there is a piece from the main body's panel, that was missing:

I thought I've looked at the laptop while I was in the shop, but either I haven't looked carefully (I am always nervous about publicly showing that I would question the quality of the service I am provided, so it is possible that my brain wouldn't process what my eyes were streaming to it :) ), or the piece was missing already.

So, naturally, I contacted the shop, they said they are going to make an investigation and got back to me on the next day with a statement that there is no chance this could've happened in their shop...

To tell you the truth, I was shocked, because at the time I was convinced the piece was actually cut out from the panel, cause of the relatively perfect shape (I thought "maybe a rookie decided to do the repair and something got terribly wrong, so he/she... 'fixed' it"),

My first reaction was not to laugh, at the time. Oh not at all! But it does seem a bit funny, doesn't it? Hm, still can't tell... because my problem hasn't been resolved, yet...

So I started thinking - "OK, maybe they are right, the piece wasn't "cut" from the panel. But how did I cause this - I haven't hit, dropped or even scratched my machine for 5 years, have slapped hundreds of hands streaming their index finger at my screen :) and I have no memory of asserting any mechanical stress on it between the repair shop and my home..." Here is the black cloth for display cleaning that came with the MacBook, that I've used for all of these years, trying to perfectly preserve it, folding it in the same way it was originally folded, putting it out and back into it's original packaging... Every. Single. Time.

I do take good (close to identifiable as an OCD) care of my things...

"But If it just fell off, I should have the piece somewhere, in-here.". So I quickly got the backpack opened it up and started searching for the piece, turned it upside down, but there wasn't anything to be found. I looked everywhere in my apartment from the floor & desk, to the kitchen, bathroom, you name it - I've checked it! Nothing... "Maybe my backpack has a hole in it?" - nope, it's a brand new backpack and there are no stylistic or other type of holes in it. In other words, I don't have the missing piece, so the chances of it falling off on my way home & disappearing mysteriously are pretty slim... next to none.

After long time of dwelling on this "mystery", I am convinced that it did fell off, most likely somewhere in the repair shop, and it did fall off, because they've (likely accidentally) compromised the structural integrity of the plate. The thing that convinced me is the state of the other hinge, where bending of the metal plate is observable (the shop claims that didn't happen there, either, btw):

When I sent this last picture, the repair shop's manager of repair services, Stoyan Bordelov, sent me a message which for the first time really made me think that they are going to make a run for it and will try to get out of fixing the issue. He said that they've checked the security camera, on which it's visible that I've "inspected" the MacBook for issues at the time of receiving, and that it was visible there was no dent on the metal plate. I asked to see this video and have so far been refused access to it, but they scratched the last statement - the latest information I got from the guy at the reception of the repair shop was "We can't see whether there is a dent or not on the video... but we do have you on tape, looking for issues!".

My next move was to contact Apple Support and since I expected it to take days if I write an email - I decided to try my luck and engage them on Twitter. And Bingo! They answered almost instantly, I've explained my issue and they said:

So I sent the case number to Mr. Bordelov, and the next day I went to get this resolved once and for all... On the front desk, the guy told me that Mr. Bordelov called Apple Support and managed to overrule the case. I asked "But why would he do this...? I did not cause that damage..." No response...

Then I spoke with Mr. Bordelov himself and he denied him overruling the case and said he needed an official confirmation email from Apple Support to actually do the repairs (and I have to somehow provide that - even though they see the case in their system...). He offered to give me a number I can call and that was that...

So I went home, incredibly disappointed and I asked Apple Support to help me resolve the issue. After a couple of messages back-and-forth, to my biggest surprise they took their words back - they were no longer offering the 100% coverage...

I was replacing this display, because of defective anti-glare coating, which Apple has an unofficial program to fix on some models of MacBooks (and mine falls in that category) even if they are outside of warranty period. And this is my case, exactly - my MacBook is no longer under warranty.

And the battle was lost...

Here are the facts:

No matter if the piece has fallen off, before or after, I took the laptop from the shop - I haven't mechanically shocked the computer (before or in the hour that it took me to find the damage, after getting it from the repair shop) and if it hasn't fallen apart mechanically for 5 years, than it's an understatement that it's more than SUSPICIOUS that it will fall apart just right after repairs which occurred in these exact places and area where the damage is!

If the plate was corroded and repair would cause another damage - they should've said so and asked me. But they didn't - THEIR FAULT;

If the plate was accidentally cut, broken during repair - THEIR FAULT.

All the ways lead to them, being unprofessional.

So to summarize - I gave my computer for display replacement, they damaged the main body, a part of it fell off (no matter if it was in the shop or outside) and now they refuse to take responsibility for their actions (both Creative Center and Apple Support).

Not only that, they've let me to believe that the issue will be fixed (Apple Support) and then took their words back!? Who does that?! Not the Apple I thought I knew. :(

And you know what? Even the "new" display is defective - the backlight is bleeding in several places...

But this isn't the first time I had to send this machine for repairs - it has been repaired 5 times...

These are, in total, ~ 3 months, I've spent without my work machine... And I was still kind of OK with it... Do you know why? Because I always knew - if something breaks down, Apple will take care of it and fix it.

And after everything that has happened, and all that time and money was lost, the disrespect and mistreatment in the last couple of days weren't enough to actually make me mad enough and make all of this effort to fight this. But I realized - I could no longer trust this service...

I'm a small business owner and I plan on expanding my operation. I wanted to purchase Apple equipment for any and every future employee that I have (even though it makes my total cost of on-boarding huge), but now I am not so sure about that...

I've converted a dozen other people to use Apple products and have always been vocal about how much I love their technology solutions and have openly shared my delight with everything the company is doing well.

At some point, after one of these repairs, I even went to the trouble to pro-actively send positive feedback for one of the guys at the repair shop, so he can (hopefully) get promoted.

And to be mistreated like that... it's disappointing and it's wrong. But I refuse to accept it!

I refuse to be denied the comfort in knowing that, if I buy Apple products and there is a defect in the hardware or bug in their software -> they are going to fix it... just because I live in a different country.

Someone might say: "Wait what? You still want to use this c*** after all this trouble?"

It's ridiculous, right?! I know! I've had soooo many issues with that machine, but... I love it! And I love the software it runs, and I love the eco-system around it and I think... I think this is a huge mistake made by couple of people, and it's not representative of the whole company. I choose to think so... even though Apple Support, not Creative Center, were the ones that first said they will make sure this is fixed and than took their words back.

That's exactly why I can't let this go. It's unacceptable. All of it. And it has to be fixed!

And not just this MacBook - it has payed for itself, time and time again - I do love it, but will just as easily get a new one. But THIS... has to be fixed - I shouldn't need to go through all of this trouble, to publicly search anyone's attention, so I can get my Apple product-related issues resolved... Your Bulgarian representation is not good enough and this has to be fixed.

Since Apple Support has, so far, refused to help me, I will file an official complaint in the Bulgarian Commission for End-User Protection against Creative Center Ltd..

Other than that I've notified all of my friends, followers and all local Apple social groups about the issue (and by the way, several people have been having horrendous stories about their own experiences with the repair shop in question, it's not just an isolated case, apparently).

I will continue to work tirelessly on this and search for the attention of Higher Management at Apple Support. So, please, if you know someone at Apple who will be interested to know what the level of their local representation is - send them a link to this post. Your support is much appreciated!

There shouldn't be a difference in the service towards American Apple users, German Apple users, or Bulgarian Apple users - there should only be "Apple users". We don't deserve a different (and lesser) level of quality, just because we are in a different geographic location.

Update #2 (and hopefully "last"):

The diagnostic was done as promised, but I almost left the shop with a machine that has no connected battery (so it only works on cord) - they forgot to connect it after the diagnostic. Fortunately, the problem was caught on time and they've fixed it for 2 min (I almost felt like it was an F1 team waiting on 2nd floor who made the fix in seconds :) ). It happens - they did try to make this quick, so I hold no grudge over it, especially since we caught it in place and there was no significant time loss.

My machine was repaired as promised (I haven't found any issues with it, so far). The top case (where the hole was) comes with a new keyboard and a battery + the repair was 100% coverage, so they threw-in a set of new speakers. The team at Creative Center has been very polite during the process. I do appreciate that and am grateful for it - Thank you.

There was a (hopefully) minor issue with the new display: 2-3 spots where the anti-glare coating was slightly deformed, but Mr. Bordelov has assured me this is not an issue and will not cause the coating to come off earlier. They've offered to replace it once again, but (I quote) "next time there might be a bigger issue than this". I don't know what that means, but I've listed the issue in the authorization for work document and I do know I am quite tired of all this, so I am just happy to be over - so I rolled with it.

There was a strange call afterwords from Mr. Bordelov, where I felt like he "casually" implied I should take his name off my posts, but... Nah, I'm not doing to do that. :)

Overall, I think this post (+ the 2 conversations with Apple Support + all the other discussions in Facebook & Twitter) made quite a stir and I believe this is the reason my issue was resolved. Maybe I'm wrong, maybe it was a pure coincidence that only after this post got over 3000 reads in 2 days, CC spontaneously changed their tune... Whatever the case is, I can only speculate and by now you probably know - I don't like to speculate.

So I do have an evidence that CC has changed their attitude (at least towards me). Although no one has apologized to me for all this time that I've lost, verbally, I do find it to be a nice gesture to make the repairs on a highest priority schedule (and to change a couple of extra pieces of hardware).

But they have a long way to go, if they want to make me (and likely lots of others) trust them unconditionally, once again. And I can't emphasize enough - I did trust them a lot, before this incident. Still, in the last week they've shown quite a progress, so I am sure - they are on the right track.

A friend of mine contacted Apple Support on my behalf and I've received a 2nd promise that they will repair the computer.

Creative Center said this hasn't been noted in the support case, but they've made a request on their own and it has been granted. They even agreed to allow me to keep the machine until the parts arrive, so we can mitigate any more lost time. Tomorrow, I am bringing it to the shop for diagnostic (they said it would take about an hour) so they know exactly which parts need to be replaced. Hopefully the next update will read "The issues have, finally, been resolved.".|||

