Due to the escalating social tensions between the Core Developers and the miners which have influence over the network, it is looking more likely by the day that the bitcoin network will undergo a hard fork. If this event is to occur, the outcome could be similar to the hard fork the Ethereum network experienced last year, where we were left with two cryptocurrencies in the aftermath.

If you haven’t read up on the motivations of each camp, read my previous blog: What You Need To Know About The Bitcoin Scaling Debate.

Assuming the hard fork is to occur, the bitcoin community will have to choose which currency they believe is the true bitcoin; Core or Unlimited. The big question here is how do we determine the source of truth, and which side is it on? Also, could both sides of the fork survive?

One of the complex ideas that is inherent to blockchain technology is the determination of what is the source of truth, or in this context what chain do you trust when the blockchain forks in two. Cryptocurrency is dissimilar to our traditional currency system, because the legitimacy of the currency is decided by a community rather than a centralised entity. There is a common understanding in the bitcoin community that the longest chain is the source of truth, which essentially means that the software that the majority of miners are consuming is what we legitimately know as the real bitcoin.

As a challenge to this thought I believe that the legitimacy of a blockchain is dependant on the attitude of the total ecosystem, not just the miners. For example in this case of Core vs. Unlimited there are large mining pools which have taken an interest in consuming Unlimited software. In a favourable circumstance, once they have the majority of hashing power in the mining space, they could fork the network and create a second bitcoin. The total community would have to decide what they see as the legitimate coin; which could be either or both coins. At this point in the example the playing field would dictate the following:

It is possible that though the miners place their majority hash power on the Bitcoin Unlimited chain, if the users and businesses strongly believe the smaller Core chain is the source of truth the miners will face the choice of switching back to Core or losing a lot of money. Therefore is is not necessarily true that the longest chain is the source of truth.

The likelihood that there will be two equally valuable bitcoins is low. The huge conflict here is the miners will not mine a coin that no one wants to use, and the users and businesses will not use a coin that is not validated by the miners.

Either way it is important to keep in mind that if you hold bitcoin before the fork occurs, once it has occurred you now hold that amount of bitcoin on both chains. For example if you have 10 bitcoins before the fork, you now have 10 Bitcoin Core(BTC) coins and 10 Bitcoin Unlimited(BTU) coins. Once the fork occurs, everyone will be faced with the choice of:

It is important to note that if Bitcoin Unlimited attempts to fork the chain without a strong majority of mining support, they will cause a lot of damage to the bitcoin brand and community by doing so. Given that the miners are profit driven, it is in everyones interest for a possible hard fork to play out as clean as possible. Long term Bitcoin advocate and Bitcoin Unlimited supporter Roger Verr has stated strongly the fork will not occur without a strong majority of miners supporting it (90%). He has high hopes that this number can be achieved.

The potential hard fork might be stressful for people who are new to the bitcoin space, however with growth comes a bit of pain. Bare in mind the only reason we have this scaling issue is because the demand to use the bitcoin network is at an all time high, the resolution of the debate is required for the network to advance to a higher capacity of users.|||

Due to the escalating social tensions between the Core Developers and the miners which have influence over the network, it is looking more likely by the day that the bitcoin network will undergo a…