Capital Factory has moved more than a dozen startups to Austin in one way or another over the past few years — starting with the first company we ever invested in — SpareFoot. Fresh off the excitement of SXSW, Capital Factory is thrilled to announce that this April we’re moving another startup to Austin — this time with a $100,000 investment waiting for them.

Whether you were around to experience the convergence of thousands of talented entrepreneurs and venture capitalists to the city first hand or have heard about the buzz of SXSW and the startup scene in Austin, we want to invite you to participate in this competition.

It’s not like it’s hard to get people to move here — we’re the fastest growing city in the country. Austin has it’s own draw and it has “emerged as one of the hottest startup hubs in the country” according to Hugh Forrest, Chief Programming Officer for SXSW (and one of the angel investor backing this competition).

In addition to the $100,000 investment, you get free coworking at Capital Factory, free server hosting, and a lot bunch of other perks and discounts to make the cash last as long as possible.

What will it take to win? We are looking for companies that have built a compelling MVP and have started to gain early customers, but most of all we want to see great people who we believe in and have demonstrated that they can be resourceful and learn from their mistakes.

Any tech or consumer startup can apply on AngelList by April 14th to be selected to pitch at Funding Day on Friday, April 28. Five finalists will receive $500 toward airfare and the opportunity to pitch in front of top Austin investors and the Capital Factory mentors, which are some of the most successful entrepreneurs in Texas on Monday, May 1.

Here is a partial list of the Capital Factory Partners who are backing this investment. They are all on your team and you are guaranteed to get a first meeting with them (you have to earn a second one):

p.s. it would great to have more women and people of color on this list. There are still a few spots left.|||

Capital Factory has moved more than a dozen startups to Austin in one way or another over the past few years — starting with the first company we ever invested in — SpareFoot. Fresh off the…