If you’ve already downloaded and use the Postman native app, you can stop reading right now. . . but only if you're really, truly, for absolutely certain.  I've talked to too many developers who think they're on the Postman native app, but they're really not.  It's an easy mistake to make.  So if you're not quite sure, please read on.

If you know you're still using the Postman Chrome app, then by all means, read on.

Many Postman users believe Postman is only available as a Chrome app.  While we started out as a Postman Chrome app used along with the Postman Interceptor Chrome extension, native apps were introduced for Mac / Windows / Linux users last year.

We know that a lot of Postman users are still on the Chrome app, but really, it’s time to make the switch and go native.

The Postman native apps are free, like the Chrome app, but better than the Chrome app.  The native apps cover all the features and functionality of the Chrome app and Chrome extension together, and more.  The native apps run on Electron overcoming a lot of the restrictions of the Chrome platform.

Previously, users of the Postman Chrome app had to download the Postman Interceptor Chrome extension in order to manage cookies and capture requests in the desktop browser.  With the native apps, this functionality is provided within the app itself.

Google announced plans to end support for Chrome apps for Windows, Mac, and Linux users.  That means that beginning THIS year, support for the Postman Chrome app is going away. In anticipation, Postman engineers have already started to build out new features and enhancements exclusively in the native apps.

I’ve talked to many developers that assume they’re already on the native app because it was designed to look and feel the same as the Chrome app.

If you don't remember which one you downloaded, the quickest way to tell if you’re on the Postman Chrome app or native app is to look at the menu bar.

Alternatively, you can visit the About tab under Settings to explicitly see which version you're using.

It’s simple.  Sign into your Postman account after you download and start the new native app, and all your history and Collections will be automatically synced.|||

