Affiliate Marketing, in my opinion, is the easiest and most enjoyable online business in the World.    You get to choose what is of interest to you; like choosing your niche.  You can choose a topic you like and talk about it while at the same time helping others.  Affiliate marketing is a legitimate way to earn recurring income each and every month via your pay-pal, direct deposit or checking account.  As an affiliate marketer, you earn commission for selling someone’s products or services by promotion them with your affiliate link; which you will receive after signing up with an affiliate program for any of these affiliate network. You can set your own hours by working  part-time to make a few hundred bucks or full-time making thousands each and every month.  The good news is that  you can do this right from your own home or anywhere that has internet access.  You won’t need to do any customer service,  fill or ship any products or have supplies on hand.  As an affiliate marketer all you do is find the products/services promote them and get paid a commission when sold through your affiliate link, and repeat over and over again.  You can signup with programs like Wealthy Affiliate, JVZoo, ShareASale, these all have affiliate programs along with all the others that are available and most affiliate programs free.

Is this a Scam? (the most concerned question when it comes to online business)

How much money will this cost me?

What exactly will I be doing?

What if I don’t know how to use a computer that well?

Like every industry, especially in the online business World, there are plenty of scams going around.  Unfortunately, they are scammers out there that are always looking for ways to get money off of newbies who are seeking ways to make money online.

All these questions may across your mind and this is normal it happens to all of us.    The good news is that there are some reputable affiliate programs that you can join at no cost to you.  You have nothing to lose with any of these programs because they are all free to start and no credit card require.  Give it a try and if it doesn’t work then you can simply let it go, but remember determination will bring you success.   Below are some tips on what you would need to as you begin your journey to success.

Get rich quick schemes: promises to become millionaires within a short time (too good to be true)

Pay to join programs: Avoid any programs that you have to pay an up-front cost to join, especially if you have to pay without testing or a trial period to see if it is something you will enjoy.

Paying for training: Most people when getting into something new would like to know that they have the information they need in order to be successful, like training and support.  This is where you have to be very careful and aware of scammers, who will try to sell you e-books, training courses, and all other kinds of information.  Do your research before jumping into any of these programs.  You can also check out Wealthy Affiliate, this program is one of the most reputable programs on the internet and involves everything you need to start as an affiliate plus you can make money right away.

1.  Choose a Niche – A topic you are passionate or knowledgeable about.

2. Find affiliate programs and products/services, make sure to research these well.

3. Build your website – some web hosting sites you can use are: www.my.wealthyaffiliate.com,         www.hostgater.com or www.webhostinghub.com .  There a much more website and hosting companies that you can use as well, to get your site up and ready to begin making money.

4.  Create your content – Use Jaaxy to help you with keyword searches.

6. promote the or products/services you selected using your affiliate link.

Don’t worry because there are lots of help, and answers to your questions, you won’t be alone.

The two most important things you will need is knowledge and a desire to succeed.

When you join Wealthy Affiliate will get two free websites that are hosted for free and they will be free forever.  You will also get training and support, videos and lessons to help get your websites up and ready to start making money online in no time.

If you have any questions on how to get started please send me a message via “contact us”  form and I will be sure to get back to you ASAP.|||

free online business for u is dedicated to helping others find free online business opportunities through affiliate marketing programs. with tools and tips