The Trump Effect is most often talked about in regard to the rise in bullying in schools since the election of Donald Trump last fall. Similarly, there has been a rise in anti-semitic activity in the United States. This activity has been attributed to Trump and his cantankerous rhetoric. I have observed similar behavior in my students.

Last month I shared with you two writing assignments I have used in a computer programming class I teach at my local community college. This past week we just completed the second of those two writing assignments for the spring semester. Before going any further let me take a moment to say the vast majority of my students are diligent, thoughtful and hardworking. These responses do not reflect the majority of students views at the college. In fact, in my experience they are the exception, not the rule.

I asked students to read this article on gender discrimination, then post their thoughts in a forum. Here are the prompts, and some of the unedited responses I got for each:

I have been using this assignment for 5 years. I can think of only one student who gave responses like this in the past. This semester I had three students who gave responses in which they refused to acknowledge issues of diversity in the workplace. There is no way for me to definitively say what effect Donald Trump and our nation’s political climate is having on my students. However, if we look at incidences of bullying, anti-semitic activity as well as “chatter” among right-wing fringe groups, there is no doubt that these groups feel emboldened and carry a greater sense of agency when sharing their views.

One of the perspectives I like to share with my students is a business case for diversity. Many students argue against “diversity for diversity's sake” and I generally agree. Here is a business case I like to share:

If you have feedback on this example or another business case for diversity, I would love for you to share it in the comments below. As educators and workers in the field (I am both) we need to share these examples either in the classroom, or in meetings and interactions with our peers. Sharing these ideas and making the business case for diversity is the only way we are going to change hearts and minds on these issues.|||

The Trump Effect is most often talked about in regard to the rise in bullying in schools since the election of Donald Trump last fall. Similarly, there has been a rise in anti-semitic activity in the…