The Nokia 3310 phone was unveiled at the Mobile World Congress in February. Phones like this are no longer popular in the U.S. However, they are still popular in developing countries throughout the world because they are inexpensive.

Qualcomm believes that they can enhance a feature phone such as the Nokia 3310 to give it some smartphone capabilities. So Qualcomm made the 205 Mobile chip, this chip was developed to give LTE capabilities, more responsiveness, and better graphics to a feature phone.

A feature phone has extremely limited capabilities in comparison to a modern day smartphone. These phones offer 2G connectivity capabilities for calling and texting. However, the new feature phones with the 205 chip will come equip with 4G LTE technology.

The 4G LTE technology means better call quality and more reliable connections. Feature phone users will also be able to send emails, perform basic web browsing, and participate in social networking.

Qualcomm recently estimated that 20 percent of all cell phone shipments are feature phones. Even though this may not be a growing market, there’s still some potential for Qualcomm to make lots of money in this area. The new 205 chip supports CDMA and GSM networks.

The picture quality on the display screen will be enhanced as a result of the new chip. Users will have the ability to stream video at 480p, this is a big improvement.

With the 205 chip, it’s now possible to have a dual camera setup on a feature phone. Phones with the new chip will also have secure payment capabilities as well as voice-over-LTE. These features will be important for people who live in developing countries because mobile payments are increasing in popularity.

Feature phones will also have Bluetooth 4.1 capabilities. The new 205 chip is a dual-core chip which will operate at 1.1GHz, this will make the phone run faster and smoother. This chip was developed for Linux-based phones, not Windows or Android phones.

The Qualcomm 205 chip will be available in feature phones in the second quarter of this year.|||

