You’ve probably heard about the term ‘subscription economy’ (if not, check if there’s a rock above you). Simply put, it describes products that provide ongoing value and charge a recurring fee for it. Think Spotify and Netflix. You probably use these services everyday and pay a monthly sum for them.

Historically, we’ve paid subscriptions for most things without batting an eyelid — cable TV, newspapers, magazines, telephone services, the works. But with the launch of the App Store back in 2008, consumers got spoilt a little on other easier-to-digest business models — the one-time payment, ads or worse, free (let the VC’s take care of the mundane things like, you know, MONEY) . Now, we’re seeing a resurgence of the good ol’ subscription with the big names dipping their toes in the subscription pool.

And today, you’ll see subscription-based products everywhere , from software and services to razor blades and tea (who else loved the Dollar Shave Club’s product video?). What makes the subscription model so attractive for businesses? What makes it better than other models like the upfront-paid or ads-based models?

Firstly, it’s very clean with no hidden costs or surprises. You get what you pay for. No irritating ads or shady data brokering involved. We’ve all heard about ‘If you’re not paying for it, you’re the product’. Businesses have come to realise that more and more consumers are becoming mindful of their data and understand the privacy risks associated with data breaches (Yahoo learnt this the hard way). Also, they are falling out of favor with apps that support crappy, irrelevant ads that pop up at just the wrong time. It’s the most legit way of going about your business.

Secondly, it’s very good from a business point of view. A subscription incentivises businesses to keep working on the product and adding new features, else run the risk of heavy churn every month (or year). When users pay a recurring fee for something, they expect to get lasting value from it, they expect to see something new regularly, something refreshing that can make them go ‘Wow’. This is what’s going through their minds when they decide to make the commitment. They’ve had enough of the $0.99 app that makes weird farting sounds or the $4.99 email app that just won’t sync.

Apple and Google have realised that retention matters and are now rewarding developers who sell subscriptions with a better revenue split (85–15 from the second year onwards instead of 70–30). Of course, it’s not that they’ve become generous all of a sudden, Apple and Google both stand to gain from this policy. Imagine an indie developer who’s made a nice little productivity app that he thinks will impact lives. Now instead of selling it for $19.99 one-time or showing ads, he’ll be more inclined to sell it as a subscription, because guess what, lightning can strike again and again. So it’s not just the big companies, Apple & Google are in a way pushing everyone to embrace the subscription model, because that also means more $$ in their coffers.

With Newton, we were clear on this from the beginning and hence we decided to charge $49.99/year. We wanted to build something that delivers a quality experience week after week than a Flappy Bird that fizzled out after a month. We knew that not everyone will take to this kindly (our obituaries were written the day we went paid), but we were sure that there will be some who’d see our side of things. Heck, we even went from 4.5 stars to 4 stars, but that did not deter us in our mission to modernise email.

We still stand by what we did because we’re bullish on the value we provide. Soon you’re going to meet Newton for Alexa and the Windows app. All this would not have been possible with a one-time fee, showing ads or selling data (which many apps end up doing once they run out of monetisation ideas). A subscription is what’s keeping us alive and a subscription is what will ensure you get the kind of email experience that no one else can give you.|||

You’ve probably heard about the term ‘subscription economy’ (if not, check if there’s a rock above you). Simply put, it describes products that provide ongoing value and charge a recurring fee for it…