Today, we are announcing a new blockchain-based digital advertising platform using an innovative, Ethereum-based unit of exchange called the Basic Attention Token (BAT).

The existing digital advertising marketplace injures key stakeholders. The introduction of BAT allows publishers, advertisers, and users to connect in a more efficient, transparent and decentralized marketplace that reduces fraud, privacy violations, and malvertisements while increasing publisher revenue.

BATs are based on user attention, which is really just focused mental engagement. BATs will be made available for crowdsale in the near future.

The advertising ecosystem started out as a marketplace where publishers, advertisers, and users were the main actors, but it is now overrun by “middleman” ad exchanges, complicated behavioral and cross-device user tracking, and opaque cross-party sharing through data management platforms.

This has translated into advertisers facing poor reporting and targeting, and publishers losing billions in revenue — while fraud has skyrocketed. Users have lost their privacy, face increasing malware risks, pay high charges to download trackers and ads, and suffer slow speeds. This has driven the adoption of ad blocking software, which is now on over 600 million mobile devices and desktops.

A few key numbers tell the story of today’s broken digital advertising landscape:

Presently, publishers are paid by monetizing attention via a complex network of intermediary players through ad networks and other such tools. With the onslaught of parasitic actors, publishers are getting very little revenue.

A new system is needed to properly value user attention. It must reward and protect the user, while giving better conversion to advertisers and higher yield to publishers.

In the new blockchain-based digital advertising platform, users will opt in to receive advertising. If they do, their attention will be privately monitored on-device in the Brave browser, without tracking. Publishers will be rewarded accordingly with BATs — tokens of exchange in a secure, private, and anonymous advertising system based in the browser and the mobile app webview. Users will also get a share of BATs for participating.

By keeping the data on the device, encrypting the data, and shielding the identities of our users as a core principle, BAT forms a bond with users that proves that not only does their data hold value, it holds substantial value that has been ignored and exploited by the middlemen year after year in the current industry model.

In sum, the BAT system provides the following benefits to:

In early stages, the BAT will be specifically tied to Brave browsers and Brave servers, along with verified publishers. Ad fraud will be reduced by publication of all source code for auditing, and by cryptographically secure transactions. Publisher payment will be through the BAT system.

The BAT exchange will be rolled out in phases over the coming months:

The Basic Attention Token is uniquely positioned to reform the ad-tech ecosystem because it is the ability to privately monitor and anonymously confirm user intent at the browser level which allows for the development of rich metrics for user attention. Attention is measured as viewed for content and ads only in the browser’s active tab in real time. The Attention Value for the ad will be calculated based on incremental duration and pixels in view in proportion to relevant content, prior to any direct engagement with the ad. We will define further anonymous cost-per-action models as the system develops.

For placement, Ads will be matched with user interests using local machine learning algorithms to judge the content to which the user is paying attention, in the context of tabs, viewability, and many other variables not available to remote trackers. This matching will be done privately, on the device only, without any signal out. This means fewer, but more relevant and valuable ads. Several scoring algorithms have been tried with the Brave donation ledger system, which automatically donates an amount proportional to the attention given to a website.

As Brave moves to a fully decentralized micropayment system, we expect other developers to use our free and open source infrastructure to develop their own use cases for BAT. We want BAT and the tools associated with it to become widely adopted web standards for future development of web content, solving the important problem of monetizing publisher content while protecting user privacy. Publishers, advertisers and users who view web content deserve a private, secure and well engineered future.

(Users and investors seeking more information can download the BAT whitepaper from basicattentiontoken.org, and can sign up to receive notifications for the upcoming BAT crowdsale launch).|||

Today, we are announcing a new blockchain-based digital advertising platform using an innovative, Ethereum-based unit of exchange called the Basic Attention Token (BAT). The existing digital…