The fact that more than nine million Britons and an estimated 90 million US adults are finding love online through dating websites is becoming a true phenomenon throughout the world.

A survey of nearly 20,000 Americans reveals that marriages between people who met online are at least as stable and satisfying as those who first met in the real world—possibly more so. And it didn't take long for other researchers to take note and expand on the true reality of today's BBW online dating experience.

And with the worldwide epidemic levels of obesity, online dating sites, like BBWcouple that specialize in BBW or plus size women dating for big handsome men and big beautiful women are some of the most popular online hook-up havens in today's Internet match making universe.

When social scientist and psychologists and counselors look for ways of helping couples work out their relationship issues, the answers are not that easy to come by. They did control for demographic factors, and that is good, But they did not control for personality, mental health status, drug and alcohol use, history of domestic violence, and motivation to form a relationship."

So the jury is still out when i t comes to the recipe for the secret sauce that makes relationships go the distance. The only way to prove that plus size women online dating has an effect on marital outcomes—positive or negative—is to do a controlled trial in which people are randomly assigned to meet people online or in the real world.

We asked BBW couple relationship consultant and coach, It would be especially easy to make a case for how well couples do when they meet online.

BBW Couple is the leading online BBW and plus size dating site matching men and women every day of the year. Our members join for free and enjoy fun and casual chatting, flirting and all the things that have made our site the hook-up destination of choice.|||

BBW Couple is the leading online BBW and plus size dating site matching men and women every day of the year.