Why should we honor the gig workers? The unsung heroes who are (quite possibly) keeping the economy going

There’s a disturbing video doing the rounds. It features a conversation between an Uber driver and the company’s CEO. The driver tries to explain how changes to Uber’s tariff model have bankrupted him. The CEO shows no concern or sympathy:

Turns out there are many, many disgruntled drivers disappointed by Uber: NotCoolUber.com. Users are not happy either. The #DeleteUber campaign apparently resulted in the deletion of 200,000 accounts.

What’s going on here?

The rise of the gig economy — independent workers on short-term engagements — has been praised by both workers and consumers. Workers love it because they can set their own hours, use their own equipment and supplement their income. Consumers appreciate the ease with which they can connect with vetted service providers. Connecting directly online also reduces wait times for services.

First, a little history on the rapidly growing gig economy.

For centuries, customers have contracted directly with workers for specific jobs — plumbers, electricians, even farriers to trim and shoe horses’ hooves. Until recently, though, connecting customers and workers took time. This kept the size of the gig economy (taking on individual jobs, each on a contract basis) relatively small. Not too long ago, contractors had to rely on classified ads and the yellow pages to connect with customers. The Internet and smartphones have changed this. Workers can now quickly connect with clients online, creating many new work arrangements.

Today’s gig economy can be broadly grouped into three categories. A few example platforms include:

Numerous studies show that the gig economy has substantially benefitted workers (job provision, turning hobbies into income, flexible work hours), consumers (access to a larger market place, quicker delivery of service) and organisations (access to talent without the usual employee benefits).

With so many perceived benefits, why all the lawsuits?

Lawsuits against gig platforms around the globe are increasing. What’s at stake is the very definition of “employee” in a tech-enabled, service-driven 21st century economy.

Clearly there’s a disconnect between the benefits all the studies present and what’s happening in the real gig world.

There’s a lot at stake in getting the gig economy right. What we’re witnessing is a fundamental transformation of our understanding of work, and it goes beyond Uber, Lyft and lawsuits. Just as working models changed in the wake of the Industrial Revolution, the nature of work may be evolving again as technology matures. The Industrial Revolution moved most of the workforce from self-employment to structured payroll jobs. While that model served us well for hundreds of years, the digital revolution and changing expectations may be creating a shift in the opposite direction. It’s just policy makers and governments that need to catch up.

In late 2016, the McKinsey Global Institute surveyed 8,000 independent workers across Europe and the United States. They asked about their income in the past 12 months — encompassing primary work, as well as any other income-generating activities — and about their professional satisfaction and aspirations for work in the future.

The McKinsey Independent Work Report found that up to 162 million people in Europe and the United States — or 20 to 30 percent of the working-age population — engage in some form of independent work. While demographically diverse, these independent workers largely fit into four segments:

McKinsey calculates that the independent workforce could potentially grow to 129 million Americans and 138 million across the EU — a staggering total of 267 million workers.

If the predicted growth in the gig economy does occur, McKinsey suggests the following macroeconomic benefits:

Economically, the gig economy has enormous implications for the global economy. So, the next time you use (as a consumer) or create (as an entrepreneur) a platform that supports the gig economy, know that your efforts are supporting the global economy.

I’m an entrepreneur in the tech space, so I’ve had several opportunities to interact with both sides of the gig economy equation: clients and freelancers. It’s easy to get caught up in macro-discussions about the gig economy, but I’d like to share three recent experiences to show why it’s important for all of us to honor the services provided by gig workers. And why it’s important that we get the gig economy working.|||

There’s a disturbing video doing the rounds. It features a conversation between an Uber driver and the company’s CEO. The driver tries to explain how changes to Uber’s tariff model have bankrupted…