Common practices of vacation accrual rules in companies. With a wide variety of leave types and vacation accrual rules used in different companies, it might be hard to define which leave tracking process would meet a company’s needs better. National, regional and company’s internal accrual procedure may imply many mechanisms of leave time accrual, which sometimes can be confusing. Most companies prefer easier leave time tracking and vacation accrual rules. However, special requirements are not uncommon.

Leave time usage rules also differ. A common practice is to not allow the employee to take vacation in the first six months – or, in the US and some other countries, in the first year of employment. Leave time can be deducted differently from the balance. In some companies, the internal procedure can imply using a coefficient for deducting leave time from the balances. There can be leave types that do not affect leave balances at all. Mostly, these are one-time and extraordinary leaves, or leaves that aren’t used very often: sabbaticals, military service leaves, time off for voting, and some other leave types. In many companies, the “use it or lose it” principle is implemented for some vacation types. If an employee does not use their leave by the specific date, it is forfeited.

It is important to keep track of used and unused vacation accurately to avoid misunderstanding and workplace conflicts. Some companies prefer the old-fashioned way, with spreadsheets and paper requests. This consumes valuable time that could be spent doing actual work. Fortunately, there are software solutions available that provide more convenient ways to track leave time accrual and spending. When selecting a tool for automated vacation accrual, there are a few things you should definitely keep in mind:

actiPLANS offers a smooth way of time-off calculation and leave request management. Managers configure the system so that it complies with accrual rules used in the company, and regular users request their leaves and get them approved easily. Flexible configuration options allow managers to set everything up in accordance to the company requirements and automate the entire process. The tool supports two separate balances: paid time-off and sick days, in days or hours depending on the company’s internal procedure. If a company does not use one or both of the balances, they can be disabled. Managers can use preset leave types or set up custom ones. Every leave type can be configured to affect paid time-off or sick days balance, or neither. Manual corrections of both balances are also possible. For those employees whose vacation accrual rules differ from the corporate ones managers can specify individual settings. This way, actiPLANS provides a convenient configuration of vacation accrual rules and keeps all data on employees’ leave balances available and up-to-date.

Vacation accrual and leave balances calculation is an important part of any company’s internal procedure, so it is critical to find a tool that will simplify and speed up this process. actiPLANS can be configured to fit almost any requirements, allowing both managers and regular employees to benefit from the automated the accrual process, keeping things accurate, transparent and hassle-free.|||

How to set up vacation accrual rules? Take a look at the common practices in accruing leave balances and automating leave time calculation.