The implications of recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) have spurred heated debate globally. As science fiction starts to become reality, AI products are slowly infiltrating homes and workplaces. This is causing concern about potential detrimental effects of AI on the job market, or even about the dangers of an AI singularity, where sentient robots take over the world and destroy humans.

I have investigated the space over the last few years, as a technologist and an active investor. And while these are all valid discussions, I believe that the focus of AI should not be just on cool home gadgets or on process optimization and automation. Instead, AI can be used to fundamentally rethink how we solve the world’s problems. AI has the potential to greatly improve things like healthcare, education, poverty and security. AI machines can do some very beneficial things today that humans will simply never be able to. If we leverage that to augment what humans do well, AI could, quite possibly, positively impact society, business, and culture on the order of magnitude of the internet itself.

I call this using AI to scale the human mind, not replace it. The human brain is the most elegant computer in existence. We process millions of sensory inputs automatically and constantly which allows us to learn and respond to our environment. But the human brain only contains about 300 million pattern processors that are responsible for human thought. What if we could complement all of our amazing ideas with not just more data but also orders of magnitude more data processing capability? Imagine how we would rethink every single problem that exists today.

Even with today’s “primitive” forms of AI, there is enough technology out there to start doing exactly this. The examples below draw from a variety of industries to illustrate the magnitude of social impact possible when we couple AI with human skill and ingenuity:

AI is driving the adoption and implementation of a field called precision medicine, an emerging approach for disease treatment and prevention that takes into account individual variability in genes, environment, and lifestyle for each person. Think of it like a type of medical personalization. For example, around 25,000 people in the U.S. are diagnosed with brain tumors every year. Traditionally, they might all be given the same course of treatment to see what might work in a “one-size-fits-all” approach. Precision medicine will allow doctors and researchers to predict more accurately which treatment and prevention strategies for a particular disease will work in which groups of people.

Many of the answers lie in the vast amount of medical data already collected. I am an investor in Ayasdi, which uses AI algorithms like deep learning to enable doctors and hospitals to better analyze their data. Through their work, medical practitioners have been able to identify previously unknown diabetes subtypes that could lead to better and understanding of therapies that could work better for certain types of patients. I have also worked with Enlitic and IBM, which are using similar AI algorithms but to detect tumors in radiology scans more accurately and efficiently, and even potentially accelerate finding a cure for cancer.|||

AI has the potential to do far more than automate business processes.