The unicorn stood still at the edge of the forest and said aloud, “I am the only unicorn there is.” They were the first words she had spoken, even to herself, in more than a hundred years. That can’t be, she thought. She had never minded being alone, never seeing another unicorn, because she had always known that there were others like her in the world… The Last Unicorn, by Peter S. Beagle

When we talk about diversity in the tech industry, Native Americans receive no attention. Neither Apple nor Google, nor any others who released diversity numbers said anything about Native representation. We are “Other”, a continent worth of people swept into miscellaneous.

We know there’s a pay gap for African Americans and Latinos, but no one’s looking at natives in tech and our experiences. When I attended the recent Grace Hopper Convention, there were signs for Latinas in tech, Asian women in tech, Turkish women in tech, and Black women in tech. Glaring, to me, (and possibly to me alone) was the omission of a sign for Native women in tech. I was reminded again that Native Americans have no part in the tech world. We lurk at the edges of society and when people see me, they’re not really seeing me, but rather some idea of what I am.

When you do tell someone you’re Native, the reactions are really bizarre:

Over the past few weeks I’ve been thinking a lot more about what it means to be Native American in this age, and more importantly, what it feels like to deal with these daily encounters. Here are a few thoughts about being a Person of Color in tech, but more specifically, a Native person in tech.

Photo from the Stanford powwow native graduating class. The author is pictured in the center, wearing a blue dress. Photo credit: Kenneth Chan.

I guess all of this is to say is that it’s lonely. And it’s particularly lonely in the tech community. This is what it’s like to be in a world that forgets you exist, where “Person of Color” doesn’t include you.

I’m writing this as a desperate call for fellow Natives at tech companies or startups, technical or nontechnical, to get in touch with me and to assure me that my experiences aren’t unusual and that I’m not alone. Suddenly, I’ve become aware that I am here by myself, and while I know I’m not the only one, the experience is such that it feels increasingly like I am. I wonder about others like me, who identify as Native, too, perhaps not in entirety or even in majority, but definitely in part. I’d love to find like-minded folks and talk about ways we can help bring technology to our peoples and build a community for ourselves.

What I’d like to see is, more than anything else, recognition that we’re part of the tech community. Even though the numbers will be depressingly small, I want us to be represented in your diversity data. Look for us when you’re highlighting people whose work deserves to be recognized. Research our struggles, shine a light on the unique challenges we face and how we overcome them. When you talk about what you’re doing to support marginalized groups in the industry, I want to hear about what you’re doing for Natives.

Don’t forget about us, and don’t tell us we’re less worthy of your attention and support by ignoring our existence.|||

Model View Culture