

 Back in 2010 the EC forced auto manufacturers to share their technical data with independent garages. Many thousands of car drivers in Europe have experienced a wider choice and cheaper servicing since then. Unfortunately car manufacturers are not the only ones to want to exert more control over their products and customers – you’ll want to know more about something similar happening in the IT industry.

The data centre market has been hard going for a number of years (see Figure for the sluggish revenue growth of new servers, storage and networks), which has increased supplier competitive and defensive activities.

New computer servers are typically covered by a 1-year hardware warranty; for the rest of their life-span (typically 6 years) service contracts are provided either by the original vendor, a third party, or occasionally by the users’ own technical staff. However a number of suppliers are now preventing users without maintenance contracts from receiving firmware upgrades. If only the initial purchaser with an up-to-date maintenance contract will have the access to future patches, these changes will limit the use of third party maintenance, second-hand equipment values and trade.

We believe the following policies are in place at the leading server vendors:

To date we believe there are no similar restrictions on servers at Lenovo, Dell or Cisco (which interestingly does appear to have a similar restriction for its Routers and Switches). Could IBM’s statement that ‘these entitlement validations are not being implemented in all countries at this time’ (ibid) indicate nervousness about the legal status of this move in some regions? I’m certainly not sure, but all vendors and governments need to be aware of the implications of such moves.



Mainly to make you buy new servers. Many users have migrated from Unix to Linux on x86 (see Figure) due to the advances in Intel and AMD chip performance and the lower cost – and ease – of maintenance, making things worse for the ‘alternative’ Unix/RISC/Itanium server vendors, who need to continue to invest in their IP despite this loss of revenue. One way to do this is through high margin hardware maintenance services. However this frustrates many users as the price usually rises and utility (including the number of patches) decreases as the equipment ages beyond 3 years. This why many turn to third party maintenance – something limited by the new contracts.

 In the ‘alternative’ server area each vendor (IBM, Oracle and HP) has a migration programme in place for moving customers to their own platform.

 As part of these activities they have revised their reseller and distribution relationships to support these solutions. They will argue that users will be more secure if they use authorised resellers and partners for buying and maintaining their servers.

 There has also been a strong move in the last few years towards Converged Infrastructure and Integrated Systems (CIandIS), where servers, storage, networking and infrastructure software are combined in solutions designed for speedier workload deployment and greater business agility. While these depend on ‘secret sauce’ software for the orchestration of southbound components, they also require more sophisticated (and more frequently updated) firmware than standard ‘horizontal’ rack servers. Hardly surprisingly then, these kinds of system too are also subject to the ‘firmware upgrade only under maintenance’ restrictions. Last year some users we spoke to thought the vendors had rushed their products out before being fully tested, which I’m sure resulted in frequent patching.

 So you can assume that the more expensive, proprietary and integrated your server is, the more restrictive the contract will be. However vendors may apply these restrictions to x86 servers of all sizes in future. HP, for instance, recent announcement covered the entire x86-based Proliant family, although it subsequently clarified that it ‘will continue to provide … [security and safety] updates to all server users’. IBM’s restrictions (see above) don’t cover System x – but Lenovo might conceivably introduce them once the acquisition’s complete. Oracle’s restrictions already cover x86 alongside Sparc servers.

Whether changes to ownership contracts are big issues or not depends on how easy it is for users to change from one type of system and vendor to another. The Single Unix Specification Version 3 (SUSv3) standard in z/OS, AIX, HP-UX and Solaris ensures software portability, but interestingly is not supported by Linux operating system vendors. In practice very few users would succeed in swapping between alternative (or from alternative to x86) platforms without having to spend large sums in other areas like storage, networking, middleware, testing and even hiring new staff to manage the system. In addition software licenses, server, storage and network components need to be renewed at different times, which limits the scope for change.

 As always things are easier for new as opposed to upgrading workloads – one small service provider we spoke to last year installed an integrated system in 2 days, but then spent 9 months swapping over each customer infrastructure. It’s also telling that server vendors’ competitive wins often involve extensive ‘proof of concept’ demonstrations and lengthy implementation engagements.

 Over all changing server platforms is much more challenging than picking a new car. By introducing their new contracts vendors are restricting the number of third parties that could help and increasing the cost. Users have to think in terms of ‘time to implementation’ alongside ‘return on investment’.



 Increased integration shows itself in other ways of course – the growth of Cloud Computing, Apple’s success, the shifting emphasis from Cap Ex to Op Ex are all aspects. Data centre vendors are preventing each other from servicing equipment, severely limiting the market for Multi-Vendor Support – another aspect of advancing integration.

 It’s all being going on for some time.

I proposed a 3-stage multi-decade view of supplier strategies back in 2010 in which the Horizontal phase – created by the anti-trust case against IBM on-going from 1969 to 1982 – gives way to the Matrix one. In my view Matrix differs from Vertical in its dependence on Open Source components and the vendor’s keenness to avoid locking its customer in.

 The ‘patching only under warranty’ rules are only a small part of the changes in vendor approaches, but they suggest we may just be returning full circle to Vertical Integration.

 Users need to be aware of potential lock-in, unrestricting vendors should make more noise and government bodies should at least consider these changes. If the EC made it easier for car drivers to use independent garages to protect their citizens, they should certainly have a look at this aspect of the IT industry as well.

 I’m very interested to hear from all suppliers and users about this important issue. So please contact us at [email protected] or comment below.|||

