One of the most interesting changes in the latest GNOME 3.24 is the addition of Night Light, a feature that is aimed at preventing eye strain.

With the Night Light option enabled, the color of the display changes based on the time of day, making the screen color warmer in the evening. It is is set to automatically follow the sunset and sunrise times for your location, but there's also an option to customize it.

The option to enable Night Light can be found in Settings > Displays:

With GNOME 3.24, the GNOME Shell notifications area (date time indicator) was improved, featuring a cleaner layout. Furthermore, Weather information for the current day is now displayed in the notifications area:

Note that the weather information gets its location from the Weather app. The location can be set to automatically follow your location, or you can specify it manually.

Another fairly important change in the latest GNOME 3.24 is the revamped user interface for Online Accounts, Printers and Users settings. More Settings improvements are planned for the future.

Here are a few of the updated Adwaita icons (the blue icon is the new Nautilus / Files icon and it's shipped with Nautilus, and not the icon theme):

The application includes recipes contributed by the GNOME community members and it allows adding and editing recipes, exporting and printing shopping lists, configurable quantities based on the number of servings, notes, as well as a hands-free cooking instructions mode.

The application includes extensions for Game Boy, Nintendo 64 and DS, and even Steam:

Ubuntu GNOME 17.04 (currently in beta, to be released in April; it will ship with most of GNOME 3.24 with a few exceptions, such as Files / Nautilus and GNOME Software) and Fedora 26 (alpha release expected at the end of March) are among the Linux distributions that will ship with GNOME 3.24.

openSUSE Tumbleweed and Arch Linux should get the GNOME 3.24 update soon.|||

After being in development for six months, GNOME 3.24 was released today, bringing improvements such as Night Light, weather information in the date / time indicator, along with updates to its applications and more.