Though the Victorians may not have been familiar with the term “Dry January,” the custom of abstaining from alcohol for a short time each year was nothing particularly new. Medical books and journals of the day often recommended the practice to cleanse the body and clear the mind. For example, in his 1864 Manual of Diet and Regimen for Physician and Patient, Dr. Horace Dobell advises that:

This advice was fairly general and did not change much throughout the Victorian era. The rationale behind it was a bit vague. Just how did an alcohol fast cleanse the body? In an article printed in the 1892 edition of Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine, Aberdeenshire physician Dr. Robert Farquharson explains:

The actual dangers of alcohol were a subject of some debate. Many temperance advocates claimed it was a poison or a sin, while others were more concerned with the aftereffects of drink than with the liquor itself. As a Temperance Tract from 1881 states:

The medical and moral pressure to abstain from alcohol “twice or thrice” each year—or to give alcohol up altogether—was quite strong. However, there were some in the Victorian era that made a persuasive case for the benefits of moderate drinking. One such argument, penned by Dr. Robert Farquharson, casts the sedative properties of alcohol in a positive light:

“A glass or two of wine makes a man quiet and contented, at peace with himself and the world, inclined to forget his troubles, and to look on the bright side of things. It is as an anaesthetic to the nervous system that its beneficial effects are most plainly seen; for the angry man forgets his wrath, the married man makes light of his cares, and the despairing wretch, who has flung away all his chances, spends his last penny in a glass of gin, and forthwith lays down all his woes on the shelf of oblivion.”

Dr. Farquharson goes on to argue that for some men, especially those who were poor, friendless, and sunk into despair, alcohol was the only means of obtaining some small sense of hope and cheer. He writes:

Unfortunately, the effect of excessive alcohol was not always cheering or sedating. Some drunken men and women became violent and abusive. In these cases, family members occasionally turned to quack remedies to cure their spouse or parent of their desire for alcohol. Advertisements for remedies could be quite appealing for those who were desperate. Consider the following advertisement which appeared in an 1886 edition of Godey’s Lady’s Book:

Of course, liquor in moderation did not—in general—lead to drunkenness, especially when that moderation was defined in Victorian terms. The recommended size of an alcoholic drink was quite small and the times of day in which that drink could be imbibed were rather limited. According to Dr. Dobell:

Dr. Farquharson’s advice on the exact amount of alcohol which one could imbibe and still qualify as a “moderate drinker” is much more flexible:

In the end, the decision whether to abstain from alcohol for a short time or to continue drinking in moderation was—as today—a matter of personal choice. Victorian doctor’s continued to recommend alcohol fasts throughout the nineteenth century. Religious groups and temperance societies continued to urge total abstinence. As a happy medium, I close this article with another sensible quote on moderation in drink from Dr. Farquharson:

I wish you all a very Happy New Year and a bright and prosperous 2017! For those of you embarking on a sober/dry January, I wish you the best of luck. If you would like more information on the modern custom of Dry January, the links below may be useful as resources.

Dry January: Giving Up Booze For A Month Does Have Benefits (NPR Article)

Mimi Matthews is the author of The Pug Who Bit Napoleon: Animal Tales of the 18th and 19th Centuries (to be released by Pen and Sword Books in November 2017).  She researches and writes on all aspects of nineteenth century history—from animals, art, and etiquette to fashion, beauty, feminism, and law.

Dobell, Horace. A Manual of Diet and Regimen for Physician and Patient.  London: J. Churchill and Sons, 1864.

Foster, Emily. Bound by Fetters; or The Evils of Drink. London: James Blackwood & Co., 1887.

For exclusive information on upcoming book releases, giveaways, and other special treats, subscribe to Mimi’s Quarterly Newsletter by clicking the link below.

You can also connect with Mimi on Facebook and Twitter.|||

“What have I done? Given my word not to touch any stimulants for a whole month. By Jove! what a long month it will seem." Bound by Fetters; or The Evils of Drink, 1887. Though the Victorians may not have been familiar with the term “Dry January,” the custom of abstaining from alcohol for a…