These days being in sync with what happening out there is a big deal, and if you are a busy person with lot of stuff to take care, it even harder. There are things that you must take care, and there are things that you would very like to take care, but you don’t have bandwidth of your time or you simply forget or you are lazy.

I am a lazy person. I like to get things done but lazily. Its like I would like to have personal assistant who will keep track on things and will tell me what to do and when to do. I wanted to have a seamless process by which I can rely on and get things done quickly. Not only getting things done, also getting information and being aware of it. Aside my personal day to day stuff, being a software developer and tech enthusiast I wanted to be on top of all things and not being overrun with too much stuff. Moreover, entertainment. Its a big deal. I wanted to know and do when it is presented.

With Todoist I manage my personal life, my work life and my information flow. I am not going to tell regular Todoist stuff, that everyone does, because its easily available on the internet. Setting up task, due dates, recurring dates, that are all boring, who cares. I am going to talk about the information flow and do GTD in that.

As you can see there is a lot going on here. I have my personal projects and as well as I have tweets I liked, online subscriptions, podcasts, newsletters, my package delivery schedule, different deals, birthday reminders from facebook, favorite pages, new videos from my subscriptions in YouTube, newly added songs in Spotify playlist and so many other things delivered to my Todoist profile in proper time, and I just attend to them in proper way. Isn’t it a lazy way to do all things in one place.

For those who don’t know the way these magic happens rather the tools that enables this are called agents. There are a lot of online agents available on the net, some are free some are paid services. The most popular of them IFTTT. It stands for 'If This Then That’. Think of these like notification agents listening on the net for something to happen and when it happens, these programs do something.

I use almost all of the usual suspects. IFTTT, Zapier, Microsoft Flow, Integromat.

IFTTT supports unlimited usage, Zapier does 100 notification per month, they call it tasks. Microsoft Flow and Integromat are relatively new and they both can do 1000 notification per month.|||

These days being in sync with what happening out there is a big deal, and if you are a busy person with lot of stuff to take care, it even harder. There are things that you must take care, and there…