I happened to post this piece to Hacker News Dystopian dreams: how feminist science fiction predicted the future . Much to my surprise, it showed up briefly on the front page. It then disappeared.It is a mostly excellent piece of work, other than the slightly ax-grindy "feminist" angle. I suspect that the title got it flagged off the front page, probably by people who didn't even read it. Most likely, they just reacted to the title, flagged it and moved on without a second look.Hacker News is an overwhelmingly male space. They get tired of the man bashing.I'm a woman and I get tired of the man bashing. So I am generally pretty sympathetic.I did email the mods of HN as an FYI. They say they want to see good writing on the front page. This is good writing. No clue if they will change the title to something more palatable for the HN crowd.The "feminist" thing and the behavior of a lot of women really offends me and grates on my nerves. An awful lot of women seem to think that men at the top have nothing but upside. This is absolutely not true and many of the people who are jealous and who feel some inherent sense of entitlement would not make the personal sacrifices involved or pay the price it takes to get there.I discuss this sort of thing a lot with my sons. We talk about studies of chimp behavior and that sort of thing. Our discussions typically leave me feeling better about the kind of men I tend to get involved with.Just yesterday, my sons and I were talking about Alpha males and how that evolves into what we see in the modern world in terms of, say, the behavior of male sports stars.You have a group of chimps and a predator shows up. Some big male takes a stand, allowing the rest of the troupe to escape into the trees. Afterwards, females offer sex in gratitude and everyone showers him with the best foods or whatever.Let's say you do a computer simulation of such things. Troupes where no badass male steps up have poorer survival rates. So do troupes where the females do not express their gratitude by offering sex, if only because having sex with this male makes it more likely that his genes will live on and the future of the troupe will be guarded by his descendants.Showering him with the best food also helps ensure the survival of the troupe. It not only makes him more likely to be willing to repeat his selfless act of potentially suicidal bravery, it makes him moreto do so because it ensures he is well nourished.I have been fortunate to have had a few conversations with men in positions of power, such as one of the founders of Aflac. These men often remember the scars and what it cost them to get there very keenly.An awful lot of angry women seem to not notice that piece of it. And that makes me really angry at them.|||

