Nootropic or smart drugs are cognitive enhancers. You will find various supplements and other herbal or synthetic substances that claim to improve cognitive function. Nootropics also promise improvement in mental performance such as memory, creativity, focus and state of well-being.

Creativity and Depression are related. We think you would agree that even a highly creative individual will not be able to perform and use their creativity when mentally depressed but her/his creations will boom with proficiency when in an uplifting or motivated state. Nootropics are specially designed to help memory, improve mood and reduce anxiety/depression while enhanceing creativity.

Isn’t it important for you to understand the side-effects associated with Nootropics? It’s imperative to choose smarter where improved brain function is concerned. However, in spite of the various options available, consuming and maintaining a healthy supply of Nootropics is not just difficult but can also get problematic.

A nootropic substance must meet five criteria set by Dr. Corneliu E. Giurgea who coined the term “nootropic.”



Most loosely think in terms of nootropics or smart drugs being a “cognitive enhancer” through improved memory, thought processing, focus, and concentration.  By this loose definition Caffeine, Adderall and even methamphetamine would be considered “smart.”



Since 2002, more than 15,000 users have reported better sleep and better daytime mental performance using EarthPulse™ PEMF. Think of EarthPulse™ as a Sleep-Machine that supercharges the mitochondria. Read our treatise More-ATP  to learn how nightly use of EarthPulse™ tunes cells for better ATP production head to toe.

Neuroscience and Psychology have proven PEMF (Pulsed Electromagnetic Fields) protect brain cells during hypoxia, help neural and other tissues regenerate at up to 4 times baseline. Our clients over the cource of over 14 years (Oct. 2016) have reported consistent Healthy Brain & Anti-Aging effects that help elevate their mood and improve executive performance.

Our unique, patented, Pulsed Electromagnetic Field (PEMF) therapy systems fine tune the mitochondria system wide while enhancing sleep and recovery. When the mitochondria in the brain are metabolizing oxygen at full capacity, there are less oxidative electrons requiring detoxification and anti-oxidant supplements. Cell membrane potential in neural cells are upregulated for faster nerve conduction.

Read our key 10hz research to see how PEMF therapy enhances creativity. People have reported being able to work longer and have greater output in their executive performance, something that smart drugs/nootropics might do, but that EarthPulse PEMF does better.|||

Nootropic smart drugs as cognitive enhancers claiming to improve cognitive function not considered Nootropic unless side effect free.