Briefly, David Noble brought a lawsuit against Samsung in New Jersey for fraud, negligent misrepresentation, and express breach of warranty, among other causes of action. He alleged that Samsung advertised its smartwatch as having a battery life of 24-48 hours, but after buying and exchanging his smartwatch three times, it never had a battery life beyond about four hours. Samsung moved to have lawsuit dismissed on the grounds that Noble had agreed to a binding arbitration clause.

In case you aren't familiar with arbitration, simply put, it's an alternative form of dispute resolution. Rather than go through the courts, using a judge or jury, legal disputes are heard by an arbitrator or arbitration panel. Depending on the scope of the arbitration agreement, the decision of the arbitrator is usually binding and final.

The arbitration provision at issue was included on page 97 of a 143-page booklet, entitled the "Health and Safety and Warranty Guide." This small booklet was included in the packaging materials with the watch and indicates that users should "...read this manual before operating your device and keep it for future reference."

The Court found that neither the cover of the booklet, nor the table of contents, contained any indication that contract terms were included in the booklet, much less an arbitration agreement. In denying Samsung's motion, the Court reasoned that a contract requires four elements:

This arbitration provision could not amount to a bilateral contract because there was no "meeting of the minds."

In order to have a meeting of the minds, the parties must have reasonable notice of the contract terms. (4) Notice of the terms does not require that the opposing party actually read the terms; but, it's been established that "when the writing does not appear to be a contract and the terms are not called to the attention of the recipient," there is no reasonable notice. (5)

Noble was not provided with reasonable notice of the arbitration provision because the booklet did not include any indication that it contained contract terms and the provision was buried deep within the booklet. Arbitration clauses must be "reasonably conspicuous," not concealed. (6)

Be transparent and forthcoming with all contract language, particularly critical arbitration provisions. All parties to a contract should have reasonable notice of the terms of the agreement.|||

