This plugin adds support for server-side rendering, for minification of styles and gives you a nicer debugging experience when using .

This plugin is only necessary if you're server-side rendering, you can use perfectly fine without it!

This plugin only works with styled-components v2

Then in your babel configuration (probably ):

This option is turned off by default

By adding a unique identifier to every styled component this plugin avoids checksum mismatches due to different class generation on the client and on the server. If you do not use this plugin and try to server-side render React will complain.

If you want server-side rendering support you can enable it with the option:

This babel plugin adds the components' name to the class name attached to the DOM node. In your browsers DevTools you'll see instead of just .

This also adds support for showing your components' real name in the React DevTools. Tget will normally show for all of your components, but with this pluginthey show .

This makes it easier to find your components and to figure out where they live in your app.

If you don't need this feature, you can disable it with the option:

This plugin preprocesses your styles with stylis and uses the entrypoint on styled-components.

This effectively removes stylis from your runtime bundle and should slightly improve runtime performance and shrink your bundle size.

It automatically disables the option, since stylis already does some minifcation on your CSS.

You can enable preprocessing with the option:

This plugin minifies your styles in the tagged template literals, giving you big bundle size savings. (note that you will not see the effect of minification in generated tags, it solely affects the style strings inside your JS bundle)

You can disable minification with the option:

We also transpile tagged template literals down to a smaller representation than what Babel normally does, because template literals don't need to be 100% spec compliant. (see for more information about that) You can use the option to turn this feature off.

Licensed under the MIT License, Copyright © 2016 Vladimir Danchenkov and Maximilian Stoiber.

See LICENSE.md for more information.|||

babel-plugin-styled-components - Improve the debugging experience and add server-side rendering support to styled-components