We still have a long way to go with chatbots

Chatbots are not new. In fact they might be more than 60 years old (or older), which is like stone age for technologies. It was around 1950 when Alan Turing thought about if machines can think and started with something that we now know as the “Turing Test”. But he wasn’t really the first one. Descartes was also thinking about the same topic even earlier in 1637.

Although chatbots exist for several years now, but for me it feels like it all started yesterday. In April 2016 Mark Zuckerberg stepped on stage and presented the beta version of their messenger platform. It was this event which made this technology available for the masses. Since that every week several articles about how to design these new interfaces pop up on my screen.

When looking at the history of graphical user interfaces, a shitload of work has already been done. There are areas like accessibility, usability and user experience. We have things like guidelines on how to design apps and websites for several operating systems. We have heuristics that help us to get the usability right. There are standards for accessibility. So we really know how to do it.

But how about conversational interfaces or more specific: messenger bots? If you search for scientific work on this … there is none. Yet!

As part of my studies at the University of Applied Sciences in St. Pölten, Austria, I am writing my master thesis about exactly that.

The goal is to specify guidelines so bot developers like you know how to design chatbots. This goal will be reached through four methods:

These methods help me to answer the following questions:

I want to know basically everything about bot development around the world. I am from Vienna, Austria and the bot scene here is really big. There are bot agencies like The Ventury who are developing bots for big companies like Austrian Airlines and have an accelerator called Elevate. The first bot from Austria, Mica the Hipster Cat Bot, came from Barbara Ondrisek. This one has reached more than 100.000 users lately. Oratio, a messenger company, organized the first conference ChatbotConf in 2016 (which will take place again in October this year). And there’s even an incubator called Lemmings by Thomas Schranz (founder & CEO at Blossom) where people learn everything about chatbots and work together on several projects like Artemis Artnapper. The city of Vienna even has their own bot. Peter Buchroithner founded together with Philipp Holly and Manfred Strasser Swell. Their chatbot Swelly is very successful and is used by 2 Million users from all over the world.

So you see there’s a lot going on here like meetups, podcasts & conferences and much more in this small country and I know a lot about it but what about other countries?

The first part of my studies is a quantitative online survey. The goal for this is to get insights about the whole bot market. I want to find out about:

The results of the online survey, the expert interviews and the guidelines will be published so that everyone can profit from that.

If you want to participate you can do this by filling out this survey:

You have a successful bot and are interested in doing an interview with me? Message me on Twitter via @wubbelme or send an email to carina@wubbel.me.

Any thoughts on that? Don’t hesitate to leave a comment!|||

Chatbots are not new. In fact they might be more than 60 years old (or older), which is like stone age for technologies. It was around 1950 when Alan Turing thought about if machines can think and…