Windows 10 fully supports syncing contacts and calendar data to the built-in Calendar, People, and Mail apps with a CalDAV and CardDAV server. However, this functionality is normally limited to select Microsoft partners only. However, you can use a work-around to add any CalDAV and CardDAV service provider.

You can’t add a generic CalDAV/CardDAV server account in Windows 10 as it imposes limits to syncing only with Google, iCloud, and Yahoo! accounts. The WebDAV Sync Engine in Windows has implemented support for generic accounts, but adding such n account isn’t an option available to users.

However, you can still get syncing up and running by adding an iCloud account and modifying its server addresses. Before I explain how to go about this, I have to put up a warning with a shrieking yellow background.

Note that there is an inherent security risk in following this tutorial. As of Windows version 10.0.1607, I’ve done all I can to verify that your DAV account password isn’t being sent to Apple if you follow these instructions. However, future changes to Windows may change the implementation in a way that may share your DAV account password with Apple. E.g. if Windows adds support for two-factor logins for Apple IDs in the future, your logins could be sent to Apple’s servers. Similarly, Windows may remove the option to modify the DAV server addresses and hardcode Apple server addresses. Don’t use this tutorial with any login credentials that unlocks any accounts you’d not want to share with Apple. Apple are unlikely to log incorrect login details that are sent to their servers — or caring about them in the slightest — but there is always the risk.

If your DAV account doesn’t contain personal information (its your calendar and address book – of course its personal information) or you’re okay with Apple potentially getting a copy of you password, you can proceed with following this tutorial.

There is one last caveat: Your DAV username has to be an email address for this to work. Most are, but this will depend on your server or service provider.

To configure a custom CalDAV and CardDAV account, first add a placeholder iCloud account in Windows.

At this point, you have a non-functioning iCloud account which we’ll use as a template for configuring your generic CalDAV and CardDAV account.

The initial sync can take several minutes depending on how much data needs to be synced. Your calendar and contacts data should eventually being popping up in the Calendar and People apps, as well as on the lock screen and in the Action Center.

As you can probably tell from the big yellow warning above, this method isn’t really recommended. It’s the best that Windows 10 offer for the time being.

The username has to be an email address, because the user interface doesn’t allow users to input anything else. There is probably no harm in supporting email addresses in addition to non-domained logins if this is your current setup. Windows will auto-discover your CalDAV endpoint by going to and your CardDAV endpoint by going to . These URIs should simply redirect to the actual endpoint addresses. Windows will also guess some common endpoint targets if the auto-discovery method fails. You shouldn’t rely on this, but rather actually implement the URIs. The User-Agent string for Windows’ WebDAV Sync Engine is “ ” (Yes, it does oddly enough include “(gzip)”.)|||

Windows 10 fully supports syncing contacts and calendar data to the built-in Calendar, People, and Mail apps with a CalDAV and CardDAV server. However, this functionality is normally limited to…