Misago aims to be complete, featured and modern forum solution that has no fear to say 'NO' to common and outdated opinions about how forum software should be made and what it should do.

As of now Misago implements all features considered "must have" on live internet forum:

Even more features will follow in future releases:

If you are looking into using Misago to run live forum, you are absolutely invited to, but please keep in mind that Misago is relatively immature software that may contain serious bugs or issues as well as quirks and lackings thay may take time to resolve, despite best efforts.

To start Misago site locally, first setup and activate virtual environment for it and then fire following commands:

This will install Misago and its dependencies in your virtual environment and will make pre-configured Misago site for you named :

Now edit file in your editor of choice in order to set up basic settings like database connection, default timezone or interface language.

Next, initialize database by using migrate commands provided by admin utility that you'll find in directory up one level from where is:

Then, call command to create super admin in database:

If nothing is wrong with your setup, Django developer server will start, enabling you to visit in your browser and see the forum index. You should now be able to sign in to user account that you have created ealier.

You will likely want to customize your site via changing settings and creating categories. You can do this with Admin Control Panel available under url.

With exception of Admin Panel, Misago frontend relies heavily on React.js components backed by Django API. This application relies on custom Gulp.js-based toolkit for development. As of current, Misago's defines following tasks:

To start work on custom frontend for Misago, fork and install it locally to have development forum setup. You can now develop custom theme by modifing assets in directory, however special care should be taken when changing source javascripts.

Misago defines template that allows you to include custom html and js code before Misago's JavaScript app is ran, named scripts.html.

If you have found bug, please report it on issue tracker.

For feature or support requests as well as general feedback please use official forum instead. Your feedback means much to the project so please do share your thoughts!

There's also Gitter for those looking for intant-messaging approach for discussing Misago development.

If you have corrected spelling, wrote new tests or fixed a bug, feel free to open pull request.

Many issues are open for takers. If you've found one you feel you could take care of, please announce your intent in issue discussion before you start working. That way situations when more than one person works on solving same issue can be avoided.

English sentences used within were extracted from National Aeronautics and Space Administration Solar System Exploration Portal and are not copyrighted as per Media and content usage guidelines.

Misago - Copyright © 2016 Rafał Pitoń This program comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.

This is free software and you are welcome to modify and redistribute it under the conditions described in the license. For the complete license, refer to LICENSE.rst|||

Misago is fully featured forum application written in Python and ES6, powered by Django and React.js