Hi friends, Here I’m going to explain about Brightscript language. It will cover most important parts. If you are a beginner, this blog is helpful for you. I didn’t include some parts. Please read their documentation for more details. I have contributed to a Roku channel project when I was in my previous company. And I already posted a blog about the introduction of the Roku and BrightScript. If you did not read the introduction part, please visit and read – BrightScript: A Detailed Introduction. This part has some basic things of Brightscript programming language. If you have doubts or suggestions, please send a message from the contact page. I will post next part soon. Enjoy the blog! 😀

What is the Brightscript? It is a scripting language. But It is not for web scripting. We know, it is for developing Roku channels. And we can use this language only in embedded devices like Roku. Yes!, it is true. This language will not work on other platforms. The basic information and installation details are on my previous blog. Please check it out.

The BrightScript language is integrated with BrightScript Components. And It has some lightweight libraries. I used a library to develop a keyboard in a Roku channel project.

Brightscript is not case sensitive. For example,

The following two for statements are same. There is no problem if it is Capital letter or not!

The BrightScript is not using the semicolon to end the line like other programming languages like C, PHP etc. Each line may contain a single statement, or a colon may be used to separate multiple statements on a single line. Also, it is not using curly braces.

Brightscript uses dynamic typing, but it could supports declared types.

The following types are supported in BrightScript:

From the Documentation, they have an announcement related to Brightscript 3.

From the above notification, they made changes something related to types. Sometimes the whole Roku gets issues related to memory. So they are trying to optimize things. It’s helpful. Keep going Roku!

If you connect your Computer with Roku via Telnet and while working with console, You can just check the type by using an inbuilt function – type().

And ? is used instead of For Brightscript 3, they have included the new optional parameters “3” in type() If you are not using this parameter, it will work like in BrightScript 2.1.

Like other languages,  we can concatenate the string.

In PHP, we use “.” operator for concatenating two strings.

In Javascript, we use “+” operator for concatenating two strings.

This is the way of concatenating two strings.

For Type Integer: It may be Hex integer or Decimal integer.

An array may contain, literals or expressions. The Array Operator [ ] can be used to declare an array. It is similar to other programming languages like PHP, Javascript etc.|||

Brightscript tutorial from Coding Alien. BrightScript programming tutorial for beginners. How to concatenate strings in Brightscript. Let's start BrightScript.