For the last couple of weeks I have been doing all my writing using a distraction free Linux writing environment. It is based around Debian Linux and Vim, and looks like this:

Please don’t be intimidated by the “hacker” style user interface. I promise that if you are a writer that uses an existing word processor, you are smart enough to use Vim!

Vim differs from your typical GUI based text editor (such as Notepad, Word, Pages, Scrivener et al) in 2 main areas:

These are both benefits to the writer because:

I think that Vim is a brilliant tool for writing first drafts and then iteratively editing that draft. While you can publish direct to eBook, PDF, Word and other formats from Vim, I think the most powerful way to use Vim is as a distraction free writing environment for your first, second, and third drafts.

Right now, I have been using Vim for 2 weeks, in an irregular capacity. I feel completely comfortable using Vim, and have written 4 blog posts, and thousands of (edited) words with it.

Here is my quick-and-dirty guide to using Vim as a writer:

Now for a few commands.

Vim commands are verb based, which lends itself exceptionally well to writing prose.

When in insert mode, Vim acts just like any other editor. You use the keyboard to form words and sentences, and those words and sentences appear on the screen.

Where Vim becomes exceptionally powerful is when editing in normal mode.

Let’s take this example. Say I have 3 paragraphs that just don’t belong. In a GUI based text editor I have 2 options:

Using normal mode in Vim, I would simply press 3d}, and voila!

This is broken down as:

Here are some similar examples:

Vim has SO much more!

Here are some more useful commands for writers using Vim:

I have found a Vim cheat sheet to be essential. The best one I have found is this Vim cheat sheet.

Another excellent resource for writers using Vim is the Woodnotes guide to Vim for writers

I first read about Vim over a year ago. It seemed like the learning curve would be too steep, so I didn’t give it a chance. But I am so glad that 2 weeks ago I took the time to learn the basics. Those basics can be mastered very quickly, and more advanced commands can be learned over time. My writing efficiency, and in fact my entire motivation and enjoyment of writing, have improved immensely in the last 2 weeks as a result of having this lightning fast distraction free writing environment in front of me.

I hope you give Vim a chance to enhance your writing, and if you do, please let me know how you go.

How to install Ruby and Rails on Debian Linux using RVM

How to create a distraction free writing environment on Debian Linux|||

Brendan Ingram: Husband. Writer. Teacher.