4. Install all packages required by the boilerplate by running

5. Now lets install all the other packages. Run the following:

6. We will use a spinner icon to simulate a loading component using icons from Font Awesome. Get the CDN html link from and paste the code snippet between the tag in the file.

8. To ensure bootstrap CSS is carried over, ensure the is imported in

7. We will use Auth0’s own Lock widget (auth0-lock) to sign in/up users. In the file, ensure the following code snippet is between the tags to ensure the Auth0 Lock widget will work on mobile devices

8. Your file should look something like this now:

9. In , create a file called and add the following code snippet. This is the initialisation methods for Auth0 and Axios.

10. In , create a file called and add the following code snippet. These are helper methods to use Auth0.

11. In , create a file called and add the following code snippet. These are helper methods to fetch and ping the Rails API server.

12. Update in with the following code snippet

13. Create three components files in and named them  , and

14. Paste the following code snippet to

15. Paste the following code snippet to

16. Paste the following code snippet to

17. We will also need to update some of our CSS as well. In  . Replace the existing CSS entires the following code snippet. Do not update the file. The scripts in the boilerplate will look after that.

18. Lastly, update with the following code snippet:

18. Just one more step to setup in Auth0. Log into your Auth0 account. Navigate to on the left menu panel. Click on the that you have used for the Rails API Server. Under , ensure Allowed Callback URLs include:

18. Now, we are ready to test our React front-end to see if it would interact with our Rails API server.

20. In your favourite browser, navigate to and click on the Sign In / Sign Up button. Sign in with the username and password (Note: as mentioned earlier, it is assumed you have set a dummy username and password)

21. You can now play around with all the buttons as shown in the gif below !|||

TL;DR In a nutshell the following gif (it might take a minute to load) shows what this article is all about: The intention of this guide is for newcomers or startups who wants to quickly bring up a…