Every year we complement our clients New Year, Women’s Day, Easter and other holidays of no less importance. Usually we don’t think about turning every present into a great newsbreak or whole layer of long PR-campaign.

Let’s try to change it and think how we can transform corporate presents into an additional tool for your company promotion. Moreover, let’s make it something more than just one proud photo of corporate calendar in your Instagram.

We all want our presents to stand out and be remembered. How can we do this if we are all surrounded by identical baskets and festive packages while crisis budgets leave us little space for imagination and creativity?

How it’s usually done? Imagine, New Year will be quite soon. It’s something like 4 months before the actual date, time to wrap the ideas up! I usually start from writing down a list of ideas while keeping in mind some restrictions (for example, we don’t want to have too formal presents).

I start from 2 lists: one with ideas for presents that are connected to the holiday and one with general presents’ ideas. In the first list I usually have all ideas connected with the symbol of the year, in 2017 case it’s a rooster. Second list is more complicated to write because you need to be innovative even when everything have been done already.

Still, after a week of mindblowing brainstorming all the lists are written. Now it’s time to look through the ideas again. All ideas that are not connected with your brand image are obliterated, you also need to cross out almost all ideas that you’ve seen in competitors lists (it was done already!) In the end, we get dull and short list with ideas that won’t make you enthusiastic enough.

Instead of polishing a turd, I suggest to change your approach towards corporate presents.

Let’s work not around idea, but around a message.

How to create reusable present? How to make such a present that won’t be thrown out in the end of holiday season?

First thing to pop up in mind is to create a present that will be remembered due to its usefulness. The most useful present is one that you’ll also use. It will be even better if you can use this item not during your free time, but during your working hours or in your work activities. That is why it’s better to use your company’ practical knowledge and create your reusable present based on it.

Our company develops complex web-services and mobile apps, that is why I need to know all about current trends in digital sphere. First thing that come into my mind is a successful case that used gamification or games on the whole.

Moreover, as a marketing specialist, I need to know everything about every stage of working process in our company. Every development project is not just a code, it’s a long-long process. Everyone in a team knows the details, but your clients are not so knowledgeable.

When we combine knowledge about trends and inner working processes we get simple formula: gamification + a story about working on a project. And here it is, new and useful idea for a present!|||

Every year we complement our clients New Year, Women’s Day, Easter and other holidays of no less importance. Usually we don’t think about turning every present into a great newsbreak or whole layer…