If yours is an eCommerce business or simply a brick and mortar store (or a chain of stores), offering personalized services, recommendations and offers with your existing and potential customers is definitely a big plus today. The levels of disposable income are high and demand is simply waiting to be met. A personalized online shopping experience can get your business not only a high volume of sales, but also unwavering customer loyalty and retention.

So what is personalization?

In today’s highly customer-centric economy, personalization is not just about having a customer return for more purchases at your business. It is about understanding and evaluating their preferences and transactional behaviours and using the same information to deliver better services to them. This is done by analysing intensive customer data across various touchpoints in the recent past. As an online business, your website is the platform from where you identify and record user behavior data and use it to deploy intelligent future business action.

Why is personalization difficult for some?

While marketers across the world understand the value that 1-to-1 customer personalization delivers, a large number of them are clueless since they do not know how to go about it. Moreover, shopping in a vast online environment keeps customers wary of sharing their personal data. (However, it has been observed that many brands are easily able to convince their users to share such information if the latter feel that the product/service is good and that sharing their personal details would help improve the overall shopping experience). Adding to this, marketers are unsure how to best analyse such vast volumes of data collected.

On the other hand, there are businesses that do not overtly seek personal details from their customers but choose to evaluate online customer shopping behaviors and act on available insights.

Swiggy food delivery is a great example of this. If you have searched for breakfast options in your area in the recent past, it remembers your preferences and displays targeted recommendations accordingly:

Interesting to note here that they are not asking for details such as phone number or email address — but targeting the user’s cookie to offer a personalized notification.

While the example above is directly from a web browser, similar personalization is possible across mobile home screens and apps and via social media too. By combining all of or a cross-section of the user data available to you, it is possible to build a quick customer profile and also segment him based on personal or customer journey specific attributes. However, it is important to ensure that over-messaging or non-contextual messaging is avoided as that will lead to spamming and will also annoy the user, creating a bitter experience for him. In fact, poorly targeted personalization can do more harm than good.

How can you benefit?

As mentioned earlier, it is a highly customer-centric eco-environment out there and everything is on-demand. While there’re a number of online solutions out there to help you to personalize customer engagement and reward you with strong financial returns, some of these can be very heavy on your pocket and non-viable for small and medium businesses. If you are an eCommerce and SaaS (software as a service) company, you can greatly benefit from integrating personalization — even if you are on a limited budget. Do visit our site to know more how your business can reach the next level and discover how easy it is to achieve, with a powerful and intuitive solution like ours.

Gamooga is one of the world’s leading omni-channel customer engagement platforms backed by a powerful predictive analytics engine which offers intelligent 1:1 Personalization, Marketing Automation, Big Data Analytics — all combined in a single powerful package.

Watch this space to know more about Gamooga’s powerful features and contact us anytime to know how we can benefit your business in multiple ways. We love to speak to people and consultation is absolutely free!|||

If yours is an eCommerce business or simply a brick and mortar store (or a chain of stores), offering personalized services, recommendations and offers with your existing and potential customers is…