Well, I now know swift3. It took awhile but I finally had to write enough swift3 code to get an iOS app shipped. For about 4 hours though I was getting the word "optional" printed out with a string even though I was using ! and it was driving me crazy. Turns out, follow me here, I was sending an http POST with the body="\(username.text)" and that was submitting to an api to create a user and the http response back was the username. Then I was printing out the response with ! and optional was there but it was coming back from the API that way. So it was the username.text that was missing the ! not the place where I was printing the result, see how confusing that can be? I even ran curl againt the API with -d username=test and saw I got "test" back not "optionaltest" like I was seeing in swift3. But at las, I was actually sending -d username=optionaltest and just not realizing it.

BTW I say swift3 always with the 3 beause that's how I googled for stuff. Here are the stackoverflow urls from my frantic googling:

Now you might think I'm a jedi level swift3 expert to understand all the concepts in those urls above right? HA! I did not know swift3 at the start of the project. I was lost. But here's what my app can now do:

1. Users can record latitude longitude data for every ATM location in the world.

2. In addition to sending the latitude longitude data, it takes a picture of the ATM and sends that to our servers and we store it.

3. We use what3words.com API to convert latitude longitude into three easy to print and read words.

4. When the iOS app loads, it hits https://kidbank.team/api/v1/atms?lat=33&lon=-118 but with the user's actual location (not hard coded values) and we get list of the 100 closest ATMS.

5. There is a camera view in iOS and the moment you move close enough to an ATM in the system, you see an super impossed KidBank ATM next to the real ATM. i.e. reality, augmented.

6. Once a you see a augmented ATM in your view, you can interactive with it. You can make a deposit, enter your PIN number, normal ATM things. The whole idea for this app is lets kids younger than 13 get a bank acount and use ATMs and learn about saving and investing.

AR makes crazy business ideas very easy to test. Like in a cartoon, you can draw anything you want and are free to do crazy stuff in the plot. vs. in real movies or TV it's more expensive to do crazy stuff. Well, it would be very expensive to build real KidBank ATMs in the physical world and find legal real estate to place them. But like a cartoon, with AR I can place my ATMs right next to the very real estate I want. Existing ATMs! For Free!

You don't have to be a Kid to use KidBank, think of Kid like kidrock

So yeah, if you want to install the app, and add 1 ATM you might get hooked and want to add a 2nd or 3rd. Code is open source; swift3 and rails. We'd love to see forks of this and people using AR in creative ways.|||

