In any type of job, the main purpose is to achieve results. I mean, if you are a doctor, your goal is to save as many people as possible and as fast as possible (after all, you are dealing with human lives); if you're an architect, you need to design nice buildings where people will feel comfortable in and, as a result, the company will sell your design to more people. As a marketing professional, you need to promote your business efficiently so that your sales team sell your products.

Of course, that to be able to do your job correctly you need to prepare for it. A doctor, for example, needs to analyze the patient's symptoms, cross the information with everything that he's learned at school and in his own experience. Only then, he will be able to give a diagnosis and choose the appropriate treatment. After the treatment starts, it can always be adjusted according to the patient's response.

Marketing works in a similar way. You need to study the audience and know the personas that you are talking to, so you can create a marketing plan and put it into action. Just like the doctor, you can adjust it if the results are not what you expected.

The main difference between a doctor and marketing professional? The marketer needs a well-designed and perfectly running process management (the doctor can have it too, but it becomes more difficult if you're working in an ER, for example). It's imperative that you define who does what, when and how. Besides, you need to create a marketing workflow to manage daily and monthly routines to make sure that you achieve your goals.

The consequences of not having a marketing management process? Poor results. It's as simple as that. Just think about it. How is your content production? Are you producing as many relevant posts or e-books as you'd like? And your website's page views? How is your conversion rates? Are you delivering as many MQL as you'd like to the sales team? If your answers for any of these questions are negative, I have bad news. You have a problem in your marketing strategy, my friend. And it's very likely that this problem is related to your management skills.

Of course, there could be many reasons for why you are facing problems to achieve your marketing goals, but from our own experience we know that some are very common.

Lack of team communication Communication is everything to a marketing professional. You need to talk with your leads, your customers, the sales department and so on. But first of all, you need to ensure that your own house is in order. Collaborative communication between management, content, and design staff needs to be seamless in order to avoid the pitfalls of marketing mayhem. Not having priorities In any sort of job you need to establish priorities. The doctor in a ER, for example, surely sees the patients that are more at risk first. In your daily, monthly, annual routine you also need to classify the tasks. Which ones need to be done first, which ones can wait? Centralization You need to delegate tasks and control that. The larger and more complex a team is, the greater the opportunity for errors, and also the greater the challenge for the manager to track who was responsible for what. For example, if you hear from a client that an unsatisfactory blog post was submitted, and you have a team of six writers, how do you know who to hold accountable for it? Not enough reports How well is your strategy performing? Are you keeping track of the processes? As a marketing manager, you are responsible not solely for your team’s performance, but also accountable for communicating with and servicing the customers. To make your job easier, it would be very helpful to have a tool where you could just create boards to follow each and every single task. There are a few other things that could be responsible for your poor results. And if you look at it carefully, you might come to the conclusion that the main cause is the lack of management. But how can you create a marketing management process and improve your strategy to increase sales?

If you are not familiar with the term, marketing management can be defined as all the activities that you do to ensure that your product or service is sold as it should.

According to Philip Kotler, “Marketing management is the analysis, planning, implementation and control of programs designed to bring about desired exchanges with target markets for the purpose of achieving organizational objectives".

Of course that, with time, the concept has changed a little bit and is changing still. In today's scenario, the role of marketing management has gained new purposes. To name a few: create value, build a brand, understand the market, build customer relationships, and so on. These items are on itself reasons to start a process management straightaway.

But if you need more motives to manage your marketing workflow and processes (hopefully with the help of an automation platform), let's list some:|||

Find out why you are not achieving the results you want with your marketing strategy and learn how to turn this ar