This is a sample section from the in-progress book 10 Minute Vim available DRM-free on Leanpub. If you find it helpful, the book has 50+ more sections like this!

The included exercises are contrived - they are designed to teach you the muscle memory needed to perform the specific command. The exercises should be performed on a pristine file: we recommend cloning this repository with and running a after each exercise to bring the files back to their pristine state.

Vim (and Vim plugins inside other IDE's) do not offer out-of-the-box semantic-aware IDE features like auto-complete and "go to definition". While the Vim editor has many plugins for extra features, we want to focus on what can be had in the default experience. The base Vim installation offers a suite of IDE-lite commands that fulfill the "80/20" rule of value: 80% of the value can be had for 20% of the cost. Instead of attempting to build a full AST of your source code for auto-complete and navigation, Vim provides basic navigation and auto-complete based on text searches of your files.

While in no way does this substitute for the full set of features in a semantic-aware IDE, they are still extremely useful. These commands derive the most power from the simple fact that they work in every text file, in any language, and without any setup.

Vim provides a basic auto-complete based off text found elsewhere in any open file.

When in insert mode, type or to list and iterate through the available options. When an option is selected, it is already "inserted" in the text, and no further command is needed to "confirm". If you do not wish to use the inserted text, will return you to your original text.

The file name and whole line completion will start the cycle, then you can use and to cycle as usual.

Use the file longWords.txt to recreate the first 14 lines starting at line 16. Start typing each word, then use either , , or to complete it - no copy, delete, yank, etc.|||

10-minute-vim-exercises - The exercise files from 10 Minute Vim, for convenience of readers