As a Project Coach at Cognitect, I get to work with awesome people. My colleagues are talented, passionate, and -- occasionally -- opinionated people. Along with software and other sorts of engineers we have people with backgrounds in music, physics, radio announcing and mathematics. But we have all found a common purpose here at Cognitect: Our customers. I also get to work with the even more diverse crew we are lucky enough to call our customers. So when I start a project the only thing I can be sure of is that everyone, everyone wants it to succeed.

What goes into a successful software project? We’ve all seen teams of great people tackle hard technical problems and triumph. Sadly, if you’ve been in the software business any length of time, you have also seen teams of great people stumble. At Cognitect we believe that software projects are mainly about people. Look around at the industry today and you can find hard technical problems, problems that can defeat even the brightest. But much more often project failures are people failures. Way more systems had been brought down by mismatched expectations and personality conflicts than by off-by-one errors or dueling library versions.

If pulling off a successful software project is all about people, then you need to pay attention to the people issues all through the project. Sadly that’s not how it usually is: Projects usually get much more attention in the middle and at the end than they do in the beginning. It’s only human nature: At the beginning of a project, the deadline is as far away as it ever will be. At the start people are generally relaxed, looking forward to a new challenge. It’s usually in the middle when commitments and decisions have been made and the pages are flying off the calendar that we tend to sit up and take notice. But after 23 years of running or coaching projects, I can tell you that the beginning of a project is when you have your biggest opportunity to put your project on the right path.

Have you ever been to a project kick-off meeting that was just a formality to introduce the team, and announce that the project started? Maybe we will vote on a cool code name and if we’re lucky there will be pizza. I’ve been to a lot of those project kick-off meetings and THEY DO NOT WORK.

As I say, the secret to software project success is the people. It’s getting a room full of individuals to work together as a team. And the secret to getting a team to work is to start before the project kick-off meeting. Step one is to figure out who should participate in the project kick-off meeting.

Who should participate in the project kick-off? Obviously, the people who are going to do the work, the developers, designers, architects and anyone else who is going to pitch in should all be there. But you have to cast your net wider than just the people doing the work. You need to ask the key question: Cui bono? Who benefits? Who are you doing this project for? And you have to follow the money. Who is paying? A project kick-off meeting cannot be productive without all the stakeholders and the project sponsor’s participation. Getting all the key players in a room together can be a pain, but if you can’t pull everyone together you may as well vote on the code name while you wait for the pizza.

Notice that I keep saying participate, not attend. Have you ever been in a meeting where a key stakeholder is “attending” the meeting but isn’t really fully participating or even paying attention? I have, and it’s frustrating and disrespectful. Worst of all it’s distracting, distracting to the folks who are really involved.

At Cognitect, we start our projects with Iteration Zero or I-0 for short. We call it iteration zero because it’s the iteration before the first “real” iteration. The first day of i-0 is the project kick-off meeting. After that, the i-0 activity focuses on learning about the project and business needs, technical details, and the beginnings of a project plan. A typical i-0 lasts two to four days, though we have done them in as little as one day for a small, straightforward project and had one stretch over two weeks for a massive effort.

The critical thing on that first day is to make sure the project goals, values, and motivations are clear to everyone. The whole point is to facilitate good conversations and get everyone participating. I use the classic talking stick technique to make sure that everyone has a say and that no one person (and I’m looking at you, Senior Executive Manager and Chief Architect) dominates the conversation. To get to this shared understanding, I use the three project framework exercises. I borrowed these exercises from Doug DeCarlo many years ago. I was lucky enough to work with Doug -- the author of eXtreme Project Management -- some years ago. Doug was a mentor to me and in the years since I’ve tweaked the exercises to fit my needs.|||

