VPNs are great tools for helping secure your internet access on an unsecured Wi-Fi network, such as those at McDonald’s, but did you know that not all VPNs are created equally?

By using a free VPN that you haven’t carefully read the terms and conditions of, you might be putting your privacy at more of a risk than it would have been just using the unsecured Wi-Fi network to browse the web in the first place.

Depending on the VPN that you choose to use, your information may not actually be as secure as you think it is. Not all VPNs are as secure as others, and this is especially the case with free VPN services.

Why? Because free VPN services have to pay for their servers somehow, and this typically means tracking information about your web browsing activity to sell to third parties, whether anonymous or not. Many free VPN providers claim to provide you with shelter from snoopers, just to snoop on you themselves.

Some VPNs disclose whether or not your web traffic is being logged for this purpose, but most people don’t bother to read the terms and conditions of software before using them to know that – hence the issue.

The kinds of things that a free VPN service might take note of in their little history books are:

.Your IP address with time stamps

 .How long you’re using the service

 .The types of websites and services you’re using

Sounds a little scary, right? That’s all the information you wish was secured from third parties, but often times isn’t, even with a free VPN to hide behind.

If the VPN service is free, and is truly keeping your data private, then you’ve at least struck gold in that department, but there are typically a few other side effects of a free VPN that can lessen the user experience of web browsing, and those include:

While they all seem like fair trade-offs for something that isn’t costing you anything out of pocket, there are a few questions you should be asking yourself about the trade-offs:

Are those ads they’re showing me safe, or will I get redirected to a malicious website if I click on one?

 Will throttled bandwidth affect my ability to complete a data-heavy task in a limited amount of time?

 How quickly am I going to blow through my data cap before I need more secure data to keep me safe?

 Is the encryption method, if any at all, strong enough to prevent prying eyes from stealing my information?

All of these are valid questions you’ll have to ask yourself when choosing the right VPN for you, and many times, free VPNs will get a certain job done.

If you have any disagreement  then comment below.

Stay connected with Best and Perfect.

|||

VPN? VPNs are great tools for helping secure your internet access on an unsecured Wi-Fi network, such as those at McDonald’s, but did you know that not all VPNs are created equally? By using a free VPN that you haven’t carefully read the terms and conditions of, you might be putting your privacy at more…