Tiny events—the flap of a butterfly wing, the fall of a grain of sand—can lead to nothing, or to catastrophe. In a previous issue 1 we described how tiny re-alignments or large avalanches in a slowly growing pile of sand seem random but at last are responding to statistical analysis. Now Mark Buchanan asks if history, too, obeys the statistical rules of the sand-pile.

In 1934, the historian H. A. L. Fisher came to a pessimistic conclusion about history: “Men wiser and more learned than I have discerned in history a plot, a rhythm, a predetermined pattern”, he wrote. “These harmonies are concealed from me. I can see only one emergency following upon another and only one safe rule for the historian: that he should recognise in the development of human destinies the play of the contingent and the unforeseen.”2

It is easy to see why Fisher might have thought this way, writing five years after the great stock-market crash of 1929 and 20 years after a chauffeur in Sarajevo had sparked the First World War by taking a wrong turn, allowing an assassin to gun down the Austro-Hungarian archduke. History looked like a string of meaningless but dangerous accidents, with tumultuous upheavals always lurking around the corner.

Historians nowadays may see this attitude as unduly despairing, yet we do not seem any closer to knowing much about the natural dynamics and rhythms of the human world. Today's events seem to fit right into Fisher's description. Five years ago, economists were celebrating how the free global flow of capital and the mathematics of modern derivative instruments had brought unprecedented stability and efficiency to the world's markets. Yet it was all a grand illusion, as the former chairman of the US Federal Reserve Board Alan Greenspan had to admit in testimony before the US congress earlier this year, describing his state of “shocked disbelief” at the global meltdown.

So, does history have any discernible patterns? Unexpectedly, a fresh perspective on such a question may be emerging from theoretical physics. Social and economic systems are driven by perpetual innovation and change, and never settle into unchanging stasis. In this sense they are systems that physicists would call “out of equilibrium”. The earth's crust is a good example: it is continually stressed and deformed by continental drift and it responds with sudden unpredictable earthquakes, which release that stress. Recent thinking in physics suggests that many systems out of equilibrium may exhibit a tell-tale pattern of change, erratic yet law-like all the same, and that human events and natural processes, despite their obvious differences, may actually follow strikingly similar dynamic processes.

Over the past two decades, physicists have been inspired by a deceptively simple problem. Imagine sprinkling grains of rice onto a table, one by one, so that a pile begins to grow. As it grows, avalanches will occasionally carry some grains away. This is obvious, yet a detailed understanding of what happens is difficult to come by. Where and when should we expect the avalanches? What is their typical size? What sets up conditions for the really big ones?

Physicists care about this problem because it is a toy model of a process that is out of equilibrium—one, that is, in which internal structures develop stored energy so that the forces at work cannot find their immediate release. Sprinkle droplets into a bathtub of water—a system in equilibrium—and each drop will quickly melt into the pool. Here the forces find their release and the result is monotonous sameness as nothing builds up. The pile of grains, in contrast, slowly accumulates stress, which is released in avalanches that follow some inscrutable rhythm. The pile evolves to what physicists call a “critical state”.

We might ask a simple question—if we drop another grain, how big an avalanche will it trigger? The remarkable feature of the critical state is that we cannot answer the question, or at least not in the usual way. For long periods not much happens—each grain triggers either nothing at all or perhaps a small avalanche of a few others. Then, at unpredictable moments, enormous upheavals involving thousands or millions of grains roll down the slopes. Such events appear as enormous spikes standing out in the time series of the pile's history, and look to human intuition as if they must have been caused by some special or exceptional shock to the system. Yet they were created by the dropping of just one grain like all others.

This is an experiment with philosophical implications. We tend to believe that great events have correspondingly great causes—that it is sensible, for example, to look for exceptional conditions that made the First World War take place, conditions that a perceptive observer might have been able to recognise as the precursor to disaster. If possible, we would like to learn lessons from history and so be better prepared for the future.

But a historian of the rice pile would have to notice that every event in the rice world begins in the same way—when one more grain falls on the pile. Yet because the pile is tuned to the critical state, the consequences of each grain are wildly unpredictable. If one day a great avalanche carries half the pile away, our historian might well narrate the grain-by-grain history of what took place. But this “explanation” would offer no insight into why one particular grain triggered such a great event, nor would it offer any lessons about when we might expect another. The rice-pile historian would learn the disconcerting truth that there was nothing special about that particular grain and nothing unusual about the condition of the pile at that moment. The pile is always in the critical state.

Mathematically, the statistical signature of critical organisation is a “power law”: the probability of avalanches of energy E falls off (asymptotically, at least for large E) in simple proportion to 1/Eα, where α is about 1.53. What bolsters the plausibility of a link between rice piles and history is that similar power laws have been discovered in thousands of natural and socio-economic settings ranging from earthquakes, forest fires and mass extinctions to business failures and even email traffic4,5. Two decades of research has convinced many scientists that many systems—including ecosystems and economies—may tend to organise themselves, like the rice pile, in a state of extreme sensitivity.

Indeed, there seems to be no “typical” size for a war. In the 1920s, the British physicist Lewis Richardson undertook a study of 82 wars that flared up between 1820 and 1929. In reckoning the size of a war, Richardson chose the simplest and grimmest statistic—the number of deaths—and found6 that wars, just like earthquakes and forest fires, conform to a power law (Figure 1). The same pattern shows up in the statistics of market fluctuations, where studies7 have found that the likelihood of price changes of size S (measured in percentage terms) over minutes, days or weeks is, for large S, proportional to 1/Sα, where α, in this case, is close to 3. A very similar pattern also describes the yearly fluctuations in the gross domestic product (GDP) of different nations8.

These empirical similarities suggest that a similar, if hidden, logic may be at work within many out of equilibrium systems, despite their superficial differences. They have also inspired a movement in physics, spilling out into many other fields, to build models loosely associated with the term “self-organised criticality”, reflecting the fact that the rice pile seems to organise itself into the critical condition, which might illuminate this logic by taking explicit account of key processes of growth and evolution that lead systems to have rich internal dynamics. The most exciting possibility is that many complex phenomena that have always been mysterious might, in basic outline at least, turn out to have surprisingly simple dynamics.

For example, many biologists have sought specific external causes for the five biggest mass extinctions apparent in the fossil record. These events stand out to the eye just like the big avalanches in the rice pile; their sheer size makes them look different and exceptional. Yet a number of simple models of out of equilibrium ecosystems of interacting species have shown that random extinctions of single species—analogous to the dropping of a single rice grain—may trigger avalanches of species extinctions that would produce a distribution of extinctions by size fitting the fossil data9,10. The big and small mass extinctions may just be identical avalanches of extinctions, only some have gone on much longer than others. This does not prove what really happened in any mass extinction event, of course, but does establish that the human mind can easily fall into the trap of seeking special external causes for seemingly special events when it is not warranted. In principle, the mass extinctions could have a perfectly natural explanation in terms of the ordinary workings of evolution. (The truth about mass extinctions probably involves both ordinary evolution as well as outside causes because we know big objects like comets and asteroids do sometimes hit the earth and can have biological consequences.)

But perhaps nowhere does this new science of out of equilibrium systems have more to offer than in understanding collective human dynamics in the economic setting. Most economists still try to understand markets by using traditional ideas associated with the concept of equilibrium. These theories view markets as reflecting a balance of forces, and implies that market values change only in response to new information—the sudden revelation of problems about a company, for example, or a real change in the housing supply. In other words, markets change when hit by external shocks and are otherwise supposed to have no real internal dynamics of their own.

Empirically, things do not seem to work that way. Nearly two decades ago, a classic economic study11 found that of the 50 largest single-day price movements since World War II, most happened on days when there was no significant news and that news in general seemed to account for only about a third of the overall variance in stock returns. A recent study by some physicists found much the same thing—financial news lacked any clear link with the larger movements of stock values.

Certainly markets have internal dynamics. They are self-propelling systems driven in large part by what investors believe other investors believe; participants trade on rumours and gossip, on fears and expectations and traders speak, for good reason, of the market's optimism or pessimism. It is these internal dynamics that make it possible for billions to evaporate from portfolios in a few short months just because people suddenly begin remembering that housing values do not always go up. Really understanding what is going on means going beyond equilibrium thinking and getting some insight into the underlying ecology of beliefs and expectations, perceptions and mis-perceptions that drive market swings.

Surprisingly, very few economists have actually tried to do this, although that is now changing—if slowly—through the efforts of pioneers who are building computer models able to mimic market dynamics by simulating their workings from the bottom up. The idea is to populate virtual markets with artificially intelligent agents who trade and interact and compete with one another much like real people. These “agent based” models do not simply proclaim the truth of market equilibrium, but let market behaviour emerge naturally from the actions of the interacting participants, just as the rice pile's surprising dynamics emerge from the comparatively simple interactions between individual grains. What comes out may be a quiet equilibrium or it may be something else.

In the context of financial markets, such models reproduce realistic power law distributions of price fluctuations in a very natural way12. Sudden rallies or crashes emerge from strong correlations in the behaviour of many market participants who come to hold similar expectations at the same time. But the promise of this perspective reaches much further too. In some very recent work, physicist Stefan Thurner and colleagues8 from the University of Vienna have shown that a relatively simple self-organised critical model based on the insights of the economist Joseph Schumpeter—who took an evolutionary, out-of-equilibrium perspective on economic systems—seems to provide a much more accurate description of market dynamics than anything in today's orthodox equilibrium theory.

Schumpeter's idea was that economic activity emerges out of a process driven by the appearance and disappearance of goods and services linked to technological progress and innovation. The result, he suggested, should be a haphazard and erratic process of “creative destruction” as new innovations can have devastating effects on well-established goods. As Thurner and his colleagues point out, Schumpeter phrased his ideas in non-mathematical terms for a good reason, because no mathematics for non-equilibrium systems existed in his day—he died in 1950. Only in recent years have researchers begun developing such mathematics with models akin to the rice pile but attuned to specific details of different areas of science, whether biology, geophysics or economics. The erratic power law dynamics characterising such systems emerge naturally in this framework and tend to show the universal phenomenon of “punctuated equilibrium” with long periods of quiet interrupted by unpredictable upheavals and the clustering of volatility. In Thurner and colleagues’ model, for example, sporadic waves of “creative destruction” in the economy get triggered by ordinary innovations sometimes having small effects and at other times leading to enormous economic revolutions.

This kind of model has a feel that is much more naturally in tune with actual market dynamics than anything from general equilibrium theory and appears to fit the detailed statistics as well—at least in some measures. Their model economy, for example, shows power law statistics for fluctuations in the economy's gross domestic product and leads to time series for GDP and GDP fluctuations very much like the real data for national economies (see Figure 2).

All of which begins to suggest that the historian H. A. L. Fisher was on to something. The natural rhythm of our human collective world seems to be strongly similar to that of many natural processes, and its ordinary workings seem to throw up great upheavals that lack any identifiable exceptional causes. This is a sobering lesson about the limits to our ability to predict and control the world around us but also a reminder that order and organisation may come in surprising forms and that many erratic processes may indeed be simpler than they appear.|||

