

 

 Its been 11 weeks! Check out our total stats since launch: 

 

 What's coming: I'm going on vacation this week. 

 25,456 people visited. 

 Hello there! We're now at 11 weeks since launch. This last week we saw about a thousand new folks visit the site. The subscriber base grew this week thanks to a mention in the DigitalOcean community newsletter. I highly recommend you check it out here! They've clearly got incredible taste :D 

 3,607 Subscribers 

 Seeing lots of new folks sign up this week thanks to DigitalOcean! Welcome to the newsletter everybody :D 

 $555.00 in Revenue! 

 No new revenue this week. Although that's to be expected with the low connection rates all of a sudden. 

 168/413 connections made 

 Yikes only one successful connection this week. Sorry guys! As usual, I'm trying to improve this statistic. 

 What's Coming 

 I'll be going on vacation this week, but I'll have access to e-mail. Expect a slight delay in connection times, and a delay in posting the weekly update! 

 

 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you'd like to help us get to 3700 subscribers, sign up below! :) 

 

 

 

 





 

 Its been 10 weeks! Check out our total stats since launch: 

 

 What's coming: Fulfilled the first leads orders. Learned a lot. Check it out. Continuing work on a place to post and discuss opportunities. 

 24,679 people visited. 

 Hey! 10 weeks since launch. I am loving this journey. Anyways, this last week we saw a few hundred new folks visit the site. While the user base churned a bit, we came out slightly ahead. I'll take it! 

 3,493 Subscribers 

 Just a little growth. We saw a lot of new people sign up and a lot of people leave. Welcome to the newsletter everybody :D 

 $555.00 in Revenue! 

 Huge uptick in revenue this week. This was thanks to a 2 incredibly generous donations and 3 brave folks who tried out the leads service. Thanks so much guys :D 

 167/383 connections made 

 Here are the latest connection rates. As usual, I'm trying to increase this statistic. 

 What's Coming 

 I fulfilled the first few orders from the leads service and learned a lot about what it takes to run that kind of service. I'm looking forward to expanding the offering in the future. 

 

 I'm going to continue splitting my time between providing leads and working on community features. Stay tuned :D 

 

 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you'd like to help us get to 3500 subscribers, sign up below! :) 

 

 

 

 





 

 Its been 9 weeks! Check out our total stats since launch: 

 

 What's coming: Just released a leads service. Check it out. Continuing work on a place to post and discuss opportunities. 

 24,315 people visited. 

 Hi guys, I'll be reorganizing this post a bit until I find a format that is easier to read and easier to write. Bear with me :) 

 

 It has now been 9 weeks since launch. This last week we saw about 1000 new folks visit the site, and we continued to see the list grow. Although, that growth is tapering a bit as we settle back into churn. I'm looking forward to a few large growth events in the coming weeks, but at this point, growth isn't the main focus. 

 3,483 Subscribers 

 We grew again, a little. I definitely prefer to be growing. But, having been through churn for a few weeks, I've come to expect it a bit! :D 

 $347.00 in Revenue! 

 Again, another record week!! 6 generous people showed their support for Opps Daily. You guys are awesome :D 

 159/362 connections made 

 Here are the latest connection rates. As usual, I'm trying to increase this statistic. 

 What's Coming 

 This week, I rolled out the leads service. It seemed like a few folks on the list were struggling to find early customers for some of their ideas so I thought I'd try and help. 

 

 I'll be splitting my time between providing leads and working on community features this week. Stay tuned :D 

 

 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you'd like to help us get to 3500 subscribers, sign up below! :) 

 

 

 

 





 

 Its been 2 months since the launch of Opps Daily. Check out our total stats since launch: 

 

 

 23,451 people visited. 

 It has now been 2 months since launch. This last week we saw some great traffic. Thanks to one of our incredible readers mentioning us on Javascript Jabber, and thanks to some hacker news comments. 

 

 We had 1300 new visitors come to the site this week. An improvement over the last few weeks. 

 

 

 

 

 3,414 subscribers. 

 We grew this week! Phew, I was getting worried. The increase in traffic brought in a slew of new subscribers. Hi everybody! :D 

 

 P.S. - have some feedback? Please don't hesitate to e-mail me! 

 

 

 

 $267.00 in Revenue! 

 Wow, you guys came out in force this week!! 9 incredible people were kind enough to support Opps Daily. Thanks again guys :D 

 

 

 

 

 

 134/297 connections made 

 Here are the latest connection rates. Everyone seemed to love the kennel idea. I'll keep an eye out for more like that. 

 

 What's Coming 

 Not too much to report here. Continuing to build out some community features which I hope to roll out soon. Stay tuned! 

 

 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you'd like to help us get to 3500 subscribers, sign up below! :) 

 

 

 

 





 

 Its been 7 weeks since the launch of Opps Daily. Check out our total stats since launch: 

 

 

 22,240 people visited. 

 We are now on our 7th week since launch, and I am loving the journey so far! I'm learning a lot and feeling challenged, so this has been a worthwhile endeavor. :D 

 

 Traffic-wise had about 500 new folks come to check out the site. Thanks for stopping by! 

 

 

 

 

 3,187 subscribers. 

 We are continuing to churn! However, this is the first week we haven't seen growth in this number. After asking around a bit, I've been told that it's probably just because the list grew so fast. So, while it's a bummer to see you guys go, I'm excited about the coming week! Opps Daily is going to get some great exposure, and I'm hoping to see growth pick up again. More on that later ;) 

 

 P.S. - I'm always open to feedback, so please don't hesitate to e-mail me! 

 

 

 

 $161.00 in Revenue! 

 This number repeatedly continues to awe me. Several thoughtful individuals were kind enough to support Opps Daily this week. You know who you are, and you are awesome :D 

 

 

 

 

 

 80/191 connections made 

 Here are the latest connection rates. This was a low week connection wise. Sorry to everybody that didn't hear back! Definitely working on increasing the quality of these interviews and raising this number. 

 

 What's Coming 

 So this week I rolled out a weekly recap e-mail. If you want to see the week's interviews all in one place, in addition to a little bonus news and commentary, subscribe! You can just click "update my preferences" in one of your e-mails and then check "weekly." NOTE - make sure you have daily checked as well if you still want the daily. 

 

 Next up I'll be working on improving the quality of the interviews, and building out some of the web products I mentioned earlier. This includes a vault, and a forum-esque website for discussing / collaborating on opportunities. I'm open to ideas if you have them! 

 

 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you'd like to help us get to 3200 subscribers, sign up below! :) 





 

 Its been 6 weeks since the launch of Opps Daily. This week I spent a lot of time trying to figure out why people were unsubscribing. Total stats below: 

 

 

 21,751 people visited. 

 Wow! It's been an incredible six weeks since starting Opps Daily. Time has been flying. It was a quiet week traffic wise, but thats just fine with me! :D 

 

 We saw about 600 new folks come to check out the site. Hi there! 

 

 

 

 

 3,213 subscribers. 

 We also saw about a 125 people unsubscribe this week and about 135 new folks sign up! 

 I think this is happening because we had 2500 folks sign up all at once and now many are realizing it's not for them. I did some investigation and show more on this below! 

 

 P.S. - Is there something you'd like to change? I'd love to hear about what you're looking for in the future of Opps Daily. Don't be shy! Drop me a line! 

 

 

 

 $121.00 in Revenue! 

 Four amazing people pitched in to help Opps Daily this week. Thank you so much for the support guys. I am super grateful :D 

 

 

 

 

 

 67/152 connections made 

 Here are the latest connection rates. To be honest, I think I've been lucky in that some of the most popular emails have have been easy to connect. I think we'll see this rate trend down a bit. 

 

 What's Coming 

 I've emailed every single unsubscriber personally and heard back from many of them. The responses were all super kind and helpful. 

 

 One piece of feedback I'm hearing over and over is that while the reader likes Opps Daily, they find getting an e-mail every day is too much. 

 

 In addition, I just ran a poll to see how you guys feel about a weekly email. Amongst the 125 respondents so far its a close split! 

 

 I want both daily and weekly e-mails: 25.8% 

 I want the weekly instead of the daily: 39.5% 

 I want just the daily: 34.7% 

 

 To remedy this I'll be rolling out a weekly recap e-mail this week. Expect an update soon. In this e-mail I'll provide a quick synopsis of all the opportunities we sent out this week and a link to the email. The downside of subscribing only to this is that by the time you see the opportunities, they may be over-contacted. 

 

 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you'd like to help us get to 3300 subscribers, sign up below! :) 

 

 

 

 





 

 Its been 5 weeks since the launch of Opps Daily. We had an interesting week, here are our total stats so far. 

 

 What's coming: New sources for our interviews 

 21,128 people visited. 

 Opps Daily hit the front page of Hacker News three times this week and it's been a wonderful and occasionally stressful ride! 

 

 Last week's stats post really kicked it off, and I was seeing something like 250 concurrent users on the site. This publicity alerted a competitor, whose daily newsletter I had modeled mine after. He subsequently did a quick writeup about us, leading to some minor controversy, but in the end I made a new friend and was warmly welcomed into his community. 

 

 Finally, I posted an "Ask HN" thread to source some interviews for the daily email. This subsequently turned into a great thread where many people shared (and continue to share) the problems they are facing at work. 

 

 

 3,204 subscribers. 

 Holy. Moly. The list swelled up to about 5X what it was. I was expecting to hit this number several months from now. I love having so many people on the list. I'm hearing from such a diverse group every day. So many of you have helped me by providing feedback, advice, or strategy. You guys continue to amaze me. 

 

 Last week several of you had great ideas for several things you'd like to see in the future, as well as things that need to be improved right now. 

 

 I want that to continue. I'd love to hear about what you're looking for in the future of Opps Daily. Don't be shy! Drop me a line! 

 

 

 

 $90.00 in Revenue! 

 One incredible soul pitched in $5 to help Opps Daily this week. Thank you so much for the support. :D 

 

 Also, for the next few days I'm including a 30-second survey in the daily email, asking for advice on how to monetize Opps Daily. 

 

 I'm getting a really good sense of what you guys value. Although many said they wouldn't (and that's totally cool), an archive of interviews seems like what you guys are most interested in paying for. Very few folks seem like they'd want to pay for a slack chat. I get that. 

 

 Please keep the incredible feedback coming. Almost 25 of you have filled it out in the first day, and for that I am SO thankful. 

 

 

 

 26/60 or 70+ish connections made 

 It's been such a crazy week. I've seen the number of requests increase several times over. In aggregate, I've been able to provide contact info for 26 of you who wanted more information. 

 

 I'm having trouble tracking how many of you have been requesting due to the sheer inflow and the nature of gmail. I'm working on a better tracking system than just counting in my inbox. Stay tuned! 

 

 What's Coming 

 This week I've seen a huge influx of users. Also, a huge influx of feedback on my current interview sourcing method. With that in mind, I've decided priority number one is to gather interviews from some different sources. I've got a handful of these interviews coming this week, so keep an eye out for a small asterisk after the body of the email explaining where the interview comes from. Also, I'm directly in touch with these folks, and they all seem interested in connecting with you. 

 

 As soon as I get a handle on the current inflow of requests I'll get back to working on all the other great stuff I have planned for you guys :) 

 

 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you'd like to help us get to 3300 subscribers, sign up below! :) 

 

 

 

 





 

 Wow, 1 month since launching Opps Daily. As usual, here's an update on our total stats. 

 

 Whats coming: 2 new products in the works for you guys; one paid, one free. 

 1921 people visited. 

 This was a great week for traffic. I mentioned Opps Daily in this thread and enjoyed a wave of visits and signups all week. 

 

 

 641 subscribers. 

 Almost 300 signups this week. Just incredible. The flow of daily requests to my inbox has also increased which has brought new challenges in terms of getting to everyone's email in a timely fashion. Time to get organized... 

 

 Last week several of you had great ideas for several things you'd like to see in the future, as well as things that need to be improved right now. 

 

 This week lets continue that trend. I'd love to hear about what you're looking for in the future of Opps Daily. That's right, I'm letting you guys steer the ship. Drop me a line! 

 

 

 

 $85.00 in Revenue! 

 Three amazing readers have sent me payments in exchange for a successful connection with a submitter. I'm continuing with a "pay what you want" model for the time being. Thank you so much for the support. :D 

 

 

 

 11/29 connections made 

 So far I've been able to connect about 30% of you with the originators of these opportunities. To those who weren't able to connect, don't get discouraged, just email me about the next one you like. :) 

 

 If any of the ideas in the daily email intrigue you, Drop me a line and I'll do my best to connect you! 

 

 What's Coming 

 So, my current focus is on building out a vault for all of you folks who want to see all the opportunities in a particular industry, or felt that the e-mail model wasn't working for you. So far I've built out an admin panel for myself and am essentially working on the guts of the application. Next comes a UI that makes sense. I'll share some screenshots when that is ready. 

 

 I'm still unsure how to price this, so if you have an idea of what you'd like to pay, please email me! 

 

 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you'd like to help us get to 700 subscribers, 

 sign up below! :) 

 

 

 

 





 

 It's been an incredible 3 weeks since launching Opps Daily. As usual, here's an update on our total stats. 

 

 Whats coming: 2 new products in the works for you guys; one paid, one free. 

 1217 people visited. 

 We had a solid week, traffic-wise. While there weren't any huge booms in traffic, it was slow and steady. Last week's post on hacker news brought some traffic early in the week. A mid-week, strategically placed comment in one of the top hacker news threads was also effective. Finally I tried to launch on product hunt yesterday. It went...okay. That's the small hill at the end of the graph. 

 

 

 366 subscribers. 

 My favorite stat to watch. We had more than 100 signups over the course of the week. 

 

 Last week several of you wrote in and told me about what you'd do with the first million from your Opps Daily idea. Many of you had ideas that were truly generous and moving. 

 

 This week I'd love to hear about what you're looking for in the future of Opps Daily. That's right, I'm letting you guys steer the ship. Drop me a line! 

 

 

 

 $25.00 in Revenue! 

 As several of you know, if I'm able to connect you with the person behind an idea, I'll throw a "pay what you want" link at the end of the e-mail. Well we had our first paying customer! Thank you so much for the support. A goal for this month was to make our first dollar and thanks to one amazing soul, we made our first $25. :D 

 

 

 

 3/6 connections made 

 So far I've been able to connect about 50% of you with the people behind these daily ideas. I'm looking forward to seeing the results! If any of the ideas in the daily email intrigue you, Drop me a line and I'll do my best to connect you! 

 

 

 

 What's Coming 

 So, after listening to your feedback and thinking deeply about what Opps Daily community can be, I've decided to develop two products for you: 

 

 The first is a paid product. Essentially it'll be a vault of all the opportunities I've collected so far (several hundred, and growing rapidly). I'm not sure how to price it, so if you have any input on what you'd like this to be or, what you'd like to pay, please email me! The reason I'm going to work on the paid product first is so that I can finance the collection of opportunities at scale, cover my own costs, and comfortably work on the second product without focusing on monetization. Also, I think it will be easier and faster to build from a technical perspective. 

 

 The second product, which I am super excited about, will be an open community for people to share opportunities and collaborate on them together. The big vision is to have a list of opportunities, and then have all the tools in place to inspire, connect, and begin working on something great. Stay tuned for more on this in another blog post. 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you'd like to help us get to 400 subscribers, 

 sign up below! :) 

 

 

 

 





 

 It's been 2 weeks since the launch of Opps Daily, and A LOT has happened in that time. Here is a quick recap! 

 

 Plans for the future: SO MANY! (Read on below for some hints about what's next for Opps Daily) 

 

 744 people visited. 

 Not too shabby! That big spike in traffic on the 24th? That's thanks to our friends at Versioning! We got shared in their newsletter. I signed up just to be polite when they said they would mention Opps Daily. Now I'm addicted. Be sure to check them out. That spike at the end of the graph? That's a nice little bump from hacker news. 

 

 

 252 subscribers. 

 Incredible. It's a pleasure to craft an e-mail for all of you, every morning. 

 

 Last week several of you wrote in and told me about your life ambitions, favorite tech stacks, and weird stuff your cat does! 

 

 This week I'd love to hear about what you'll do with your first million from your Opps Daily idea, your favorite app, or the weirdest food you've eaten! 

 drop me a line! 

 

 

 

 5 unsubscribers 

 While always a bummer to see people go, each unsubscribe is an opportunity to find out how to improve Opps Daily! I'll let you know what I find out! 

 

 

 

 3 heartfelt responses 

 Several people wrote in this week with constructive criticism and praise. This is the fuel that keeps me going! 

 "I love getting these emails, keep up the great work." 

 "I just wanted to say that I really like OppsDaily - it's such a great resource for problems that needs solving." 

 "It’s one of the emails I look forward to receiving every day since I signed up." 

 

 

 

 1 connections made 

 Opps Daily connected its first developer with submitter! We have one other connection in progress. I can't wait to hear back about the result! If any of the ideas in the daily email intrigue you, Drop me a line and I'll do my best to connect you! 

 

 

 

 So many plans for the future! 

 Many of you reached out to me with suggestions for how we can make Opps Daily better. First of all, a huge thank you to everybody who took the time to e-mail. You didn't have to, and your input makes this community better. 

 

 Some of the most common requests were: 

 

 A way to connect with the poster of an opportunity. 

 A way to share existing solutions. 

 A way to collaborate with other members of the community on these problems. 

 

 This week I'm going to start working to accomodate those requests. Stay tuned, and please keep the feedback coming :D 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you want to help us get to 300 subscribers, 

 sign up below! :) 

 

 

 

 





 

 launched one week ago. In that time a lot has happened. Here are the stats, with the details below. Opps Daily, launched one week ago. In that time a lot has happened. Here are the stats, with the details below. 

 

 Unsubscribers: 1 

 (I found out why! - see below) 

 

 388 people visited. 

 Incredible. Its like we launched on a time delay. Most of that traffic came from the indiehackers newsletter. Opps Daily could not have launched on a better platform. 

 

 

 112 subscribers. 

 This is so humbling and amazing. 112 of you wonderful folks subscribed. I am incredibly grateful! 

 

 I'd love to hear from you by the way, seriously, tell me about your life ambitions, your favorite tech stack, or something weird your cat does - drop me a line! (still waiting for this graph to update) 

 

 

 

 1 unsubscriber 

 At first I was really bummed to hear we had our first unsubscriber. But, after some investigation, it was revealed that they left because they were launching a new venture and couldn't invest any time in new ideas. I can't think of a better reason for leaving! Best of luck in your new venture! :D 

 

 

 

 2 people interested in collaborating 

 It seems like there are 2 people interested in collaborating with opps daily. Super excited to find out more and I'll keep you posted of any relevant results. 

 

 

 

 6 campaigns sent 

 The campaigns are rolling out. You voracious readers are opening emails at an almost 35% higher rate than the industry average, and clicking at almost 4% higher. 

 

 

 

 1 heartfelt response 

 I got this in response to one of our morning campaigns and found it really touching. I just had to share this: I might frame this. Seriously. 

 

 

 

 1 mentions in the indiehackers newsletter 

 Opps Daily got mentioned on the indie hackers newsletter and it shot our traffic through the roof. All of a sudden subscriber notifications started rolling into my inbox. Leading to the taking of a screenshot and a tweet, which then led to this.... 

 

 

 

 1 retweet by indiehackers 

 Indie Hackers retweeted us! All of a sudden I was getting follower notifications as well. This was an incredible day. I'm still cleaning out my inbox from all the sign ups and follows. 

 

 

 

 Thanks for reading! Are you trying to find the right idea to work on? Looking for some inspiration? We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you want to help us get to 200 subscribers, 

 sign up below! :) 





 

 launched yesterday. It went okay. This is a short recap of where we launched, the resulting traffic, and signups. Opps Daily, launched yesterday. It went okay. This is a short recap of where we launched, the resulting traffic, and signups. 

 

 I shared the project on Indie Hackers, Hacker News, and Reddit. and in the solo founder slack channel mentioned in this thread. These are my favorite places on the internet so it felt natural to share what I've been working on there. Particular credit goes out to the solo founder slack channel, as those guys are super helpful and awesome! Indie Hackers garnered 110 views and 10 comments (on the indiehacker thread). According to google analytics this turned into 19 visits and 2 confirmed signups, but I suspect several more of those visits converted. This was in my opinion the best response. Hacker News provided 20 visits to the site. The post got buried in show hn though. This might have been because I sent people to upvote the link directly. Unbeknownst to me, this was a no-no. Reddit brought one person to the site, but I wasn't expecting much from the giant "share your startup" thread. Slack provided 5-6 signups, and also constant feedback on the landing page while I was first designing it. So far the list has grown to 19 people! 

 

 Thanks for reading. We ask people about the problems they face at work, and the software that could solve those problems. Then, we send you their answers. Every. Day. 

 If you want to help us get to 20 subscribers, 

 sign up below! :) 

 

|||

