Whatever the next four years have in store, it’s clear that Americans will very likely continue to be stuck arguing for a while about experts. How much power should they have? How accountable should they be? How much can they be trusted? How much deference do we owe them — or will we have to end up, in the time-intensive course of our work and play, giving them?

Amid the furor about various types of U.S. elites, and the pseudo-tribal conflicts surrounding them, the ineffable political debates about expertise that will always arise in a democracy are being made intractable.

But there is little doubt that experts are having a bad historical moment. It’s growing harder to see how to mount a defense of expertise that not only seems right but sounds good and captures broad-based public attention — much less adherence. The challenge is steep, but in a new book, “The Death of Expertise,” national security professor (and all-time top “Jeopardy!” contestant) Tom Nichols has gamely taken it on.

Nichols begins with the obvious, then gives it a twist. Americans are often, and now, thanks to the internet, routinely, suspicious and hostile toward what he calls “established knowledge” — and toward those who know it. But more than a tradition of independent thinking and skepticism is at work. Today, Nichols suggests, more and more citizens are actively proud to be ignorant.

And it does seem that, on a bad day, lack of expertise is twisted into a sort of team identity, strangely similar in its aggressive self-celebration to the politicized associations pervading race, class, gender and sexuality debates on and off American campuses. If elites have racked up too many failures to be trusted out of instinct, habit, duty or merit, ordinary Americans have also — for other, deeper reasons — too often wound up without enough of a sense of personal and shared pride to grant expertise even a modestly authoritative role in their lives.

This crucial insight distinguishes two concepts often conflated by experts and non-experts alike: power and authority. Even if our elite experts had avoided or resolved all the major crises of the young 21st century, a popular hatred of authority has elevated a class of leaders who play the sorts of powerful roles charismatic, authoritative experts used to hold — but are anything but true authorities. In business, culture, entertainment, politics and academia, too many popular leadership figures are peddling a kind of knowledge far different from expertise: a kind of gnosis, to borrow an old term for secret, saving knowledge possessed only by a special elect.

If that sounds arcane, just take a look around. While traditional experts muster and pass down authority through a hard-earned combination of rational inquiry, tested practices, mutual accountability, and ultimately a distaste for playing power games, today’s gnostic leaders revel in power, encouraging their followers to do the same — by breaking down established boundaries, questioning received authority, and entitling themselves to assert (violently if necessary) that their exclusive knowledge of their “own truth” entitles them to absolute deference.

Gnostic culture has taken on a political character in part because standard-issue religion is not the only intermediary civil institution to suffer in these times. Habits of local self-government have also taken a powerful hit, and the fear has spread that all politics is increasingly a national fight, with each issue subject to winner-take-all rules.

The result has been that, paradoxically, Washington has become over the decades one of a few remaining safe spaces for experts. Yet the more expertise has become concentrated in and around the federal government, the more nearly magical powers we have demanded of it — and the more bitterly we have been disappointed.

Therefore, today many Americans are drifting into a deathly dilemma, resentful of the idea of authority in government but desperate to wield government’s tremendous power. Under such conditions, gnosticism flourishes. It promises adherents all the access to power that authoritative experts can’t or won’t muster, and all the self-justifying sanctity that power alone lacks.

From higher education to online journalism to simple conversation, as Nichols notes, struggles around who has what right to make which unchallenged claims have become too costly, too exhausting, or both. Such is the power of gnosticism to beat down its opposition, especially the weak opposition of people who lack durable pride but resist solid authority.

“Experts,” Nichols writes, channeling the venerable sociologist Max Weber, “can only offer alternatives. They cannot, however, make choices about values.” That distinction is important, but in ignorant hands, it sounds like what it isn’t — a call to mystically set one’s own identity as the ultimate value and fight for power accordingly. Throughout the 20th century and into this one, neither Weber nor any other expert was able to fend off identity politics fueled by “charismatic” gnostic leaders lacking in deeper authority. No expert was able to prevent the horrible cultural and political conflicts, decade after decade, that resulted.

And so, although established knowledge did its best to protectively, modestly disenchant itself, the immodesty of scientific and technological advancement made expertise look mystically powerful and potentially messianic in the minds of secularizing people lacking in traditional sources of pride.

When both private-sector science and a new political science of “public policy” experts failed to deliver, many fell back on the prospect of worshiping themselves and their kind, no matter how ugly in their ignorance.

James Poulos is a columnist for the Southern California News Group.|||

Whatever the next four years have in store, it’s clear that Americans will very likely continue to be stuck arguing for a while about experts. How much power should they have? How accountable should they be? How much can they be trusted? How mu