How can we get there?

First of all, keep in mind, it’s a young community in a very fresh field. 31.4% percent of respondents from a recent data visualization survey said it’s their first job doing data visualization! So, it’s only natural that we are having a hard time between much more established fields like UI/UX design and computer science and engineering.

Likewise, only 25.4% say data visualization is the primary focus of their job. Consequently, many folks see data visualization as a supplemental skill rather than a full-time profession. In my view, this is a structural problem if we want to be taken seriously —beyond just making “better charts”— but also testament to the fact that if we want to establish data visualization as a profession, it will take some work.

Yet, as I argued earlier already, I don’t think we gain much from overemphasizing the (supposedly) fundamental differences between “serious/functional” and “aesthetic/entertaining” data visualizations, or, conversely, diminishing Excel dataviz work as “not really data visualization”.

I am thinking back to the time when it was fashionable to “draw lines in the sand” or to attack designers on live TV. The harsh, narrow-minded criticism that novel designs and approaches faced for a while did not always lead to better results, but, in contrast, scared talented folks away from the community. I am really quite happy that, by now, we have a data visualization community that understands the many purposes of data visualization beyond scientific analysis.

Last, there might be a common misconception about what it takes to learn to create great data visualizations. There’s lots of materials available online to get started with data visualization and to create “cool data graphics”. Yet, in order to advance professionally and to create actual impact, it is absolutely necessary to collect lots and lots experiences from actual project work, and especially to face criticism, have one’s designs challenged, learn how to iterate, and develop a robust process to consistently deliver great results (yes, real artists ship).

But I don’t think twitter, blogs, or forums are the places to do that. Rarely have I seen online criticisms of data visualizations that actually took the time to reflect on briefing, motivation, project constraints, or aesthetic value, as Wattenberg and Viegas suggest in Design and Redesign.

The most valuable criticism happens where it matters — when working on a job, facing challenges and questions from a client or your co-workers, or during education when your teacher or mentor forces you take position and sharpen and defend your designs. If we think vocational training and actual professional practice can be replaced by occasional flame wars on twitter, a couple of bl.ocks and reading /r/dataisbeautiful, then we ourselves are the ones who don’t take data visualization seriously.

So, please, by all means, let’s keep the data visualization community inclusive and open to new ideas and approaches . And let’s all work together — data scientists, Excel folks, data artists, enigineers — to demonstrate that we can create value with custom, high-end data visualizations in applied, business-critical settings. The future of our young discipline might actually depend on it.|||

I started being serious about data visualization around 2005, when the field was still pretty niche and people like Martin Wattenberg, Ben Fry, Jonathan Harris, Marcos Weskamp, Eric Rodenbeck, Jer…