This is the story of three great cities of the Italian Renaissance, two exceptional artists and one revolutionary new medium. Michelangelo Buonarroti was from Florence, where drawing – disegno – was considered the father of all arts. Sebastiano del Piombo, ten years younger, came from Venice, where cross-continental trade brought rare minerals and pigments to artists who became masters of colour – colorito. The two men met where all roads meet, in Rome.

They were thrown together by the disruptive power of a new technique: oil painting. Italian artists had been slow to adopt this method, which had been widely used in northern Europe since the early 15th century. The quickest on the uptake were the Venetians, who used it to create a depth and lustre of colour unimaginable with quick-drying egg tempera or fresco. Sebastiano had mastered it; Michelangelo struggled. His solution was to work with the young Venetian.

“Michelangelo & Sebastiano” at the National Gallery in London is the first exhibition to explore their partnership. It began in 1511, when Sebastiano arrived in Rome, and Michelangelo was putting the finishing touches to one of the most daring commissions of his life: the decoration of the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. The pair hit it off. The curator, Matthias Wivel, thinks it highly likely that Michelangelo invited Sebastiano up onto the scaffolding to examine his colossal frescos and admire the ambition of the design, with its non-naturalistic colours and muscular, classically inspired figures.

Michelangelo wagered that by combining his genius for design with Sebastiano’s gift for colour, they would gain an edge in the growing market for oil painting. He was right: by collaborating they produced work that neither could have completed on their own. Their creative partnership, which lasted for two decades, brought both men huge success – and friendship. Reams of sketches show their intense exchange of visual ideas, while letters filled with humour, affection and politics show how close they were. Michelangelo even became the godfather of Sebastiano’s first child.

Their relationship didn’t last. For reasons that are not entirely clear they fell out. Though this exhibition proves that Michelangelo could be a generous colleague, it was not for nothing that he was known as terribile – difficult to work with. Their contemporary, Giorgio Vasari, a writer who idolised Michelangelo, sent Sebastiano down in history as the lesser artist and man.

True, this was not a partnership of equals. Michelangelo was one of the great polymaths of the Renaissance: he designed St Peter’s basilica in Rome, his sculpture of David remains the Western ideal of masculinity, and his frescos at the Sistine Chapel are one of the wonders of the world. But when it came to oil painting, Sebastiano was better by far. This tightly edited exhibition shows Michelangelo as a genius, and rehabilitates Sebastiano as the master artist who rendered Michelangelo’s vision in Venetian technicolour.|||

Sebastiano was better with colour, Michelangelo was better at drawing. Together they made a great team