This library aims to be a drop in replacement to the current programming interface of . The existing interface to using attributed strings has a few flaws, namely if you dont know the Key and type of value needed to set a certain attribute, you have spend time checking documentation or the reading the comments for . Another concern is safety, passing a dictionary of type to the constructor of is a potential crash at runtime waiting to happen.

By wrapping the current official interface to into a fluent easy to use API, Attributed was made in an attempt to give developers an alternative option to the official interface.

Using Attributed is fairly straight forward, just create the attributes you wish your attributed text to have:

And then simply apply them to a :

The attributes dictionary that was passed to the NSAttributedString constructor as in has been made an actual type .

There are two intefaces for working with the type. The suggested interface is the Constructor interface that accepts a closure that returns an object.

The second way of working with objects is to set properties one method call at a time. The benefit of this interface is a base set of attributes can be created and then that base set of attributes can then be freely modified. Since is of type there is zero chance of corrupting the original base object by working this way.

Two extensions have been made to the type . The first is: where is an object of type . This function will return an from an object of type .

The second interface is similar but takes closure given a blank that the user can modify and return to be used in constructing an .

If you use Carthage to manage your dependencies, simply add Attributed to your :

If you use Carthage to build your dependencies, make sure you have added to the "Linked Frameworks and Libraries" section of your target, and have included in your Carthage framework copying build phase.

If you use CocoaPods to manage your dependencies, simply add Attributed to your :

Contributions are more than welcome!

Attributed is free software, and may be redistributed under the terms specified in the LICENSE file.|||

Attributed - Modern Swift µframework for attributed strings.