In my article detailing the command line utilities available for configuring and troubleshooting network properties on Windows and Linux, I mentioned some Linux tools that, while still included and functional in many Linux distributions, are actually considered deprecated and therefore should be phased out in favor of more modern replacements.

Specifically, the deprecated Linux networking commands in question are: arp, ifconfig, iptunnel, iwconfig, nameif, netstat, and route. These programs (except iwconfig) are included in the net-tools package that has been unmaintained for years. The functionality provided by several of these utilities has been reproduced and improved in the new iproute2 suite, primarily by using its new ip command. The iproute2 software code is available from Kernel.org. Iproute2 documentation is available from the Linux Foundation and PolicyRouting.org.

.

 Now let’s take a closer look at these deprecated commands and their replacements.

This article will not focus on iproute2 or the ip command in detail; instead it will simply give one-to-one mappings between the deprecated commands and their new counterparts. For replacement commands that are listed as ‘not apparent’, please contact me if you know otherwise.

Please note that nslookup and dig are covered separately here.



.

 Some ip neighbor examples are as follows:

Invalidates the ARP cache entry for host 10.1.2.3 on device eth0.

Adds a “permanent” ARP cache entry for host 10.1.2.3 device eth0. The Neighbor Unreachability Detection (nud) state can be one of the following:

.

 Some examples illustrating the ip command are as follows; using the table above you should be able to figure out what they do.

.

 The syntax between iptunnel and ip tunnel is very similar as these examples show.

(ipip-tunl1 is the name of the tunnel, 83.240.67.86 is the IP address of the remote endpoint).

 



Iptunnel is covered in more depth here.

Iwconfig’s successor, iw, is still in development. Official documentation for iw is available here and here.

.

 Some examples of the iw command syntax are as follows.

.

 Some examples of ip route command syntax are as follows.

# ip route add 10.23.30.0/24 via 192.168.8.50

 

 # ip route del 10.28.0.0/16 via 192.168.10.50 dev eth0

 

 # ip route chg default via 192.168.25.110 dev eth1

 

 # ip route get [ip_address] (shows the interface and gateway that would be used to reach a remote host. This command would be especially useful for troubleshooting routing issues on hosts with large routing tables and/or with multiple network interfaces).

This article and the topic of deprecated Linux networking commands has generated much interesting commentary on Reddit.

If you found the content of this article helpful and want to expand your knowledge further, please consider buying a relevant book using the links below. Thanks!|||

In my article detailing the command line utilities available for configuring and troubleshooting network properties on Windows and Linux, I mentioned some Linux tools that, while still included and functional in many Linux distributions, are actually considered deprecated and therefore should be phased out in favor of more modern replacements. Specifically, the deprecated Linux networking…