Hours after the riots in Tottenham on Saturday 6 August had finally abated and London's streets had returned to relative calm, a message pinged out, first on to a few phones, then dozens, then hundreds if not thousands across north London.

"Everyone in edmonton enfield wood green everywhere in north link up at enfield town station at 4 o clock sharp!!!!," it began. "Start leaving ur yards n linking up with your niggas. Fuck da feds, bring your ballys and your bags trollys, cars vans, hammers the lot!!"

The message was sent through the BlackBerry Messenger (BBM) network: a free mobile phone messaging service open to anyone with a BlackBerry smartphone. Once users have swapped a pin, they can share messages as often as they like, and at the touch of a button send a broadcast (or "ping") to everyone on their contact list.

This extraordinarily efficient – and secure – communications network was a key tool for many who took part in England's riots, as an easy way to share information on where other looters were, safe routes home, and what the police were doing.

While the government debated whether to shut down Twitter, or prosecute Facebook users, it was BBM that was actually playing a substantive role in the riots, according to those who took part.

One ex-gang member received her first piece of information on the riots while sat behind the wheel of her family car.

"BlackBerry. Nothing but BlackBerry," the 22-year-old mother explained. "No one was on their computer, everyone was on their phones. BlackBerry's how we knew what – everything was happening."

She explained how she and others like her from economically deprived communities across England were able to afford a handset once limited to business people.

She doesn't have a monthly phone contract, but thanks to BlackBerry she can own a smartphone on pay-as-you-go.

"I pay £5 [monthly] then I get to use it [BlackBerry] for a month. I can go on the internet as well, for a fiver. That's why on everyone's phones, pictures were being sent around, so much stuff, you know."

Being able to keep up with friends 24 hours a day for only £5 a month and the low cost of a handset were major draws for many people interviewed by Reading the Riots researchers, especially as many were from families on low incomes.

The cheap price of the new Curve handset helped, too: a new Blackberry Curve 8520 handset without a contract can cost £110, versus £426 for the high-end BlackBerry Bold or £480 for the iPhone 4S. Furthermore, on the black market a Curve 8520 will on average cost £60; according to one participant in the August riots this price can drop to as low as £40.

The low price of BBM was one draw to the predominantly young rioters who used the handsets for everyday communication anyway – but the network came with other advantages too.

"BBM jumped in with this quick, free service when network providers were still charging 10p per text message; the only drawback was the service was exclusive to BlackBerry handsets, and so of course everyone had to get one," explains the social media consultant Tara Jane Seton.

Many young people did: Ofcom statistics confirm BlackBerry was the favoured smartphone of teenagers, cornering 37% of the youth market (44% for teenage girls), compared with just 24% across all age groups.

The same report shows how important instant messaging is for the group: 72% of teenagers use smartphones for instant messaging – often never even touching web services or other social networks.

"I don't know about Twitter and Facebook, neither do I have an account with them," says a former supermarket worker who took part in looting a branch of Carphone Warehouse. "All I know is that the BlackBerry was enough to give me enough information, or tell me at the time, of what was going on, where to stay wary of and what sort of things were targeted."

The pattern of BBM usage appears consistent across the England riots, although London seems to have had the highest penetration. BBM was used by some rioters interviewed in all the towns covered by the research project, but its use was higher in London.

Anecdotal evidence suggests this is partly due to a lower average age among interviewees in London, but there are suggestions that BlackBerry's popularity among young black people, through the urban music scene, could also explain the trend. BlackBerry has been an urban icon since 2008, particularly on the underground funky house scene, where a series of songs have been produced about the handset – including one from the veteran garage emcee Maxwell D, BB Hype.

Maxwell D, a founding emcee of the pioneer garage crew Pay as You Go, said: "Every poor youth in the ghetto has a BlackBerry. It was just a common thing: you buy a BlackBerry and you're on a BlackBerry hype [following the trend]. It became fashionable; everybody had to have it … When I go to a dance I ask who has a BlackBerry and everyone will just take out their phone."

He added: "The main thing about the phone that everybody was gassed [excited] about was BBM – that was the main feature. It's just become the normal way to communicate … Everyone has BlackBerry for BBM period – BlackBerry is not a status phone; it is the cheapest way to communicate. It's the best social networking phone out there.''

Broadcasting on BBM was particularly effective in organising people on the streets and identifying targets with – as one rioter put it – "military precision". The "broadcast" feature allows users to instantly send the same piece of information to all their contacts, sometimes running into the hundreds.

On the morning of Monday 8 August – the day of the most intense rioting in the capital – many Londoners awoke to find BBM messages providing a roadmap for the impending disorder. Hackney was scheduled to begin at 5pm; Peckham, 6pm; Clapham, 9pm. As the night progressed, there were live updates, many of which encouraged people to head to Croydon and Ealing, which suffered the worst disturbances.

Some rioters even set up riot supply stalls using BBM broadcasts, according to one participant: "I got a broadcast from Birmingham: 'Ah, who wants to buy rioting kits?'" he said. "Gloves, masks, petrol bombs: £5. I was like: 'wow'."

BBM broadcasts were also used by Tottenham residents to share information about the circumstances surrounding the death of Mark Duggan, the event that sparked the initial riots in the area that eventually spread across the nation.

These broadcasts detailed mistrust in the police and the IPCC over Duggan's death.

"At first people were sending around broadcasts about Mark Duggan, 'cos I knew a couple of people that knew Mark Duggan, so they were sending broadcasts saying 'he was a good person', 'he's innocent'," said one person who took part in Saturday's protest.

"After a couple of days into the riots, people were sending messages saying, basically saying 'fuck the police', 'get your bandanas, meet up at a certain particular point, tube station, or whatever, at a particular time, and we'll go and riot in a certain area that hasn't been touched yet.'"

One real advantage of the BBM network for rioters – and also for Arab spring activists in the Middle East – is the network's security.

Unlike Twitter, where messages are usually public, and Facebook – whose privacy settings are not used properly by many users and which for technical reasons is easier for authorities to access at a later date – BBMs are private to recipients and encrypted during transmission, a fact of which many rioters were aware.

"A friend explained to me that they're closed servers and no police or anyone can monitor them," said one 23-year-old from Newham. "Because it's not open, it's not a public server so no one can know, they can't track them; like if you put it on Facebook anyone can see that, the police can see that and stop it straight away." Not all rioters thought this way, however; some threw their BlackBerrys away after the riots for fear of being incriminated.

The presence of encrypted, hard-to-track but easy-to-use communication devices in the hands of thousands of young people prone to riot was the result of a series of unintended consequences, according to one legal expert.

"BBM's security measures weren't designed to circumvent the authorities – it's the result of two unintended effects. BlackBerry's original key market was not teenagers, it was business users, for whom security is crucial as they transmit confidential information," said Mike Conradi, a partner at DLA Piper.

"Since then, young people have taken to it in droves as it is cheaper and has more functionality than texting. These rioters weren't using BBM because they thought it was secure, they were using is because it's what they use every day."

Conradi also suggested authorities and BlackBerry manufacturer Research in Motion (RIM) alike might find the current situation – unintentional or otherwise – difficult to alter, owing to the legal protections all BBM users are entitled to.

"It's legally questionable whether RIM could take any action to monitor BBM messages," he said. "It would be unlawful for RIM to identify users sending such material without appropriate authorisation from police or the courts, as this would involve searching users' messages. So, oddly, RIM could face more legal issues if it tried to take action than if it does not."

Everyone in edmonton enfield wood green everywhere in north link up at enfield town station at 4 o clock sharp!!!! Start leaving ur yards n linking up with your niggas. Fuck da feds, bring your ballys and your bags trollys, cars vans, hammers the lot!!

Keep sending this around to bare man, make sure no snitch boys get dis!!!

What ever ends your from put your ballys on link up and cause havoc, just rob everything. Police can't stop it. Dead the fires though!!

Just got the word that boys are making way to #croydon, make it happen boys! Burn the place to the ground #Lewisham #Hackney #londonriots

H.U.D riot tonight kingsgate at 12 . Be there ... SPREAD THE WORD|||

The free, secure BBM service was an easy way to share information on where riots were and what police were doing