While developing web applications, I keep a close eye on performance issues, particularly in database queries. In my latest project, I’ve been using Knex.js, a SQL query builder for Node.js.

I developed a method of logging the queries executed by Knex.js as well as the execution times for each query. This method can be applied to nearly any application that uses Knex.js, and it uses a few features of Knex.js that I didn’t notice immediately, so I thought I’d share this small but useful bit of code.



In Knex.js, you can use to interface with different events regarding your queries. To capture the execution time of a query, I used the “query” event, which fires when a query is called, and the “query-response” event, which fires after the database responds successfully.

By using these event hooks, I’m able to get information about the queries the server is executing, such as the unique identifier of the query as shown below:

Having access to these two events, I’m able to record the start and end time for each query. To time the queries, I used a library called performance-now which can get fairly accurate results within a few milliseconds. Also, since Knex.js will execute queries asynchronously, I recorded the order of when the queries are sent to the database. I find it helpful to see the queries in the order in which they are called instead of when they respond.

Now that I’ve recorded the times of my queries, I can print them to the console. Logging the queries that Knex.js executes is pretty straightforward:

However, I prefer to see queries printed out in the order I called them, rather than when the database responds with the results. This makes debugging database calls easier since I can usually predict the order the server should be calling the queries rather than when the responses should come back. To do this, I updated my “query-response” event hook to this:

Again, the code for these two print functions is fairly straightforward:

Now, whenever I run a query, I should see the execution time of each query in my console like this:|||

I developed a method of logging the queries executed by Knex.js and the execution times for each query. It can be applied to nearly any app that uses Knex.