AngularSpree Plug and play frontend application for SPREE E-Commerce API built with using Angular2, Redux, Observables & ImmutableJs.

AngularSpree is an open source Angular(2.x+) front-end application for Spree Commerce. It's free and always will be.

Go ahead use it the way you want to or let us know at if you need any help with this project.

We have been working with Spree for very long time, making products for a lot of clients. There was one pattern we noticed in what the clients always asked for. They were comfortable using spree for the backend API but not for the front-end. These requests have been very consistent with so many awesome front-end framework around.

When Angular team realeased the beta version in March last year we knew that angular was going to be a big player soon. We decided to give it a try. Hence, AngularSpree was born as a front-end framework for the most awesome backend api for E-Commerce out there.

Currently, this is a fairly basic vesion of the application. We are calling it a pre-alpha release.

There is a long way to go... keep an eye on this project here on github.

Based on this application and other applications we have built in past we are working on a full blown Angular 2 fundamentals course on udemy. Throughout this course you'll learn how to build yatrum from ground up.

Subscribe to this course here

We've built AngularSpree keeping scaling in mind leveraging the best technologies out there.

As of now, the application has 7 major modules, , , , , , , .

We are working on documentation and we can share that once we are looking at a more stable release.

We try to make sure that we keep the repository upto date with the angular release every weekend.

On this page user can filter products as per category. Change layout of the products(cozy, comfortable) etc.

Cart page displays all the line items or items in the cart which the user has added while browsing the website.

Display's the detailed product information of a particular product.

We are using Yarn as a package manager in this project though you can also use if you like to.

**Start the API for this project to work successfully.

We have a very thin and custom repo which is the backend for this project. Clone it and run the server. We have updated the readme on how to setup the backend API project.

There are many different ways to contribute to AngularSpree's development, just find the one that best fits with your skills. Examples of contributions we would love to receive include:

Big features are also welcome but if you want to see your contributions included in AngularSpree's codebase we strongly recommend you start by initiating a chat on our slack channel.

Run for a dev server. Navigate to . The app will automatically reload if you change any of the source files.

Run to build in production with service worker pre-cache and then to serve.

Run to build the project. The build artifacts will be stored in the directory. Use the for a production build.

We are very proud of our work.

We love some frameworks too:-

If you want to hire us for a project, please contact us on .|||

angularspree - Angular 2.x+ Open source e-commerce front-end for Spreecommerce, Docs available