Not a lot of people know about Ray Dalio, and he prefers it that way.

Considered one of the “100 most influential people in the world” by Time magazine, Dalio is the founder of Bridgewater Associates, the largest hedge fund in the world, with $122 billion under management.

But whatever image you have of Dalio, you are probably wrong.

Most of us have no clue what truly successful people are like. That’s something Dalio learned when he first started his hedge fund.

Here’s an excerpt from Principles, a brilliant (and freely available) manifesto of Dalio’s rules for life and business:

Instead, Dalio noticed that truly successful people have an interesting sort of humility:

Take any self-made billionaire — or high achiever in any field — and you’ll find a large number of these “failure-loving” people.

For example, here’s a quote from another billionaire — Warren Buffett’s business partner, Charlie Munger:

Mistakes are the currency of success.

Still not convinced? Here’s an excerpt from a third billionaire, George Soros. Many consider him the greatest trader of all time:

Okay, so (a) recognizing mistakes and (b) learning from them may be the most important thing for success. But with the recent popularity of books like Dweck’s Mindset, you probably already knew that.

The hard part is doing.

There’s a reason so many of us give up in the face of failure — it feels terrible.

Dalio has a name for this feeling:

Most people fail a few times, get hurt and say, “I’m not disciplined enough for this. It hurts. I can’t do it.”

That can’t be helped. Fear of pain is natural, after all:

Associating pain with long-term payoffs is not natural, but it can be learned. What’s more, if done well, the pain actually starts to feel good.

The key to achieving this state is a gradual pushing of your boundaries:

Here’s what that looks like more visually:

When we see people doing amazing things — lifting a thousand pounds, making a million dollars in a single trade, walking on tightropes — we tend to forget that they didn’t start that way.

Like the rest of us, they started small.

For the first twenty years of my life, things were pretty terrible. No friends, no hobbies, no goals. But since I started looking at my flaws and challenging myself — talking to people that scared me, traveling, pushing myself out of comfort zones — each year has been better than the last.

Now, there’s one last gem buried in Dalio’s quote:

Dalio’s sees his work and life as one, high-stakes game…

As a kid, I played games all day as an escape from reality. Until recently, I never considered that all those hours might’ve been useful.

Here’s Dalio on the wonders of gamification:

In college, I hardly went to class. Instead, I would wake up a 9 or 10 in the morning and play games well past midnight. The only breaks I took were to scavenge the fridge or use the toilet.

I wouldn’t recommend that life to anyone. But not once did those countless hours feel anything like “work.”

Gamification is not about looking down on life. It’s about reframing life — and failure — in a way that makes it fun. And if it’s fun, you can do it forever.

The challenges of life become thrilling:

If you look at serious gamers, you’ll notice that — sooner or later — simple games no longer satisfy them. They need more complexity, more difficulty, more reality.

What game is more complex, more difficult and more real than, well, real life itself?

When I realized that, I didn’t need games anymore.|||

Considered one of the “100 most influential people in the world” by Time magazine, Dalio is the founder of Bridgewater Associates, the largest hedge fund in the world, with $122 billion under…