Laravel GitScrum is a free application developed in Laravel 5.4. The aim is help the developer teams to use Git and Scrum on task management of the day-to-day.

Available in English, Chinese, Russian, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, French, Indonesian and Hungarian.

GitScrum can be integrated with Github or Gitlab.

Product Backlog contains the Product Owner's assessment of business value User Story is a description consisting of one or more sentences in the everyday or business language that captures what a user does or needs to do as part of his or her job function. Features: Acceptance criteria, prioritization using MoSCoW, definition of done checklist, pie chart, assign labels, team members, activities, comments and issues. Sprint Backlog is the property of the development team and all included estimates are provided by development team. Often an accompanying sprint planning is the board used to see and change state of the issues. Features: Sprint planning using Kanban board, burndown chart, definition done checklist, effort, attachments, activities, comments and issues. Issue is added in user story to one sprint backlog, or directly in sprint backlog. Generally, each issue should be small enough to be easily completed within a single day. Features: Progress state (e.g. to do, in progress, done or archived), issue type (e.g. Improvement, Support Request, Feedback, Customer Problem, UX, Infrastructure, Testing Task, etc...), definition of done checklist, assign labels, effort, attachments, comments, activities, team members.

The requirements to Laravel GitScrum application is:

Important: If you have not yet installed composer: Installation - Linux / Unix / OSX

Important: If you have not the .env file in root folder, you must copy or rename the .env.example to .env

Can you help us translate a few phrases into different languages? See: https://github.com/renatomarinho/laravel-gitscrum/tree/feature/language-pack/resources/lang

Remember: Create the database for GitScrum before run artisan command.

You must create a new Github App, visit GitHub's New OAuth Application page, fill out the form, and grab your Client ID and Secret.

You must create a new Gitlab App, visit Gitlab new application, fill out the form, and grab your Application ID and Secret.

The github issue tracker is only for bug reports and feature requests. Anything else, such as questions for help in using the Laravel Gitscrum, should be posted in StackOverflow under tag .

Contributions are always welcome! https://github.com/renatomarinho/laravel-gitscrum/graphs/contributors

Laravel GitScrum is licensed under the MIT license.

Support us with a monthly donation and help us continue our activities. [Become a backer]

Become a sponsor and get your logo on our README on Github with a link to your site. [Become a sponsor]|||

laravel-gitscrum - Laravel GitScrum is a free application to task management of the day-to-day. Git + Scrum = Team More Productive