As the last question of the survey we asked participants: "What is the most important thing the Ember project can do today?" Using text similarity analysis, we identified the most commonly mentioned topics. Here they are with a selected quote.

Documentation is getting better, but I would love to see more detailed documentation of framework methods and properties and an easier way to know what the core team is currently working or focusing on... I would also love to understand more about broccoli, which continues to be a confusing part of the cli that I don't quite understand how to extend.

I'd like to see more stability/maturity from Ember Data. We've been able to get our API/back-end team to (sometimes reluctantly) adhere to JSON-API, but there are some features that we'd like a more complete answer for: multiple record updates/creates in one transaction, optimistic concurrency control (using ETag headers), and relationship updating/rollback on errors.

Provide more updates on the future direction of the project, especially when it comes to routable components and how they will replace controllers.

Cut down Ember's size, allow code splitting, improve performance and keep on stealing good ideas from other frameworks.

Communication / marketing. Ember is a great framework, but it's sometimes difficult to show that greatness to non-Ember devs, or to business folks making decisions.

In general I think that reducing the size and boot-up time of the application hasn't gotten enough attention. Tree-shaking and lazy code evaluation are important features to have these days, especially for larger applications. Also, bundling everything in one minified file maybe doesn't make as much sense anymore in an HTTP2 age.

We were curious how important these topics were to participants with different amounts of experience. The following chart shows how experienced with Ember developers mentioning each topic are:

Performance was a common theme regardless of experience with Ember. Documentation and guide improvement requests were more common from developers with less Ember experience while requests for tree shaking, routable components and mobile support were more prevalent among experienced Ember developers.|||

