Host your code online in as many public and private repositories as you want. Free for 5 users.

building software, you often find yourself navigating to different tools, littering your browser with tabs just to stay on top of the information you need. It happens so frequently that you’re likely not even hese unnecessary actions all start to add up, sapping your productivity and focus.

Wouldn’t it make more sense to bring the relevant information you need into context so that you don’t have to navigate away from your work? That’s why we’ve added JIRA issue details within Bitbucket Cloud, so you never need to navigate away from Bitbucket to get context on an issue.

Click on a JIRA issue key link from within Bitbucket and see the of the issue.

This makes it easier for you and your team to stay coordinated between code and related JIRA issues. Anywhere you can add issue key links, such as commit messages, comments, pull requests, and branches, you can now see JIRA issue details, in context. Only Bitbucket allows you to have your JIRA information at your fingertips – no other code repository tool can provide this functionality.

If you need to make edits or view further information you can easily click on the View Issue in JIRA link at the bottom.

Over the next several months, we’re adding more functionality so you never have to leave Bitbucket, further speeding your development cycle.

If you’re already using issue keys in your commit messages today, simply click on the links to enjoy visibility on JIRA issues. If you’re not using issue keys in Bitbucket, try adding one to your next commit message. Type out an issue key that exists in one of your JIRA projects, for example, “TEST-123” and voilà, you should now be able to click on the issue keys to view it’s details. Read more about using issue keys in Bitbucket here.

JIRA Software is the preferred issue tracker of over 350,000 Bitbucket teams. We did an extensive study amongst our users and found teams who have JIRA Software and Bitbucket integrated release 14% more often and close 23% more issues (when compared to teams using just one of those products).

Have more specific questions about this post? Reach out to us on Twitter to get the information you need.|||

