--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Mar. 28, 2017-- (Nasdaq:AMZN) today announced that it has reached an agreement to acquire SOUQ.com, an e-commerce leader in the . Joining the family will enable SOUQ.com to continue growing while working with to bring even more products and offerings to customers worldwide.

" and SOUQ.com share the same DNA – we’re both driven by customers, invention, and long-term thinking,” said , Amazon Senior Vice President, International Consumer. "SOUQ.com pioneered e-commerce in the , creating a great shopping experience for their customers. We're looking forward to both learning from and supporting them with technology and global resources. And together, we’ll work hard to provide the best possible service for millions of customers in the ."

"We are guided by many of the same principles as , and this acquisition is a critical next step in growing our e-commerce presence on behalf of customers across the region," said SOUQ.com CEO and Co-Founder . "By becoming part of the family, we'll be able to vastly expand our delivery capabilities and customer selection much faster, as well as continue great track record of empowering sellers."

Subject to closing conditions, the acquisition is expected to close in 2017.

is guided by four principles: customer obsession rather than competitor focus, passion for invention, commitment to operational excellence, and long-term thinking. Customer reviews, 1-Click shopping, personalized recommendations, Prime, Fulfillment by , AWS, , Kindle, Fire tablets, Fire TV, Amazon Echo, and Alexa are some of the products and services pioneered by . For more information, visit www.amazon.com/about.

SOUQ.com is the largest online retail and marketplace platform in the Arab world, featuring more than 8.4 million products across 31 categories such as consumer electronics, fashion, health and beauty, household goods, and baby. Today, SOUQ.com attracts over 45 million visits per month, with localized operations in the KSA, and .

SOUQ.com offers a convenient and safe online shopping experience with secure online payments, option to pay cash on delivery and free returns. For more information, visit www.Souq.com.|||

