Want to write styles in JavaScript, but also want Sass-style helper functions and mixins? Need a consistent color palette throughout your app? is for you!

modules are meant to be used as stand-alone imports. You should avoid importing the entire library directly:

When modules are imported properly, tree shaking in webpack 2 and Rollup can be leveraged to reduce your bundle size.

See the full documentation at polished.js.org!

You can optionally also use to compile the static function calls out and remove the (already tiny) runtime performance impact of using .

In the documentation you will see examples using object spread properties. ( ) To enable this syntax in your project add the plugin (or the preset to enable all stage three features) to your Babel configuration.

When writing styles in JavaScript, many people need Sass-style helper functions to be productive. brings them to you in a nice, lightweight package tailor-made for styles in JavaScript.

The main difference with Sass is that it's written in a functional style and all color functions are curried. This means you can compose them together into your own reusable helpers with a function of your choice:

First of all, we didn't find another library that had everything we needed, and we don't care about installing a dozen packages separately.

Specifically most other packages that provide color functions do so in an object-oriented style, often with a fluent API that's very different from the Sass-style helpers. This means people that aren't very familiar with JavaScript might shy away from using them.

was made as a standard library for everybody, no matter if they know JS inside out or not.

polished is compatible with any library that accepts styles as JS objects. This includes, but is by far not limited to, , radium, aphrodite, glamor, glamorous, jss and many more!

No matter if you're using inline styles or CSS-in-JS, polished is for you.

Copyright © 2016 Maximilian Stoiber. Licensed under the MIT License, see LICENSE.md for more information!|||

polished - A lightweight toolset for writing styles in JavaScript ✨