Troubled electric-car startup Faraday Future has ended talks with Vallejo about building an auto factory on the former Mare Island Naval Shipyard, city officials reported Friday.

The company will instead focus on completing its first factory in North Las Vegas, officials said. Work on the $1 billion factory came to a halt in November amid reports that privately held Faraday was facing a cash crunch.

The company — which aims to challenge Tesla with its own high-performance electric car — said Friday that it remains interested in the 157-acre Mare Island site and may restart negotiations in the future.

Faraday “would like to thank the city and its officials for their generosity and professionalism throughout this process, and looks forward to exploring future opportunities with the city,” the company said in a press release.

The Los Angeles company does not release financial information. But questions about its viability have been swirling since last fall.

Faraday’s main financial backer is Chinese billionaire Jia Yueting, CEO of technology conglomerate LeEco, which has its own electric car division. But in a letter to LeEco employees last fall, he acknowledged that the company had lost focus and grown too fast. Nevada’s state treasurer told the China Daily newspaper that Jia had run out of money.

LeEco declined to comment for this story. .

Faraday reported last month that it is soliciting bids from construction companies to carry out the next phase of construction in North Las Vegas.

“Faraday Future wants to reinforce that our commitment to the state of Nevada and our $1 billion investment in the region over the next few years has never changed,” the company said in a Feb. 15 press release. It reported spending $120 million so far, with grading on the site now complete.

Faraday unveiled its first production car, the FF 91, at the CES show in January and plans to begin production in 2018.|||

Troubled electric-car startup Faraday Future has ended talks with Vallejo about building an auto factory on the former Mare Island Naval Shipyard, city officials reported Friday.  The company — which aims to challenge Tesla with its own high-performance electric car — said Friday that it remains interested in the 157-acre Mare Island site and may restart negotiations in the future.  Faraday “would like to thank the city and its officials for their generosity and professionalism throughout this process, and looks forward to exploring future opportunities with the city,” the company said in a press release.  Faraday’s main financial backer is Chinese billionaire Jia Yueting, CEO of technology conglomerate LeEco, which has its own electric car division.  “Faraday Future wants to reinforce that our commitment to the state of Nevada and our $1 billion investment in the region over the next few years has never changed,” the company said in a Feb. 15 press release.