Australia is home to the only surviving 1914 Delage Type-S grand prix car in the world, and thanks to a world-first feat of technology this much-loved centurion is still on the road.

In 2014, when the engine block cracked and water pumped out of the exhaust system, the Delage ground to a halt and was consigned to a mechanic's workshop in Castlemaine, 130 kilometres north-east of Melbourne.

With no replacement parts or original drawings to go by, and with few people having the traditional manufacturing skills, pre-war motorcar engineer Grant Cowie looked for alternative ways of rebuilding the complicated 16-valve engine.

"I knew that to use the traditional method, which involves a wooden pattern, would be prohibitively expensive and with such a complicated casting it was possible it would take several attempts to get it correct," Mr Cowie said.

He decided that using digital technology to clone the original block would be the most accurate, efficient and non-destructive method to get the car back up and running.

The trouble was, a repair this complex had never been attempted before.

Using powerful lasers, the engine block was scanned inside and out, saving thousands of hours of pattern making, with months of work done in a few days.

The scan data was then used to digitally repair the cracked engine on a computer before a sand mould was created using a 3D printer.

A local iron foundry cast the engine using the 3D-printed mould, before it was finished with traditional manual machining.

After the engine was installed, there was an enormous sense of relief when the Delage turned over successfully.

"It's one thing to finish machining it, then you've got to put it all together," Mr Cowie said.

While many modern car parts are 3D printed, project manager Philip Guilfoyle said a repair of this scale was unique.

"To my understanding this hasn't been done before in car restoration in the world," he said.

Car owner Stuart Murdoch was determined that any repairs done remained true to the original, so when this unique restoration technique was suggested to him he responded: "Boldness, be my friend."

"I had faith in them and I wasn't disappointed," he said.

And now that the 103-year-old car is back up and running, Mr Murdoch is a very satisfied customer.

"It is a considerable achievement for all those involved and, might I say, quite an achievement for Australian engineering," he said.

Motoring historian Douglas Blain, meanwhile, marvelled at the fact that this one priceless S-Type still remains.

And Mr Guilfoyle thinks the digital repair technique may revolutionise restoration car repairs as mechanics like Mr Cowie become less dependent on dwindling car parts and fading skills.|||

Australia is home to the only surviving 1914 Delage Type-S grand prix car in the world, and thanks to a world-first feat of technology this centurion is still on the road.