What’s business all about? It can’t just be about making money right? Business is about an idea. The baker who wants to show off his bread, the businessman who has found the gap, the educator who wants to teach. It all begins with the initial idea.

We can go right back to the famous golden arches of McDonalds for a good example – the people behind one of the biggest businesses in the world started out with a simple idea – to bring food to people anywhere as speedily as possible. Mark Zuckerberg’s FaceBook was built on the idea of having stupid fun at college until it morphed. Everything big starts with a tiny idea. The idea is so very important in business. You see, the idea is how you get people to believe in your business. Customers need to believe in products so they can part with their hard earned money to purchase it. They need to believe in it so they can keep coming back and buying and buying.

The idea is also the pitch – which again, is the exact same principle of getting people to believe in your product. The pitch requires you to ask investors to believe in your product so they can part with their hard earned money so that the product can be made and eventually get customers to part with their money. The cycle is almost the same, but pitches are harder – how do you get people to part with money on the basis of an idea? They are paying for imagination! The answer? A prototype product.

A prototype isn’t just embellishment of an idea – it is the fully physical embodiment of an idea. It is a dream realized. It is much easier to ask investors to back something that exists, rather than nothing at all (which is what an idea is, in real life). If your idea is one of a kind, then great – you’ve got a headstart! However, every idea could do with help and prototype is how things can be taken into your own hands.

A prototype must be made and while it can be quite rudimental, making it look, and function, as close to the idea as possible is key. If your prototype is a dummy, that’s good – but imagine if it was the fully fledged thing? Those are the two paths you can take here and both will require all the creativity you can muster.



 How We Use Prototyping, And How It Made Us More Efficient

Prototypes have been made from socks and cardboard or out of micro fibre laser printed plastic – both have their clear benefits… A prototype just has to be something real. You can make a prototype at home and make a good one with the aid of a 3D printer, but for higher concepts you might need help from actual designers, read LaserLight.com to see how laser drilling can help bring your ideas to reality with precision. A professional touch could make the difference in the pitch!

If you’ve got an idea – it’s worth bringing it to reality with the aid of true design and a prototype, otherwise it might just stay in your head.|||

What's business all about? It can't just be about making money right? Business is about an idea. The baker who wants to show off his bread, the businessman