I have experienced quite a bit of change in my career, having worked full time for more than 10 companies and consulted at over a dozen. When I lost faith in a company, business model, leadership, or my boss; I would try to change things. This meant having the courage to speak up, step up, and be the catalyst for change.

Catalyst

1. a person or thing that precipitates an event

The ordinary hero hiding in each of us is often the most powerful catalyst for change.

 — Tate Taylor

The first startup I was at, Shutterstock, experienced almost a doubling of employees every year for 5 years. I was managing the new business teams, launching or relaunching 6 web properties in 5 years. These were the startups within the startup. We understood, and mostly embraced the Satir Change Model in a business context. Constant change and experimentation was a requirement. We embraced the chaos required to level up.

The original core product was the big revenue generator. Over time they shifted from being risk aware to risk averse. They stopped taking big swings that are a requirement to maintain a high percentage rate of growth. Core revenue was still growing, but at a declining rate. They stopped being courageous.

I wanted the core teams to learn from the successes and failures of the new business teams. They could learn from the risks we took. My attempts to advise and share our wisdom were largely ignored. While I had the courage to speak up, I had yet to earn their trust and respect. Without trust, they had no reason to put their faith in me, or to look to me for hope. Trust is required for both faith and hope.

I made a decision to step up and start volunteering for almost anything, regardless of my qualifications and comfort level. If no one else volunteered, I would, no matter the task or project. I was the backup for running various department meetings. I managed social events (I was very shy growing up). I would interview candidates at a moments notice. I took the lead on projects that were far outside my comfort zone and expertise.

My ability to influence and facilitate change outside my teams increased steadily. People who I didn’t work with directly would come to me for advice. We worked together to put the company on a better trajectory, to give everyone hope.

Years later a core developer, whom I hold in high regard, shared his impression of me. Initially he thought of me as “just a PHP developer” who wouldn’t have much impact at the company. Eventually he considered me to be one of the pillars of the company. All because I had the courage to step up.

The next startup I was at was not succeeding, though it wasn’t failing either. Like many startups do, they were running out of money. The trajectory we were on didn’t seem to be the path to success. I had lost faith in leadership and the direction we were heading. I still had faith in our business model and my teams. There was hope.

The current status quo was giving us small “victories”. These small victories were giving us false hope. They were too small to achieve real success. It was our own version of “fake news”. Morale was declining and frustration increasing. People were losing faith. They needed something to give them hope.

A few of us set out to change how we were planning and building things, how we were structured, how we communicated. We asked questions, challenged ideas, pressed for more information, proposed changes, created roadmaps and restructured teams. It was a lot to ask all at once. To get through the chaos of change would require faith, hope and someone with the courage to be the catalyst. This was the time to quit, to give up, to leave.

Over the course of a few months, others put their faith in the few of us that were facilitating change. We worked long hours and over the weekends. Not because it was required, but because we had hope. We believed we were correcting our trajectory so the company could reach it’s full potential. We started to show that we could move faster and deliver a higher quality product. We started turning the ship around.

We did not succeed in accomplishing what we set out to do. There was a restructuring and some of us were let go. We failed, but we didn’t fail to have an impact. We all believe we are better for the courageous experience. Many of the things we started are still in place, and we believe the company has higher potential now. Those still there continue to find hope in the new status quo.

Remember that guy from the deli? He is considering getting involved in politics. Not in our government, in the government of his birth country. Politics is something he has few qualifications for, and is far outside his comfort zone. Why not go back and be the bearer of hope for others there? I admire his courage. It’s people like him that make a country great, who gives us hope. I have faith that he can become a pillar of society if he so chooses. I hope he chooses to stay and help us achieve a new status quo.

People do not put their faith in the bystanders, the watchers, the complacent. They put their faith in the courageous, the catalysts, those who embrace change to constantly evolve and grow. In return, the courageous are the ones who give others hope. The courageous are the ones who have the highest potential to succeed. That day at the deli, I realized this was the secret to my success. I was never the best or smartest person in the room, just the most courageous.

Successful careers are based on inspiration, motivation and execution. Faith, Hope, and Courage. Have faith in what inspires you, let hope motivate you, and always have the courage to be executing.

Nemmi’s Deli & Pizza

Satir Change Model

Ask What, Why, and How to gain Purpose and Perspective|||

My father always told me to never criticize unless you know you can do better. I’ve tried to live by those wise words. Throughout my career I didn’t consider myself “better” than my co-workers. I was…