Speaking to middle school students at an event encouraging young women to pursue STEM education, Trump said she and her 5-year-old daughter will take a coding class together this summer.

"As a mom, I am trying to do my part, as well. My daughter, Arabella, and I are enrolling in a coding class this summer," Trump said at Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum. "We're excited to learn this incredibly important new language together. Coding truly is the language of the future. "

The first daughter made her first formal on-camera remarks since her father took office in a museum theater ahead of a screening of "Hidden Figures," the 2016 Oscar-nominated film that tells the story of three African-American women at NASA that helped launch the first astronauts into orbit.

Trump touted her father's commitment to the space program, expanding NASA's space exploration program and adding Mars as a key objective. She encouraged the young women to pursue careers in STEM fields, asking those in the audience to raise their hands if they were interested science, technology, engineering or math. "Your response fills me with incredible hope. Today's statistics, though, not so much. Women make up 48% of the workforce but only 24% of stem professionals," she said. "I dare you to beat these statistics." On the campaign trail and at her namesake apparel and accessories brand, Trump made women and girls' empowerment a signature issue. She's participated in round table discussions on the topic at the White House and helped establish the United States Canada Council for the Advancement of Women Business Leaders and Female Entrepreneurs last month, along with her father and Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau. "Women's participation in STEM, where so many of the jobs of the future will come from, is critical in the fight for wage equality and for the empowerment of women in the economy," she told the students Tuesday. President-elect Donald Trump has been in the spotlight for years. From developing real estate and producing and starring in TV shows, he became a celebrity long before winning the White House. Trump at age 4. He was born in 1946 to Fred and Mary Trump in New York City. His father was a real estate developer. Trump, left, in a family photo. He was the second-youngest of five children. Trump, center, stands at attention during his senior year at the New York Military Academy in 1964. Trump, center, wears a baseball uniform at the New York Military Academy in 1964. After he graduated from the boarding school, he went to college. He started at Fordham University before transferring and later graduating from the Wharton School, the University of Pennsylvania's business school. Trump stands with Alfred Eisenpreis, New York's economic development administrator, in 1976 while they look at a sketch of a new 1,400-room renovation project of the Commodore Hotel. After graduating college in 1968, Trump worked with his father on developments in Queens and Brooklyn before purchasing or building multiple properties in New York and Atlantic City, New Jersey. Those properties included Trump Tower in New York and Trump Plaza and multiple casinos in Atlantic City. Trump attends an event to mark the start of construction of the New York Convention Center in 1979. Trump wears a hard hat at the Trump Tower construction site in New York in 1980. Trump was married to Ivana Zelnicek Trump from 1977 to 1990, when they divorced. They had three children together: Donald Jr., Ivanka and Eric. Trump uses his personal helicopter to get around New York in 1987. Trump stands in the atrium of the Trump Tower. Trump attends the opening of his new Atlantic City casino, the Taj Mahal, in 1989. Trump signs his second book, "Trump: Surviving at the Top," in 1990. Trump has published at least 16 other books, including "The Art of the Deal" and "The America We Deserve." Trump and singer Michael Jackson pose for a photo before traveling to visit Ryan White, a young child with AIDS, in 1990. Trump dips his second wife, Marla Maples, after the couple married in a private ceremony in New York in December 1993. The couple divorced in 1999 and had one daughter together, Tiffany. Trump putts a golf ball in his New York office in 1998. An advertisement for the television show "The Apprentice" hangs at Trump Tower in 2004. The show launched in January of that year. In January 2008, the show returned as "Celebrity Apprentice." A 12-inch talking Trump doll is on display at a toy store in New York in September 2004. Trump attends a news conference in 2005 that announced the establishment of Trump University. From 2005 until it closed in 2010, Trump University had about 10,000 people sign up for a program that promised success in real estate. Three separate lawsuits -- two class-action suits filed in California and one filed by New York's attorney general -- argued that the program was mired in fraud and deception. Trump's camp rejected the suits' claims as "baseless." And Trump has charged that the New York case against him is politically motivated. Trump attends the U.S. Open tennis tournament with his third wife, Melania Knauss-Trump, and their son, Barron, in 2006. Trump and Knauss married in 2005. Trump wrestles with "Stone Cold" Steve Austin at WrestleMania in 2007. Trump has close ties with the WWE and its CEO, Vince McMahon. For "The Apprentice," Trump was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in January 2007. Trump appears on the set of "The Celebrity Apprentice" with two of his children -- Donald Jr. and Ivanka -- in 2009. Trump poses with Miss Universe contestants in 2011. Trump had been executive producer of the Miss Universe, Miss USA and Miss Teen USA pageants since 1996. In 2012, Trump announces his endorsement of Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney. Trump speaks in Sarasota, Florida, after accepting the Statesman of the Year Award at the Sarasota GOP dinner in August 2012. It was shortly before the Republican National Convention in nearby Tampa. Trump appears on stage with singer Nick Jonas and television personality Giuliana Rancic during the 2013 Miss USA pageant. In June 2015, during a speech from Trump Tower, Trump announced that he was running for President. He said he would give up "The Apprentice" to run. Trump -- flanked by U.S. Sens. Marco Rubio, left, and Ted Cruz -- speaks during a CNN debate in Miami on March 10. Trump dominated the GOP primaries and emerged as the presumptive nominee in May. The Trump family poses for a photo in New York in April. Trump speaks during a campaign event in Evansville, Indiana, on April 28. After Trump won the Indiana primary, his last two competitors dropped out of the GOP race. Trump delivers a speech at the Republican National Convention in July, accepting the party's nomination for President. "I have had a truly great life in business," he said. "But now, my sole and exclusive mission is to go to work for our country -- to go to work for you. It's time to deliver a victory for the American people." Trump faces Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton in the first presidential debate, which took place in Hempstead, New York, in September. Trump apologizes in a video, posted to his Twitter account in October, for vulgar and sexually aggressive remarks he made a decade ago regarding women. "I said it, I was wrong and I apologize," Trump said, referring to lewd comments he made during a previously unaired taping of "Access Hollywood." Multiple Republican leaders rescinded their endorsements of Trump after the footage was released. Trump walks on stage with his family after he was declared the election winner on November 9. "Ours was not a campaign, but rather, an incredible and great movement," he told his supporters in New York. Trump is joined by his family as he is sworn in as President on January 20. She encouraged the young men in the audience to do their part, as well. "I'm going to give you a call to action. I'm going to urge you to empower your female classmates and support them along the way," she said. Trump was joined at the event by Education Secretary Betsy DeVos. Before the screening, the two toured exhibits with some of the female students. "American innovations have transformed the world. From the light bulb to the smartphone, America leads by example, and you can continue to move the needle in favor of greater innovation. You are the next generation of innovation. You are the future and the future is in your very capable hands," Trump said. Trump spoke alongside DeVos, as well as representatives from the Air and Space Museum and NASA Astronaut Kay Hire. Her father's proposed 2018 budget eliminates NASA's $115 million Office of Education. Per the budget , the elimination will "(result) in a more focused education effort through NASA's Science Mission Directorate." "I think you nailed it," @IvankaTrump tells a student after completing a coding activity at @airandspace pic.twitter.com/mA5lmQGLIF — Betsy Klein (@betsy_klein) March 28, 2017 As the special guests left the theater, the students were tasked with a coding activity. Trump jumped in, watching as one of the students slid zeroes and ones across a keychain. "I think you nailed it," Trump said.|||

Ivanka Trump revealed Tuesday she's going back to school.