Le Studio is hiring! Check out the positions we have available

We recently investigated just how inexpensive French engineers and developers are in comparison to those in other European nations (not to mention the United States!). Yet excellent, competitively priced engineers are but one of many reasons that France has become an increasingly attractive place to found a startup or launch a venture. The government, universities, and the business ecosystem are piling on resources and cutting red tape — and the effects are really starting to show.

From a well developed venture capital ecosystem to immigration to demographic projections to the unique position of the French language, France is in the process of seizing the title of best place to found outside of Silicon Valley.

While the French government, with its byzantine laws and labyrinths of red tape, may seem like it ought to be on a list of reasons not to found in France, in regards to the Tech sector the government has been a blessing.

For one thing, while nations such as the United States and the United Kingdom are making efforts to dam the relentless stream of talent that had hitherto been following into their borders, the French government is keen on redirecting that stream here. And perhaps the greatest example of this redirection is the French Tech Ticket, a program through which promising prospects can streamline their immigration to France. But beyond just working to foreign attract foreign talent, the French government’s public investment bank, BPIFrance, has made a 7.4 billion dollar fund available for investment in startups and new ventures.

It’s not just about what the government does, but also what it doesn’t do.

Lately the French government has been working to remove potential bureaucratic snafus that would otherwise slow the relentless pace of change in the startup world. When technologies change at such a breakneck pace, being bogged down by government bureaucracy can be a death sentence to a young venture.

As an example of this kind of improvement: the time it takes to found in France has been reduced to just 4 days. This is on par with digital economy leaders such as Estonia and beats out the United Kingdom at 5 days, the United States at 6, and Germany at 11.

Another example of the government facilitating development is the station F project. Housed in a former train station, this 200 million euro project, with the capacity to hold up to one thousand startups, is set to become the largest incubator in the world. And while this is a privately funded venture, both the French government and the Parisian government have gone out of their way to facilitate its construction. Paris itself is committing 70 million euros to the project in the way of improving the environs and transportation to the mega-incubator.

Station F is planning to open its doors this summer.

Much like in the US, a complete ecosystem is in the process of forming in France in general, but Paris in particular. A system wherein excellent schools (with which France abounds) work to produce not just good engineers, businessmen, politicians, etc. but to form entrepreneurs from the very start. And to put in place structures to support them should they start a business in the midst of their studies.

HEC is one of the major supporters of station F, EPITA allows students to continue their education even if their business takes them away from school temporarily, and so forth — examples abound of French universities demonstrating such support to entrepreneurs. And, much like American Universities, French universities are beginning to see the value of directly investing in, facilitating, and encouraging the startups that spring up within their walls.

Beyond traditional and established universities moving to accommodate this new status quo, France is also home to one of the biggest and most successful schools using the peer-to-peer method of teaching: école42. This development school has quickly become a major source of developers for the French tech environment.

But outside of an increasingly friendly school system, one finds not only a friendly government and competitively priced developers, but also a very developed venture capital and funding ecosystem. From startups studios like us at Le Studio to half billion dollar venture capital funds like Partech, there are ample investment opportunities in France for a young startup or an eager potential founder.

And, as part of the EU, founders here have access to the entirety of the European Union in terms of potential market, employees, and source of investment.

As the United Kingdom casts away the lines that moor it to the European Union and sails away to the tune of ‘Rule Britannia,’ London’s reign as the number one startup destination in Europe will be put to an unprecedented test. And, in terms of the tech field and several other industries, no country stands to profit from this departure more than France, and no city more than Paris.

Continental investment in Britain will become more unattractive; first on account of the uncertainty of the situation and later on account of the natural boundaries that exist between sovereign nations. And while the United Kingdom will retain certain advantages that are natural to it (the largest of which being that it is English speaking), before Brexit it was an ideal mix of two worlds. Due to its history, the United Kingdom enjoys one of the tightest relationships with one of the greatest economies of the world: the United States. At the same time it has (or has until Wednesday, anyway) total and complete access to the European market.

So whereas before it had incomparable access to two of the biggest markets in the world, this will soon no longer be the case. And with the UK out, France will now assume the powerful position of the second biggest economy in the Union .That is to say that with the UK gone, France will be even more influential within the Union and be able to more effectively shape it as she pleases.

London will naturally retain the well developed ecosystem that those twin advantages allowed it to construct over the last twenty years, but its structural advantage will be very reduced. In fact, the same structural advantages that made the UK such a powerhouse are beginning to be seen in France.

The language advantage and the deep ties that the UK enjoys with the United States find a parallel in the ties between France and the exploding markets in French speaking Africa. In fact, thanks almost entirely to West Africa, French is set to become the most spoken language in the entire world. And provided African nations manage to avoid the political corruption and brain drain that have held them back in the recent past, these nations are set to be the next major global engine of economic growth.

Growth to which France will have unparalleled access due not only to linguistic and cultural ties, but also due to already well developed relationships with these countries.

Disregarding the growing populations, markets, and demand found in Africa, France also finds itself practically alone in having relatively healthy demographic projections in both the near and long term. While the aging demographics and low birth rates found in countries such as Germany and Italy have been described as ‘apocalyptic,’ France finds itself in the enviable position of having both strong skilled immigration and comparatively healthy demographics at home. All of which bode well for long term stability and growth in both foreign and domestic markets.

Lastly the language advantage that the UK enjoys regarding the anglosphere is in the process of slowly being eroded. Thanks to the internet, the media, and the entertainment industry each passing generation of French students has a greater and greater mastery of English. Within the French tech community English has become practically a requirement. So while a relatively high level of English has become standard among French tech entrepreneurs, one doesn’t see anglophone nations making much of an effort to learn French. With the changing demographic trends this will be their loss.

France is in the extremely unique and enviable position of not only being positioned to succeed within the European market, but being ideally positioned in a rapidly changing global landscape.

There’s no better time than now and no better place than France.

Le Studio VC is a Paris-based startup studio. Providing seed capital, expertise, and guidance, Le Studio acts as a launchpad for startups. By both investing and participating in the initial stages of development, success is more likely and more rapid.

If you are interested in starting your own company or working with us — let us know at Le Studio|||

We recently investigated just how inexpensive French engineers and developers are in comparison to those in other European nations (not to mention the United States!). Yet excellent, competitively…