A New York architecture firm has unveiled designs for a skyscraper that is out of this world.

Deemed the ‘world’s tallest building ever’, Analemma Tower will be suspended from an orbiting asteroid 31,068 miles (50,000 km) above the Earth– and the only way to leave is by parachute.

The orbital path would swing the tower in a figure eight pattern between the northern and southern hemispheres each day, taking residents on a tour through different parts of the world - all in just a 24 hour orbital cycle.

The radical design was created by Clouds Architecture Office, which is also the mastermind behind proposals for a Mars house and a cloud city.

The firm's latest design, Analemma Tower, will 'overturn the established skyscraper typology', as it builds from the sky down, instead of the ground up.

'Through the course of history humanity has been able to affect the environment on increasing scales,' explained the firm.

Analemma Tower will be suspended from an orbiting asteroid and hang down to the Earth. It will travel in a figure eight pattern through the northern and southern hemispheres and pass over major cities such as Panama City, Havana, Atlanta and New York City. The proposal calls for Analemma to first be constructed over Dubai, which has proven to be a specialist in tall building construction at one fifth the cost of New York City construction. The design will use a system called the Universal Orbital Support System (UOSS), which attaches a high strength cable to an asteroid that is lowered to Earth and attached to the tower. Since this new tower typology is suspended in the air, it can be constructed anywhere in the world and transported to its final location  The massive skyscraper will be setup in sections and each with a designated purpose. Business will be conducted at the lower end of the towers and sleeping quarters will be positioned two-thirds of the way up the building. Residents will also have access to a gardening area, a place for worship and in the bottom level will be sections for dining, shopping and entertainment. The architects plan to take full advantage of the skyscraper's location and will place solar panels at the upper most levels to generate power from the sun. And residents will enjoy fresh water from condensation of clouds and rainwater, which will be collected and purified.

A New York architecture firm has unveiled designs for a skyscraper that is out of this world. Deemed the ‘world’s tallest building ever’, Analemma Tower is shown suspended from an orbiting asteroid – and the only way to leave is by parachute

'Today our activity is being registered on a global scale. So why not apply design thinking on a planetary scale?'

'Analemma Tower is an example of a mixed use building that incorporates planetary design strategies, yielding the world’s tallest building ever.'

The design will use a system called the Universal Orbital Support System (UOSS), which attaches a high strength cable to an asteroid that is lowered to Earth and then attached to the tower.

‘Since this new tower typology is suspended in the air, it can be constructed anywhere in the world and transported to its final location,’ Clouds Architecture Office shared on its website.

‘The proposal calls for Analemma to be constructed over Dubai, which has proven to be a specialist in tall building construction at one fifth the cost of New York City construction.’

And although some may question the firm’s ability to capture an asteroid for the project, Clouds Architecture Office believes its idea will soon no longer be just a concept from science fiction films.

‘In 2015 the European Space Agency sparked a new round of investment in asteroid mining concerns by proving with its Rosetta mission that it's possible to rendezvous and land on a spinning comet,’ shared the firm.

‘NASA has scheduled an asteroid retrieval mission for 2021 which aims to prove the feasibility of capturing and relocating an asteroid.’

The tower would travel on a figure eight path over certain major cities in the northern and southern hemispheres - this includes New York City, Havana, Atlanta and Panama City.

And the amount of daylight increases by 40 minutes at the top of the tower due to the curvature of the Earth.

‘Analemma can be placed in an eccentric geosynchronous orbit which would allow it to travel between the northern and southern hemispheres on a daily loop,’ Clouds Architecture Office explained.

‘The ground trace for this pendulum tower would be a figure eight, where the tower would move at its slowest speed at the top and bottom of the figure eight allowing the possibility for the towers occupants to interface with the planet’s surface at these points.’

‘The proposed orbit is calibrated so the slowest part of the towers trajectory occurs over New York City.’

According to the drawings, it seems that Cloud Architecture Office is not just developing a massive skyscraper, but is also designing a floating city.

The large tower will be setup in sections, each with a designated function for the residents to feel more at home.

Business will be conducted at the lower end of the towers and sleeping quarters will be positioned two-thirds of the way up the building.

Residents will also have access to a gardening area, a place for worship and in the bottom level will be a place to dine shop and enjoy entertainment.

The architects plan to take full advantage of the skyscraper's location and will place solar panels at the upper most levels to generate power from the sun.

Residents will also have access to fresh water from condensation of clouds and rainwater, which will be collected and purified.

Because the tower will be traveling on a looping path, the views will change throughout the day depending on the height of the tower.

The architect firm plans to design shape-shifting windows that change size and height in order to deal with pressure and temperature differentials.

However, while researching atmospheric conditions for the project, the team discovered that there is most likely a height that people could not tolerate due to the extreme conditions.

‘For example, while there may be a benefit to having 45 extra minutes of daylight at an elevation of 32,000 meters, the near vacuum and -40C temperature would prevent people from going outside without a protective suit,’ shared Clouds Architecture Office.

‘Then again, astronauts have continually occupied the space station for decades, so perhaps it’s not so bad?’|||

A New York firm has designed a massive skyscraper that is out of this world. Analemma Tower will be suspended from an orbiting asteroid – and the only way to leave is by parachute.