Wealth tech investments reached a record of 74 deals in 2016. This subset of fintech companies offer an alternative to traditional wealth management firms by offering technology-enabled tools that are advancing the investment and wealth management profession.

We identified over 90 companies in the wealth tech space and organized them into 7 main categories based on the services and software they offer, then sub-categorized them by the client group they serve, whether business-to-consumer (B2C), business-to-business (B2B) or both. B2C companies serve individual or retail investors, while B2B companies provide software and services for wealth managers, family offices, or investment advisors.

We included companies in our map based on recency of funding, quality of investors, and Mosaic score, CB Insights’ proprietary algorithm that uses financial and non-financial signals to predict private company health.

We define investment & wealth management tech to include fintech companies that offer an alternative to traditional wealth management firms and technology-enabled tools that are advancing the investment and wealth management profession. This includes full-service brokerage alternatives, automated and semi-automated robo-advisors, self-service investment platforms, asset class specific marketplaces, and tools for both individual investors and advisors to keep up with the changing dynamics in wealth management.

This category excludes both personal and corporate expense management and monitoring tools, tools specific to investment banks, and high-frequency trading platforms.

Click on the image below to enlarge. This market map is not meant to be exhaustive of companies in the space. Categories are not mutually exclusive. We categorized companies based on their primary use case.

The category breakdown is as follows:

See the full list of startups below:

Want more data about fintech startups? Log in to CB Insights or sign up for free below.|||

From robo-advisors to mobile investing, fintech startups continue to create technology aimed at retail investors and advisors.