Waymo, the self-driving car spin-out from Google X, is Uber. It focuses on Anthony Levandowski, who was a key engineer at Waymo and co-founder of Otto, a 7-month old driverless software company for trucks that Uber purchased for $700m. , the self-driving car spin-out from Google X, is proving far more effective on Californian roads than its competitors. Data shows that Waymo logged 30x more autonomous miles in 2016 than others and only required human intervention 0.2x per thousand miles for safety reasons. Waymo also made the news for pursuing a federal civil lawsuit against. It focuses on Anthony Levandowski, who was a key engineer at Waymo and co-founder of, a 7-month old driverless software company for trucks that Uber purchased for $700m. Waymo claims that Levandowski stole 14,000 confident files from Otto servers that describe key self-driving software and LiDAR IP before selling the company to Uber. It has subsequently transpired that Levandowski consulted to Uber on self-driving technology six month before he started Otto. Putting Uber further into the spotlight, one of its AVs was involved in a serious crash in Arizona , where the company’s cars retreated post their testing ban from SF streets.

Tesla announced it was close to releasing version 2.0 of Autopilot (AP2) based on NVIDIA Drive PX2 and in-house software (vs. 1.0 Mobileye system). While the speed limit for Autosteer has been upped, only 1 out of 8 camera sensors on the new hardware stack is being used. As such, a US law firm is seeking to sue Tesla for selling AP2 to customers before it’s ready. On the other hand, an Ohio car insurance provider is offering reduced premiums for Tesla owners with Autopilot.

Google made Kaggle, GA release of a) Cloud ML Engine for training and deploying proprietary models to the cloud, and b) Cloud Vision API. There were also releases to help data scientists visually explore and prepare data (Cloud Dataprep) as well as integrate data from BigQuery and Commercial Datasets, and the fully-managed data processing pipeline for batch and streamed data (Dataflow). This shows that ML infrastructure is indeed still a native space where opportunities exist for specialised startups. Separately, YouTube announced that it had reached made lots of announcements at Cloud NEXT 2017 including the acquisition of data science community, GA release of a) Cloud ML Engine for training and deploying proprietary models to the cloud, and b) Cloud Vision API. There were also releases to help data scientists visually explore and prepare data (Cloud Dataprep) as well as integrate data from BigQuery and Commercial Datasets, and the fully-managed data processing pipeline for batch and streamed data (Dataflow). This shows that ML infrastructure is indeed still a native space where opportunities exist for specialised startups. Separately,announced that it had reached 1 billion machine-generated video captions for their audio content. More on video understanding later!

Innovation in AI, whether it occurs in the real world or research lab, builds upon the shoulders of published research. There are two fundamental flaws in the implementation of research: Papers a) seldom contribute much time to solving and openly discussing engineering problems, and b) are fraught with a lack of rigor and reproducibility. These are important problems that we must work to correct as a community. DistillPub , a new open-source publication for the machine learning, can help here. It provides new data visualization opportunities, transparency over methods and cash prizes for clearly communicated work.

Google DeepMind and the UK’s National Health Service (NHS). Based on analysis of information reported last year by the New Scientist, the authors argue that the breadth of patient data shared between parties was far greater than originally announced and concerns more than patients under direct care for acute kidney disorder. They claim that plans for a consolidated and canonical data infrastructure for the NHS is beyond the original stated remit of the collaboration (see Researchers in Cambridge published a sharply critical piece on the collaboration betweenand theBased on analysis of information reported last year by the New Scientist, the authors argue that the breadth of patient data shared between parties was far greater than originally announced and concerns more than patients under direct care for acute kidney disorder. They claim that plans for a consolidated and canonical data infrastructure for the NHS is beyond the original stated remit of the collaboration (see DeepMind Blockchain project ). More importantly, the authors state that minimal consultation was had with public bodies governing data privacy, health research and medical device regulation. The NHS and DeepMind responded saying that this paper misrepresents the use of data and makes both factual mistakes and analytical errors. While the tone of this piece is also unfairly harsh, it highlights the careful balance that needs to be struck between sufficiently complying with incumbent regulatory frameworks and streamlining these procedures to catalyse necessary upgrades to core NHS services.

Pro case: it’s an effective way to Con case: a 

 Following Bill Gates earlier this year, French Socialist Party candidate Benoit Hamon suggested a corporation tax on economic value generated as a result of AI (“robot tax”) that will go to fund universal basic income.: it’s an effective way to prevent further wealth disparity between the rich who can afford robots to work for them and the less well off who can’t.: a robot tax stifles innovation and automation isn’t the only factor that affects the incentive to participate in labor markets (e.g. education, safety nets, trade) and thus shouldn’t be targeted in isolation.

Video understanding: Developing systems that understand the contents of video in real-time remains a complex, unsolved problem. This is largely because current static image ML tools don’t go much beyond object recognition, semantic segmentation (labelling each pixel) and captioning. Facebook, which has users consume over 100 million hours of video a day, has set it sights on this problem because Google launched a Kaggle competition using the YouTube-8M dataset, but that only focuses on predicting video labels from 4716 classes (e.g. “electric guitar”, “cuisine” and “talent show”). Meanwhile, a startup in Berlin called TwentyBN is attacking : Developing systems that understand the contents of video in real-time remains a complex, unsolved problem. This is largely because current static image ML tools don’t go much beyond object recognition, semantic segmentation (labelling each pixel) and captioning., which has users consume over 100 million hours of video a day, has set it sights on this problem because “video understanding is going to be ridiculously impactful”. launched a Kaggle competition using the YouTube-8M dataset, but that only focuses on predicting video labels from 4716 classes (e.g. “electric guitar”, “cuisine” and “talent show”). Meanwhile, a startup in Berlin calledis attacking video understanding from a unique angle . First, they build a dataset of crowd-acting videos that depict short segments of objects interacting with one another (e.g. placing/pushing/dropping an object onto/on/off a table). Next, they train networks to accurately predict these correct action labels to learn common sense about the 3D world in which objects interact that can be transferred to new problems.

Ian Goodfellow, formerly part of OpenAI’s founding team, has moved back to Google Brain.|||

Nathan Benaich - Reporting from 19th January 2017 through March 28th 2017I’m Nathan Benaich — welcome to issue #18 of my AI newsletter! I will synthesise a narra