Most ransomware usually includes a text file or html file to inform the user that his/her system has been infected by a certain type of ransomware. Using this information, an affected user can select the suspected ransomware name to decrypt files. Users having trouble identifying the type of ransomware should contact Trend Micro Technical Support for further assistance.

Note: When selecting the "I don't know the ransomware name" option, the tool will prompt the user to select a target file to be decrypted and will try and automatically identify the ransomware based on the file signature.

The tool can either attempt to decrypt a single file or all files in a folder and its sub-folders by using recursive mode. By clicking “Select & Decrypt”, choose a folder or a file and click OK to start the decrypting process.

After the file(s) or folder(s) are selected, the tool will start scanning and decrypting files automatically.

If the scan target is a folder, the tool will collect some file information from the target folder first to help identify which files need to be decrypted. During the scan, a scrollbar will indicate the decrypting progress, and the UI will be updated to indicate how many files are encrypted and the number of files have been decrypted.

The tool can decrypt certain types of ransomware-encrypted files (e.g. TeslaCrypt) files very quickly. However, other file types (e.g. CryptXXX) may take significantly longer. The overall duration also depends on how many files are located in the target folder.

If Stop is clicked during scanning, the process will be interrupted.

If the tool identifies files encrypted by one of the ransomware mentioned above, it will ask the user to provide additional information to proceed due to some unique processing required for the specific decryption.

After selecting the “click here” option highlighted above, another dialog will appear asking for a file pair. The user will need to select a infected file and a matching non-infected file if there is an available backup copy (the larger the file size the better).

Once the scan and decryption process is finished, the UI will show the results.

By clicking See encrypted files, the tool opens the encrypted file location or folder which was selected for scanning. The decrypted files are resident in opened folder.

The decrypted file name(s) will be the same as the previously encrypted file(s), with the exception being the removal of the extension appended by the ransomware.

For those file(s) encrypted without the file name changing, the decrypted file name will be {original file name} decrypted.{extension}.

By clicking Done, the tool returns to the main UI. Repeat step 1 and 2 to decrypt more files.|||

Learn how to use the Trend Micro Ransomware File Decryptor tool to unlock encrypted files.