Red Hat, Inc. (NYSE: RHT), the world's leading provider of open source solutions, today announced financial results for its fiscal fourth quarter and fiscal year ended February 28, 2017.

“We closed the year with an exceptional performance. The fourth quarter marked our 60th consecutive quarter of revenue growth, and we crossed the $2 billion milestone in subscription revenue and total deferred revenue for the fiscal year,” stated Jim Whitehurst. “As customers embrace digital transformation, they are turning to Red Hat as a strategic partner to deliver solutions that can help them realize the benefits of these initiatives. Enterprises and service providers are increasingly adopting hybrid cloud infrastructures and open source technologies, which is fueling our growth and positioning Red Hat for the long-term.”

“Our strategic position with customers is evidenced by the continued growth in large commitments to Red Hat. The number of deals greater than $1 million in fiscal 2017 grew by over 30% annually, and we closed a record number of deals over $20 million, including our first-ever deal of approximately $100 million in the fourth quarter,” stated Eric Shander, acting Chief Financial Officer of Red Hat.  “This performance also drove a record backlog of $2.7 billion in U.S. dollars, up 28% year-over-year which contributes to our fiscal year 2018 revenue outlook of 13% to 14% growth and should help drive expanded GAAP operating margin of 15.2% and non-GAAP operating margin of 23.6%.”

Revenue: Total revenue for the quarter was $629 million, up 16% year-over-year both in U.S. dollars and measured in constant currency. Constant currency references in this release are detailed in the tables below. Subscription revenue for the quarter was $560 million, up 17% year-over-year both in U.S. dollars and measured in constant currency. Subscription revenue in the quarter was 89% of total revenue.

Full fiscal year 2017 total revenue was $2.4 billion, up 18% in U.S. dollars year-over-year, or 17% measured in constant currency. Subscription revenue for the full fiscal year was $2.1 billion, up 18% year-over-year both in U.S. dollars and measured in constant currency. Subscription revenue in the full fiscal year was 89% of total revenue.

Subscription Revenue Breakout: Subscription revenue from Infrastructure-related offerings for the quarter was $435 million, an increase of 11% in U.S. dollars year-over-year and 12% measured in constant currency. Subscription revenue from Application development-related and other emerging technologies offerings for the quarter was $125 million, an increase of 40% year-over-year both in U.S. dollars and measured in constant currency.

Full fiscal year subscription revenue from Infrastructure-related offerings was $1.7 billion, an increase of 15% in U.S. dollars year-over-year and 14% measured in constant currency. Full fiscal year subscription revenue from Application Development-related and other emerging technologies offerings was $439 million, an increase of 36% year-over-year both in U.S. dollars and measured in constant currency.

Operating Income: GAAP operating income for the quarter was $94 million, up 31% year-over-year. After adjusting for non-cash share-based compensation expense, amortization of intangible assets, and transaction costs related to business combinations, non-GAAP operating income for the fourth quarter was $153 million, up 23% year-over-year. Non-GAAP references in this release are detailed in the tables below. For the fourth quarter, GAAP operating margin was 15.0% and non-GAAP operating margin was 24.3%.

Full fiscal year GAAP operating income was $332 million, up 15% year-over-year. After adjusting for non-cash share-based compensation expense, amortization of intangible assets, and transaction costs related to business combinations, non-GAAP operating income for the full fiscal year was $556 million, up 15% year-over-year. Full fiscal year GAAP operating margin was 13.8% and non-GAAP operating margin was 23.1%.

Net Income: GAAP net income for the quarter was $66 million, or $0.36 per diluted share, compared with $53 million, or $0.29 per diluted share, in the year-ago quarter. During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017, GAAP net income and earnings per diluted share benefited by approximately $1 million from the adoption of Accounting Standards Update 2016-09 ("ASU 2016-09") in the first fiscal quarter of 2017.

After adjusting for non-cash share-based compensation expense, amortization of intangible assets, transaction costs related to business combinations, and non-cash interest expense related to the debt discount, non-GAAP net income for the quarter was $110 million, or $0.61 per diluted share, as compared to $97 million, or $0.52 per diluted share, in the year-ago quarter. Non-GAAP diluted weighted average shares outstanding excludes any dilution resulting from the convertible notes because any potential dilution is expected to be offset by our convertible note hedge transactions.

Full fiscal year GAAP net income was $254 million, or $1.39 per diluted share, compared with $199 million, or $1.07 per diluted share, in the prior fiscal year. After adjusting for non-cash share-based compensation expense, amortization of intangible assets, transaction costs related to business combinations, and non-cash interest expense related to the debt discount, non-GAAP net income for the full fiscal year was $414 million, or $2.27 per diluted share, as compared to $355 million, or $1.91 per diluted share, in the prior fiscal year.

Cash: Operating cash flow was $318 million for the fourth quarter, an increase of 27% on a year-over-year basis. Full fiscal year operating cash flow was $784 million. Total cash, cash equivalents and investments as of February 28, 2017 was $2.1 billion after repurchasing approximately $139 million, or approximately 1.9 million shares, of common stock in the fourth quarter. The remaining balance in the current repurchase authorization as of February 28, 2017 was approximately $636 million.

Deferred revenue and backlog: Total backlog for fiscal year 2017 was in excess of $2.7 billion, up 28% year-over-year. We define total backlog as the value of non-cancellable subscription and service agreements, including total deferred revenue, which is billed, plus the value of non-cancellable subscription and service agreements to be billed in the future not reflected in our financial statements. At the end of the fiscal year, the company’s total deferred revenue balance was $2.1 billion, an increase of 20% year-over-year. The full year negative impact to total deferred revenue from changes in foreign exchange rates was approximately $1 million year-over-year. On a constant currency basis, total deferred revenue would have been up 20% year-over-year.

The portion of total backlog to be billed in the future not reflected in our financial statements was in excess of $650 million as of February 28, 2017, compared with the ending balance in excess of $410 million reported for fiscal year 2016. The portion of total backlog to be billed during fiscal year 2018 was in excess of $330 million as of February 28, 2017, compared with in excess of $275 million for the fiscal year ended February 29, 2016.

For the first quarter:

Full year non-GAAP operating margin guidance is derived by subtracting the estimated full year impact of non-cash share-based compensation expense of approximately $200 million and amortization of intangible assets of approximately $30 million.  Full year fully diluted non-GAAP EPS guidance is derived by subtracting the expenses listed in the previous sentence and the full year impact of non-cash interest expense related to the debt discount of approximately $19 million and an estimated annual effective tax rate of 28% before discrete tax items. Additionally, full year fully diluted non-GAAP EPS excludes approximately $19 million of discrete tax benefits related to share-based compensation that are included in full year fully diluted GAAP EPS.  Full year fully diluted non-GAAP EPS excludes approximately 1 million diluted shares resulting from the convertible notes because any potential dilution is expected to be offset by our convertible note hedge transactions.

First quarter non-GAAP operating margin guidance is derived by subtracting the estimated impact of non-cash share-based compensation expense of approximately $46 million and amortization of intangible assets of approximately $8 million. First quarter fully diluted non-GAAP EPS guidance is derived by subtracting the expenses listed in the previous sentence and non-cash interest expense related to the debt discount of approximately $5 million and an estimated annual effective tax rate of 28% before discrete tax items. Additionally, first quarter fully diluted non-GAAP EPS excludes approximately $10 million of discrete tax benefits related to share-based compensation that are included in first quarter fully diluted GAAP EPS.  First quarter fully diluted non-GAAP EPS excludes approximately 2 million diluted shares resulting from the convertible notes because any potential dilution is expected to be offset by our convertible note hedge transactions.

A live webcast of Red Hat's results will begin at 5:00 pm ET today. The webcast, in addition to a copy of our prepared remarks and slides containing financial highlights and supplemental metrics, can be accessed by the general public at Red Hat's investor relations website at http://investors.redhat.com. A replay of the webcast will be available shortly after the live event has ended. Additional information on Red Hat's reported results, including a reconciliation of the non-GAAP adjusted results, are included in the financial tables below.|||

Fourth quarter total revenue of $629 million, up 16% year-over-year; full fiscal year total revenue of $2.4 billion, up 18% year-over-year  Fourth quarter subscription revenue of $560 million, up 17% year-over-year; full fiscal year subscription revenue of $2.1 billion, up 18% year-over-year  Fourth quarter Application development-related and other emerging technology subscription revenue of $125 million, up 40% year-over-year; full fiscal year Application development-related and other emerging technology subscription revenue of $439 million, up 36% year-over-year  Year-end deferred revenue balance of $2.1 billion, up 20% year-over-year