Mohammed Reza fled Iran for Australia in 2013 after "problems with the government".

Reza still speaks through an interpreter but that hasn't stopped him from opening Shiraz IceCream selling freshly made Iranian-inspired sweets, ice cream and juice in Merrylands, New South Wales.

Reza started learning the trade from an early age, helping in his father's shop in Abadan, Iran, and dreamt about one day owning his own shop and exporting Iranian products to the world.

He operated businesses in Iran and Dubai that employed several staff so when Reza arrived in Australia he joined the pilot of The Ignite Small Business Start-ups Program, which helps newly arrived humanitarian migrants or refugees set up businesses.

"I got in touch with them and they helped me find a place, rent a place and everything, they explained to me the law of Australia," Reza says.

Shiraz IceCream opened more than a year ago and provides employment for Reza, his wife, son and one other staff member.

"It is going well and compared with the first day it is going very well," Reza says.

​While refugees are often portrayed as a drain on Australia's economy a study released last week finds refugee entrepreneurs can provide significant economic benefits to Australia.

The study, From Refugee to Entrepreneur in Three Years, analysed the outcomes of the Ignite program, which was launched in 2013 as an initiative of humanitarian organisation Settlement Services International.

The study found 68 per cent of refugee graduates of the Ignite program had moved off Centrelink payments, with some also paying company tax and generating jobs for others.

Ignite has reached the end of its three-year pilot during which time the program helped establish 66 new refugee businesses.

The majority of the businesses are in retail followed by cultural and recreational services and construction.

The study found savings of $880,000 a year in Centrelink benefits – or a potential $4.4 million over five years – among the 35 refugees interviewed.

Twenty staff have been taken on by the program's entrepreneurs.

The study was headed by Professor Jock Collins of UTS Business School.

"The stand-out finding is the diversity of business types set up by the refugee graduates of the Ignite program," Collins says. "There is no typical refugee business enterprise. Businesses established by successful Ignite clients cover many different industry classifications."

Collins says the refugees success rate must be measured against the substantial barriers they face.

"At first glance refugees are the most unlikely entrepreneurs," he says. "They lack capital to start up a business, they have no credit history, no assets or security. In many instances their educational qualifications are not recognised and they have no social networks."

Working against the odds, Reza says Shiraz IceCream covers the costs of labour, rent and turns a small profit.

"It doesn't make a lot of profit but we have a very good view for the future," he says. "I know that my product is very unique and people love it so much that I would love to franchise my business and then I could develop my business to other areas."

Reza believes Iranian sweets have an international taste that have given them appeal in Sydney and will make a successful export business.

"Everything in the shop is handmade, and people come from all over Sydney to eat them," he says.|||

Mohammed Reza arrived in Australia with nothing but now people come from across Sydney to try his sweets.