Sustaining a career in the NFL is not easy. The average career lasts just over 3 years, the lowest of any of the four main sports in the U.S., and that includes practice squad players who never even play in a game. Also, NFL contracts are not guaranteed, meaning players ― even stars ― can be cut at any time.

According to a 2015 study by Forbes, the median of “percentage of games started” by seventh-round picks from the 2010 draft from 2010-2015 is 0 percent. In other words, the mere fact that Jean Francois has become a starter while more than doubling the NFL career average is almost unheard of.

As a result, the tech-obsessed 30-year-old ― who was cut by Washington despite having one more year on his contract ― has a unique perspective when looking ahead to life after pro football. Despite being a star player and winning a national title at college football powerhouse Louisiana State University, he knew the odds of a career weren’t especially high.

“During my rookie season, I spent a lot of money,” he says. “I was like, ‘Do I really want to be this type of guy?’ I didn’t want to just spend money, because you won’t get it back. ... The next year you couldn’t pay me to spend a dime.

So Jean Francois started to ask around the league ― talking to veterans, coaches and anyone who would offer advice. He started to educate himself, going through an assortment of different business and economic publications. Forbes, Fortune and Bloomberg are his favorites.

With the help of his financial manager, he then purchased a Dunkin’ Donuts location in Georgia. Before long, he owned 25 franchises throughout the South, and he still has plans to expand to Houston. He committed himself to the business in every offseason, understanding the nuances of the business as he would an NFL playbook. At first, it was a grueling process, learning about projections and parsing through spreadsheets. But soon, it became second nature. He still feels a thrill every time one of his stores beats the sales projections.

When challenges ― such as consistency in the product and service ― presented themselves, Jean Francois leaned on his football background and his experience working with a team. But he’s never had a problem with a single employee.

“Making sure everybody has a positive vibe,” Jean Francois says, is paramount. “I gotta make sure that I set the mindset of people in there to be happy. Teamwork is the most important thing. It can make things work better. In other words, if football is a brotherhood, business is a community.

“[Business] helped me become a better person,” he says. “Business makes you open up as a person, because now you’re more well-rounded. Early on in the NFL, you get influenced by the Rolls-Royces, the Ferraris, the Lambos. The next thing you know, you’re broke and out of the league.”

“My son ― when he looks at me, I want to be the right father figure,” Jean Francois says. “He inspires me. I thought I grew up already, but when he came along, I was like, ‘Okay, I really didn’t grow up.’ When I look at him, it all makes sense.”

His $3 million deal with the Packers is only for the 2017-18 season. Then, he’s not sure where he’s headed, but he does have one big idea, despite lacking any tangible experience within the stock market.

He wants to earn an Executive MBA in his hometown at the University of Miami, through a new Artists and Athletes program that has drawn rave reviews. Created in 2015 and aimed in large part toward football players, it employs a schedule that allows players to train early in the morning before going to nine hours of classes complemented by late-night study sessions.|||

A productive NFL career has inspired Ricky Jean Francois to want more.