Diving into the tech scene can be a daunting task, if you’re new.

Where do I start? What do I need to learn?

These are all legitimate questions that you might ask, and here’s our take on those questions: Read up on reputable journalism on the subject!

Get your important facts and complete picture from these recommended journalists on the list below.

Follow their social media for the latest updates, and you’ll always be in the know for whichever area that peaks your interest.

Walter S. Mossberg is an American tech journalist who was, from 1991 through 2013, the principal technology columnist for The Wall Street Journal.

He is currently Executive Editor of The Verge and Editor-at-Large of Recode, websites owned by Vox Media.

He covers technology stories – concentrating on the cultural and commercial impact of the internet – for all of the BBC’s news outlets.

Cade Metz is a WIRED senior staff writer covering Google, Facebook, artificial intelligence, bitcoin, data centers, computer chips, programming languages, and other ways the world is changing.

Jordan Crook is a Senior Writer based out of Brooklyn, NY.

She writes about internet culture, social networks, and consumer-facing technology.

Jordan hosts many of TechCrunch’s live events, including regional TC Pitch-Offs and the world-renowned TechCrunch Disrupt conference.

She’s also a co-host on the TechCrunch Radio show on Sirius XM each week.

She has written for publications such as Mobile Marketer and MobileBurn.

He is currently the Deputy Editor of The Conversation US and editor of the Environment and Energy desk.

He has a strong viewpoint on the technology and believes in saving the environment.

Bryan Clark is an excellent reporter, an editor and author at The Next Web.

He volunteers many tech talk shows and interviews.

From the past year, he has been doing some great work at The Next Web. He digs web culture, social media, and inappropriate use of GIFs.

You can see the interview videos and follow him on the above links.

PandoDaily may not be as well known as Wired or TechCrunch but is definitely a highly respected tech media outlet.

PandoDaily is a web publication that offers technology news, analysis, and commentary, with a focus on Silicon Valley and startup companies. Their moto: “speaking truth to the new power”.

New York City based tech journalist and staff writer for Forbes Magazine and Forbes.com covering leadership.

He is interested in how individuals inspire a team and lead it to success, and all the wisdom they earn along the way.

Ron Miller is enterprise reporter at TechCrunch. He has been a Freelance Technology Journalist since 1998. In addition, he is Contributing Editor at EContent Magazine where he writes the Media Redux column.

He is going to have an influential impact in coming years in the field of digital lifestyle.

Jon Russell is an Asia based tech journalist for TechCrunch. He is currently based in Bangkok, Thailand.

Formerly he was an Asia editor for The Next Web.

Jon Russell is passionate about the development of the internet, technology, and startups in Asia.

Founder at One Million by One Million (1Mby1M)

Sramana founded 1Mby1M in 2010, the world’s first virtual accelerator, to help a million entrepreneurs globally to reach a million dollars in annual revenue, build $1 trillion in global GDP, and create 10 million jobs. [http://1mby1m.com]

In 2015, Sramana was named one of LinkedIn’s Top 10 Influencers. From 2008 to 2010, she was also a columnist for Forbes. She currently syndicates her columns to Inc., Huffington Post, Small Business Trends, and a host of other publications.

He has written for various internet technology news websites like The Next Web, CNET, ZDNet, Techspot, Ars Technica, and Neowin.

He is the man of ethics, and share honest and unbiased news and opinions.

Lee is the Senior Technology Editor, and oversees story development for the gadget, automotive IT, and culture sections of Ars Technica.

A long-time member of the Ars OpenForum, Lee has an extensive background in enterprise storage and security.

Lee also writes the occasional long-form piece on manned space flight or gaming.

She writes about technology and a journalist at TechCrunch.

She plays an important role in covering the San Francisco Bay Area and having their cultural and political issues.

She has worked for various big names like Bloomberg, Venture Beat and The Wall Street Journal.

He is the security editor at Ars Technica and cover the topics under malware, computer espionage, botnets, and hardware hacking.

He is a prime journalist of the publication and has 15 years of experience in the field.

He was editor-in-chief of famous tech news network The Verge and a co-founder of Vox Media. He recently launched The Outline, a next-generation version of The New Yorker while also fixing many of the ills facing digital publishing and advertising.

He is the influential writer of the technology sector.

He works at the Verge as a senior editor.

He has a serious cult following on all the social media accounts due to the friendly and straightforward views.

She has worked for 30 years as American freelance technology writer, author, podcaster and news editor.

She is a reputable journalist and also worked at Microsoft strategy.

He is an American entrepreneur, writer and journalist.

He is a CEO and founder of Recent media.inc, a Silicon Valley based startup.

He is quite popular among young and emerging entrepreneurs

Alexia Tsotsis is a former co-editor of TechCrunch, famous digital magazine and a news website. She was listed by Forbes magazine as among the top 30 under 30 in the Media category in 2011.

He is editor in chief of the famous technology website ZDNet and editorial director of CNET’s TechRepublic.

He has covered various news about the technology and financial-services industries since 1995.

He was born in 1951, and is an American journalist associated with various big names like tech hub for Medium and Wired.

He has written various books on computers, technology, cryptography, the Internet, cybersecurity, and privacy.

He currently writes for Backchannel.

He is an author and deputy editor at Ars Technica.

He is great content manager and writes about technology law and policy.

He is the author of the famous book The Internet Police: How Crime Went Online, and the Cops Followed.

We always look out for the best. If you think we have missed out someone, please send a request to rav@emergeapp.net|||

