“How many emails does it take to get a reply?”

Reps, managers, and consultants constantly ask this question.

Read any report, skim any blog, or ask any expert – you’ll find that the average number it takes to get a reply ranges from 7 (the consensus a few years ago) to 17 (Yes, I found that in a real report). That’s a pretty wide range.

The result: everyone is aiming to build a 17-email Play (or call it sequence, cadence, flow, etc.).

The only problem is this is completely wrong! This promotes mediocrity and adds to the problem.

Three concerns. First, why is that number so high? Second, why is it still increasing? Lastly, why are we aiming for the average? Do you really want to be average?

This is the problem with averages – it promotes mediocrity. I don't care what the average is. I want to know how many emails it takes for the best sales reps to get a rely.

What's the cause? Let's first turn to technology. Technology is a blessing. We can do more advanced things, faster. This includes sending personalized emails en masse.

However, technology is also a curse, and it’s at the heart of what we’re talking about now. The advent of “robo-spam” email tools has made it ok to send a high volume of low-quality emails.

Here’s what happens: The report is released stating the number of emails it takes to get a response, then reps say “we should have that many in our outbound email Plays.” Reps run out of things to say, resulting in crappy emails, which consequently lower responses, and ultimately results in a higher number of emails it takes to get a response. Then, the next year the new (inevitably higher) numbers come out, and the cycle continues.

This perpetual cycle won’t stop unless we do something about it right now!

I can spot “robo-spam” from a mile away, and I bet you can too. Just because you used my name and company, doesn’t mean it’s personalized. This still reeks of a templatized, generic, one-size-fits-all email. Sure, it may look like it was a bespoke email, but it doesn’t feel like it.

Here’s the test – can you swap out basic variables, such as name and company, then send it to someone else? If the answer is yes, then you have a generic, templated email (aka “sales spam”).

You must realize that the number it takes to get a reply should be doing down, not up! The average number of emails it takes me to get a reply hovers around 2. Sharp shooters like Heather Morgan can consistently get a reply in one single email.

How is this possible?

Then, write like a human! Don’t sound like a robot. It’s worth repeating: Deliver a personalized, relevant email to a qualified prospect if you want a reply.

Write just like you would talk to a good friend. Keep it short and to the point. Don't use 20 words when 12 will do. Have a clear CTA.

Don’t rely on technology to do your job. Technology itself doesn’t make a sale – only humans can do that. Any tool that you use must add to the interaction, not take away from it.

What if you had only one email, only one chance to connect with a prospect – what would you say?|||

