The IEEE Global Initiative for Ethical Considerations in Artificial Intelligence and Autonomous Systems. Ethically Aligned Design: A Vision For Prioritizing Wellbeing With Artificial Intelligence And Autonomous Systems, Version 1. IEEE, 2016. http://standards.ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/autonomous_systems.html.

Something a little different for today… the IEEE recently put out a first version of their “Ethically Aligned Design” report for public discussion. It runs to 136 pages (!) but touches on a number of very relevant issues.

The report itself is divided into eight sections, each of which seems to be the result of the deliberations of a different sub-committee. The eight areas are:

I’m going to focus on the first five of these areas today, and of necessity in reducing 136 pages to one blog post, I’ll be skipping over a lot of details and just choosing the parts that stand out to me on this initial reading.

This section opens with a broad question, “How can we ensure that AI/AS do not infringe human rights?” (where AI/AS stands for Artificial Intelligence / Autonomous Systems throughout the report). The first component of the answer connects back to documents such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and makes a statement that I’m sure very few would disagree with, although it offers little help in the way of implementation:

The other two components of the answer though raise immediately interesting technical considerations:

The second of these in particular is very reminiscent of the GDPR ‘right to an explanation,’ and we looked at some of the challenges with provenance and explanation in previous editions of The Morning Paper.

The report calls for new standards describing “measurable, testable levels of transparency, so that systems can be objectively assessed and levels of compliance determined.

This is an interesting section. The overall argument / intention seems to be that we want to build systems that make decisions which align with the way the impacted communities would like decisions to be made. The actual wording raises a few questions though…

What if the norms and values of the community they serve aren’t desirable? For example, based on all the horrific stories that are increasingly being shared, the ‘norm’ of how women are treated in IT is not something we would ever want to propagate into an AIS. There are many examples in history of things that were once accepted norms which we now find very unacceptable. Could we not embed norms and values (e.g., non-discrimination) of a better, more noble version of ourselves and our communities? Presuming of course we can all agree on what ‘better’ looks like…

This opens the door to ‘moral overload’, in which an AIS is subject to many possibly conflicting norms and values. What should we do in these situations? The recommended best practice seems guaranteed to produce discrimination against minorities (but then again, so does democracy when viewed through the same lens, this stuff is tricky!):

In the same section though, we also get:

The book “Moral Machines: Teaching robots right from wrong” is recommended as further reading in this area.

Understanding whether / ensuring that systems actually implement the intended norms requires transparency. Two levels of transparency are envisaged: firstly around the information conveyed to the user while an autonomous system interacts, and secondly enabling the system to be evaluated as a whole by a third-party.

The report highlights two key issues relating to business practices involving AI:

Companies should implement ‘ethically aligned design’ programs (from which the entire report derives its title). Professional codes of conduct can support this (there’s a great example from the British Computer Society in this section of the report).

The lack of transparency about the AI/AS manufacturing process presents a challenge to ethical implementation and oversight. Regulators and policymakers have an important role to play here the report argues. For example:

For further reading, “An FDA for Algorithms,” and “The Black Box Society” are recommended.

There’s a well made point by Frank Pasquale, Professor of Law at the University of Maryland about the importance (and understandability) of the training data vs the algorithm too:

This section stresses the importance of a ‘safety mindset’ at all stages.

The paper “Concrete problems in AI safety” (on The Morning Paper backlog) describes a range of possible failure modes.

Any AI system that is intended to ultimately have capabilities with the potential to do harm should be design to avoid these issues pre-emptively. Retrofitting safety into future more generally capable AI systems may be difficult:

This is the section most closely aligned with the GDPR, and at its heart is the problem of the asymmetry of data:

The call is for tools allowing every individual citizen control over their own data and how it is shared. There’s also this very interesting reminder about Western cultural norms here too:

What is personal data? Any data that can be reasonably linked to an individual based on their unique physical, digital, or virtual identity. That includes device identifiers, MAC addresses, IP addresses, and cookies. Guidance on determining what constitutes personal data can be found in the U.K. Information Commissioner’s Office paper, “Determining what is personal data.”

The report also points out how difficult informed consent can be. For example, “Data that appears trivial to share can be used to make inferences that an individual would not wish to share…”

I’ve barely scratched the surface, but this post is getting too long already. One of the key takeaways is that this is a very complex area! I personally hold a fairly pessimistic view when it comes to hoping that the unrestrained forces of capitalism will lead to outcomes we desire. Therefore even though it may seem painful, some kind of stick (aka laws and regulations) does ultimately seem to be required. Will our children (or our children’s children) one day look back in horror at the wild west of personal data exploitation when everything that could be mined about a person was mined, exploited, packaged and sold with barely any restriction?

Let’s finish on a positive note though. It’s popular to worry about AI and Autonomous Systems without also remembering that they can be a force for tremendous good. In addition, as well as introducing unintended bias and discrimination, they can also be used to eliminate it in a way we could never achieve with human decision makers. An example I’ve been talking about here draws inspiration from the Adversarial Neural Cryptography paper of all things. There we get a strong hint that the adversarial network structure introduced with GANs can also be applied in other ways. Consider a network that learns an encoding of information about a person (but explicitly excluding, say, information about race and gender). Train it in conjunction with two other networks, one that learns to make the desired business predictions based on the learned representation, and one (the adversarial net) that attempts to predict race and gender based on that same representation. When the adversarial net cannot do better than random chance, we have a pretty good idea that we’ve eliminated unintended bias from the system…|||

The IEEE Global Initiative for Ethical Considerations in Artificial Intelligence and Autonomous Systems. Ethically Aligned Design: A Vision For Prioritizing Wellbeing With Artificial Intelligence And Autonomous Systems, Version 1. IEEE, 2016. http://standards.ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/autonomous_systems.html.   Something a little different for today... the IEEE recently put out a first version of their "Ethically Aligned Design" report for public…