Last week, Razer added the option for players using its Cortex game launcher to earn “zSilver” credits simply by playing games while using the app. zSilver — which can also be earned by buying Razer products — can then be exchanged at the zVault store for Razer products or discounts on the company’s online store.

Which brings us to the Razer Chroma Mug Holder, which is not available for sale with real money and will exclusively be offered through the zVault for 100,000 zSilver. I’m just having a hard time believing this is actually real.

I’m having a hard time believing this is actually real

According to Razer, the Mug Holder features the company’s Chroma lighting and is compatible with all its other Chroma products — meaning that if this is real, we will live in a world where your coaster lights up every time you frag someone in Call of Duty. The mug itself is a 20-ounce, stainless steel mug, with a built-in notification system that can cause the stand to blink to remind you to take a drink.

But look at this image! This is a list of tech specs and system requirements for a mug holder. This isn’t even a fancy one that heats your coffee — we’re taking about a glorified, light-up coaster here.

Adding fuel to my conspiracy theory file is that unlike everything else on the zVault store, the Chroma Mug — which again, can only be bought through the zSilver system — isn’t actually listed on the store. It’s simply a “coming soon” promotion, which only adds to my skepticism.

That said, if it is real, at the maximum rate of 900 zSilver a day, the Razer Chroma Mug Holder could be yours for 100,000 zSilver after just 111 days of gaming.

[Update: Razer has confirmed to The Verge that the Chroma Mug Holder is in fact a real, physical object that exists, along with video footage purporting to show the device in question. We’ll continue to update this story with additional information concerning the existence of the Chroma Mug Holder as we have it.]|||

Last week, Razer added the option for players using its Cortex game launcher to earn "zSilver" credits simply by playing games while using the app. zSilver — which can also be earned by buying...