Worldwide in almost every competitive sport, professional athletes are benefiting from the use of PEMF therapy to enhance their performance. These professional athletes are experiencing performance enhancement effects such as improved stamina, better hand-eye-motor synchronization, faster recovery and lower pain, all this using now easily available PEMF Devices.

The key benefits of PEMF therapy for professional athletes are:

With these effects, athletes experience benefits to their entire body and at any level and exhibit better performance.

Athletes and indeed all those who are fitness conscious, need to have their muscles working in an optimal fashion. This ensures structural integrity and also improves performance of the body. The biggest health risk to the athlete is having injury. Optimum performance will reduce the risk of injuries. So, PEMF therapy is used by athletes to maximize performance and at the same time reduce the risk of sports injury. It also helps the body recover faster from any injuries.

Pulsed electromagnetic fields increase the uptake of oxygen into muscle. PEMF Therapy devices raise blood and tissue oxygen levels by decreasing rate of O2 burn. An increase in oxygen can significantly enhance muscle performance and stamina. In competitive sports a 1% edge may be all that is needed to win, although people have reported upto 60-70% performance improvement within a few weeks of use.

The body’s muscles are able to perform harder, longer and recover faster with PEMF Therapy. After a workout, muscles become sore and sometimes tensed. A well-known effect of PEMF therapy is to reduce muscle tension and soreness/pain. Athletes often participate in competitions and practice inspite of their injuries. This is why regular use of PEMF therapy is becoming a practice at high level, or even weekend competitions.

It usually takes athletes between 2 to 3 days to recover from competitions. In past, it was noticed that Eastern European and Russian athletes would be fully energized the next day without showing any of the effects of previous days. They were using some sort of PEMF devices. These were not considered to be doping. Essentially PEMF systems are therapy devices that help to wash the stress, remove soreness and reduce lactic acid in muscles.

PEMF is widely used by Professional Athletes worldwide. Recently, Russia Today reported that US athletes were using covert brain stimulation technology in Rio Olympics 2016.

If you are a professional athlete or hope to be one, PEMF therapy is the answer to your prayers. Feel better, perform better, naturally!|||

Worldwide in almost every competitive sport, professional athletes are benefiting from the use of PEMF therapy to enhance their performance. These profes...