Time to get technical. For each property, we want to know its return on investment (ROI). How much do I get back for each dollar (or euro) I invest in a property or house? To find the ROI of a property, we can look at the money you’ll earn when a player lands on your property and compare that to how much you’ve invested. For instance, for Mediterranean Avenue (Dorpsstraat), you’d have to invest 60 to buy it. When someone lands on it, you get 2 back. The resulting ROI is 3.33%.

Next, let’s find out how many times players actually land on each property. For this, we’ll need to run a partial simulation. We’ll create a board consisting of 40 spaces and a player that rolls 2 dice and goes around the board. Then, if that player lands on a property, we’ll count that hit. In the end, if we divide all those hits by the average total number of hits for all properties and by the total number of spots (40), we’ll get the normalized amount of hits each property gets. Each number represents the likelihood that a spot will be hit, 1 being average. To get an accurate number, the simulation needs to include Chance and Community Chest cards, jail and wanting to stay in jail near the end of the game, and a total game time of about 30 turns in which rolling doubles creates an extra turn. Then we let the simulation run 1 million of these ‘games’. In the simulation, this only takes 2 seconds, but in real life, this would take an astonishing 7 years!  The Hit Rate Heat Map shows a heat map of the hit rates of each property.

Now, let’s multiply the normalized hit rate we found in the simulation with the ROI in order to get the ‘actual’ ROI for each property and all amounts of houses. As we can see in the Average ROI Heat Map, the colors differ a lot, which indicates imbalance in the game. Orange (Utrecht) and Dark Blue (Amsterdam) are indeed the towns with the highest ROI (greenest), which means that if you own one of these towns, you’re more likely to win the game. We were right on that! Balancing this game means that we have to turn the color of every property of the Average ROI Heat Map into bright yellow.|||

