For the last two years, we’ve been running a buy-and-hold cryptoasset hedge fund.

These assets are a new investment class with many desirable features, including extraordinary upside potential and price movements that are highly non-correlated with other asset classes (such as equities, gold and real estate).

In this post, we present our framework for valuing these assets, which we’ve used to build our portfolio.  In its two-year history, our portfolio has had roughly the same volatility as bitcoin, and produced returns far better than bitcoin alone.

It’s worthwhile to spend a bit of time dissecting the term cryptoasset.  We define cryptoassets as assets for which questions of ownership are settled via blockchain-based ledgers. We distinguish between Layer-1 and Layer-2 assets.  Most blockchains have a single Layer-1 asset (often referred to as it’s native currency).  Fees associated with publishing transactions on a blockchain are denominated in its Layer-1 asset and typically this asset’s supply and distribution are mathematically controlled (e.g. via mining).  For example in the Bitcoin blockchain the Layer-1 asset is BTC; for Ethereum it’s ETC; for Ripple it’s XRP.

Many blockchains support the creation, transfer and exchange of assets other than their Layer-1 asset; we term these Layer-2 cryptoassets.  Examples include TheDAO tokens on the Ethereum blockchain, MaidSafeCoin (via OmniLayer) on the Bitcoin blockchain and Bitstamp-USD on the Ripple blockchain.  It’s worth pointing out that many (although not all) Layer-2 assets imply a level of counterparty risk vis-a-vis whatever entity that issues them.  E.g. Owning 1 Bitstamp-USD on the Ripple blockchain simply means Bitstamp owes you 1 USD.

It’s worth noting that as an investor, Layer-1 assets are usually preferable to Layer-2.  Joel Monegro eloquently captures one of the main reasons why (casting Layer 1 vs 2 in the terminology of protocol vs application) in his Fat Protocols post:

It’s worth noting that while we aim to be general, much of our framework only makes sense in the context of Layer-1 assets.  Layer-2 assets (especially those representing liabilities of specific issuers) lie outside its scope of this framework.

We also look at the technical design decisions, and whether they are appropriate for the use case of the coin.  These include:

One particular design decision of enormous import is the consensus mechanism / governance.  The choice of consensus / governance mechanism determines where the chain falls on the spectrum of Trustlessness/Permissionlessness/Immutability vs Centralized Control.  Events like the ETH/ETC split demonstrate that the notion of chain consensus must be analyzed at two distinct levels.  At the lowest (first-order) level one can analyze the formal rules embodied in a chain’s consensus code.  However, one must also contemplate the informal and inherently political process governing how those first-order rules can be changed and what recourse different stakeholders have when confronted with code changes contrary to their interests.  The space has attracted experimentation on both levels.  In this author’s opinion our collective understanding of both levels is still rather dim.  That said, certain things should stand out as red flags, e.g. project’s with (1) no “constitution” (2) incentive-incompatible constitutions or (3) constitutions that have been broken.

Implementation: Incomplete and somewhat messy but has the most theoretical promise vis-a-vis available anonymity alternatives.  Dev team is comparatively small/slow but on the whole thoughtful and focused.

Value Accretion: The anonymous payments use-case already has a large and growing market.  The lack of anonymity provided in practice by Bitcoin is underappreciated.  A large segment of this market adopting Monero (as has happened to a certain degree recently) would translate to a large increase in demand.  Furthermore, Monero’s inflation schedule in the medium-long term would fall well below demand in such a scenario.

Competitive advantage: Monero started life as a fork of Bytecoin.  The Monero team admired Bytecoin’s anonymity tech but found its code a mess and its distribution mechanism patently unfair.  Since the split it has managed to command superior developer talent/mindshare.

Zcash’s anonymity tech is theoretically superior but far more complex and will likely take a long time to stabilize.

Market: The goal of Ethereum is to build a general platform for decentralized applications.  Is this useful?  Platforms per-se aren’t useful, the applications running on them are.  In this light some imagination is required since many potential applications would be the first of their kind.

However, even beyond its decentralized application focus, I think a strong argument could be made that Ethereum is better (or will be once/assuming it stabilizes) than Bitcoin when it comes to Bitcoin’s core use-case: p2p value transfer.  This is in large measure due to its design having benefited from learning from Bitcoin’s mistakes.

Implementation: Even at the time of its pre-sale, the team working on Ethereum was impressive and since then has managed to attract a development ecosystem rivaling Bitcoin.  The management of the project has proven exceptionally competent, focused, pragmatic and open-minded and the result has been the most technically ambitious blockchain project to date.

Value Accretion: The native currency has similar supply characterics as Bitcoin (modulo the possibility that inflation may continue forever at some small level) and other than the genesis block carve-outs for presale buyers and development funding, distribution is via mining (currently).  This doesn’t raise any red flags and IMHO an attractive model for speculators.

Competitive advantage: With regard to its core decentralized application use-case Ethereum currently has no real peers functionality-wise other than forks.  IMHO developing a distributed application on a fork with a minority of the developer mindshare makes little sense, especially given Ethereum is still an evolving work in progress.

In theory Bitcoin could evolve to compete but this is unlikely anytime soon given its conservative development philosophy.

Market: Steem aims to create a social media platform.  This is an admittedly huge market whose revenues traditionally flow from selling user’s data and attention.  Existing platforms like reddit rely on complex weighted user voting schemes to curate user-contributed content based on a karma-driven reward system.  Steemit has attempted to devised a blockchain-based scheme that rewards valuable contributors with both money and editorial influence as well as allows users to outright buy editorial influence.

Implementation: The core idea is cool but the implementation raises some red flags.  To name a few:

Value Accretion: There are liquidity constraints intentionally built into Steem (which actually has several different native currencies) that, in our opinion, lead to widespread misunderstanding of its overall  true valuation and make it less appropriate for passive long-term speculation.  Additionally, the disproportionate amount of it held by the company and its founders make it challenging to model future market supply.

Competitive Advantage:  Unclear.  You can earn money publishing on Steem.  However, it’s not clear it’s the optimal medium for garnering either profit or attention.

While cryptoassets have many attractive qualities, anyone entering this space should be aware of several challenges, such as:

But for those willing to put in the work, cryptoassets offer incredible upside.  And their high volatility can actually reduce the overall risk in your portfolio, given the non-correlation of their returns vis-a-viz other asset classes.|||

