Mike Arpaia and I flew out of JFK on the morning of January 22nd, 2012. We were gainfully employed by ████████ and responding to a breach that a client had suffered. Mike and I spent a week pouring over forensic artifacts and soon identified the perp as a Russian-speaking hacker called “M4g”.

Belan targeted tech firms on the west coast. Many of the large breaches publicized during 2012 and 2013 are attributed to him, and news of others didn’t make it into the public domain.

This post details the victim estates and provides insight into the modus operandi of a prolific adversary. Please use this material to consider your environment and ensure these weak links do not exist within it.

Belan’s observed offensive traits were as follows:

Email addresses and password hashes were amassed with each compromise. Cracked credentials were used to target further victims via exposed mail services (e.g. Outlook on the Web or G Suite), and the exploratory process was repeated to gain privileged network access via VPN or similar means.

The marketing department of Belan’s first known victim ran a vulnerable WordPress server from a branch office. The server sat on the corporate WAN and could access internal systems: it wasn’t segregated or placed in a DMZ.

Belan found the server through a Google search and exploited it via CVE-2011–4106. Next, he downloaded tools via wget from m4g.ru and elevated privileges via CVE-2010–3856.

The following steps were undertaken over a five day period:

Belan’s second known victim was notified by the FBI of a breach. We identified an engineering account that had accessed the corporate VPN from Russian IP space, and subsequently discovered a compromised web server running on the engineer’s iMac in the kitchen of his home in Santa Clara.

The web server was a Linux VM running within the iMac via Parallels. Belan had found the server via the engineer’s own public Linkedin profile, e.g.

The Linux VM hosted a handful of PHP sites. Belan worked to remotely compromise the Linux VM, host system, and finally his target, as follows:

Application, database, and infrastructure logs within the victim environment were rolling (overwriting entries after 10–14 days). As such, our ability to investigate this compromise was limited. The facts however are as follows:

By mid-2013, Belan had amassed 200 million credentials (including email addresses, passwords, but also answers to security questions). Organizations embracing cloud services but not 2FA were soft targets.

A third victim was breached through the following steps:

1.2 billion usernames, password hashes, and security questions have been compromised from a handful of known victims (including Yahoo, Evernote, Scribd, and Zappos, according to the New York Times), and likely millions of further records from unknown victims.

Consider the number of organizations that provide services to their users and employees over the public Internet, including:

Next, consider how many enforce 2FA across their entire attack surface. Large enterprises often expose domain-joined systems to the Internet that can be leveraged to provide privileged network access (via Microsoft IIS, SharePoint, and other services supporting NTLM authentication).

Finally, consider the number of corporate VPNs using unsafe 2FA (requiring only a username, password, and software-based certificate). First-hand experience leads me to believe this number is high. VPN certificates and keys are often found within and lifted from email, ticketing, and chat services. 💥|||

A post-mortem examination of Alexsey Belan’s victims, revealing his tactics and hacking techniques.