Datawright, part of Kerridge Commercial Systems, is in the running for the Big Data, Internet of Things or Analytics Solution of the Year, SME Solution of the Year and Software Innovation Solution of the Year awards. The nominations are in recognition of the company’s work with automotive supply chain company Arlington Automotive NE.

In 1999, Arlington Automotive implemented K8 Manufacturing, Datawright’s manufacturing Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software. As the business grew, Arlington Automotive needed to capture real-time performance data from their machine presses in order to improve press stroke per minute per machine. In the past, this data was often captured too late, meaning improvements could not be made to production rates.

Datawright created a solution to this issue in 2016 by implementing the ‘Internet of Things’. Wi-fi automation devices were connected to a micro-switch in each press, meaning real-time data could be captured every minute. Overall, implementing this solution increased productivity by 16%, with each machine producing seven parts on average instead of the previous six.

Andy Gough, general manager at Datawright, said: “Datawright has a long and proven record of delivering effective IT problem-solving solutions and value to customers. The Arlington IoT project is a great example of this.

"The solution was designed and delivered by Datawright. What made the project unique was the fact that it bridged the hardware/infrastructure and software elements of collecting big data, using the Internet of Things and analysing the data collected. It’s fantastic that our work has been recognised by the European IT & Software Excellence Awards. We're looking forward to the results being announced at the end of March”.

The ninth European IT & Software Excellence Awards 2017 take place on March 30th. The awards were established in recognition of IT providers that create innovate solutions to create more efficient and profitable ways of working for businesses.|||

The Gateshead-based software provider has made the final shortlist in three categories at the 2017 European IT Software Excellence Awards.