This guide is unlike others I’ve done so far, and has a bit of a narrative to go along with the sketches. I thought the entire concept of garbage collection and how it gets dealt with in javascript, or more specifically in engines that run javascript, deserves a bit more of an explanation. I would also like to mention that this guide is meant to be beginner friendly, and does not cover every aspect of memory management within V8, and the rest of V8 internals. I’ve added a bunch of resources, if you want to delve into it more. This guide also focuses on ✨ javascript ✨, obviously garbage collection is different in things like C.

Ok, so let’s get started.

V8, the javascript runtime engine, not to be confused with your fav tomato juice 🍹, compiles and executes your beautifully written javascript. V8 comes with a generational, stop-the-world garbage collector, which I am going to try to explain below. It comes hand in hand together with Chrome. SpiderMonkey would be the Mozilla’s equivalent, and Chakra, Microsoft’s. Basically when running javascript, you need an engine to handle it for ya and V8 is one of your options, whether it’s in the browser or in node.js environment. (P.S. it’s all ✨ open-source ✨.)

The essential point of garbage collection is the ability to manage memory usage by a specific program. Languages such as C are generally able to hook into program’s memory management and allocate and free object within the context of the program. ECMAScript, on the other hand, lacks that particular interface to access memory management (yes, that means no API). Which basically means all memory management rights™ in a program get passed over to V8.

Since we don’t have access to infinite amount of memory, garbage collector’s job is to go through objects that are allocated in memory and determine whether they are dead or alive. Those that are alive get to stay in memory, those that are dead get removed, and memory gets allocated back to the heap.

What’s a heap though? A heap is an unstructured region, where the objects get allocated memory. This kind of allocation is dynamic, since the size / lifetime / quantity of objects is unknown, so it needs to be allocated and deallocated at runtime.

So if we look at the concurrency model, heap works directly with the call stack, as the objects showing up in the stack require memory allocation. It would look something like this:|||

This guide is unlike others I’ve done so far, and has a bit of a narrative to go along with the sketches. I thought the entire concept of garbage collection and how it gets dealt with in javascript…