Do you have an idea you want to showcase, or have a stunning story to tell or, maybe you’re a business person and need an engaging way to present your new project? Whatever you’re up to, an impact and well-made presentation of your idea is crucial to get the desired positive response.

A well-made explainer video telling the company story or product will dramatically increase trust and capture the viewers’ attention and boost conversion rates. People prefer videos to reading, because it is about visual experience. Video engagement is not only perfect for people don't like to read, but for a wide range of audience, who like to get the idea in minutes rather than read pages of info. Thus, it is a good way to present your product and increase its recognition, using a video tool.

Now, it’s so easy to amaze your audience and create a fascinating video with the help of our super functional Explainer Video Toolkit.

In this tutorial we are going to show you, how to make an explainer video with Renderforest. The uniqueness of this stunning toolkits is that it includes more than 400 interactive scenes, including characters, various items, kinetic typography, video and photo holders and more.  Enhanced video projects, which have hundreds of scenes and presets, can be made by this toolkit.

To create an explainer video, simply visit Renderforest site,    or sign in, if you already have an account.

When signed in, choose Video templates section and choose Explainer Video Toolkit – one of our trendiest tools.

Here we are. Hit “Create” button to start your video production process.

Here you have two options - either to use already made presets to save your time or start your video creation from zero.

The choice is yours, however we advise to have a look at our preset catalog, which includes dozens of presets like Company promotion, Gaming App promotion, Real Estate company promotion and much more. Hit "Load Preset" to see our preset catalog.

Simply choose the preset best fit for your project and start edition process, by adding your texts, media, and scenes, if needed. There is a large catalog of characters and scenes to meet your needs. You can drop and draft scenes, delete them or add new ones.

Choosing your scenes style, customizing color, makes your video best fit for your project, expectations and taste.

Add some music from our catalog or simply upload your own music – the choice is yours, the options – endless. It’s all about your imagination. The rest is Renderforest’s responsibility.

When finished with edition, you can Preview your creation, which is saved in your Renderforest account forever. You can reach it any time by going to My Videos page by clicking on your name and choosing My videos from dropdown list for re editing or extracting. But there are several option for exporting your creation. The first one is free option and we recommend to export free version first before processing paid rendering. Free videos have SD 360 quality and you’re able to edit, download and publish this videos any time you wish, but this videos will have a Renderforest watermark. If you want the videos without it, you can choose our paid subscription plans. Another option is to pay for each export.  All the details regarding our pricing you can find  .

However, if you want to make your own video, selecting each scene, character, we have another option for you.

Hit “Add scene”, instead of “Load a preset” button and start creating your own, unique and one in a kind video.

We have a vast catalog of characters, logo animations, signs and tricks, Internet and social media and more.

This list is really long and each one of these categories include dozens of templates. So the only one thing you have to be concerned about is not get lost.

Choose your preferred category, choose scene and start your video creating, simply by adding scenes, deleting or dropping and drafting them.

Here again an opportunities to choose the style of scenes, customizing color, choosing or uploading the music are available. When done, you can Preview your creation and reach it any time by going to My Videos page by clicking on your name and choosing My videos from dropdown list for re editing or extracting. Don’t forget also about the option of exporting videos without Renderforest watermark. All the details regarding our pricing you can find  .

Hope this tutorial was helpful. Enjoy your video production with Renderforest, where the only limit is your imagination.|||

In this tutorial we are going to show you, how to make an explainer video with Renderforest. The uniqueness of this stunning&nbsp;toolkits is that it includes more than 400 interactive scenes, including characters, various items, kinetic typography, video and photo holders and more.&nbsp; | en |