Elon Musk is the co-founder, CEO and Product Architect at Tesla, overseeing all product development, engineering, and design of the company's electric vehicles, battery products, and solar roofs.

Since the company’s inception in 2003, Tesla’s mission has been to accelerate the transition to a sustainable energy future. The first Tesla product, the Roadster sports car, debuted in 2008, followed by the Model S Sedan, which was introduced in 2012, and the Model X SUV, which launched in 2015. Model S was named Motor Trend 2013 Car of the Year, received Consumer Reports’ Best Overall Car and earned the highest-ever safety rating awarded by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. In 2017, Tesla will begin deliveries of Model 3, a $35,000 mass-market electric car with over 215 miles of range.

In 2015, Tesla introduced two energy storage products, the Powerwall home battery and the Powerpack industrial-scale battery. In 2016, Tesla acquired SolarCity, the leading provider of solar power systems in the United States, and in 2017 will release the Solar Roof, a beautiful and affordable energy generation product.

Elon is also the co-founder, CEO, and lead designer of Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX), where he oversees the development and manufacturing of advanced rockets and spacecraft for missions to and beyond Earth orbit, with the goal of creating a self-sustaining city on Mars. He is also the co-founder and chairman of OpenAI, a non-profit research company working to build safe artificial intelligence and ensure that AI's benefits are as widely and evenly distributed as possible.

Previously, Elon co-founded and sold PayPal, the world's leading Internet payment system, and Zip2, one of the first internet maps and directions services, which helped bring major publishers like the New York Times and Hearst online.|||

Elon Musk is the co-founder, CEO and Product Architect at Tesla, overseeing all product development, engineering, and design of the company's electric vehicles, battery products, and solar roofs.