I was naïve to gender inequality until it hit me square in the face. A few years ago, my CEO Ed and I accepted a meeting with a financial institution that wanted our business. During the course of our meeting, one gentleman refused to make eye contact with me. He presented to the other two men in the room as if I didn’t exist. Ed, as intuitive as he is, caught on. At the end of the meeting, he playfully commented, “You’ll have to get Kira’s approval. She makes all of the decisions around here.” The gentleman looked as if he’d seen a ghost.

I defy all stereotypes of a CFO as a 31-year-old woman. That’s right. As if being a woman executive doesn’t pose its own challenges, being a young woman undoubtedly adds extra layers. How do I choose to address these challenges when they get in my way? Head on. Allow me to share some of my own professional rules I strive to live by:

A healthy support system is just as important in your professional life as it is in your personal life. This is possibly the best career advice someone has ever given me. Over time, identify other professionals in your company, industry, and community who you have resounding respect for. Participate in industry-specific committees and conferences that give you the opportunity to network with others who share a similar role as you. Try to get on at least one nonprofit board of directors. Surround yourself with professionals, both men and women, who inspire you. Build relationships with them. I’ve learned some of the most valuable lessons in my career while off the clock.

Look in the mirror and say, “I am awesome.” Stop apologizing unless you did something worth apologizing for. Not sure what I’m talking about? Keep a log of how many times per week you utter the word, “sorry.” Some of you will get it. If you don’t, keep up the good work. Own your ideas. Take credit when credit is due. When you know what’s best for your company, especially when you are the subject matter expert in the room, confidently exercise your voice. Publicly lift up your fellow women colleagues in opportune situations. In turn, they will do the same for you when you may need it the most.

Yes, you will have to work harder. However, do not allow your unwavering work ethic become your Achilles’ heel. You must achieve and maintain a work-life balance. Every second of every day has a return on investment. Inside the office, build strong teams underneath you. Invest quality time in their training and development. Delegate, even when it seems easier to just “do it yourself.” It’s OK if they fall down and make a mistake. You did and it got you here. Make sure your best people have a clear growth path and know how much you value them. You will not advance unless your stellar team advances with you.

Outside the office, realize when you need to make investments like a cleaning service, so you can increase the quality of your time off. Do not let go of the things that bring you happiness. Spend time with your family, attend that music festival, or sign up for a half marathon like you’ve always wanted to. Stop missing out on life because you consistently put your company before yourself. Tremendously successful businessman Joe Shmoe doesn’t. Personal regrets will only breed resentment. So leave the office every Monday by 5 PM. Completely unplug for one full week at least twice per year. Set your own standards and hold yourself accountable.

You may be the most intelligent, hardest-working, dedicated employee in your company. You may be the employee who puts your company before yourself all too often (if so, reread point number 3). If you cannot effectively present your brilliant ideas, none of this matters. I’ve watched Dale Carnegie–trained executives talk about nothing and effortlessly command a room. It’s all in the delivery, ladies. Learn how to work that room, conference call, or one-on-one conversation. Always know your audience. And yes, pick up a copy of Dale Carnegie’s How to Win Friends and Influence People. This classic went to print in 1936. Society has evolved, but human nature hasn’t changed much in 81 years.

Set yourself up for success with these simple words of advice. Have awareness. When gender inequality or other challenges cross your path, face them head on. Always be proud of who you are, and please join me in continuing the march forward.|||

