We have a strict Code of Conduct that requires our suppliers to adhere to high standards for safe working conditions, fair treatment of workers and environmentally safe manufacturing. Every year we strengthen these standards in a continuing effort to raise the bar. By forming close partnerships, we help our suppliers develop the knowledge and skills they need to operate responsibly. In 2016, even as we raised our benchmarks and added new suppliers to our program, our collaboration resulted in higher scores across the board.

We conducted 705 supplier assessments in 2016. Almost 30 percent of these were first-time assessments for suppliers new to the program. By working closely with our suppliers, we were able to increase the number of high-performing supplier sites by 59 percent and decrease the number of low-performing supplier sites by 31 percent.

In order to know whether our suppliers are progressing, we conduct regular assessments. We assess suppliers in three main categories: labour and human rights, environmental responsibility, and health and safety. Each category is scored on a 100-point scale based on more than 500 data points that correspond to our Code of Conduct. We expect our suppliers to show steady improvement, and we work with them to achieve this through education, training tools and support.

We’re leading the way on the environment and helping our partners keep pace. Throughout our supply chain we’re driving programs that minimize carbon emissions, eliminate landfill waste, conserve water and replace unsafe chemicals. We’re also helping our suppliers reduce the amount of energy they use and make the switch to renewable energy. We’re advancing renewable energy usage by working with suppliers to create 4 gigawatts of renewable energy around the world by 2020 that will help power their facilities. In 2016, we tripled the number of supplier sites participating in our energy efficiency program, resulting in the reduction of more than 150,000 metric tons of carbon emissions. A number of large suppliers have already committed to power all Apple manufacturing with renewable energy by the end of 2018. These commitments will reduce carbon emissions by 7,000,000 metric tons per year, the equivalent of removing 1,500,000 cars from the road for a year. We’re even taking responsibility for our paper supply chain: more than 99 percent of the paper used in our packaging comes from either recycled wood fibre or sustainably managed forests and controlled wood sources.|||

