Help?Since asking people to use pip to install things, I get a lot of feedback on pip not working. Feedback like this.What's it for? It's not built into python?I should download pypy?You're weird.But why is it called pip?pip is broken on the raspberianpip3 doesn't exist on windowsPeople have an old pip. Old pip doesn't support wheels.I heard about eggs...Well, eggs are another zip file with python code in it. Used mainly by easy_install.The pip executable or script is for python 2, and they are using python 3.pip is for a system python, and they have another python installed. How did they install that python? Which of the several pythons did they install? Maybe if they install another python it will work this time.It's not working one time and. And now certain files can't be updated without sudo. However, now they have forgotten that sudo exists.pip doesn't tell them which python it is installing for. But I installed it!pip doesn't install things atomically, so if there is a failed install, things break. If pip was a database (it is)...Virtual environments work if you use python -m venv, but not virtualenv. Or some times it's the other way around. If you have the right packages installed on Debian, and Ubuntu... because they don't install virtualenv by default.What do you meanI can't move it to another place on my Desktop?pip installs things into global places by default.Why are packages still installed globally by default?This is not ideal. It doesn't work on windows. It doesn't work on Ubuntu. It makes some text editors crash (because virtualenvs have so many files they get sick). It confuses test discovery (because for some reason they don't know about virtual environments still and try to test random packages you have installed). You have to know about virtualenv, about pip, about running things with modules, about environment variables, and system paths. You have to know that at the beginning. Before you know anything at all.Is there even one set of instructions where people can have a new environment, and install something? Install something in a way that it might not break their other applications? In a way which won't cause them harm? Please let me know the magic words?I just tell people `pip install pygame`. Even though I know it doesn't work. And can't work. By design. I tell them to do that, because it's probably the best we got. And pip keeps getting better. And one day it will be even better.Help? Let's fix this|||

