If you’re a sports fan, especially a baseball fan, you’ve probably seen the movie Moneyball with Brad Pitt.  It's the true-to-life story of the Oakland A’s and how manager Billy Beane, with a small budget to pay salaries, uses the expertise of his assistant’s math and statistics to figure out that players who get on base can make a big determination of whether a team will win or lose.  They go on to win their first playoff series in years and made the playoffs for four consecutive years on their low budget.  It's a great movie. I highly recommend it.

Cities are a lot like a sports team, and what we do is similar to what Billy had to do.  He had salary money and used it to get players for a value, who could get on base.  As City Managers, we help set the direction of our cities with our planners and councils, and as we build out, we have a finite amount of land along with our finite ability to maintain and replace (ideally) the infrastructure we accept.  We use up land in our respective city limits/extraterritorial jurisdictions, and accept infrastructure dedicated from developers in order to create tax base from the value of private investments made.

Not all development is fiscally productive.  Urbanization, or more accurately, sub-urbanization, is not necessarily prosperity. The hard sobering fact is that, when permitting development in our cities, we’ve hired anybody, regardless of whether or not they can get on base, and we wonder why we don’t win.  We plan for and receive, thousands of acres of low and middle value residential developments with a ton of future infrastructure liabilities using our scarce lands.  We don’t do the math on whether or not a new development will make the city richer or poorer.  In a tax and fee adverse environment that is growing increasingly hostile, with the majority of our citizens struggling and frustrated with us (and everything), shouldn’t we know this?

Let’s start playing to win by daylighting the financials of what’s happening and encouraging more fiscally sustainable development.  What if we actually grew stronger with every development?  Here’s an idea I would love for you to try: Score development proposals based on fiscal productivity.  Add that to the mix.  Of course, be careful and always listen to your city attorney.  There are a number of consultants that can perform fiscal analysis studies to help out, but beware, don’t take a developer’s numbers at face value.  Don’t even use their consultants if they’ve offered to pay for the service.  The answer is already “it makes money, don’t worry about it.”|||

When permitting development in our cities, we’ve hired anybody—regardless 
of whether or not they can get on base. And we wonder why we don’t win.