I have a candidate for interview. Let’s call him Brian. We’ve been struggling to find a good candidate for this role, which is particularly intensive in terms of problem solving and algorithmic intelligence. We’re used to hiring good generalists. Full stack people that have solid judgement choosing tools, libraries and frameworks and that put together working applications. For this job we need something different: a real problem solver with the ability to absorb a vast amount of detail.

Brian is of indeterminate age, somewhere between 35 and 50 to look at. He wears a cheap suit that is about a size too large for him and this contributes to his agelessness. In a way he looks like a senescent 14 year old, applying for his first job. Brian has a diploma from an indifferent higher education institute. He’s only ever had one job, programming (something like) cash registers. He’s never heard of git (or Github), doesn’t do a lot of programming outside of work, has vaguely heard of C++11 and seems to think it might catch on over the next 20 years - he’ll have to look into it sometime. He’s a Windows user. He used to program in some obsolete internal IDE, but when that got to be too much trouble to maintain he started using Notepad. Had he looked at something with syntax highlighting? Brian’s eyes light up for a moment, then slowly he slumps and finally he shrugs gently.

His interests outside of work are largely walking and thinking. Pressed on the latter he says he finds a lot of things very interesting, but doesn’t seem to want to be more specific than that.

Brian then methodically demolishes the technical test we’ve prepared for him (we asked a specialist outside the company to assess him on this). He chooses to give all his answers in long hand, on lined paper. He makes small schoolmasterish gestures and sounds all the while: a slight harrumph here, a theatrically (for Brian) raised eyebrow there. Afterwards he points out some of the deficiencies and logical gaps in the questions and explains how he addressed them in his answers. He is not in the least modest about his answers. He is satisfied with them.

Afterwards, it turns out, given the time constraints, they are excellent. We all agree that Brian is our man. Brian’s CV (an MS Word Doc) came via a Dublin jobs website, rather than from the expensive specialist recruiter we’d engaged. I contact Brian on the email supplied. After a couple of days without an answer, I try the mobile number. It’s disconnected. A couple more emails without reply and I move on. We hire someone else.

I’m clearing out my about a year later and I see that old Word Doc. My curiosity about Brian has strangely intensified during that time. I open it up and I see that his address is close to where I have moved in the meantime. About a couple of streets away. Next time I’m walking home I pass that way and as I get close to his front door, I get an irresistible urge to know. I stop. I approach. I hold up and drop the old metal knocker, as if somehow the passivity of dropping makes me less responsible for this inappropriate intrusion. A girl in her twenties comes to the door. Brian? Oh yeah, I took his room. I think he went back to Donegal to take care of his mother or something.

I often wonder what it was I wanted to know as I went up to that door. I often wonder what precisely Brian was thinking about. Sometimes I think of his intellectual self-sufficiency and isolation and it makes me shiver a little. There is a challenge to our biology in the lives of people who choose to withdraw, a cosmic strangeness to the mind that doesn’t seek communion anymore. Brian had gone north to a cold and dismal county to tend to his dying mother. I knew myself the kind of house it would be. I could picture the dusky, yellow light of the hallway. The new things that would somehow still look like relics from the 1950s. Brian wouldn’t have a computer up there. Why would he? There was nothing he needed on a computer.|||

Brian, The Programmer