Business companies, life-style bloggers, and governmental and non-governmental organizations – all of them use email marketing and send email campaigns. However, all of those campaigns have a different purpose. Bloggers care about the traffic and subscribers, non-governmental organizations care about donations and stakeholder publicity, politicians send email campaigns to save their ratings, etc.

Meanwhile, the purpose of ecommerce email marketing is to sell goods. That means you create chains of messages to communicate with your customer, and each time, a message generates revenue.

Ecommerce email marketing is not only about promotional newsletters. There is a wide range of emails that might be sent to your customers. Using your basic business data, you may send highly personalized cart recovery, customer reactivation emails, promotional newsletters, welcome emails, etc. However, Rome wasn’t built in a day, so small business retailers should not bombard their customers’ inboxes with hundreds of different messages at a time.

This ecommerce email marketing guide will lead you through the process and help you understand what is important in email communication and how to set up a high converting email chain for your customers.

Why does Soundest takes care of this ecommerce email marketing guide? The reason is simple. Currently, the number of retailers that benefit from ecommerce email marketing is still small. When we see how our clients greatly succeed from using their basic business data, we want to help those who are not yet reaping the fruits of their labor. We want to encourage retailers to take advantage of the basic data that every business has and send emails that are relevant to customers, thereby generating profit.

This guide will provide you with actionable tips, statistics, case studies, and recommended sources—and, in some cases, even ready-made solutions.|||

This is a guide for small business owners. It covers the main email marketing components: email list building, rules for professional email design, introduction to marketing automation, etc.