ZIP (Zone Improvement Plan) Code — this is a system of post addresses. Made by USPS at 1963. Also there exists ZIP+4 code — an expanded postal code system which defines not only the state, city and district, but also the exact house. US use 5 or 5+4 digits ZIP-code.

Canada uses ZIP Code as well, but it’s 6-character alphanumeric string code (e.g. A1A, 1A1…).

Europe, Middle Asia ⤑ Postal Code. 3–4 character numeric codes

Australia ⤑ Postcode. 3–4 character numeric codes

Brazil ⤑ CEP (Código de Endereçamento Postal)

India ⤑ PIN (Postal Index Number). Numeric only

UAE ⤑ P.O.Box (Post Box Number). In the closer future UAE is planning to switch on Makani system.

Also, you might encounter the following abbreviations which are used for the customers that receive 200 items or more of Standard / Short and Long machinable letter-mail each business day:

• LVR (Large Volume Receiver) — Australia.

• CEDEX (Courrier d’Entreprise à Distribution EXceptionnelle (“special business mail”)) — France.

The systems mentioned above are only the most popular in the world. But there are even more. Anyway, I believe you got the point. For a specific country there is a specific postal system with its own name, constraints and values. Find out more here.

In our case, 95% of the market for us is in EU and US. Hence, there was no sense to spend a lot of time and efforts to find out everything about other systems and support them properly. That’s why we are going to cover only the following.

1. US

 1.0. Known as ZIP Code or ZIP+4 Code

 1.1. Numeric + space or hyphen (“–”)

 1.2. Min length: 5-digit

 1.3. Max length: 10-digit + hyphen

 1.4. If there was entered 6th character (this means that the user is gonna type in ZIP+4 code), use auto-formatting and put the hyphen automatically

 1.5. Format: 12345 (ZIP), 12345–6789 (ZIP+4)

3. Norway+Switzerland+Germany+Austria+Liechtenstein (serviced by Posten):

 3.0. Known as Postal Code

 3.1. Numeric

 3.2. Length: 4-digit

 3.3. Format: 0001

4. Netherlands

 4.0. Known as Postal Code

 4.1. Alphanumeric

 4.2. Length: 6characters + hyphen/space

 4.3. Format: NL-1000 (does’t use letters combinations “SS/SD/SA” because of the associations with the Nazi occupation in time of WW2).

6. UK

 6.0. Known as Postcode

 6.1. Alphanumeric

 6.2. Min Length: 6 characters

 6.3. Max Length: 8 characters

 6.4. Outward code format: AN, ANN, AAN, AANN, ANA, AANA, and AAA (letters I and Z are not used in the second alpha position (except GIR 0AA))

 6.5. Inward code format: always NAA (letters C, I, K, M, O, and V are never used)

Obviously, the auto-formatting can be applied only after the answer due to the different formats of the first half of the code.

I don’t know about you, but I was quite surprised with this new information.

As you might have already notice, by ZIP/Postal Code you can detect the city, state, and in some cases, even the full address. That might be a dramatical time-saver, especially for the countries where citizens know their codes pretty well. For instance, US and UK.

But that will not work for the post-soviet countries because their citizens aren’t really familiar with their postal codes. Hence, it makes sense to put ZIP/Postal code field right after the country and before the City, the State, and the address line. Thus, after a user entered the code, we can automatically detect the city, state, and the address line — it’s possible only when the user types in ZIP+4 or full Postal Code.

For instance, here is Apple’s Checkout form. By entering ZIP code they detect your city and state, but don’t give you the possibility to set them without the ZIP code.

BTW, if we designed a form for the consumer product, we could collapse all these Billing Address fields under only one — ZIP/Postal code. Because a complete customer address might be detected by a postal code. So a respondent doesn’t have to fill out billing address manually. Only in case the customer doesn’t know his code.

Anyway, in both cases, you should save the ability to manually answer on these questions without the mandatory need to enter zip/postal code first. But still, you will be able to automatically detect ZIP/postal code backwards.|||

After reading this article you will know how to validate properly each field; how to decrease the number of errors a respondent might make; how the differences between B2C and B2B markets lead to…