Snap Inc. has signed a pact with NBCUniversal for the 2018 Winter Olympics that will make the popular messaging app a home for Olympic-themed content and allow NBCUniversal to sell Games-related geofilters and “lenses” to advertisers for the first time.

The deal for next year’s Winter Games in Pyeongchang, South Korea, expands upon a similar partnership between the two companies for the 2016 Rio Olympics. It will allow Snapchat to share clips of NBC’s Olympics content in a live story that will also feature user content.

In addition, Snapchat will carry coverage of the Games that BuzzFeed will co-produce with NBC for the Snapchat Discover media hub.

Advertising commitments related to this deal could come in between $50 million and $75 million in the first quarter of 2018, people familiar with the matter said. NBCUniversal executives unveiled the Snap partnership to advertisers Wednesday as part of the annual ad sales presentations known as the “upfronts.”

As in the prior deal, NBC will be able to sell ad slots on its Snapchat video content. Now, it will also be able to sell geofilters and lenses, which have become signature ad formats for Snapchat. They let marketers overlay their brand imagery on users’ faces, photos or videos.

While NBC’s game highlights will likely appear on many online platforms, including Facebook and YouTube, Snap will exclusively have some original Olympics-related content cocreated by BuzzFeed and NBC on its platform.

In an interview, NBC Olympics President Gary Zenkel said Snap has never before allowed a partner to sell national filters and lenses to marketers, a sign of the deepening relationship between the two companies since NBCUniversal invested $500 million in Snap as part of its March initial public offering.

Mr. Zenkel noted that nearly 35 million people in the U.S. viewed NBC’s Rio Olympic coverage on Snapchat, consuming over 230 million minutes of content on the platform. He said the vast majority of that audience was under the age of 35.

“We will take to the market and into our Olympic discussions that unique opportunity to get in front of a very young audience during the period of the Games,” Mr. Zenkel said.

Snap’s ability to show momentum in attracting ad dollars is key to its growth and to supporting its valuation of over $24 billion. Some analysts expect the company will reach revenue of $1 billion in 2017, more than double the $404 million it generated last year. But it is operating in a highly competitive environment in which giants Facebook Inc. and Alphabet Inc.s’ Google are sucking up digital ad dollars.

Ahead of the IPO, the company had been courting Madison Avenue aggressively. It met with media-buying arms of ad giants including WPP WPPGY 0.57% PLC, Omnicom Group Inc., Publicis Groupe SA, and Interpublic Group of Co s., seeking ad-spending commitments of $100 million to $200 million from each firm for 2017, roughly double or triple what these firms spent on the platform in 2016.

Snap went public at $17 a share earlier this month. While its stock has been volatile in recent weeks, it has stayed above the IPO price and was at $22 in early afternoon trading Wednesday.

Write to Shalini Ramachandran at shalini.ramachandran@wsj.com and Maureen Farrell at maureen.farrell@wsj.com|||

Snap Inc. has signed a pact with NBCUniversal for the 2018 Winter Olympics that will make the popular messaging app a home for Olympic-themed content and allow NBCUniversal to sell Games-related geofilters and “lenses” to advertisers for the first time.