I’m currently working on a new product to improve the attendee experience at tech conferences. While I got many insights by asking friends and family to tell me about the last conference they went to, I needed to reach more people who go to tech conferences. Last week, SXSW Interactive was happening in Austin, TX. If you’re not familiar, SXSW is a yearly gathering of many people from all over the tech industry filled with talks, parties, and big announcements.

I was seeing lots of tweets about the event popping up on my feed and friends posting their travel updates to Austin on Facebook. Many people who go to the event engage with others and share their experiences in a variety of social channels. Given the attendees’ online presence, why not poll Twitter?

Because of a few unexpected retweets on this first poll, I was getting more people excited to vote and share their thoughts. I immediately thought of how Michael Margolis of GV runs immersive research sprints to quickly understand other people’s perspectives. Much like the initial phase of any good design thinking project, a research sprint is geared at interviewing, observing, and analyzing your customers to answer important questions.

The engagement I received from the SXSW crowd was great, so I decided to post on a regular cadence throughout the week. The second question was geared toward learning:

Beyond the polls, I tried to reach out to people who commented, liked, or followed me as a result of my tweets. I ended up having 10+ in-depth conversations throughout the week. Several people offered and talked to me via phone and video chat.

Twitter polls are not scientific, but they can answer my questions about how people learn and connect at conferences. My top insights are:

By reaching out via DM and asking follow-up questions, I had about 30 conversations. More than 10 were in-depth conversations. I can’t stress how vital this is — reaching out individually was the best way to improve my understanding of the attendee experience. People like to talk about themselves and their experiences if you ask thoughtful questions.

If you can make it happen, try to observe your customers directly. You won’t be able to reach the same number of people, but can lead to the best insights. This could be a follow up activity you may consider after engaging and finding helpful participants.

Tweeting is free — although you might want to pay for power tools in the future. I would have loved to edit my tweets!

I paid $33 over two Twitter ad campaigns as my polls were closing. This was not effective, but I learned a lot from messaging Twitter Ads Help (@TwitterAdsHelp). I asked them how to increase tweet engagement, write effective copy for ads, and test my campaigns. I wanted a feature to dynamically vary ad copy, and I hope my suggestion gets bubbled up. Till then, I created a Twitter Moment to be able to present the polls in a more ad-friendly manner.|||

I’m currently working on a new product to improve the attendee experience at tech conferences. While I got many insights by asking friends and family to tell me about the last conference they went to…