I have read a lot of stuff over the years, such as about The History of Women's Work , and I have had a class on Women's History, among other things. But a lot of that reading was long ago and far away. I have no plans to try to back up this post with studies or evidence.This post is my personal opinion.It is based on many years of reading about the very real challenges women face in life, no matter how good they are or how right they get it. It is also based on many years of thinking through the details as to why my life did not go the way I expected it to when I was a teenager doing well in school and looking forward to a modern life as a liberated woman, part of a two career couple.(Ha ha. None of that happened. I had a 1950's style marriage, followed by divorce and poverty.)What I have come to firmly believe is that the traditional gender-based roles where mom is home with the kids and dad is the primary breadwinner is a system that evolved as the least worst answer for all involved parties in a subsistence culture. This is what most humans have lived with for most of human history. Generally speaking:1) Most people are heterosexual.2) Nature has evolved to sneakily encourage reproduction, what with sex feeling good, etc.3) Reliable birth control has mostly not been available for the vast majority of human history.This is not some evil plot by "The Patriarchy." In a subsistence culture prior to money being widely available, most people literally are working to put food on the table.That is not a metaphor. In Hunter-Gatherer cultures, most work revolves around physically extracting food from the landscape.Mothers gather because they can do that with a baby strapped to their back. They can't reasonably participate in the hunt while lugging around a baby so they can breast feed it when it is hungry.This was not done to oppress women. It was not done to treat them like servants. It was not done to treat them like second class citizens.It was what worked as well as possible, under very difficult circumstances where starvation was a constant threat. My sons tell me that it is ironic that The Irish Potato Famine is remembered the way it is because for most of human history, famine was not newsworthy. It was so common, it was background noise.The traditional Nuclear Family, where dad goes off to work to bring home a good paycheck and mom's primary responsibility is the family, still works. When the kids are young or one of them has special needs or there are other challenges in the family, having mom home with the kids and doing the "women's work" and dad going to a paid job still gives all involved parties the least worst outcome.So, if you are a young woman hoping to have kids, it makes sense to hope to marry a guy who makes good money so you can be home with the kids -- at least for a time, if only while they are really little. If one of the parents can be home with the kids, everyone's quality of life will be better than the generally harried existence of two income couples who are paying most of her income for daycare for up to five years.Thus, young women who want children are going to continue to be inclined to make many of the same choices their mothers or grandmothers made. They will put their man's job first. They will relocate so he can get a better paying job, taking a pay cut for themselves in the process. They will do the housework so he can put his time and energy into his career.It all grows logically out of human biology. Regardless of how rich, smart or educated you are, if you choose to reproduce the old fashioned way, she is the one who will carry the baby in her womb and she is the one who will produce milk to nourish it.The result is that both biology and the long tradition of human culture that evolved out of what worked for human biology cast a very long shadow over the human race. Even women who don't want children or can't have children or are not heterosexual wind up with enormous social pressure to engage in some of these same behaviors.There is a great weight of society expecting it. The pressure is enormous and expectations are unbudging because, historically, survival literally depended upon conforming to such patterns of behavior.I don't know how to solve it. I don't know exactly how we get to a better world from here. But I think the first step is to understand this origin story as compassionately, respectfully and objectively as possible.I think it absolutely does not help to start from an assumption that men are evil asshats intentionally oppressing women because "Power corrupts" and The Patriarchy has power. I don't think that gets us anywhere good.|||

