recruitment. Often those who stay in the study long enough

become part of treatment efﬁcacy analyses. Staying with a provider

who uses a manualized therapeutic approach for multiple weeks

requires a tremendous amount of commitment, whereas in the real

world, nearly one-quarter of patients prematurely drop out of ther-

seeing a therapist in our observational research, they may not have

seen them long enough to induce positive change. Further, it could

be that some people started therapy because of a traumatic life

event and actually declined at a less rapid rate than if they had

not sought therapy. It would be helpful if future research could

identify the major differences between people who stay in therapy

long enough to receive what might construed as an effective treat-

ment, and those who only dabble in therapy and therefore do not

get exposed to the intervention mechanisms that lead to positive

change, as well as repeatedly assess for severe life events.

The third explanation concerns therapists who deliver therapy.

Again, in a controlled intervention, treatment integrity is often one

of the highest priorities of the research protocol. In contrast, imple-

may not happen with as much structure or rigor. In one study of

treatment-as-usual for drug and alcohol disorders, the researchers

found that most therapists failed to implement well-validated

to focus on assessing social functioning and asking open-ended

questions, rather than changing relevant thoughts, feelings, or

behaviors. Implementation science is a relatively new ﬁeld (see

Proctor et al., 2009 ) and future research might address more thor-

oughly the potential gap between the how therapy is validated in

controlled studies and how it is implemented in real-world

The present research should be interpreted in light of several

factors. Neither of the samples were clinical in nature and no infor-

mation about type/duration of therapy was available. Therefore,

our results are limited in their ability to inform us of therapy effec-

tiveness as well as therapy time course. Though the use of PSM

allows us to be more conﬁdent in ruling out many alternative

hypotheses, individuals were not randomly assigned to therapy

experience versus no therapy experience. Further, despite control-

ling for numerous observed variables from the available data, it is

possible that variables not assessed in either study inﬂuenced our

results. To assess the robustness of our effects in the presence of

of depression in Studies 1 and 2 and a small to moderate unob-

served confounder, a difference of nearly two standard deviations

(0.59/0.3 = 1.97) in the TOSCA, and nearly one standard deviation

(0.27/0.3 = 0.9) in the HRS, would need to exist between the treat-

ment and the control groups to eliminate those effects. Finally, due

to the size and scope of TOSCA and HRS, only self-reports of per-

research may wish to examine other forms of data (e.g., informant

report) as well as examine data gathered in closer temporal prox-

whether personality trait change can be tracked on a micro level.

The current ﬁndings highlight an urgent need for future observa-

tional research that includes more frequent assessments before,

during, and the after therapy, thereby enabling greater temporal

rently, such data does not exist.

The present research was not intended to directly assess the

effectiveness of clinical interventions. However, we unexpectedly

found that people reporting that they have seen a therapist for

treatment also report predominantly negative changes in personal-

ity traits and psychological functioning. These are some of the ﬁrst

attempts to investigate the effect of therapy in naturalistic data

and more research is needed to understand how therapy in the real

world is associated with personality trait change. We point out

several factors and explanations that mitigate against drawing

the strong conclusion that therapy is not a uniformly positive inﬂu-

ence, but the gravity of this issue necessitates that researchers

investigate the apparent discrepancy between these ﬁndings and

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in

nature, diagnosis, and treatment of neuroticism back to the future.

effects of school tracking on psychometric intelligence: Do academic-track

Assessing and interpreting personality change and continuity in patients

Conscientiousness and longevity: An examination of possible mediators.

roam: Processes of self-esteem development from adolescence to emerging

adulthood in the context of international student exchange.

traits to anxiety, depressive, and substance use disorders: A meta-analysis.

Lachman, M. E., & Bertrand, R. B. (2001). Personality and the self in midlife. In M. E.

university avenue: Life paths, life events, and personality trait change at the

validation of the NEO-FFI in a sample of young adults: Effects of the response

P.I. Chow et al. / Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2017) xxx–xxx

Please cite this article in press as: Chow, P. I., et al. Therapy experience in naturalistic observational studies is associated with negative changes in person-|||

Official Full-Text Publication: Therapy Experience in Naturalistic Observational Studies is Associated with Negative Changes in Personality on ResearchGate, the professional network for scientists.