People show various tones, such as joy, sadness, anger, and agreeableness, in daily communications. Such tones can impact the effectiveness of communication in different contexts. Tone Analyzer leverages cognitive linguistic analysis to identify a variety of tones at both the sentence and document level. This insight can then used to refine and improve communications.

It detects three types of tones, including emotion (anger, disgust, fear, joy and sadness), social propensities (openness, conscientiousness, extroversion, agreeableness, and emotional range), and language styles (analytical, confident and tentative) from text.

#NArgsString = '[["One", "Two", "Three"], [0.98, 0.87, 0.87]]'

#This is a arguments string for plotly formatting

#First we extract all the data from the JSON from Watson.  Can pretty print if you want

#Initialise the sub components of the plotly argument string

#Itterate through the JSON structure picking up attributes and values

#Build the x and y Python lists that we'll use for the plotly argument

#This is the arguments string for plotly.  We need to use the .join method to make sure the arguments string is properly formatted for the x axis values

#Make sure we have " not ' around the JSON elements

#Form the body for the HTTP POST

#Read the response and print it for the user

I am excellent at everything.  There is nothing I can not do.  Throw a challenge at me and I will succeed.  I have beaten every target ever set for me.  Employ me and you will employ a winner.

A Solution Architect with a wide range of knowledge and experience in the Telecommunications and IT industry.  Has significant experience of leading cross-functional teams to deliver innovative solutions spanning IT, Network and TV systems.  A strong self-starter with proven analytical and problem solving skills.  Able to learn about new technologies quickly and apply this knowledge to design tasks.  Well-developed communication and presentation skills, both written and oral.

A Solution Architect with a wide range of knowledge and experience in the Telecommunications and IT industry.  Has significant experience of leading cross-functional teams to deliver innovative solutions spanning IT, Network and TV systems.  A strong self-starter with proven analytical and problem solving skills.  Able to learn about new technologies quickly and apply this knowledge to design tasks.  Well-developed communication and presentation skills, both written and oral.  I’m so afraid that if I don’t get this CV right then I won’t be employed by anyone; I’m really really scared, worried and frightened about this!

in the Telecommunications and IT industry.  Has significant experience of leading cross-functional teams to deliver innovative solutions spanning IT, Network and TV systems.  A strong self-starter with proven analytical and problem solving skills.  In a fast paced, ever changing technology world, is confident in his abilities to quickly learn and apply new skills.  Well-developed communication and presentation skills, both written and oral.

Now to up the conscientiousness.  I actually had to play with the language a lot and even then I only managed to improve it by 0.1.  Here's what I wrote:

A Solution Architect with a track record of successful delivery in the Telecommunications and IT industry.  Has significant experience of leading cross-functional teams to deliver innovative solutions spanning IT, Network and TV systems.  A strong self-starter with proven analytical and problem solving skills.  In a fast paced, ever changing technology world, is confident in his abilities to quickly learn and apply new skills.   A conscientious, reliable individual who always who sets challenging goals, forms structured plans to achieve them and follows through until the job is complete.

A Solution Architect with a track record of successful delivery in the Telecommunications and IT industry.  Has significant experience of leading cross-functional teams to deliver innovative solutions spanning IT, Network and TV systems.  A strong self-starter with proven analytical and problem solving skills that is never happier than when working with like-minded individuals to harmoniously collaborate and solve problems .  In a fast paced, ever changing technology world, is confident in his abilities to quickly learn and apply new skills.  A conscientious, reliable individual who always who sets challenging goals, forms structured plans to achieve them and follows through until the job is complete.|||

Using IBM Bluemix Watson APIs to optimise my CV (resume)