Free/libre software stack for Kobo ebook readers. No proprietary software (except WiFi and EPD controller firmware), no spyware and no DRM. Based on koreader and Debian.

WARNING: At this point, okreader has only been tested on a few different devices. Only install it if you know what you're doing. You could brick your ereader and in some countries you might void your warranty.

This project is at a very early stage. Lack of the following features could be a problem, especially for non-technical users:

okreader is also expected to work on other Kobo devices using the i.MX507 SoC, but some additional u-boot and/or kernel patches might be needed (see this repository). okreader commit #1e7825eb has been confirmed by @dtamas to also work on Kobo Glo. Support for newer devices might be added at a later time. If anyone wants to test / lend or donate any of the untested or unsupported devices, please get in touch at okreader at linux-geek dot org. Also see this thread for a short description of the steps involved in getting okreader running on an unsupported Kobo device.

There seem to be multiple hardware revisions with different WiFi adapters. The firmware-okreader package only provides the firmware for the adapters in the devices I've tested: Kobo Aura, Kobo Touch rev C (N905C) and Kobo Mini.

Apart from these specs, the contrast and the ghosting of the electronic ink display also tend to get better in newer models. However, even old models tend to be quite usable. I find a Kobo Touch perfectly readable in moderate to strong ambiental light and a Kobo Aura readable with the frontlight off in strong light or with the frontlight on in dark to moderately lit environments.

If you're looking to buy an ereader for use with okreader, I'd recommend getting a Kobo Touch (£10-£30 used on eBay) if you don't need a frontlight or a Kobo Glo (not tested at the moment) or Aura otherwise.

Note: The build system is intended to run on Debian or Ubuntu, on ARM. Cross-building should also be possible with little effort, but it's not implemented. If you don't have access to an ARM system, you could try using QEMU.

Note, koreader dependecies require autoconf >= 2.65. You might have to manually specify an autoconf version, for example:

WARNING: At this point, okreader has only been tested on 3(!) different devices. Only install it if you know what you're doing. You could brick your ereader and in some countries you might void your warranty.

Important: The internal micro SD / eMMC stores configuration information unique to each hardware unit and firmware files which might not be available elsewhere. Therefore, it is essential to backup the first 15 MiB of the internal storage at the very least. I strongly recommend backing up the entire internal storage.

Some Kobo ereaders (as far as I know, Touch, Glo and some Aura revisions) store their firmware and data on internal removable microSD cards. On these devices, it is recommended to replace the internal microSD card with one containing okreader. Other ereaders store their firmware on an eMMC chip soldered to the PCB. On these devices, it is recommended to boot okreader from the external microSD slot, leaving the official firmware on the internal storage unmodified.

The first partition on the factory SD starts at the 15 MiB offset. The space before the first partition contains U-Boot, the Linux kernel image (in uImage format), the serial number of the device, a hwconfig block used both by U-Boot and Linux to detect the hardware configuration, a waveform block used by the electronic ink screen driver and one other unknown data blob.|||

okreader - Free/libre software for Kobo ebook readers