My Popularity as Measured in Facebook Happy Birthday Posts

Hey everyone, with polls officially closed on both coasts, it is time for my annual birthday analytics report. This year, I again saw strong YoY (year over year) growth in the number of ‘Happy Birthday!’ Facebook wall posts. As you can see, after a striking drop at age 23, I have bounced back to my age 22 levels.

I am unsure of what caused the downtick during ages 20-23, but I can only imagine it’s because I stopped paying for likes. Fortunately, I am again gaining ground, and I hope the trend continues upward. However, to ensure that I continue to improve, I need to dig into the spike.

The increase in happy birthday posts for G25 (Ginny Year 25) could be due to:

In addition to growth in number of birthday posts, I also wanted to look at retention. Of the 75 people who wrote me a happy birthday wall post last year, 42 came back this year to do the same. This corresponds to a 44% churn rate, which I find unacceptable. This year, I committed myself to liking each happy birthday post within 15 minutes of receiving it. In doing so, I believe I provided a better user experience for the happy-birthday-wishers in the hopes that they be willing to write on my wall again next year. I anticipate that this will result in a higher retention rate for G26 (Ginny Year 26). I am also going to start a viral meme campaign in which every year on my birthday, people take photos of themselves writing on my wall. It would be like a yearbook, except only about me, and as a result, my friends would be more likely to be repeat happy-birthday-wishers.

I also wanted to examine what percentage of my friends defriended me on my birthday. According to my research, it is very common to defriend your Facebook friends on their birthdays because you’re reminded of their existence. I’m proud to report that I started my birthday with 1,068 friends and ended it with 1,066 friends, which means fewer than .2% of my Facebook friends unfriended me. I find it satisfying to know that my existence only drove two people to remove me from their lists. I have several hypotheses for the low defriending rate:

As I always say, the number of happy birthday posts you get on Facebook sets the tone for the year, and Mark wouldn’t give us the numbers if he didn’t want us to analyze them and adjust our self-esteem accordingly. Anyway, thanks again for all the happy birthday wishes, friends!|||

