Fovea is a unified command-line interface to computer vision APIs from Google, Microsoft, AWS, Clarifai, Imagga, IBM Watson, and SightHound Use Fovea if you want to:

The table below characterizes Fovea's current feature coverage. Most vendors offer broadly similar features, but their output formats differ. Where possible, Fovea uses a tabular output mode suitable for interactive shell sessions, and scripts. If a particular feature is not supported by this tabular output mode, vendor-specific JSON is available, instead.

indicates a working feature, indicates a missing feature, and empty-cells represent features not supported by a particular vendor.

Clone the Fovea repository, install its dependencies, and source its environment script.

Obtain credentials for the web services you plan to use. These should be supplied to Fovea via environment variables. See for a template.

If no other flags are set, is set by default, and is set to .

Several providers offer label translations, and all default to English (en). Learn which languages a given provider supports with the list flag.

From the list of vendor-supported languages, set the desired language with the argument.

Most vendors support face detection. In addtion, OpenCV's pre-trained Haar cascade is available with the and flags. The bounding box for each detected face is reported in a four field format, described below.

See examples/face-detection for further information.

At present, only Google supports landmark and location detection.

OCR is only supported in the JSON output mode, and its format is vendor specific.

Emotion detection is only supported in the JSON output mode, and its format is vendor specific.

Scene descriptions are only available in the JSON output mode, and its format is vendor specific.

The parameters for NSFW and Adult image detection vary a bit between vendors. The values for Google are fudged from likelihoods (VERY_LIKELY, LIKELY, VERY_UNLIKELY) to numeric values (0.01, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 0.99), in order to follow the convention established by other services.

Categoriziation is only available in the JSON output mode, and its format is vendor specific.

Image type detection is only available in the JSON output mode, and its format is vendor specific.

Dominant color detection is only available in the JSON output mode, and its format is vendor specific.

Celebrity face matches are reported in a seven field format (if is set), or a six field format (if is not set). These formats are described below.

In contrast to IBM and Microsoft, which return only their highest confidence results, Clarfai returns a long list of possible matches for each face. Exclude lower-confidence matches with the parameter.

Vehicle detection and recognition are only available with SightHound. Recognized cars are reported in a ten field format, described below.|||

Fovea - A CLI for the Google Cloud Vision, Amazon Rekognition, Clarifai, Imagga, IBM Watson, SightHound, and Microsoft Computer Vision APIs.