As of Wednesday, the countdown to Brexit has begun. Negotiations between the European Union and the United Kingdom must be completed within two years from today - and there are a huge number of issues, laws, formalities and regulations to be discussed and resolved. It won't be easy.

For those of us on the outside, however, things aren't likely to change much for the next two years, giving us a bit of time to enjoy a few of those things that are almost certain to change once Brexit is finalized. The following is a (partial) list of things you might consider enjoying one last time before the United Kingdom is no longer part of a united Europe.

Take Advantage of Short Lines on Weekend Trips to London

Many Germans have become used to taking a periodic weekend trip to London. Passports, of course, are a must, since Britain never joined the Schengen border-free travel area. And even today, the British national sport of queueing is on full display at Heathrow and Gatwick. But travelers from the European Union nevertheless enjoy advantages relative to those from elsewhere.

But those benefits are likely going to disappear. One of the main promises made by the Brexiteers, after all, is that of "taking back control of our borders." That could mean that EU citizens will become subject to stricter identity controls pursuant to a so-called "hard border." The British government estimates the average waiting time for such controls at 45 minutes. Currently, EU citizens must wait an average of 25 minutes. The Airport Operators Association has said it is "highly concerned" about the potential impact Brexit could have on waiting times.

Get Married to Stay Together

In the mid-1960s, the Beatles penned the song "Michelle, Ma Belle," a declaration of love to a fictitious French woman. In the future, though, relationships with foreign partners might become a bit more complicated. Depending on the outcome of the Brexit negotiations, EU citizens may not have automatic residency rights in the United Kingdom - and vice versa.

One potential solution for couples is to get married, so that the foreign partner can first apply for permanent residence and then also citizenship. But British authorities might take a close look at such an arrangement: Marriages of convenience organized by criminals are considered a significant problem in Britain. In response, state inspectors make frequent visits to newlyweds.

Nürnberger sausage from Newcastle, parmesan cheese from Portsmouth: Those are just two labeling shams that could result from Brexit. Once Britain is no longer part of the EU, it may choose to discard the EU system of protecting regional and traditional food names (known as "protected geographical indication").

Several manufacturers in the UK are likewise concerned about losing such protections. Producers of Cornish pastries, for example, are opposed to Brexit for that reason and are demanding that protections remain in place even after Britain is on its own. It remains to be seen whether they will be successful. Nick Clegg, the former deputy prime minister, warned against the danger last November, saying that specialties like Melton Mowbray pork pies or Stilton cheese could be copied in other EU countries.

For many young Europeans, a highlight of their university studies is spending one or two semesters at a foreign university. Such exchanges are made possible by the European Union's Erasmus Program, which has been supporting them for 30 years. Brexit calls British participation in the program into question. In 2014, the EU excluded Switzerland from Erasmus following the adoption of the "mass immigration initiative," which limited the freedom of EU citizens to settle in the country.

Brexit is also a problem for the 16,000 German students currently studying at British universities. Thus far, they have only had to pay the same tuition rates as locals. In the future, however, the much higher tuitions charged to non-EU foreigners could apply to European students as well.

Pay Your Hospital Bill with Your Card

A stay in the hospital is not usually a vacation highlight. But the European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) at least makes it easier for those living in the European Union. It guarantees the free choice of doctors and treatment conditions equal to those enjoyed by locals. Often that means that patients don't have to pay a thing.

The British may soon lose this privilege. But the Guardian recently sought to encourage its readers with a bit of humor: "If you have not been lucky enough to fall ill while visiting Europe with an EHIC in the past, there are still plenty of simple ways to hospitalize yourself during a future visit to, say, Ibiza, Amsterdam or Ayia Napa."

Among other things, the EU is a gigantic redistribution machine. The contributions paid in by member states help fund billion-euro subsidy programs for farmers, researchers and structurally weak regions. One can certainly doubt the efficiency of such programs. But one thing is certain: Britain, too, has been a beneficiary for decades. According to the British Treasury, the country receives 4 billion pounds each year from Brussels.

Prior to the Brexit referendum, those in favor of leaving the EU promised that the discontinuation of the subsidies would be compensated for. Now, though, such promises sound a bit less generous. Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Hammond said last year that London would replace the shortfall only until 2020. Given that the Brexit negotiations will last for two years, the government has only pledged to cover the expenses for two years.

Many British chocoholics have already felt the impact of Brexit: First, Mondelez reduced the number of triangles in its Toblerone bars sold in the UK. And now, the size Cadbury chocolates, likewise produced by Mondelez, might be reduced as well.

What might initially seem like a rather bizarre decision is actually indicative of a significant problem facing British food producers. Because the British pound has lost significant value as a result of the decision to leave the EU, the purchase of ingredients abroad, such as cocoa, has become more expensive. Producer Unilever apparently tried already to pass along the costs to Tesco, but the supermarket chain refused to go along - resulting in the temporary unavailability of the beloved spread Marmite.

Not a few British would like to retain their EU privileges beyond Brexit - and are thus applying for citizenship in other EU countries. In Berlin, Hamburg and Frankfurt alone, the number of applications have climbed within a year from 79 to 480, according to a survey undertaken by the daily Die Welt. Germany-wide numbers will only be available mid-year. The increase became particularly noticeable following the referendum on June 23, 2016.

By applying before Britain officially leaves the European Union, applicants are ensured the ability to retain dual citizenship in Germany. In contrast to people from non-EU countries, European Union citizens are allowed to retain their citizenship in their home country.

The trend is also true on the other end. The number of applications for permanent residency in Britain has almost tripled since the Brexit referendum, relative to the previous year. But those interested in doing so don't have an easy time of it: The application is fully 85 pages long.|||

The clock is now ticking. In two years, Britain will no longer be part of the European Union. Here are eight privileges that will be lost.