It’s time again for my annual review of MIRI’s activities. In this post I’ll provide a summary of what we did in 2016, see how our activities compare to our previously stated goals and predictions, and reflect on how our strategy this past year fits into our mission as an organization. We’ll be following this post up in April with a strategic update for 2017.

After doubling the size of the research team in 2015, we slowed our growth in 2016 and focused on integrating the new additions into our team, making research progress, and writing up a backlog of existing results.

2016 was a big year for us on the research front, with our new researchers making some of the most notable contributions. Our biggest news was Scott Garrabrant’s logical inductors framework, which represents by a significant margin our largest progress to date on the problem of logical uncertainty. We additionally released “Alignment for Advanced Machine Learning Systems” (AAMLS), a new technical agenda spearheaded by Jessica Taylor.

We also spent this last year engaging more heavily with the wider AI community, e.g., through the month-long Colloquium Series on Robust and Beneficial Artificial Intelligence we co-ran with the Future of Humanity Institute, and through talks and participation in panels at many events through the year.

We saw significant progress this year in our agent foundations agenda, including Scott Garrabrant’s logical inductor formalism (which represents possibly our most significant technical result to date) and related developments in Vingean reflection. At the same time, we saw relatively little progress in error tolerance and value specification, which we had planned to put more focus on in 2016. Below, I’ll note the highlights from each of our research areas:

We saw a large body of results related to logical induction. Logical induction developed out of earlier work led by Scott Garrabrant in late 2015 (written up in April 2016) that served to divide the problem of logical uncertainty into two subproblems. Scott demonstrated that both problems could be solved at once using an algorithm that satisfies a highly general “logical induction criterion.”

This criterion provides a simple way of understanding idealized reasoning under resource limitations. In Andrew Critch’s words, logical induction is “a financial solution to the computer science problem of metamathematics”: a procedure that assigns reasonable probabilities to arbitrary (empirical, logical, mathematical, self-referential, etc.) sentences in a way that outpaces deduction, explained by analogy to inexploitable stock markets.

Our other main 2016 work in this domain is an independent line of research spearheaded by MIRI research associate Vadim Kosoy, “Optimal Polynomial-Time Estimators: A Bayesian Notion of Approximation Algorithm.” Vadim approaches the problem of logical uncertainty from a more complexity-theoretic angle of attack than logical induction does, providing a formalism for defining optimal feasible approximations of computationally infeasible objects that retain a number of relevant properties of those objects.

We continue to see a steady stream of interesting results related to the problem of defining logical counterfactuals. In 2016, we began applying the logical inductor framework to decision-theoretic problems, working with the idea of universal inductors. Andrew Critch also developed a game-theoretic method for resolving policy disagreements that outperforms standard compromise approaches and also allows for negotiators to disagree on factual questions.

We have a backlog of many results to write up in this space. Our newest, “Cheating Death in Damascus,” summarizes the case for functional decision theory, a theory that systematically outperforms the conventional academic views (causal and evidential decision theory) in decision theory and game theory. This is the basic framework we use for studying logical counterfactuals and related open problems, and is a good introductory paper for understanding our other work in this space.

For an overview of our more recent work on this topic, see Tsvi Benson-Tilsen’s decision theory index on the research forum.

Our main results in reflective reasoning last year concerned self-trust in logical inductors. After seeing no major advances in Vingean reflection for many years—the last big step forward was perhaps Benya Fallenstein’s model polymorphism proposal in late 2012—we had planned to de-prioritize work on this problem in 2016, on the assumption that other tools were needed before we could make much more headway. However, in 2016 logical induction turned out to be surprisingly useful for solving a number of outstanding tiling problems.

As described in “Logical Induction,” logical inductors provide a simple demonstration of self-referential reasoning that is highly general and accurate, is free of paradox, and assigns reasonable credence to the reasoner’s own beliefs. This provides some evidence that the problem of logical uncertainty itself is relatively central to a number of puzzles concerning the theoretical foundations of intelligence.

2016 saw the release of our “Alignment for Advanced ML Systems” research agenda, with a focus on error tolerance and value specification. Less progress occurred in these areas than expected, partly because investigations here are still very preliminary. We also spent less time on research in mid-to-late 2016 overall than we had planned, in part because we spent a lot of time writing up our new results and research proposals.

Nate noted in our October AMA that he considers this time investment in drafting write-ups one of our main 2016 errors, and we plan to spend less time on paper-writing in 2017.

Our 2016 work on error tolerance included “Two Problems with Causal-Counterfactual Utility Indifference” and some time we spent discussing and critiquing Dylan Hadfield-Menell’s proposal of corrigibility via CIRL. We plan to share our thoughts on the latter line of research more widely later this year.

Although we planned to put more focus on value specification last year, we ended up making less progress than expected. Examples of our work in this area include Jessica Taylor and Ryan Carey’s posts on online learning, and Jessica’s analysis of how errors might propagate within a system of humans consulting one another.

We’re extremely pleased with our progress on the agent foundations agenda over the last year, and we’re hoping to see more progress cascading from the new set of tools we’ve developed. At the same time, it remains to be seen how tractable the new set of problems we’re tackling in the AAMLS agenda are.

In September, we brought on Ryan Carey to support Jessica’s work on the AAMLS agenda as an assistant research fellow. Our assistant research fellowship program seems to be working out well; Ryan has been a lot of help to us in working with Jessica to write up results (e.g., “Bias-Detecting Online Learners”), along with setting up TensorFlow tools for a project with Patrick LaVictoire.

We’ll likely be expanding the program this year and bringing on additional assistant research fellows, in addition to a slate of new research fellows.

Focusing on other activities that relate relatively directly to our technical research program, including collaborating and syncing up with researchers in industry and academia, in 2016 we:

On the whole, our research team growth in 2016 was somewhat slower than expected. We’re still accepting applicants for our type theorist position (and for other research roles at MIRI, via our Get Involved page), but we expect to leave that role unfilled for at least the next 6 months while we focus on onboarding additional core researchers.

Also in 2016, we:

2016 was a strong year in MIRI’s fundraising efforts. We raised a total of $2,285,200, a 44% increase on the $1,584,109 raised in 2015. This increase was largely driven by:

Assuming we can sustain this funding level going forward, this represents a preliminary fulfillment of our primary fundraising goal from January 2016:

As the graph below indicates, 2016 continued a positive trend of growth in our fundraising efforts.

Drawing conclusions from these year-by-year comparisons can be a little tricky. MIRI underwent significant organizational changes over this time span, particularly in 2013. We also switched to accrual-based accounting in 2014, which also complicates comparisons with previous years.

However, it is possible to highlight certain aspects of our progress in 2016:

Due to the fact that we raised more than $2 million in 2016, we are now required by California law to prepare an annual financial statement audited by an independent certified public accountant (CPA). That report, like our financial reports of past years, will be made available by the end of September, on our transparency and financials page.

As of July 2016, we had the following outstanding goals from mid-2015:

We currently have seven research fellows and assistant fellows, and are planning to hire several more in the very near future. We expect to hit our ten-fellow goal in the next 3–4 months, and to continue to grow the research team later this year. As noted above, we’re delaying moving forward on a type theorist hire.

The Open Philanthropy Project is currently reviewing our research agenda as part of their process of evaluating us for future grants. They released an initial big-picture organizational review of MIRI in September, accompanied by reviews of several recent MIRI papers (which Nate responded to here). These reviews were generally quite critical of our work, with Open Phil expressing a number of reservations about our agent foundations agenda and our technical progress to date. We are optimistic, however, that we will be able to better make our case to Open Phil in discussions going forward, and generally converge more in our views of what open problems deserve the most attention.

In our August 2016 strategic update, Nate outlined our other organizational priorities and plans:

All of these are still priorities for us, though we now consider 5 somewhat more important (and 6 and 7 less important). We’ve since run three ML workshops, and have made more headway on our AAMLS research agenda. We now have a large amount of content prepared for our AGI alignment overviews, and are beginning a (likely rather long) editing process. We’ve also released “Logical Induction” and have a number of other papers in the pipeline.

We’ll be providing more details on how our priorities have changed since August in a strategic update post next month. As in past years, object-level technical research on the AI alignment problem will continue to be our top priority, although we’ll be undergoing a medium-sized shift in our research priorities and outreach plans.|||

