18 months of Elixir in production at 2nd largest sport website in the world Bleacher Report, a division of Turner Sports, is the second largest sport website in the world. At peak times they deliver over 1.5 billion page views per month and serve over 200,000 concurrent requests to their mobile apps alone. Join Dave Marks, Sr. Director of Engineering, and Ben Marx, Lead Engineer as they review the how and why of porting Bleacher Report’s most critical apps from Ruby to Elixir. They’ll highlight the initial challenges of adopting a young and unfamiliar language through the benefits realised having run Elixir in production for the last year and a half. View now

The first encounter with Erlang is often a tough one since The Golden Trinity of Erlang - share nothing processes, fail-fast and failure handling - provides a mix of features not found in other languages. We will spend most of this webinar looking at how to design systems with asynchronous message passing between processes that do not share any memory. View now

Data centre servers utilization average between 6 to 12% – the most efficient utilization barely touches 35% (at Google). When faced with a computing problem, companies just put up more servers to cater to the workload, instead of running the machines the company already has at higher utilization. This short-term solution results in ever-increasing energy consumption and escalating costs of operations. How to tackle this tremendous waste of resources? View now

Elvis (and how to properly rock in the Erlang World) Elvis is an Erlang style-checker written in Erlang that you can run in your console or integrate nicely in your github projects. Erlang Solutions invites you to join our next webinar featuring Brujo Benavides (Inaka’s CTO). He’ll present an overview of Elvis, he will let you how it works and how it was built. He will also open the discussion about Erlang Guidelines and code styles. View now

Fermilab is America’s particle physics laboratory. In this webinar, scientists Dennis J. Nicklaus and Richard M. Neswold will describe how Erlang is used in controls applications of particle physics research. They will provide an overview of some of the scientific experiments ongoing at the lab and the accelerator infrastructure which provides beam to those experiments. They will show where the Erlang-based components fit in the accelerator control system, including a framework for accelerator controls data acquisition and a data pool manager for control system client data requests. They will delve into the data pool manager more deeply to illustrate why Erlang was an excellent choice for this application, and show features of Erlang that expand the capabilities of the data pool manager. Join us on 16 Dec at 17:00 GMT (11:00 CST; 9:00 PST). View now

Sqor Sports is a sports social network that connects 2000+ current and former athletes with their fans. 75% of Sqor Sports users are mobile, so highly reliable iOS and Android apps are crucial. Erlang Solutions’ mobile branch Inaka took on the challenge of fortifying Sqor Sports legacy apps/servers, creating new features, and architecting the migration to scalable and more reliable solutions. One of the project’s highlights is the unique chat feature Inaka developed in the mobile app from scratch. Beyond the technical demands, this project presented unique logistical challenges, as it required a combined team of experts from many disciplines to work from four locations, over three time zones. On April 7th at 12:00 noon PDT (8 pm BST, 9 pm CET) Sqor Sports project lead Chuck Pinkert and Inaka senior project manager Tatiana Oudine will talk you through the challenges faced and the lessons learned in this project. Join us to ask the speakers your questions. View now

25 May 16:00 BST (15:00 UTC; 17:00 CET; 08:00 PDT)

 Sportrisq are a broker and distributor of risk management solutions and products to the sports industry. Sportsrisq’s core platform is written in Python; however, as a result of Python’s poor threading model, they were experiencing issues with certain low- latency components within their stack. In this webinar Sportsrisq’s CTO Justin Worrall will describe the process of migrating two of those components to Erlang; the underlying problems involved, the perceived benefits of Erlang in those situations, the decision making process, the application designs and the results. View now|||

