Zero-day exploits target zero-day vulnerabilities. Zero-day vulnerabilities are those for which no official patch has been released by the vendor. This means that no days (zero days) have elapsed between the time the vulnerability was discovered and the time an official patch was made available. Therefore, the administrators have had zero days to fix the flaw. It ceases to be a zero day once a fix is available.

Mitnick’s Absolute Zero-Day™ Exploit Exchange is an exclusive brokerage service through which you can buy and sell zero-day exploits. Due to Mitnick Security’s unique positioning among security researchers and the hacker community, we are able to offer a specialized brokering service by connecting discerning government and corporate buyers with senior security researchers and exploit developers.

Mitnick specializes in only EXCLUSIVE, AKA “absolute,” zero-day exploits. We also provide custom penetration techniques and countermeasures that are researched, developed, and tailor-made to your specifications. Zero-day exploits may be purchased through a private auction or via direct purchase through our premium services.

IMPORTANT NOTICES: To be either a buyer or a seller of zero-day exploits through Absolute Zero-Day™, please understand the following:

We only deal with . If you were to use the Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) as a guide, your exploit would be:

Mitnick’s Absolute Zero-Day™ Exploit Exchange is an exclusive club of buyers and researchers that focuses only on premium, legitimate exploits.

As a prospective buyer, you must request access to the Absolute Zero-Day™ Exploit Exchange. Upon approval, you will be able to connect with our team to communicate your needs. This is not an online portal; this is a premium network.

You will be notified when our sellers provide suitable zero-day exploits that match your specifications as they become available. When you purchase an exploit, your money will be held in escrow according to the individual deal.

IT'S "ABSOLUTELY" THE BEST:

Almost all our buyers are part of the ABSOLUTE “X” program. This premium zero-day brokerage service provides exclusive vs. nonexclusive use of a zero-day exploit. As part of the negotiated/bid purchase for a zero-day exploit, buyers state that they want to have exclusive use and knowledge of the working exploit. Buyers also state a minimum timeperiod during which they will be the exclusive users of the zero-day exploit.To help ensure that the researcher has not and will not sell it elsewhere, money transfers will be authorized for release from escrow in the form of multiple installments for the duration of the period of exclusive use. Premium buyers find this method particularly effective when they combine it with our ABSOLUTE “Z” premium service.

Certain buying members pay Mitnick Security a retainer fee to ensure they will be the first to be notified and have first right of refusal of new zero-day exploits that target certain systems or products of interest. This allows for significant focus to not only ensure you’ll maintain an edge over your competitors but also helps foster Mitnick’s research staff to find or develop useful exploits. Fees will be set at our discretion based on your needs. Please note: If we do not know you, fees will include, but are not limited to, an upfront, nonrefundable payment of $500, up to and including travel costs and expenses for you or our representatives as well as investigations and reference checks. These added checks help ensure the compliance for and the operation of the exchange.

Please note: If we do not know you, fees will include, but are not limited to, an upfront, nonrefundable payment of $500, up to and including travel costs and expenses for you or our representatives as well as investigations and reference checks. These added checks help ensure the compliance for and the operation of the exchange.

Mitnick’s Absolute Zero-Day™ Exploit Exchange welcomes expert security professionals and researchers. If you are a researcher with a rare talent, you belong with us. We provide the premium buyers and high-end project requests you desire.

Upon approval of your qualifications, we will accept your zero-day exploit submissions. We will offer you privacy (your details will remain confidential), and we will simultaneously expose your exploits to top-paying government and corporate buyers. You can be assured of timely payment upon purchase of your zero-day exploit. Your money will be safe in our escrow until successful validation and other deal terms are met. We realize the efforts you have put into research, and we will make sure you are appropriately rewarded.

When you have discovered or developed a zero-day exploit, you will be asked to describe the following points relevant to the exploit: the product or service that is affected by the exploit, the level and type of access gained to the vulnerable product or service, the value and popularity of the product or service affected, whether success of the exploit depends on “user intervention,” and whether the targeted vulnerability is present in default configurations of the product.

The following checks and balances help drive premium prices for your offerings and have helped to virtually eliminate disputes. Due to our exclusivity and to provide the assurances that premium buyers demand, the following may or may not be required:|||

Absolute Zero-Day&trade; Exploit Exchange is dedicated to providing a premium, private, and effective service that matches our buyers? unique needs with quality