This article is one in a series of updates on Net Neutrality.

The FCC rules being overturned haven’t actually gone into effect yet. They require that ISPs notify consumers when their information is being collected, and how it is being used or shared. In some cases, these rules require ISPs to ask for the consumer’s consent to sell their information for advertising purposes.

Republicans and the FCC itself point towards other big data collection companies like Google and Facebook, which are regulated by the FTC, as being on an unfair playing field to ISPs regulated by the FCC.

The NCTA-The Internet & Television Association, which represents major ISPs like Comcast, said in a statement, “The Senate’s action represents a critical step towards reestablishing a balanced framework that is grounded in the long-standing and successful FTC privacy framework that applies equally to all parties operating online.”

Net Neutrality is defined by the principle that ISPs should enable access to all Internet content regardless of the source, and without favoring or blocking particular products or websites.

Throughout this timeline, ISPs like Comcast have fought for the ability to prioritize certain websites in order to gain profits–including having Netflix pay them to solve a streaming connectivity “issue.”

Organizations like Fight for the Future made sure that constituent voices were heard throughout legislative process, as the Open Internet rules and the Title II Net Neutrality proposal garnered over 3 million consumer comments.

If the FCC regulations are overturned and ISPs are subject to the FTC’s regulations, ISPs will ignore many of the hardfast restrictions placed on them by the FCC. The FTC’s regulations call for slow, methodical review of ISP actions.

Ryan Calo, a law professor at the University of Washington remarked, “Now we go back to a place where (ISPs) really have to do something egregious to get caught.”

People are increasingly aware of how their data is being used by ISPs and advertisers and want more control over how their personal data is being used. Over the course of this debate, consumers and ISPs have celebrated minor victories.

With the FCC’s jurisdiction to regulate ISPs hanging in the balance, it seems Net Neutrality is far from being a mainstay of U.S. Internet policy. Now that both houses of congress have voted to repeal the FCC regulations, all that remains is for President Trump to sign the repeal bill into law.|||

Last week the U.S. senate voted to remove Obama-era FCC Net Neutrality regulations, assigning ISPs to the more lax FTC regulations.