If you own a share of General Motors Co. stock, what do you really own? Common stock is a slippery beast, but you can write a list of its main attributes. It goes something like this:

None of that exactly captures the essence of what you own: Facebook Inc., for instance, has never paid a dividend, has said it doesn't plan to, is too big for anyone to realistically buy, and your voting rights are pretty worthless. (It does do some stock buybacks.) Nonetheless its common stock is worth more than $400 billion. There is a mysterious residue to the value of common stock that comes from somewhere other than the lawyers' list of its formal rights.

Still, there that list is. Five things: dividends, dividend growth, mergers/liquidation, buybacks and votes. It feels sort of random, doesn't it? There are good historical and financial-theory reasons for that particular list -- it's the way to describe the "residual claimants" on a corporation, and to incentivize and monitor managers to take care of those claimants -- but it is just a list of stuff that people have thought up, not an invariable law of nature. You can monkey with it. Lots of companies don't have dividends. Snap Inc. went public with no voting rights. People bought its stock anyway.

If you think too hard about this, another idea might occur to you. If you can omit some items from the list, why can't you split up the items on the list? Like, instead of common stock being a package of (1) dividends, (2) dividend growth, (3) merger/liquidation rights, (4) buybacks and (5) votes, what if it was instead two packages, of, say, (1) dividends and (2)(a) dividend growth, (b) merger/liquidation rights, (c) buybacks and (d) votes? Would those two packages be worth more, or less, or the same as the one package? Would changing the numbering in that sentence create value, or destroy value, or is the notion that the numbering of a sentence could affect the value of a car company completely absurd?

Every four years or so, David Einhorn, the founder of Greenlight Capital LLC, rediscovers the concept of preferred stock and publishes a big presentation about it. I think it is about the most moving and beautiful recurring event in finance, like the migration of the Demoiselle cranes over the Himalayas, but for preferred stock. His current idea is that General Motors should split its common stock into two classes. Here is Greenlight's proposal. One class of stock -- the "Dividend Shares," ticker GMD -- would get the current dividend of 38 cents a quarter. The other class -- the "Capital Appreciation Shares," ticker GM -- would have most of the other rights of shareholders; in particular, they'd be the ones that participate in any future growth, in the form of stock buybacks or dividend increases. (They'd also have 10 times the voting power of the GMDs.) Each current GM share would be split into one GM share and one GMD share, and then everyone could trade so the shares could find their natural homes. "The Dividend Shares will be attractive to yield-oriented investors," says Greenlight, while "the Capital Appreciation Shares will be attractive to growth-focused investors."

The normal way to describe this would be to say that the GMD shares are "preferred stock" -- entitled to fixed dividends, but not growth or (much in the way of) voting rights -- while the GM shares are "common stock." Einhorn avoids those terms, possibly because "preferred stock" sounds sort of old-timey and fuddy-duddy, or possibly because it's weird for a big industrial company to have preferred stock equal to more than half of its common equity market capitalization, or possibly (most likely) because "preferred stock" has some negative implications for credit ratings.

But that terminology aside, here is the takeaway of Einhorn's presentation: The Dividend Shares should trade like preferred stock with a dividend yield of 7 percent to 9 percent, for a value of about $17 to $22 per share. (The common stock's current dividend yield is about 4.4 percent. ) The Capital Appreciation Shares should trade like common stock with a price-earnings ratio of 5.6 to 8, for a value of about $26 to $38 per share. (The common stock's current price-earnings ratio is about 5.6, which seems like an odd floor for the new Capital Appreciation Shares' P/E ratio, but whatever. ) The package, then, should be worth about $43 to $60 per share. The stock closed yesterday at $34.71. "Our plan will unlock between $13 billion and $38 billion of shareholder value through appropriate valuation of GM’s dividend and earnings potential," Greenlight says.

By doing nothing.  Right now, GM shareholders get a 38 cent dividend and a 5.6 P/E ratio. Einhorn's plan would give them a 38-cent dividend over here, and a 5.6 P/E ratio over there. If they think about those two things at the same time, they think the combination is worth about $35. If they think about the one thing, then meditate for a bit to clear their minds, then think about the other thing, they will think the combination is worth at least $43, or as much as $60. Or so Einhorn argues.

Of course he could be wrong. GM has rejected his plan, pointing out that the valuation impact is "unproven and entirely speculative," while splitting the shares would create some real annoyances. ("Material governance challenges arising from two classes of stock with divergent objectives," for one thing, and potential liquidity difficulties, for another.) My favorite objection is "that Dividend Shares would result in loss of GM's investment grade credit rating." Right now GM pays a 38 cent dividend every quarter on its common stock. Under Einhorn's plan it would pay the same 38 cent dividend on the same number of shares of GMD stock. But because it would call those shares "Dividend Shares," the rating agencies would treat them sort of like debt, as an obligation that had to be paid and that limited GM's financial flexibility.  Einhorn's plan is to change nothing substantive, but to pronounce the word "dividend" with a bit more of an emphasis. He thinks this will make investors notice the dividend more. GM's objection is that it might make the rating agencies notice the dividend more.

It is easy and fun to be sarcastic about all of this, but that is mostly the wrong response.  This is what finance is. Creating value by raising money from investors and using it to build cars is great and all, but there is nothing particularly interesting about it as finance. It's just car-making. The magic of finance -- the reason it's a big industry, and the reason that hedge-fund managers are often a lot richer than car-company executives -- is that it can, in its finest moments, create value out of nothing.

There is a straightforward and unromantic way to explain that. Finance is about dividing up risks, and allocating those risks to the people most able and willing to bear them. People who want more risk cushion those who want more safety; people who want more safety compensate the willing risk-takers for that insurance; everyone is better off. Progress in finance, then, is about finding clever ways to slice risks more finely and market them to people who want them. People who like General Motors's business but want safe steady income can just buy its bonds. People who like its business and want more upside in exchange for more risk can buy its common stock. But these are crude divisions, and a true financial visionary will see a category of risk -- Dividend Shares -- that doesn't exist yet and try to fill that need.

But describing the mechanism in that way, as risk allocation, shouldn't diminish the magic of this effort to create value where there was no value before. The beauty of Einhorn's proposal -- whether or not it's right -- is the faith he puts in the power of the human imagination. General Motors has some stuff. Einhorn doesn't propose to change that stuff. He just wants us to look at it differently, to see the same facts in an altered light, to reconstruct the mental categories with which we think about the stuff. He thinks that effort -- the purely mental process of thinking about GM in a new way -- is worth at least $13 billion.

Einhorn's proposal, then, is to take all of the current elements of General Motors, add nothing, subtract nothing, but just arrange them in a subtly different and more pleasing pattern, one that excites people more, one that people will pay more money for. That's what art is. This is art.

This column does not necessarily reflect the opinion of the editorial board or Bloomberg LP and its owners.

To contact the author of this story:

 Matt Levine at mlevine51@bloomberg.net

To contact the editor responsible for this story:

 James Greiff at jgreiff@bloomberg.net|||

He thinks it would look much nicer with a few cosmetic changes.