Sitting has been branded the "new smoking" for its supposed public health risks, especially for people with sit-down office jobs.

Over the past 15 years or so sitting has been linked with cancer heart disease and diabetes and even depression . This has led to a surge in media stories on the risks of sitting, even for people who do a lot of exercise.

Then there's the rise in the popularity of standing desks to encourage people to get off their chairs to improve their health.

But is sitting really that risky? And do we really need standing desks?

What does the evidence say?

We wanted to see if there was any difference between sitting watching TV, sitting at work, or sitting at home but not watching TV.

Once we took into account obesity, physical activity, and other factors contributing to developing type 2 diabetes, neither total sitting time, sitting at work or sitting at home but not watching TV were linked with developing diabetes.

We found only a weak association with the time spent sitting watching TV and an increased risk of developing diabetes.

That's not the whole story. At least two factors determine if sitting is a risk factor in its own right: the type and context of sitting.

We're most likely to sit at work, at play and while travelling. And a growing body of evidence suggests not all sitting is equal.

Each of these aspects of watching TV increases the chances of poor physical and mental health. But studies cannot account for all these complex influences. In other words, TV involves a constellation of health risks that go uncounted. So TV studies only tell us that excessive TV viewing is a behaviour that needs to be reduced, but tell us practically nothing about the health risks of sitting.

An important aspect of our study was that participants said they were physically active, reporting an average 43 minutes walking a day, plus more than two hours of other physical activity a day.

This suggests it's particularly important to find ways to allow office workers forced to spend many hours a day in front of a computer to add physical activity to their daily routine.

As well as individuals changing their behaviour, governments need to provide infrastructure for active commuting, like bike lanes and secure bike racks at stations, and encourage people to use public transport. Employers could provide incentives and facilities for active commuting, like providing showers at work, and promote lunchtime walks, encourage the use of stairs instead of lifts, and even walking meetings when convenient.

Reducing the amount of time spent sitting can be a useful option if people don't want to walk or cannot walk, cycle or exercise.

Where to now?

Rather than being the "new smoking", we need to think of sitting as an important part of the wider problem of physical inactivity.|||

Sitting has been branded the "new smoking" for its supposed public health risks. But is sitting really that risky? And do we really need standing desks?