Ok so you’ve got over your click bait reluctance along with the general WTF and have actually started reading – so what could these three things possibly have in common?

So Kevin Bacon is largely famous for being no more than 6 steps away from any other actor, when a step is having appeared in the same movie. In graph theory terms he is often described as the centre of the actors network – unfortunately this is a ‘zombie statistic’, it won’t die and isn’t true - but it is often used as a shorthand for the structure that emerges in complex networks with non-random connections. A possibly more interesting example is the use of social networks to anticipate the spread of disease, as illustrated in the example of ‘friendly’ relationships between high school students below:

Interestingly servers, virtual or real, also have ‘friends’, they don’t just interact with other servers, the interactions have a volume of exchange. They are more friendly with some servers than others, and as a result amenable to the same social network analysis as can be applied to relationships between people. Indeed, as has been observed in many major data centre transformation programs, after the easy (lonely – unlike the example above) servers have been moved, progress tends to stall as dependencies which are poorly understood emerge and today’s transformation targets turn out not to be so movable. As an example the synthetic data centre below has the servers which are ‘friends’ and should move together marked in the same colours:

So to Brexit – or more relevantly the ‘Great Repeal Bill’ it has caused – given this requires the greatest single enactment of legislation in UK history it is strange to call it a repeal bill, but then management is as management does. Intriguingly, laws also have friends, that is to say other laws that they depend upon, and further laws which refer to them, and those relationships can potentially be ascribed a strength. Just how hard would it be to untangle the relationship between laws? Sadly I, and I suspect in reality no one, actually has the information which would allow this relationship map to be constructed – so this diagram is not present in this article.

The author has seen the consequences of attempting to unwind legacy data centres into the cloud, or indeed other data centres in the absence of knowing just what a servers ‘friends’ are, and sometimes progress has been less than stellar. It is interesting to consider the impact on the ‘Great Repeal’ process of being similarly unaware of the relationships between laws that may prevent their easy migration. In the DC setting there is an approach that works, move the whole lot at once and change nothing – it is far from clear that this approach will satisfy either side of the Brexit migration, but it may be the only route.

At the risk of advertising, the DC migration problem is illustrated as a game on telepathic goats at - dv4it|||

