The planets all orbit the Sun at different speeds along orbits that are different circumferences, so they are usually distributed all around the Sun, as in this picture.But in the mid 1970s, there was an alignment that made it possible for a single spacecraft to pass near multiple outer Solar System planets, as in this picture.Now, you might be thinking ""  Well, the spacecraft is starting from Earth and since Earth is orbiting the Sun, that means any spacecraft launched from it is also orbiting the Sun.Let's imagine this on a smaller scale example.  Imagine a flat disk that is not rotating.  Now imagine an ant walking from the center outwards.  Now imagine the same disk is spinning.  Because the ant is on the disk, if the disk has an angular velocity, the ant does too, so the ant's movement (from the perspective of an outside observer) will be a curve.To be able to build one spacecraft and have it accomplish multiple missions was a marvelous opportunity.  And, because this alignment of planets only occurs about once every 179 years, it was an opportunity that would be irresponsible to miss.  It was such a good opportunity that we decided to build two identical spacecraft, in case something happened to the first one.  Those spacecraft are named Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, and they look like this.Each Voyager is equipped with several scientific instruments to collect data about the objects it passes and the environment around Voyager.  It has cameras that took beautiful pictures of the planets.  It has a magnetometer to measure the strength and orientation of magnetic fields.  It can detect cosmic rays and plasma.Notice that big white high gain antenna.  We'll talk more about that in a moment, but let's address the first part of the question.Imagine you are outside playing a ball game with some friends.  You throw the ball to one of your friends that is nearby.  A few minutes later you throw the ball to one of your friends that is faraway.  You don't put a lot of conscious thought into it, but when you throw to the friend that is faraway you throw it with more force.  Why do you do that?  You do that because once you let go of the ball, the force from your arm disappears.A force (F) is something that accelerates (a) a mass (m).  Your arm takes a stationary mass (the ball) and accelerates it and then you let go of it.  At the point you let go, there is no more acceleration caused by your arm, because the ball and arm are no longer connected.  But the ball keeps moving, because it has velocity.  And it will keep moving until exterior forces decelerate it and lower the velocity to zero.This is Sir Isaac Newton's First Law of Motion.This is a very important concept for spacecraft.  People often assume that a spacecraft traveling through space needs to be firing a rocket engine to continue moving, but it doesn't.When the Voyager spacecraft were launched into Earth orbit, they traveled around the Earth until they were lined up to follow that yellow line in the above graphic and then they did a big, but short engine firing.  This engine firing served to accelerate them to a great velocity.  The spacecraft would then continue to travel along that yellow line without any form of propulsion.Sir Isaac told us that the Voyager should continue in motion with the same speed and in the same direction unless acted upon by an unbalanced force.  Here on Earth we are used to seeing things decelerate pretty quickly when we let go of them.  That deceleration is caused by unbalanced forces - things like friction with the ground or drag with the air.In space, once we get out of low Earth orbit, there is no air to cause drag.  We are on no surface so there is no real friction.  But there is one force that serves as an unbalanced force -The Sun is massive and thus has a huge gravitational attraction, pulling things towards it.  We often imagine it like a big heavy metal ball on a canvas, like a trampoline.  The ball stretches the canvas downwards, causing nearby things to roll towards the ball.The canvas is curved by the mass of the ball.  The closer we are to the ball, the steeper the canvas is and the harder it is to climb out.  The farther from the ball, the canvas gets less steep and it's easier to climb out.So, our objective with a spacecraft that is to head away from the Sun is to accelerate it to a high enough initial velocity that even though the Sun is decelerating it, because that deceleration gets less and less the farther away we get, the velocity never reaches zero.  We call this initial velocityThe escape velocity is going to be the velocity at which the spacecraft'sis equal to its gravitational.  This next equation illustrates that mathematically.The left side is the kinetic energy.  Kinetic energy is defined as the energy that a body possesses by virtue of being in motion.  It is determined by the mass and velocity of the object (in our case, Voyager).The right side is the potential energy.  Potential energy is defined as the energy possessed by a body by virtue of its position relative to others.  So, how far apart are Voyager and the Sun.  Since it's the gravitational potential energy we include the parameters relevant such as the mass of the two objects and the gravitational constant.So, our variables are:m = mass of Voyager (~700 kg)M = mass of sun = 5.98E30 kgG = gravitational constant = 6.67384E-11 Nm^2kg^-2r = distance between object and sun (m)So, solving for v we get:Any spacecraft moving in excess of that velocity will be able to escape the Solar System without firing additional thruster burns.We can see that as r increases, the escape velocity decreases - meaning the farther one is from the sun, the less velocity is needed to escape.  Here's a graph comparing the escape velocity for the Solar System to Voyager's actual velocity.Leaving Earth, Voyager had pretty much the same heliocentric (that means with respect to the reference frame centered on the Sun) velocity as the Earth.  So, about 36 km/s.  That's actually not fast enough to escape the solar system at that location (about 42 km/s).We're close to the Sun, so the Sun's gravity pulled on Voyager harshly.  By the time it reached Jupiter, it was down to around 9km/s.  That's below the escape velocity at that location, but we were able to use Jupiter's gravity to speed Voyager up, back to about 25 km/s.  This happened with each planet.  Until eventually past Neptune Voyager is slowly decreasing in speed but that deceleration gets less and less the farther it gets from the Sun and it is well above the escape velocity.So, Voyager will be able to travel away from the Sun forever.  Eventually it will be attracted to another star.Okay, let's move on to the second part of the question.NASA maintains what is called the Deep Space Network (DSN).  It is composed of antenna sites in California, Spain, and Australia (each 120 degrees of longitude apart so that the the full Earth is covered).  At these sites are giant dish antennae, ranging from 34 m (85 feet) to 70 m (230 feet) across.  The antennae are parabolic (bowl shaped) - meaning they are designed so that every signal that hits them is reflected off of the curve towards the center where they are combined, making the signal stronger.These giant antennae manage to pick up the weakest of signals.  In fact, it is believed that the antennae could continue to receive Voyager signals even if it traveled for another century (although we expect Voyager's power supplies to be too weak by about 2025).  Voyager is powered by heat produced from radioactive decay.  When it left Earth, that system had an output of about 450 watts.  Today it is down to less than 250 watts.When Voyager transmits a signal, from its high gain antenna that is pointed at Earth, the signal power is at about 19 watts, but it becomes weaker and weaker as it travels about 16 hours at the speed of light, to reach Earth.  By the time it hits one of the DSN antenna it is at about 10E-16 watts.  Fortunately Voyager transmits at a very high frequency (x-band 8.4 GHz) which is not commonly used for terrestrial purposes, so the signal doesn't get lost in the clutter from things like cell phones, TV, and GPS.Let's figure out how long it takes for the signal to travel from Voyager to Earth.Voyager 1 is currently 19,330,000,000 km from Earth.Voyager 2 is currently 15,799,000,000 km from EarthA radio signal travels at the speed of light 300,000 km per second.Voyager 119,330,000,000/300,000 equals 64433 seconds or 17.9 hours.Voyager 215,799,000,000/300,000 equals 52663 seconds or 14.63 hours.I should close by talking and showing a little about what Voyager gave back to us.  Voyager gave us indications that Europa has an ocean below its icy surface.  It informed us that Titan has rain storms of methane.  It revealed that Io releases sulfur and oxygen into a ring around Jupiter that inflates Jupiter's magnetic field.  It took us to the termination shock where the solar wind suddenly drops in speed - the boundary of the solar system.The Earth and Moon together.The fluid dynamics of Jupiter's atmosphere.  Voyager revealed dozens of giant hurricanes.GanymedeA volcano erupting on Jupiter's moon Io.  Io has 100 times as much volcanic activity as Earth.Incredible details of the components of Saturn's rings including shepherd moons and kinked F-ring.Clouds and a dark spot on Neptune.  We observed winds of 1600 km/hr (1000 mph).Ice geysers on Neptune's moon Triton.Voyager 1 is traveling 35 degrees out of the ecliptic plane, towards the Solar Apex, towards the constellation Ophiuchus.  Voyager 2 is traveling 48 degrees out of the ecliptic towards the constellations Sagittarius and Pavo.Voyager will cross the galaxy for billions of years.  Long after our solar system has died and been reborn as a new star, Voyager will still be heading outwards, carrying proof that we existed.  It carries not only sounds and music that represents our cultures, but diagrams showing where we came from.Also on that record is a message from the President:|||

