Best smartphone display on the market Bixby is not fully operational, and Vision is hit or miss Although the Bixby assistant isn’t ready for prime time, the Samsung Galaxy S8 is a fantastic phone because of its captivating infinity display, very strong performance, long battery life and great cameras.

The Samsung Galaxy S8 and S8+ are the best Android phones you can buy, and they’re not even finished yet. Starting at a fairly steep $750 and $850, respectively, Samsung’s new flagships forge a beautiful new path for smartphone design by stripping away unsightly bezels with their respective 5.8- and 6.2-inch infinity displays, and these are the first handsets to boast Qualcomm’s beastly Snapdragon 835 processor for record-breaking performance.

Samsung’s new Bixby virtual assistant is incomplete, and we’re not fans of the fingerprint sensor’s location. But when you add in excellent battery life and improvements to a camera that was already top-notch, you have two winning handsets with the Galaxy S8 and S8+.

No offense to the LG G6, but the Galaxy S8 exemplifies a bezel-free phone done right. Samsung didn’t just take away the bezels on this phone; it crafted a space-age work of art with a new infinity display that stretches from edge to edge. The Galaxy S8 not only has a slightly bigger screen-to-body ratio than LG’s phone but also looks sleeker because of the way the Gorilla Glass curves toward the edges on the front and back. Other Android phones look like blah, flat slabs by comparison. The S8 is also thinner and narrower than the G6.

The screen on the S8 is 5.8 inches, versus 6.2 inches on the S8+. But other than the difference in display size, the S8 and S8+ have the same design. Overall, we prefer the bigger screen on the S8+, but if you have small hands, you’ll likely find yourself repositioning the phone in your hand to reach certain buttons, including the home button, which is now a virtual button instead of a physical key. The button worked well in our testing, providing solid haptic feedback. It’s flanked by the Recent Apps and Back buttons.

What’s remarkable about the Galaxy S8 is how much more screen real estate it gives you compared with the S7, while still offering a compact and lightweight design. The S8’s 5.8-inch screen is housed in a 5.5-ounce, 2.7-inch-wide chassis, whereas the 5.1-inch S7 weighed 5.4 ounces and had the same width. The S8 is taller, but it’s still easy to use with one hand.

With its 6.2-inch screen, the 6.1-ounce S8+ is heftier than the 5.5-ounce, 5.5-inch S7 Edge. But the S8+ makes the iPhone 7 Plus (6.2 x 3.1 x 0.29 inches, 6.6 ounces) look positively bloated. Plus, unlike the latest iPhones, the S8 and S8+ have headphone jacks.

No matter which size you choose, it won’t be long before you see fingerprint smudges on the back of the phone. The smudges were especially prominent on the midnight black version of the S8 and S8+, but you can also choose the lighter orchid gray or arctic silver, which don’t show smudges as easily.

We were worried that the fingerprint sensor’s placement right next to the camera on the back of the Galaxy S8 and S8+ might be a problem. And it was, initially. Because the sensor is fairly narrow, it’s difficult to target it without looking. We got used to it after a couple of days, but we still wish it were below the lens.

If you don’t want to reach around the S8 to unlock your phone, you can choose from a couple of other biometric options that Samsung gives you. There’s facial recognition, as well as iris scanning. Iris scanning unlocks your phone faster and even works in the dark, but it doesn’t work in direct sunlight; your eyes need to be fully open, so squinting isn’t an option. The facial recognition is not only slower but also had trouble in direct sunlight and doesn’t work in the dark.

Our advice? Use the iris scanning everywhere except in the sun, and when there is bright light, just use the fingerprint scanner.

Apple is reportedly bringing an AMOLED screen to the iPhone 8, but I’d like to see the next iPhone try to top this panel. Sporting a resolution of 2960 x 1440 pixels, both the Galaxy S8 and the Galaxy S8+ turned in nearly perfect scores on our tests, offering a very bright picture, amazingly vivid colors and near-perfect color accuracy.

The extra-wide 18.9:5 aspect ratio doesn’t work well with some apps, but overall, we like how immersive the experience is when watching video and playing games. When watching the new Star Wars: The Last Jedi trailer, we could make out every wrinkle in Rey’s hands as she seemed to levitate the rocks around her with the Force, as well as every rising ring of smoke around Kylo Ren’s smoldering mask. As the camera panned around to the island where Luke was training Rey, it was hard not to be impressed by the golden sunshine that reflected off the water, as well as the lush, green foliage dotting the mountains.

The S8 backed up our experience by reproducing a superb 183 percent of the sRGB color gamut. That blows away the LG G6’s 134 percent, but the AMOLED screen on the Google Pixel scored an even higher 191 percent. (However, when you turn on Adaptive Display mode on the Galaxy S8, it can reach as high as 255 percent.)

If you’re looking for accurate color, the S8 can deliver that, too. In its AMOLED photo mode, the display notched a Delta-E score of 0.28 (0 is perfect). The LG G6 was closest, at 1.01, but the Pixel XL was way behind, with 5.88. Like the LG G6, the Galaxy S8’s screen is HDR certified, which means you can enjoy a wider range of colors and better contrast on videos that support the standard. Amazon, Netflix and YouTube offer a growing variety of HDR-ready movies and shows.

The 18.5:9 aspect ratio doesn’t work well with every app. For instance, in Super Mario Run, we noticed unsightly bars above and below the game. But Samsung’s own apps are optimized, and you can fill the screen by pushing a button while watching YouTube and Netflix, even if the video looks a bit stretched out.

For a small speaker, the Galaxy S8 pumps out pretty sweet sound. When we listened to Justin Timberlake’s “Can’t Stop the Feeling,” on this phone, the lyrics were clearer, and the volume was louder, than the same track on the LG G6. 



The latter handset sounded slightly muffled by comparison. However, you don’t get stereo sound from the Galaxy S8 as you do from the HTC U Ultra. 



The Galaxy S8 goes boldly forward into a new era of speed, thanks to Qualcomm's Snapdragon 835 system on a chip (at least in the U.S.; in other regions, the S8 will have Samsung's Exynos 8895 chip). The S8 also comes with a healthy 4GB of memory, 64GB of storage (twice the amount you get from base models of the LG G6 and the Google Pixel) and microSD card expansion for people who need even more space.

When you put it all together, the S8's muscle blitzes every other Android phone on the market, and even challenges the iPhone 7 Plus for total performance supremacy. The S8 almost always feels exceedingly snappy, no matter if you're vaulting over Goombas in Super Mario Run or mowing down aliens in N.O.V.A. Legacy. We didn’t experience any lag when using multiwindow mode for chatting with friends while streaming video on YouTube. If you pay close attention, you may notice that some of the transitions when switching between apps aren't 100 percent smooth, but that seems mostly cosmetic.

In terms of benchmark performance, the Galaxy S8’s multicore score of 6,295 in the Geekbench 4 overall performance test was more than 50 percent higher than that of its closest Android competitor, the Snapdragon 821-powered Google Pixel XL (4,146), and more than 15 percent better than the iPhone 7 Plus (5,392). Its single-core score was 1,846, which is a good deal lower than the iPhone 7 Plus’ single-core score of 3,533, although that's to be expected because the S8's Snapdragon 835 features eight cores, compared with four cores in the iPhone 7's A10 Fusion chip.

The Galaxy S8's graphics power was also quite impressive, as it hit 36,508 on 3DMark's Ice Storm Unlimited test. The iPhone 7 Plus came the closest to matching the S8, with a score of 36,104, while other Android adversaries, like the LG G6 (29,611) and the Google Pixel XL (28,182), were farther behind.

One area where the S8 still can't quite keep up with the iPhone 7 is on web surfing. On the JetStream 1.1 JavaScript test on Chrome, the S8 scored 70.26, which is significantly higher than its Android cohorts, including the Pixel XL (55.93) and the LG G6 (56.2). However, it’s still far short of the iPhone 7 Plus' fantastic score of 145.5 while using Apple's Safari browser.

New for the S8 is Samsung's Device Management tab, which is best accessed by swiping in from the Edge tab. It offers a quick look at the status of your device, including battery status, power mode (optimized, performance, game or entertainment), available storage and your current memory usage. There's even an optimization button that cleans up any lingering apps and clears your cache, which is a handy tool for people who go weeks or months without actually turning off their devices.

When we first found out that the S8's 12-megapixel rear camera is ostensibly the same as the one on last year's S7, we were a bit disappointed. But that rush of emotion was a bit premature, because under the hood, Samsung made some important software enhancements. And then you toss in a new, higher-resolution, 8-MP front cam, and you get a phone that produces noticeably better pictures no matter which shooter you're using. The most important tweak comes in the form of Samsung's new multi-image photo processing, which mimics the operation of the Google Pixel's HDR+ mode by taking multiple pictures when you press the shutter, selecting the best one, and enhancing that image with extra details and info from the remaining two pics.

When we took both the S8+ and a Pixel XL out for some side-by-side testing, it was clear that Samsung's adjustments have had a pretty positive effect. At a nearby farmer's market, the S8 captured a crate full of apples with better contrast, richer colors and better details than the Pixel XL. 



And when I continued down the street, the S8+ topped the Pixel XL again when I snapped a pic of some flowers, this time offering better white balance than Google's phone, as evidenced by the greenish hue on the white flower's petals. 



But it wasn't a clean sweep for the S8+. When I really tried to push both cameras to the limit by shooting a backlit scene pointing straight at the sun, the Pixel XL stunned us with a shot featuring big, bold colors and sharp details, even though there was some serious lens flare going on. 



Inside, in pretty much ideal conditions, the S8+ and the Pixel XL were again neck and neck. The one difference is that the Pixel's cool color tone brought out the green in the pistachio macaroon, while the pic from the S8 sported a more neutral white balance, which led to a more pleasing overall photo. 



Finally, at a local bar with even less light to work with, both the Pixel XL and the Galaxy S8 impressed us with photos that were brighter than the scenes in real life. Small differences included less blown-out highlights in the S8's pic, which was countered by more detail in the darker areas of the scene in the Pixel's photo.

When it comes to tweaking your photos or changing modes, Samsung has added new Snapchat-like filters that let you decorate faces with various animal masks, hats and other silly emojis. But if that doesn't strike your fancy, the camera also comes with modes for shooting panoramas, food, slow-mo and more. And as with all good camera apps, there's also a Pro mode that lets you adjust settings manually.

As for selfies, the S8 and S8+ sport new 8-MP cams with a wide-angle lens, which makes it easy to snap you and all your besties at once. However, compared with the Pixel XL's 8-MP camera, the S8's selfies can sometimes be a little lacking. 



We compared photos shot by the S8 and the Pixel XL outside on a sunny day. The Pixel XL's photo had an extra level of sharpness and detail we didn't get from the S8+. Our face looked a little too smooth and perfect on the Samsung, to the point where we were wondering whether Beauty Mode was kicking in even when we had it set to 0.

The Galaxy S8’s camera can shoot 4K video at 30 frames per second and slow-mo video at up to 240 frames per second at 720p. (In comparison, the LG G6 shoots at just 60 fps in slow-mo.)

To test the Galaxy S8’s video quality, we shot some footage of a pond with fish swimming about in 4K. The S8’s footage looked crisper and more vibrant than what the iPhone 7 Plus captured, even if the colors looked a bit oversaturated. However, when we put both phones on a mount to test image stabilization, the iPhone 7’s video looked smoother; we saw a bit of stuttering in the S8’s footage as we walked up a grassy hill.

The Galaxy S8 introduces a new personal assistant, Bixby, to take on the likes of Apple’s Siri and Microsoft’s Cortana. For a hallmark feature on its flagship phone, Bixby feels pretty half-baked right now. Actually, make that quarter-baked.

The main appeal of Samsung’s new virtual assistant is the ability to substitute your voice for tapping, which can save time. For instance, during demos, we saw that you should be able to say things like, “Send the last photo I took to Mom” or “Show this video on the TV.” (It has to be a Samsung TV, but it’s pretty nifty.) Unfortunately, Bixby's voice controls won't be available at launch, and while Samsung says this functionality will be made available later this spring via an update, we're still waiting on an official date. Bummer.

Instead, you’re limited to features such as Bixby Vision, which leverages the camera and object recognition to identify objects. We found this worked pretty well when we pointed the S8 at various household items, such as shampoos, snacks and aluminum foil. It also works for books. After pointing the Galaxy S8’s camera at any object, we could check prices online on Amazon.

Say you’re at the liquor store and want to know the rating of that wine or what food to pair it with. Bixby has also partnered with Vivino to identify that bottle and spit back information. However, at a wine store in New York, the feature was more miss than hit, as it seemed to have trouble with the bright lights. At home, though, Bixby identified three wines correctly, though we were greeted with a home server error.

Bixby has some other limited talents at the moment, including the ability to set reminders and a Bixby Home tool with a card interface that shows you your schedule, what’s trending on Facebook, the weather, news and other info. But Bixby won’t really get interesting until you can speak to it. You can still use Google Assistant, which is also preloaded on the S8.

Running Android 7.0 Nougat, the Galaxy S8 still has a skin on top of Android, but it’s fairly intuitive, and Samsung’s minimalist, line-drawn icons are easy to understand. We like that you don’t have to tap a button to see all of your apps from the home screen; just swipe down from the middle of the screen, and then swipe left to see more apps.

If you swipe down from the very top of the screen from wherever you are, you’ll see your notifications and Samsung’s quick-settings shortcuts. Finally, swiping in from the left provides access to Edge screen shortcuts, such as a customizable list of apps, a device maintenance screen (for battery, choosing performance mode, etc.) and a Smart Select tool for selecting an area of the screen and sharing it or pinning it to the top of your display.

You’ll also find a ton of advanced features. The ones at the top of our list include a one-handed mode that you can activate by tapping the home button three times to shrink the screen, as well as the ability to quickly launch the camera by pressing the power key twice.

At least on the T-Mobile S8 we tested, there was minimal bloatware. T-Mobile included just five of its own apps: Device Unlock, T-Mobile, T-Mobile Name ID, T-Mobile TV and Visual Voicemail.

The Galaxy S8 works with the new Gear VR for those who want to experience virtual-reality games and content, but that’s not the only interesting accessory. The new DeX ($149) is a dock that lets you use the S8 and S8+ as a mini PC. The dock can connect to a full-size monitor via its HDMI port, as well as a keyboard and mouse via Bluetooth. It also has an Ethernet jack and a USB port.

Out of the box, the Samsung Connect app will let you access and control various Samsung-branded smart home gear. For instance, you can start your Samsung robot vacuum ($549) or peek inside your Samsung Family Hub fridge (about $2,900) to see what you need from the store while you’re out. But you’ll get a lot more possibilities when Samsung starts selling its Samsung Connect Home -- a combination mesh Wi-Fi router and SmartThings hub that will let you control other items, such as Philips Hue lights and Netgear’s Arlo security camera.

Samsung offers a slew of other accessories, including an LED View cover for always having the time in view, a wireless charging stand and more. Check out our roundup of the Best Galaxy S8 accessories and Galaxy S8 cases.

One concern about a phone with this much screen is how that extra real estate might impact battery life. The Galaxy S8+ has a slightly smaller battery than last year’s S7 Edge (3,500 mAh versus 3,600 mAh), and yet the S8+ improved almost 1 hour, to 11 hours and 4 minutes, on the Tom's Guide Battery Test (continuous web surfing on 4G LTE using T-Mobile's network). The standard Galaxy S8’s 3,000-mAh battery endured for 10:39 on the same test, improving on the Galaxy S7's (8:47) time by nearly 2 hours.

We obtained these results with the phones’ resolutions set to their max 2960 x 1440 pixels. They come with the less demanding 2220 x 1080 setting on by default.

MORE: Smartphones with the Longest Battery Life

Compared to the Galaxy S8+, the Pixel XL's battery life was just a bit longer, at 11:11. The iPhone fell about a half-hour short (10:38) of both of those phones, and the LG G6 finished way behind, with a time of just 8:39.

On top of that, the S8 has battery smarts that let it learn about your usage patterns to help extend its longevity even further. And when you need to juice the phone back up, you can take advantage of the S8’s fast-charging capabilities via its included USB Type-C cable or use one of Samsung's slick wireless chargers (available separately).

It’s clear that, with the Galaxy S8 and S8+, Samsung set out to create more than a phone. It’s trying to build a more Apple-like ecosystem, with devices ranging from the Gear VR and the DeX dock to the new Samsung Connect app for controlling smart home gear and the Bixby assistant. It’s also evident that Samsung hasn’t yet reached that goal, as Bixby’s voice features won’t be activated until later. But even with that glaring shortcoming, the Galaxy S8 still beats the Android competition while surpassing the iPhone 7 and iPhone 7 Plus in terms of design, display quality and camera performance.

The Galaxy S8 isn’t the first phone to offer a nearly bezel-free design, and yet it looks and feels more modern than the LG G6 (despite Samsung’s awkward fingerprint-sensor placement). And the S8 also runs circles around the Google Pixel’s design while offering faster overall performance and a better camera. The infinity display is simply gorgeous, and the Snapdragon 835 chip lives up to the hype both in speed and battery efficiency.

Some shoppers may want to wait to pick up the S8 or S8+ until Samsung delivers a finished Bixby — and to make sure Samsung makes good on its battery safety promises — but overall, these are the best Android phones you can buy and our top picks overall.|||

Although Bixby isn't finished, the Samsung Galaxy S8 is a fantastic phone because of its captivating infinity display, very strong performance, long battery life and great cameras.