[This post was originally published here. To get a better formatting of the article go directly there.]

Before I jumped into into the field of deep learning my first thoughts were about the hardware I would need to run deep learning models. Of course I could have used cloud services such as Amazon AWS GPU instances, but when I saw their pricing I realized that this wasn’t a viable solution in the long run. Truth is that I also wanted to replace my old RX 280 by a shinny new GTX 1070 for gaming… And to my surprise this GPU revealed to be much faster than what amazon could offer at a much higher price! Find the benchmark I used for comparison at the end of the post.

We’ll not discuss how to setup the hardware part required to use this tutorial. Rather my goal here is to setup the software part. I assume you already have a machine with an NVIDIA GPU capable of using CUDA and a Linux OS installed on it (here we will use Ubuntu 16.04 LTS x64). If you have an AMD/ATI GPU most of this tutorial still applies to you but I won’t cover the installation on this kind of hardware.

If you have no time to spare for the setup or you are looking for a ready to use solution, take a look at Floydhub which is the perfect service to run hassle free deep learning models at a cheaper cost than Amazon AWS.

This post will be split in 2 parts.

The installation includes: Jupyter notebooks, Anaconda, Pycharm IDE (yes, not everyone wants to use notebooks) and Tensorflow running on a GPU.

Most of the knowledge gained here (if not all) could also be applied to other deep learning frameworks such as Pytorch. 

By the end of this post you will be able to run out-of-the-box deep learning models which would be as effective as an Amazon AWS GPU instance.

This tutorial is targeting 2 type of audience: One with a basic computer science background who would like to properly setup a secure remote environment for deep learning, and the other which don’t have a background in CS but would like to have their own deep learning rig. 

As these 2 audience are distinct, parts of this tutorial are between separators which mainly target the second audience. Those with a CS background can skip these pieces of information if they already know about the subject.

Anaconda is a very useful tool to switch between different virtual environments.

What is a virtual environment? Why use it?|||

[This post was originally published here. To get a better formatting of the article go directly there.] Before I jumped into into the field of deep learning my first thoughts were about the hardware…