A new image, spilled online recently, originating from the vast tech leak blog, Slashleaks, is placidly portraying the two most expected smartphones of this season – Samsung’s Galaxy S8 and S8+. The S8 is reputed to accompany a 5.8-inch display, and the S8+ with a bigger, 6.2-inch display. The half an inch difference, in the proportion, have evidently demanded a larger frame, making it obvious to make out difference in size, at the very first look.

In addition to that, the Galaxy S8+ features an aspect ratio of 18:9 that makes the device compact, however, making it look slightly longer. Hence, the device, will probably be less demanding, to hold and work with one hand, even though it is actually pretty bigger. Moreover, we anticipate that it will hold an 83% of screen-to-body proportion, according to some sound tips. Therefore, the 6.2″ S8+ ought to be about the span of a 5.7″ handset.

Apparently, now we have shrewdly come to know about the specs of the Galaxy S8 and S8+, with an array of leaks in the past. Accordingly, they will sport a Super AMOLED, narrow-bezel displays. The smartphones are expected to be fuelled, by the newest Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 chipset, for which they will be the first set of smartphones to run this processor.

Well, the new processor has assured that it will jazz up the phones’ performance by 27%, whereas with 40% lesser power consumption. Further, it will be offered a 4GB of RAM, along with a 64GB/128GB of built-in storage, which is quite enough to store as much information.

We’ve heard this rumor before; the camera aspects of the devices will accompany a 12-megapixel Dual Pixel camera with LED flash, put-up at the back. Over the frontage, it will have an 8-megapixel auto-focus selfie camera.

A Bit of gossip recommends that the Galaxy S8+ will be equipped with a 3,500mAh battery, while it will be a 3,000 mAh one, in the S8. However, both the devices will run on Android 7.1 Nougat OS out-of-the-box, with TouchWiz layered on the top. Past spilled renders have proposed that the devices will hold a 3.5mm audio jack, alongside an USB Type-C port for quick charging.

Stay tuned for the latest information about the highly awaited smartphones, which are just on the verge of getting unveiled.|||

Just one day ahead of official launch, Samsung's Galaxy S8 ( 5.8-inch display) and S8+ ( 6.2-inch) Dimension size spotted in an image.