This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... more than thirty thousand North Koreans have fled their socialist country and of itself three FBB isolated state wiping themselves a modern capitalist society skull ... what are the most difficult challenges understanding that the color of water decide ... how to manage their money ... in state school new school Securities's total multiple until somebody ... in the one she ... helped reduce the protest after treating counseling and bank accounts of many defector struggle to grasp Modern Financial Services exposing them to Deccan stance ... I ... when can all be fled North Korea in two thousand ten ... you never heard of an ATM ... so the first time to ditch and ... it was the bases ... close uses for news of a car ... those that ... didn't go quite as the case ... was to surprise ... at that time ... cannot long struggle to understand how to best spend this money ... it continues to ... have the money the house ... use the ... money how to put it how to use the ... my puts it The masala ... you learn the basics of finance in a class on how to live in modern society these cuts is provided by the Supreme government to almost be defectors upon arrival at the so-called from one facility which operates from an undisclosed location Anaconda centers scattered throughout the country with a lot of ... credit cards and turned to foreign to many defectors who say they've never counted them in the north ... was ... he was ... Owens ... the move ... it was a new heavens ... the government has recently doubled the number of hours spent on financial education ... sectors ... it is even built a replica bank to keep the factors had to use an ATM ... to create encourages defectors essay by matching the saving of four to sixteen dollars per month ... I ... that effect is Coco world were thinking of a true non interest ... in North Korea the central bank controls every count ... beating people distrust institution itself ... most kids are sitting in cash ... Luke and Apple are some people come to North Korea to those old and aren't the only tool that can happen in Utah and sometimes the money from the might and power tools can complement to not pay this money being on time on the beest dot case and put in twenty ten in our house ... for many state sponsored classes aren't enough Christian organizations to become a strong source of support for North Koreans first helping them to the fact ... that offering them support once again to the south ... when do it ... we did it to them to keep ... a month ago that it has to undergo when you do it ... the deal with the ... Korean won and Tuesday ... mm ... churches like this one provide effect is a regular check ins advice on finances and savings installment payments for larger purchases can be especially confusing because something beneath the only pay the upfront fee ... and in turn that can come off in the Mondial ... into ... ghosts and and and so I think I think I can include candle ... lit that remain kind and that Nikolas up a couple so we had no ... legal it is all perishable ... will not implement I can still come away Hislop and meimei who will listen to me and some of the costume ... some defector successfully integrated to modern society ... Joseph Parker brands and operates the pic is taken from outside Seoul after first opening a coffee shop in two thousand fourteen with a fifty thousand dollar loan ... employees of the defences of the farm ... which is planning to buy your feet ... and they come so either governments to provide ... housing ... for new on the hard since he ... was seeking and the Korean keeper did I have oily skin through the inoffensive and some are projected to become all about it for us citizens ... because protests aimed at helping factors are crucial to the success of my ... but a false front lawn ... and of course Japan ... he and he made the morning because I don't have a headache because I don't have any asset ... ahead to all my life ... you don't think researcher has recently published a book is a comics to teach the defectors how to manage the money ... he also published a study last year showing how prone defectors were falling for scams ... among ... his moment in time not because of the ... book although tomb ... he says that once im alone at about two hundred effective using a total of fourteen million dollars ... once can make them ... happy so reportedly went back to North Korea where she said on national television that quote they are as it stands in South Korea asset as water is there for ... the Department of the Copeland to cope ... with the pecans and eco wasn't going to put them ok ... in in in time ... hard to predict a bit of cumin and toddler unit and has ventured into custody ... under the unification scenario ... the challenge will be about nearly thirty thousand people to twenty five million people ... the entire population of North Korea ... I ... I ... if|||

North Korean defectors must adjust to a completely different economic system in South Korea, or risk financial exclusion. The Wall Street Journal looks at the challenges facing some of capitalism's