Apple has a few ways to create parallax effects using only tools. Parallax previewer is a stand alone application that can have image layers added to it and can be exported as an LCR file, which is Apple's proprietary parallax file format. They also provide a Photoshop plugin that can export a PSD file as an LCR file. Lastly, there is a command line utility, , that can export LSR or PSD files into an LCR file.

Re:Lax provides a way to create parallax effects at runtime, eliminating latency for the users of your app and server-side support required to generate parallax images. It provides ways to create custom parallax effects to any programmatic view as well as the ability to generate a parallax LCR file at runtime! See for yourself:

LCR files are most useful when creating Top Shelf extensions that display dynamic parallax content. If your app retrieves layered images from a server at runtime, you must provide those images as files. files are generated from or Photoshop files using the command-line tool that’s installed with Xcode, or by using . This process does not scale when creating parallax files for dynamic content; fortunately, Re:Lax fixes this.

We have reverse engineered the image format in order to make this convenient for content providers. This can be done on the fly without the need to use a server to distribute the parallax image files. Re:Lax makes programmatically generating files within your app or extension a breeze.

You also have access to the raw image data if you'd rather write the image to a file to save for later

The Example app includes a TopShelf extension which demonstrates how to dynamically create LCR files at runtime and display them on the Top Shelf

Re:Lax makes creating programmatic parallax effects easy by providing a constructor that takes an array of s

For more flexibility, can be constructed with a which is a custom view that will apply the parallax effect to all subviews. An is also available if you want to force the parallax effect to be more subtle.

Our weapon of choice is subprojects + Frameworks, but we're just happy that you want to use our library.

Re:Lax is available using an MIT license. See the LICENSE file for more info.

Tweet us at @marksands or @JARinteractive to let us know if you're using the library|||

Re-Lax - Recreating Parallax on tvOS