Also available on tomjewett.com: my color tutorial, which includes explanations of all major color systems and a "Tutor" demonstration page that provides interactive selection and analysis of Web colors.

This third edition of dbDesign is a general update, both to meet legal requirements for U.S. “Section 508” accessibility and to bring the code into compliance with the latest World Wide Web Consortium standards. In the process, I've tried to make the SQL examples as generic as possible, although you will still have to consult the documentation for your own database system. Graphics no longer require the SVG plugin; large-image and text-only views of each graphic are provided for all readers; the menu is now arranged by topic areas; and the print version (minus left-side navigation) is done automatically by a style sheet.

The second edition was largely motivated by the very helpful comments of Prof. Alvaro Monge, as well as by my own observations in two semesters of using its predecessor in class. Major changes included the clear separation of UML from its implementation in the relational model, the introduction of relational algebra terminology as an aid to understanding SQL, and an increased emphasis on natural-language understanding of the design.

The original site was the outgrowth of a previous book project, Practical Relational Database Design, by Wayne Dick and Tom Jewett. The move online featured condensed discussions, an integrated view of database concepts and skills, and use of the Unified Modeling Language in the design process. I’m grateful for the positive response that the site has received so far, both from my own students and from online readers worldwide.

In every edition of this site, I owe a huge debt of gratitude to Prof. Wayne Dick, lead author of the earlier PRDD book and internationally-known accessibility expert. We’ve worked together for so long that it’s hard to identify separate authorship of the material here—I hope that this general acknowledgement will suffice. The students in my Fall 2002 class were especially helpful in “test driving” each page and asking lots of questions! As always with teaching materials, my students are the main source of inspiration and motivation to develop the site.

Tom Jewett

 Department of Computer Engineering and Computer Science, Emeritus

 California State University, Long Beach

 www.tomjewett.com/

 email: tom [at] tomjewett [dot] com

Copyright © 2002–2006, by Tom Jewett. Links to this site are welcome and encouraged. Individual copies may be printed for non-commercial classroom or personal use; however, this material may not be reposted to other web sites or newsgroups, or included in any printed or electronic publication, whether modified or not, without specific permission from the author.

Copyright © 2002–2006, by Tom Jewett. Links to this site are welcome and encouraged. Individual copies may be printed for non-commercial classroom or personal use; however, this material may not be reposted to other web sites or newsgroups, or included in any printed or electronic publication, whether modified or not, without specific permission from the author.|||

Teaching resource and tutorial for an introductory database class or individual use