In recent years, law enforcement agencies and lawmakers have attempted to crack down the production of methamphetamine by restricting the sale of ingredients that can be used to make meth. As part of that effort, many states have agreed to limit the sale of over-the-counter medications that include ephedrine and pseudoephedrine as ingredients. Ohio is among those states, and makes it a crime under Ohio Rev. Code 2925.55 to buy, receive, or otherwise acquire more than a certain amount of products that contain pseudoephedrine.

When you buy a product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine in Ohio, your purchase is tracked through a multi-state database called the National Precursor Log Exchange. Purchases are updated in real time, and when you attempt to make a purchase the database is checked for your purchase history to ensure you haven’t bought more than the allowed quantity of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine by going from pharmacy to pharmacy. The database logs your name, address, product type, quantity, and date and time of your ephedrine and pseudoephedrine purchases. When you’ve reached the limit, the database system sets an alert that notifies retailers not to sell you any more of the product.

Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are decongestant drugs that are commonly used in medicines to treat cold, allergy, and sinus symptoms. Products that contain pseudoephedrine include such common over-the-counter medications as Sudafed, Robitussin, Dayquil, Benadryl, Tylenol Sinus, Zyrtec, Advil Cold and Sinus, Allegra-D, Claritin-D, Aleve-D Sinus and Cold, and many other medications that treat coughs, nasal congestion, and other symptoms of allergies or a cold.

Ohio Rev. Code 2925.55 makes it a crime to knowingly buy, receive, or otherwise acquire more than 3.6 grams of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine products in a single day and no more than 9 grams in 30 consecutive days, unless you have a valid prescription that is lawfully dispensed. The restrictions apply to the actual weight of the ephedrine or the pseudoephedrine, not the overall weight of the product and all of its ingredients.

The statute breaks down four different crimes related to purchase of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine:

When you’re convicted of illegally obtaining methamphetamine precursors, you face the possibility of months in jail and a fine of up to $1,000. Although the offense is a misdemeanor, it is a drug conviction on your permanent record. Additionally, drug offenses in Ohio carry a possible driver’s license suspension.

When you’re convicted of a drug offense, no matter how minor it seems, there will be effects on your life beyond the potential for jail time, fines, and loss of your driver’s license. Among the possible consequences you may face later on because of a conviction for purchasing precursor chemicals are:

If you’ve been charged with purchasing methamphetamine precursor chemicals, there are some ways that an experienced Columbus drug attorney may be able to help. Under Ohio law, you may have a defense to the charge if you had a valid prescription from a doctor or other health provider authorized to write prescriptions, and the ephedrine or pseudoephedrine products were lawfully dispensed by a pharmacist.

You also may have a defense if purchases were incorrectly logged and you didn’t actually buy the quantity alleged; if you weren’t the person who made the purchases, such as being the victim of an identity theft; or you didn’t knowingly acquire more than the allowed amount of the ephedrine or pseudoephedrine product.

Additionally, there often are flaws in police procedure that violate your constitutional rights. Those flaws may include problems with how the police make arrests, conduct searches or seizures, and gather or process evidence. When the police make a mistake, a Columbus drug attorney may be able to prevent evidence from being used against you in court, which can provide leverage to get your case dismissed or negotiate a lesser charge with a lighter penalty.|||

Have you been charged with possession of Sudafed or a related drug? Contact Columbus drug attorney Ben Luftman for a free consult: (614) 500-3836.