The Internet can be a little unfair. It's way too easy for ISPs, telecoms, politicians, and corporations to block access to the sites and information that you care about. But breaking through these restrictions is tough. Or is it?

Please read all installation instructions carefully before proceeding.

Streisand is based on Ansible, an automation tool that is typically used to provision and configure files and packages on remote servers. Streisand automatically sets up another remote server with the VPN packages and configuration.

Streisand will spin up and deploy another server on your chosen hosting provider when you run on your home machine (e.g. your laptop). Usually, you do not run Streisand on the remote server as by default this would result in the deployment of another server from your server and render the first server redundant (whew!). Support for local provisioning (i.e. Streisand locally configuring the system on which it is installed) will be added soon.

Complete all of these tasks on your local home machine.

Clone the Streisand repository and enter the directory. Follow the prompts to choose your provider, the physical region for the server, and its name. You will also be asked to enter API information. Once login information and API keys are entered, Streisand will begin spinning up a new remote server. Wait for the setup to complete (this usually takes around ten minutes) and look for the corresponding files in the 'generated-docs' folder in the Streisand repository directory. The HTML file will explain how to connect to the Gateway over SSL, or via the Tor hidden service. All instructions, files, mirrored clients, and keys for the new server can then be found on the Gateway. You are all done!

You can also run Streisand on any number of new Ubuntu 16.04 servers. Dedicated hardware? Great! Esoteric cloud provider? Awesome! To do this, simply edit the file and uncomment the final two lines. Replace the sample IP with the address (or addresses) of the servers you wish to configure. Make sure you read through all of the documentation in the file and update the file if necessary. Then run the Streisand playbook directly:

The servers should be accessible using SSH keys, and root is used as the connecting user by default (though this is simple to change while editing the inventory file).

If there is something that you think Streisand should do, or if you find a bug in its documentation or execution, please file a report on the Issue Tracker.

Jason A. Donenfeld deserves a lot of credit for being brave enough to reimagine what a modern VPN should look like and for coming up with something as good as WireGuard. He has my sincere thanks for all of his patient help and high-quality feedback.

Corban Raun was kind enough to lend me a Windows laptop that let me test and refine the instructions for that platform, and he was a big supporter of the project from the very beginning.

I cannot express how grateful I am to Trevor Smith for his massive contributions to the project. He suggested the Gateway approach, provided tons of invaluable feedback, made everything look better, and developed the HTML template that served as the inspiration to take things to the next level before Streisand's public release. I also appreciated the frequent use of his iPhone while testing various clients.

Huge thanks to Paul Wouters of The Libreswan Project for his generous help troubleshooting the L2TP/IPsec setup.

I also listened to Starcadian's 'Sunset Blood' album approximately 300 times on repeat while working on this.|||

streisand - Streisand sets up a new server running L2TP/IPsec, OpenConnect, OpenSSH, OpenVPN, Shadowsocks, sslh, Stunnel, a Tor bridge, and WireGuard. It also generates custom instructions for all of these services. At the end of the run you are given an HTML file with instructions that can be shared with friends, family members, and fellow activists.