“If I knew I was going to live this long, I would have taken better care of myself.” - Mickey Mantle.

We started The Deck in 2006 and for the first couple years it struggled. By 2008, it was an OK business and by 2009, it was a pretty good business. From then through 2013, The Deck was going along just fine.

Things change. In 2014, display advertisers started concentrating on large, walled, social networks. The indie “blogosphere” was disappearing. Mobile impressions, which produce significantly fewer clicks and engagements, began to really dominate the market. Invasive user tracking (which we refused to do) and all that came with that became pervasive, and once again The Deck was back to being a pretty good business. By 2015, it was an OK business and, by the second half of 2016, the network was beginning to struggle again.

After a long, successful run, The Deck’s time has come and we’re shutting it down. We’re sorry to see the network go, but we’re proud to have supported so many independent voices, and the open web, along the way.

Thanks a million to the sites and services that were a part of The Deck over the years. Without exception, every affiliate deal was made with a simple agreement to participate and was based on trust, honor and friendship. What few issues arose were handled with common sense towards a common purpose. We’re proud of that too.

Thanks to the hundreds of independent and independent-minded advertisers who ran schedules on the network and put their products and services in front of an audience curious to find out more about them.

Marketers interested in running ads on, or sponsoring, the sites and services listed on this page should reach out to them directly. These sites offer large, loyal, engaged audiences and a variety of ways in which advertisers can reach them.

Finally, thanks to the regular readers of the network sites: web publishers, writers, developers, editors, reporters, bloggers, art directors, curators, photographers, illustrators, students, filmmakers, typographers, artists, animators, musicians, coders, designers and all the other creative professionals who paid attention to the ads, occasionally clicked one, and once in a while even bought an advertised product, or signed up for a service.

As is usual at Coudal Partners, we’re working on some new stuff. Over time, we have started, operated and shut down a number of businesses. Like this, and this, and this. If we have a definable “corporate culture” it’s that we are easily distracted by new ideas. We’re OK with that. It keeps things interesting and we get to continue learning. And to us, that’s what work is really all about.

In the meantime, we are quite busy with one of our other projects, and we’d be delighted to ship you a mess of Field Notes Brand products. You can purchase them here.|||

