Over the years, I’ve been part of many product teams. I’ve seen good and bad examples of how product managers work with designers. Today, I manage product teams. The way I structure them and lead them are heavily influenced by my past experiences, and it boils down to three core tenets:

These are the cultural tenets I’ve always wanted. I’ve seen some bad situations. Some product people view design as a feature, something that can be bolted on later. Some believe it’s an expensive habit that some companies like Apple have the luxury for. And this is the worst case: hiring a designer who designed a similar product before, and bombarding them with dribbble links to achieve a certain outcome. This happens a lot, and I pity those designers; they’re suffering inside.

Fundamentally, design is problem solving. Everybody is designing things all the time, whether they realize it or not. Design is a loaded word — some say it’s how it looks, some say it’s how it works. But to me, it’s being thoughtful. When I see a careless login experience, I think that this person was either not thinking or thinking in the wrong way. When I see something obvious, I wonder how much thought went in.

Good design is an outcome of collaboration between product managers and designers. They approach problems from opposite ends. A product manager brings intimate knowledge about the problem, context, and the user — they come from the problem end. A product designer brings intimate knowledge about the solution and approaches — they come from the solution end. Together, they can arrive at a good solution they’re both happy about. It requires a lot of thinking, brainstorming, prototyping and experimentation.

To that end, I find it silly when people ask if design is worth it for their audience or problem space. Usually, people who ask this question don’t understand design, they think design is Apple or a hundred million dollars. I also find it stupid when product people bombard designers with dozens of references. These people are just lazy. It’s important to look at examples. In fact, they are an important part of design research. But simply asking a designer to make something look like something else doesn’t work. It’s like asking a jazz musician to do rock music.|||

Over the years, I’ve been part of many product teams. I’ve seen good and bad examples of how product managers work with designers. Today, I manage product teams. The way I structure them and lead…