With the production of smartphones and other smart gadgets, outburst of social media platforms like YouTube, Facebook, Instagram and etc., anyone can be a moviemaker.

Today, what is more easelly done, than shooting a video with smartphone? It's so easy to shoot any video, but certainly, for shooting the good one, you need to master some really good hacks. Having a good device with  good camera is the first thing for quality videos. However, having a good camera doesn't garantee that your produced videos will be outstanding. Instead, master some video producing know-hows, and make your video production easy, fun … just, amazing!!!

In comparison with pocket camera or DSLR, a smartphone isn’t the best shooting device, simply because of its' lens - they are tiny. However, learning a basics of smartphone videography can turn you into a smartphone Tarantino.

We’ve made a research to find out smartphone video production tips, provided by field’s gurus to make your smartphone video storytelling experience fun and … well professional.

So what to prefer? Smartphones or tablets? 

Recording functions of these devices are very similar, however, smartphone is easier to handle.  This is very important, when shooting long videos. Do you  think tablets are better ? Our choice is smartphone.

Charging your device properly is the first and one of the most important things you have to be concerned about. Imagine, your device turns off in the middle of the video production process. This is the most inconvenient situation you can experience. Pay also attention to phone’s available memory to have needed storage for your recordings. Remember, that your memory card is not a bottomless bottle.

Say "no" to vertical videos

Stop shooting vertical video! Just, STOP !!!

Sure, you'll claim that for a smartphone it is natural to shoot vertically, however, get, that it doesn't look professionally. The fact that many people do it, doesn't mean you have to do the same.  Don’t give in to the Dark Side.

One of the most important things in videography is a proper lighting. Smartphone has a tiny lens, this is a fact. To avoid your videos look like blurried, muddy mirrors, think of giving as much light as it's possible.  Sure, you can buy some extra lens to make your videos look like professional camera shot, but, since then, remember – Let there be light, because light is good :)

To avoid shaky hand produced videos, buy some equipment to make your smarphone steady, while shooting. It will help you to avoid shooting blurred or shaky videos. Buy tripod stabilizers or camera cages, or, at least, lean your hands to steady foundament, like tables, chairs and etc..

Videos are not just about visualizations, they are also about sound effects. Video is formed of visual story and supported by sound. Give significant attention to sound of your video. Built-in microphones are not the best ones, when you look for quality. They don't save your videos from environmental noise, for sure. Sure, your videos can be edited later via special software, however, it is complicated and time costly process. It's better to buy separate recording device and record the sound of your videos. External recording device will make your videos look and sound more professional.

The Sun Is Your Enemy and Friend

What are we without this hot fire ball  in the sky? It doesn't refer to our lives, in general, but also to videography. While shooting outdoors capture your videos, when it  faces the front of your object.  Otherwise, game is over. However, the sun is not only your enemy, it's also your best friend. How? It gives your smartphone a strong diffused light, which it needs more, while shooting a videos. For using the sun for your benefit,  keep its' light behind you during video production.

Now, you know necessary know-hows, about how to make a quality videos with your smartphone.

 These tried-and-true hacks will help you to enjoy your smartphone video production process as well, as to shoot stunning videos.|||

Today, what is more easelly done, than&nbsp;shooting a video with smartphone? It's so easy to shoot any video, but certainly,&nbsp;for shooting the good one, you need to master some really easy-handled&nbsp;hacks. Read the article concerning smartphone videography techniques.&nbsp; | en |