I am Adam McElhaney, a privacy activist & net neutrality advocate from Chattanooga, Tn. 



 I think that your private Internet history should be yours. I also believe your Internet should be neutral. 

 I am raising money to help secure those freedoms. 

 It is my ultimate hope that we will be able to use the donations to restore our right to privacy.





 I have laid out a plan on our course of action. This isn't going to be easy and this will not be quick. I'm going to continue fighting for you.



 Should something happen and I fail you, I want you to know that this money belongs to you and our cause. I have no intentions of keeping a nickel. I have no intentions of withdrawing any money until I am certain I can deliver.



GoFundMe let me know that offering to route certain people's donations to different organizations is complex. That said, if we can't buy the data in the end for whatever reason, we'll send funds to EFF so they can continue fighting for this mission. Refunds will still be possible too.





It will be your choice. 



 But I am not giving up and neither should you. 



 We are stronger united.



 ---



 What started it all:



 Thanks to the Senate for passing S.J.Res 34 , now your Internet history can be bought.



 I plan on purchasing the Internet histories of all legislators, congressmen, executives, and their families and make them easily searchable at searchinternethistory.com.



 Everything from their medical, pornographic, to their financial and infidelity. 



 Anything they have looked at, searched for, or visited on the Internet will now be available for everyone to comb through.



 Help me raise money to buy the histories of those who took away your right to privacy for just thousands of dollars from telephone and ISPs.  Your private data will be bought and sold to marketing companies, law enforcement. 



 Let's turn the tables. Let's buy THEIR history and make it available. 



 -----------------



 Check me out on Twitter @windmarble  or Facebook to see who I am.



 I didn't censor any of my accounts or pictures. What you see is what you get.



 Yes, I use social media. I understand that what I put on the Internet is out there and not private. Those are the risks you assume. I'm not ashamed of what I put out on the Internet.



 However, I don't think that what I lookup on the Internet, what sites I visit, my browsing habits, should be bought and sold to whoever. Without my consent.



 Join me in the fight to turn the tables and do whatever it takes to take back your privacy.|||

Purchase Private Internet Histories by Adam McElhaney - I am Adam McElhaney, a privacy activist & net neutrality advocate from Chattanooga, Tn.  I think that your private Internet history should be yours. I also believe your Internet should be neutral. I am raising money to help secure those freedoms. It is my ultimate hope that we will be able to use...