For the past week, I've been blogging about my progress regarding my two startup projects, Crowdnote and Poolski, but there's as third project I've been working on as well: this blog. Yesterday, for the first time, I posted Day 1 on Hacker News to test its value in the wild, and I'm very glad I did, because the results were nothing special.

I posted it around 1am EST, right after I'd written my daily blog entry last night. I'd never posted anything on Hacker News before, let alone something I created. I was nervous; I was essentially experiencing stage-fright: the fear of being rejected. I was about to expose my work to strangers in a public forum, and I had no idea if my work even qualified as post-worthy in that community. What if people told me that my work sucked? If I was successful, would people try to hack my site or steal my ideas?

Those questions are exactly why exposing my work was necessary.

In the days immediately preceding Day 1 of this blog, I was driving from Los Angeles to New York after quitting my job. I was listening to Jia Jiang's audiobook "Rejection Proof", a recount of his 100 days of rejection experiment and how he learned to embrace rejection as a growth opportunity. That's what posting this blog was for me: a growth opportunity. All the questions I had about reactions to the site were answered. It turned out to be fine, even trivial, to post my blog on Hacker News. In fact, I don't think that community cares if I post my own articles, so long as the content doesn't violate their community guidelines. Nobody hacked my site or stole my ideas, because so few people ever read the article that those wouldn't even be real possibilities. I found out that I have a totally different problem: how do I get this blog to attract an audience?

When I checked Hacker News and Google Analytics this morning, I felt both relieved and excited. There were zero comments left in the discussion section for the post, but enough people had clicked in the article that I knew Hacker News could still be a viable avenue for publicity. There was potential here, and I just needed to keep trying.

I already have ideas of what I can do differently. First, I need to try posting something at peak hours; if I share stuff in the wee hours of the night, it will probably get lost in the shuffle by morning. So I'll try posting in the afternoon and see if the results change. Secondly, I did a little research and realized that blog posts generally get recognition online, not the blogs themselves. If the blog is to become popular, then it needs to be filled with posts that can stand on their own (I'm personally thinking about joelonsoftware.com). Every post should be self-explanitory and should never assume that readers have more context than I give them. I wouldn't feel comfortable posting more articles if the readers would be confused by them or would need to do their own research to understand them. This blog is intended to give readers a long-term perspective on taking a chance being a technical founder, but that doesn't mean they should be expected to read the posts in chronological order.

Finally, nobody wants to read about my quest to make a blog popular before it gets popular, so this will be my last post about this sort of thing. The point is that I finally understand the significance of releasing early and releasing often through my experiment on Hacker News last night. The first release of this blog gave me valuable insight now, while I still have months of articles to write and chances to improve with each one.|||

