We are social beings. We do like to share info with others, about our daily routine - food we eat, cloth we wear and etc. It gives us an opportunity to communicate with our followers, to please our vanity and, well, add some colors to our lives. Instagram is one of those social network, where people post millions of their photos every day.

Today this social giant has over  600 million active users . It is twice as much as the population of the entire United States! The users of Instagram are different, however, there are some super users, who has millions of followers over the world. Seems they know some super recipe to drive other to their pages, or, they just know how to take stunning photos. Well, to comfort ourselves lets bet - it's a lie. They just have mastered some really easy techniques to look beautiful on their Instagram feed, and successfully use them. Very often their cool shots are all about these hacks and pretty editing. Fashion bloggers, celebrities or just some users use these techniques to make their photos look perfect. So why some of  them get even paid to wear some brands cloth or advertise any other product on their Instagram pages.

Here we gathered some simple hacks from Instagram  successful users, to make your Instagram feed look interesting.

It is a good idea to plan your Instafeed beforehand. Sure, there are situations, when improvising can make a sense, however planning your content is a good idea.  Plan ahead, what you really want to share with your followers. Select your content first, your style, whether you’re going to post your style experiments or, simply, post your food photography. So plan your content ahead.

All we are a vain creatures. In case of Instagram or any other social madia, we like to count our likes. However, keep calm. There are some posts that will be liked from few, or some popular posts, that will generate hundreds of likes. Don't get obsessed with likes, it's a serious mental problem, that make you chase likes. If doing like that, you will end up with ordinar, all pleasing content and, well, with serious psychological problems. Be unique, one of a kind, post what you really like.

Well, thanks that Instagram is so good designed with lots of functions, but please, avoid using its filters, while taking a photos.  Instead, use your camera's apps, because they are much better and advanced for taking a photos.  Those can help you to capture better photos. Also, don’t forget about other apps, like VSCO Cam and Rookie . They have some advanced functions, like shutter speed and white balance controls to take better photos. If you are an iPhone user, use Camera+  , an iPhone-only app, which is perfect to stabilize shaky hands effect.

There's a common opinion that simmetrical images are more eye pleasing. However,  don’t be fixed on this, don't put your object in the center of your photo. Let your photo be a little "imperfect", but unique.

To get the perfect photo one should take dozens to find the perfect shot. Hardly you'll get the perfect one from the first shot. Take at least ten, from different angles. It will help you to find the perfect one.

Say “Yes” to editing yourself

Come on, we all do selfies. It’s common for Instagram, also. However, not always we like these selfies.  Imagine every thing is perfect in your selfie, but there's a bunch of hair not in the right place. Never thought, why the photos of successful Instausers are so perfect?  Right, they use lots of apps to edit their photos. YouCam Perfect and Perfect365, are the apps the   for retouching her selfies. You can use them either.

Lighting is a key for taking a good photos in any type of photography. No filter or app will give the photos this clearness than a proper light.  Natural light always is a savior for your photos, so if you’re outdoors, use so called “golden hours” to take your most beautifully captured pictures.

All Instagram users know about its filters, but there are bunch of apps to work on your photo's color, style, add frames or stickers or apply retro effect. Rookie, Camera+, Faded, and Snapseed have such filters.

There’s an algorithm for getting more “Likes”

Curalate, an image analytics company, analyzed dozens of million images to understand if there is some algorithm to get more "likes". Here are some of their findings: lighter images are more popular than darker ones, blue is loved more than red, and etc.. For looking more fashionable, scientists have developed a special    for that.

As we talked, when shooting for Instagram take at least 10 photos to find the perfect one. Try taking pictures from unusual and different angles. Capturing from different angles will help you to see the things from unique perspective.

Practice is the key to success

Have you ever seen those crazy Instausers, that take dozen or even hundreds of the same object over and over again? However, thay are not crazy, thay just try to imrove their shooting technique. Practice all the time. This is a key to successful feed. Practice, in finding a better compositions, places, with different frames and filtres. These will help you to take sharp and clean photos and become interesting-to-follow user.

Hashtags are very important in social media, especially in Instagram. When posting your photos, choose trending hashtags to get more followers and viewers of your feed.  Also it’s a good idea to use many hashtags, relevant to your photos. Carefully chosen hashtag can make your post to stay on top for a long time.  



|||

We do like to share info with others, about our daily routine, food we eat, cloth we wear and etc. It gives us an opportunity to communicate with our followers, to please our vanity and, well, add some colors to our lives. Here, in this article, we have&nbsp; gathered some useful&nbsp;tips from Instagram successful users to make your Instagram feed look stunning. | en |