It’s been said that human beings now have a shorter attention span that a goldfish. Research by Jampp, a performance marketing platform for mobile, shows an 88% decrease in consumers’ attention span year over year and a 35% decrease in average app session length quarter over quarter. That’s why, when it comes to mobile apps, a seamless and engaging user experience is everything. Without it, you’re pretty much setting yourself up for failure. If you want to do it right, here’s a list of brilliant apps you can look at for inspiration.

You’ve probably heard of Duolingo, a free app you can use to learn dozens of different languages. The app’s interface is simple and clean. Gamification elements make it addictive. The makers of Duolingo are also blending linguistics, cognitive psychology and machine learning to really understand how their users learn. It’s an enjoyable and effective app for boosting your language skills and definitely one to look at for good UI design.

Figuring out public transport schedules and routes when you’re visiting a new city is not always easy. Until you discover Moovit. Besides offering the best routes to get to your destination, the app offers real time service alerts due to traffic or relocated stops. The interface is very intuitive and you don’t even need to sign in to get started (big plus when you’re on the run). The app has been so well received by users that governments around the world are actually asking them to launch locally.

Windytv (previously Windyty) is awesome on mobile and desktop. Windytv provides an interactive weather and wind map. An eye catching visualization of wind patterns in your location is the first thing you see when you open the app. You can view wave data, precipitation and cloud cover, and more. All of this useful info packed in an incredibly simple interface that you’ll want to keep coming back to.

Microsoft is not exactly known for delivering seamless user experiences, but Outlook on mobile is pretty impressive. Wired called the mobile app “the biggest email innovation since spam filtering.” The UI is clean, snappy and very smartly designed. It also integrates with your Outlook calendar and OneDrive, making it a powerful app for Office 360 users.

We use our smartphones for work all the time. How about using them for meditation? 5 Minute Escapes is an app that will make you want to explore mindfulness. The UI is simple and stunning. Just select the escape you want, press play and the audio will guide you through the session.

Fresh Air is one of the best weather apps for iOS out there. It’s got a great looking interface and provides some pretty neat functionalities, including an integration with your calendar that helps you anticipate how the weather may affect your plans. It’s a must-see example of an app design that was carefully thought through.

Know anyone that doesn’t use WhatsApp? If you live in Latin America or Europe, probably not. The app has become a messaging staple for many and there’s a reason behind that. It’s nicely designed and really easy to use. When it comes to messaging apps, it’s simplicity is hard to beat.

Trello, recently acquired by Atlassian, has become an indispensable task management tool for many. The mobile version of the app is very similar to the desktop version. Creating boards, cards and checklists is just as easy and it even works offline! Definitely a nice app to check out for UI/UX inspiration.

Tracking expenses is tedious and boring, until you discover Expensify. To quote PC Mag’s review: [ Expensify ] “focuses on taking care of the tedium associated with expense tracking, both for employees and administrators. That means offering a lot of technology integration, trustworthy optical character recognition (OCR), and a workflow system that won’t annoy anybody.” You can easily capture receipts using the app’s Smart Scan, seamlessly create expense reports and much more. It takes the frustrating bit out of a task nobody likes, and it looks great too.

Human is a daily activity tracker that helps you find out if you’re doing enough to stay in shape. Its beautiful UI and visualizations make fitness enjoyable for pretty much anybody. Human was acquired by Mapbox in 2016.

Need help building a mobile app? Get talented software developers on Squads.|||

It’s been said that human beings now have a shorter attention span that a goldfish. Research by Jampp, a performance marketing platform for mobile, shows an 88% decrease in consumers’ attention span…