The snapd team recently announced a new release of snapd supporting Ubuntu 14.04 LTS (Trusty) for servers and desktop (i386, amd64). The snapd service is what makes possible the installation and management of applications packaged as snaps.

In a nutshell, if you have systems using Ubuntu 14.04 LTS, welcome to a brand new world!

Installation on Ubuntu 14.04 is straightforward. Firstly, open a terminal, and type the following command to install snapd:

You can now download and run any application from the Ubuntu snap store, let’s start by installing a hello-world snap!

The first time you install a snap, snapd also installs the “core” snap, which is the common platform for all other snaps. After the installation, you can use the “snap list” command to list installed snaps:

Then, in order to run “hello-world”:

However, the first time you try to run a snap on 14.04, you might experience the error “The command cannot be found”. This is due to the fact that “/snap/bin” has not been added to the $PATH environment variable. To do so, a script called “apps-bin-path.sh” has been added to /etc/profile.d. It will automatically run after you reboot or re-login and add snaps launchers to your path. When this is done, snaps should launch as expected:

Hooray! The “hello-world” snap is running on your Ubuntu 14.04 machine. To further explore snaps, you can use the “snap find” command to search for more.

Without any arguments, it will show featured snaps:

 Command output edited to fit the blog width.

It can also be used as a search engine for all stable snaps:

As you can see, the “snap” command is used to manage snaps the same way you use “apt” to manage debs. You can learn more about it by following this short tutorial (the first two steps are about installing snapd on various distros, you can skip them!). Of course, the built-in help is available through “snap –help”.

Krita : a free and open source digital painting application. Snaps allow Krita developers to release their software directly to users, at their own pace, regardless of OS release schedules.

PostgreSQL 93, 94, 95 and 96: since snaps are confined, you can install multiple PostreSQL versions at the same time, which comes in handy for testing.

Nextcloud and Wekan: No need to present Nextcloud for file sharing, but maybe you don’t know about Wekan: a kanban boards server similar to Trello. By installing these snaps you can spin up instances of complex collaboration software in minutes.

openHAB: turn any system into a home automation backend, in a minute.

Ubuntu Make: deploy and setup developer environments easily on Ubuntu (Android, Unity3D, Arduino, Swift, etc.). As this snap requires full access to your system, it’s only installable in “classic” mode, which more or less means “unconfined”.

To get some insight on available or installed snaps, the “snap info” command will give you everything you need, such as commands provided by the snap:

To browse all the available stable snaps in the store, you can visit uappexplorer, use the “snap find” command or install the “snapweb” snap and visit https://localhost:4201 for a local store interface.

If you want to snap your software and publish it, you can have a quickstart at tutorials.ubuntu.com and dive-in further with the snapcraft documentation.

If you have any questions, get in touch with the snapcraft team on Rocket.Chat and on the snapcraft mailing-list.|||

Ubuntu Insights - The Ubuntu resource center