Assignees does automatically code review requests on GitHub (currently). This project is based on the hackathon-starter and it is a side project developed in a couple days for our needs (and also for fun).

The application is available at: https://app.assignees.io/.

See the next section if you want to host it yourself.

This project provides a command line tool to perform various operations. You can run it via Yarn:

In development environment, you should run the command above within a Docker container:

This project provides a Docker Compose configuration to quickly build and start it. Clone the project, then run:

The application will shortly be accessible at: http://assignees.dev:3000/.

Important: you must configure your local DNS to be able to use in the URL. You can edit your file, but it is recommended to install and configure Dnsmasq. This link is a good tutorial.

The contains my credentials (for an application that does not exist anymore at the time of writing by the way). You should register a new OAuth application on your own.

It is also recommended to use ngrok if you plan to test webhooks from your development environment.

This project is configured with environment variables. Here is the list:

Also, setting to looks like a good idea.

N.B. because of the Yarn incompatibility on Heroku, I set to and to .

To monitor the application at an early stage, it is possible to use New Relic APM. These extra environment variables could be useful (at least on Heroku):

Note: this commit has disabled New Relic on this project. You can re-enable it by yourself by requiring the package in both the file and the code.

You may want to change the name of the project, the contact email address, or the Piwik tracking code by editing the template.

This project runs on Node 7.4 and uses Yarn as package manager. Version 0.16.1 is used on Heroku because of an incompatibility. In development, Yarn 0.19.1 has been used without any problem.

Assignees is released under the MIT License. See the bundled LICENSE file for details.|||

assignees - :eyeglasses: Code reviews for everyone.