It all comes down to the question:

If so, compression may not be enough. When we say an image is core to the reader’s experience, what we really mean is that such an image is needed for the user to make sense of the content. In other words, we need that image to be ready as quickly as we can, or otherwise we’d deliver a bad experience. In this case, there a couple of techniques you may want to check out:

Conversely, if the image is not fundamental for the reader, compression may be your answer. You can look up tools like TinyPNG or ImageMagick, or reduce the resolution of your image to a more common size (like 1024px wide). The rule of thumb would be to try and stay between 100K and 200K. Why? Because at that size, users on a mobile network, would be able to get the image in under a second, which is an acceptable amount of time to be passively waited.

Loading the image via JavaScript will make things even worse. In fact, that would be a technique that makes sense only for the so-called blocking resources, meaning those assets that force the browser to wait the download of such an asset before rendering the page.

CSS files and JavaScript files are blocking resources. Images are not.

In fact, the browser already loads images with low priority, and asynchronously renders them in the page as soon as they are ready.

Let’s revise how a regular image gets treated by the browser:

This is what happens if you load it via JavaScript:

As you can see, your image’s download would depend on JavaScript to be ready just to be discovered.

Let’s frame the problem here: a big fat image (>500Kb) makes it for a really slow experience on mobile devices and flaky connections. The problem is relevant only if the image is somehow core to the reader’s experience (as you confirmed). In such a case, you’d want this image to be displayed as soon as possible.

Therefore, we need a way to have the request being sent sooner. The new preload directive is a standard-compliant way to achieve just that, but only in modern browsers. Here’s how it would look:

The download of the image would happen almost in parallel with the parsing of the HTML document.

Hope this helps anyone. Let me know if there’s anything unclear, or that you disagree with.|||

I stumbled upon this question on the reddits and I figured I’d dive a little bit deeper, since I believe it is an interesting and legitimate doubt to have. What size is too big? What can we do if we…