Strikeforce Technologies Inc(OTCMKTS:SFOR) has seen a spectacular rise over the past year since trading as low as $0.0001 last year. The stock hit highs of $0.025 in October of last year before coming back down. Since than SFOR has been on the rise recently topping $0.0185 and looking to make a run of previous $0.025 highs.

There are plenty of things to get excited about there; the CEO is a former JPM hot shot who sued Microsoft and won. SFOR is quickly gaining a foothold in the highly lucrative cyber theft market.

Strikeforce Technologies Inc(OTCMKTS:SFOR) helps to prevent cyber theft and data security breaches for consumers, corporations and government agencies. The company provides powerful two-factor, “out-of-band” authentication, in addition to patented keystroke encryption and mobile solutions.

SFOR products include GuardedID® eliminates your vulnerability to data theft due to keylogging attacks, a leading cause of cyber crime. Unlike anti-virus and anti-malware software, GuardedID® protects your data from both known and unknown keylogger threats.

StrikeForce’s patented anti-keylogging technology secures your sensitive personal and financial information by proactively encrypting every keystroke as you type. GuardedID® also provides advanced anti-clickjacking and anti-screen capture technology, for multiple layers of protection from cyber-attacks.

Another SFOR product is Mobile Trust keystone encryption for mobile device; an estimated 16 million mobile devices are infected with mobile malware, with threats constantly on the rise.1 MobileTrust® is the world’s most advanced security suite for mobile devices, with the power to protect your confidential information, online transactions, and login access against keylogging spyware. MobileTrust® even helps you create and store hard-to-crack passwords.

SFOR military-grade anti-keylogging technology encrypts every keystroke you type into your smartphone or tablet while browsing, texting, emailing, and logging in to any website or VPN. With MobileTrust®, keylogging cyber thieves have nothing to see — and nothing to steal.

To Find out the inside Scoop on SFOR Subscribe to Microcapdaily.com Right Now by entering your Email in the box below

On October 4 SFOR announced the launch of its new video blog: Online Security – What You Need to Know … (In Under 3 Minutes!). The weekly series focuses on must-watch topics in personal and small business cyber security.

In Entry 1, “Yahoo Hacked,” series host and StrikeForce Executive VP George Waller reveals the chilling consequences of consumer data breaches, such as the recent hack that compromised over 500 million Yahoo user accounts.

On March 20 SFOR announced it has filed patent infringement lawsuits in U.S. District Courts this week against Gemalto, Inc.; Vasco Data Security; Entrust Datacard; and SecureAuth Corporation.  The lawsuits against Gemalto and Vasco were filed in the District of Massachusetts and the cases against Entrust and Vasco were filed in the Eastern District of Virginia.  These new lawsuits claim infringement of one or more of StrikeForce’s United States Patent Nos. 7,870,599; 8,484,698; and 8,713,701.  These suits are in addition to the three cases filed in June 2016 involving StrikeForce’s ‘698 patent that are currently pending in the District of New Jersey against Duo Security, Centrify Corporation and Trustwave Holdings, Inc.

“We can sit by and watch competitors use our patented inventions without permission, or we can do something about it.  We’ve decided to do something about it,” said Mark L. Kay, StrikeForce CEO.  “We think competition is healthy, but competitors should create their own original technology, not use what we developed.”

We have a Monster Pick Coming. Subscribe Right Now!

Currently trading at a $9.27 million market valuation SFOR does have $1.67 million in the treasury. SFOR is an exciting story in small caps; the Company is quickly gaining a foothold in the highly lucrative cyber theft market and the CEO is a former JPM hot shot who sued Microsoft and won. We will be updating on SFOR when more details emerge so make sure you are subscribed to Microcapdaily so you know what’s going on with SFOR.

Disclosure: we hold no position in SFOR either long or short and we have not been compensated for this article|||

Strikeforce Technologies Inc(OTCMKTS:SFOR) has seen a spectacular rise over the past year since trading as low as $0.0001 last year. The stock hit highs of $0