“The appropriate humility is ‘hey I did what had to be done.'” It’s really easy to be “humble” and treat your victories as something that you didn’t earn. Only people at a very high level can afford to be “humble”. You might not be able to do so and that’s ok. Ultimately, the inability to internalize success is worse than any arrogance you could have.

19:20 Jump Before You Are Ready to Leap “This forces you to push yourself a little bit harder.” The greatest personal growth comes by taking on what you don’t think you are ready to handle. This will force your growth (or your failure). Either way, you’ll know where you are. Resolving things for good or ill is often better for your mood than not knowing.

22:15 Put Yourself Out There Nothing kills the sense that you are fake as fast as a ten minute conversation with the type of people who are trying to do what you are trying to do. This is not an insult, but it’s really easy to compare yourself to the top of your field when you are only a year or two in. That’s not particularly fair to yourself. It also makes learning from those people difficult. You will also learn a lot by teaching and will get a more realistic assessment of where most people’s skills actually are.

“That’s where you get the flow to look like an expert.” If you are adequately prepared for what you are doing, it’s much easier to come across like you know what you are doing, because that’s what experienced people do themselves. Planning ahead actually teaches you what you need to know to NOT be a fraud. That includes getting over the things that intimidate you. The other thing that planning does for you is allow you to run ideas by trusted friends and get feedback.

29:45 Consider Those Who Are More Skilled in the Proper Light “Don’t look at people that are way better than you and think they are always going to be that way.” It’s incredibly easy to think that the people you think are better than you will always be better than you. That’s also a very demoralizing thought. However, if you can formulate the right questions for the experts suddenly they are a resource, not competition.

35:35 Realize Where You Are Better It’s really easy to see the “experts” as being better than you are in all areas. You almost certainly have some deep knowledge of something that the “programming professionals” don’t have. Don’t undervalue it, even if the industry tells you otherwise. Odds are good that it isn’t any less valuable than what they know, merely that you are valuing it as less. Monomania in tech is very much a thing. You should compare the totality of your own life experience against the level of expertise of any “expert” you come across and see if their “expertise” actually exceeds your own. This doesn’t mean that you tear down other people, merely that you stop tearing down yourself.

44:00 Stop When You Reach Your Limit Sometimes imposter syndrome doesn’t come from pushing to your limits. Rather, it comes from trying inappropriately to exceed what you can actually do. Try to determine whether you have tried to exceed your capability. You’ll do this at some point and if you don’t admit it, you’ll feel inadequate. Remember that it is ok to end up in over your head. It’s part of your learning process. If you aren’t getting in over your head on occasion, you aren’t learning. The best swimming teachers arrive when you are drowning.

48:08 Learn to See Failure as Part of the Process “You learn more by failing than you do by succeeding.” If you learn something on the first try, odds are good that it wasn’t worth learning. If you treat failure as a learning experience, it is both much easier to learn from and much easier to keep going. Remember how your learned as a child. Every step was a win – you didn’t expect to totally win in the first try.

Don’t tell yourself that winning is a lesser achievement. If the win doesn’t feel big enough to matter, figure out how to make it bigger. Raise the bar, raise the pressure. You will get the confidence to do more and bigger things by pushing yourself past your level of comfort. “Make those dull tasks challenging by making challenges for yourself.”

Other people don’t realize how much effort it took to get where you are. Remember how dumb the average person is, then realize that the people mostly likely speaking to you about what you are doing are biased towards those who can’t actually execute. Haters are what you get when you do well. If you are running into them, you are headed in the right direction.|||

In general, it occurs when the inevitable plateau in learning happens.