This is because lights can only be paired with one bridge at the same time. So you will need to tell the official app which bridge you want to control.

You can not control all your Philips Hue lights with only one Hub. The official Philips Hue app forces you to switch between your bridges if you want to control the lights associated to the bridge that it isn't connecting.

Maybe you have more than 50 Philips Hue bulbs at home and you need two bridges. Or maybe you need two bridges because the signal is not good enough to control all lights around your home.

Thanks to Yeti, you can now control all your Philips Hue lights at the same time even if you have two bridges

With Yeti you won’t need to worry about switching between your bridges. Yeti does it automatically for you so you can find and control all your lights through the Yeti home screen.

Yeti will communicate with the correct bridge associated with the light you want to control.

By the way, It doesn’t matter if your bridge is the first or the second generation of Philips Hue bridges. Yeti works with all Hue bridges and offers the same usage experience for all of them.

1- Download Yeti - Smart Home Automation from the AppStore(iOS) or PlayStore(Android). You can find the app here.

2- Connect your phone to the WiFi network where your Philips Hue bridges are connected.

3- Yeti will find your bridges and lights automatically. It will ask you to push the bridge button for both bridges when it's in the discovery process so don't forget to do so!

4- After the bridge discovery, you'll be able to control all your lights without switching between bridges. Hurray!!

Enjoy controlling your two Philips Hue bridges with Yeti!

Try to control two Philips Hue Bridges at the same time with Yeti. It's available on Android and iOS:|||

Sometimes people have more than two Philips Hue bridges. On this blog post, we will show how you can control all your lights without switching between bridges. Yeti make smart home easier for people.