The Pomodoro Technique isn’t like any other time-management method on the market today. What makes it so unique?

1. WORK WITH TIME - NOT AGAINST IT For many people, time is an enemy. We race against the clock to finish assignments and meet deadlines. The Pomodoro Technique teaches you to work with time, instead of struggling against it. A revolutionary time management system, it is at once deceptively simple to learn and life-changing to use.

Essential to the Pomodoro Technique is the notion that taking short, scheduled breaks while working eliminates the “running on fumes” feeling you get when you’ve pushed yourself too hard. It’s impossible to over work when you stick to the system. You may end up taking fewer sick days, too!

Whether it’s a call, a Facebook message, or suddenly realizing you need to change the oil in your car, many distracting thoughts and events come up when you’re at work. The Pomodoro Technique will help you log your distractions and order them according to priority levels. Often, they can wait.

Most of us are intimately acquainted with the guilt that comes from procrastinating. If we haven’t had a productive day, it’s pretty easy to end up feeling like we can’t enjoy our free time. Becoming a Pomodoro Master involves creating an effective timetable, allowing you to truly enjoy your time off.

These are all ways real folks use the Pomodoro Technique:

The fundamentals of the Pomodoro Technique are simple yet incredibly effective.

3. WORK ON THE TASK UNTIL THE POMODORO RINGS Immerse yourself in the task for the next 25 minutes. If you suddenly realize you have something else you need to do, write the task down on a sheet of paper.

The Pomodoro Technique isn’t just about helping you get things done today; it’s about learning how you work so you can save time in the future.

While the contours of the Pomodoro are set, what you do within them can be adjusted to maximize efficiency. One way to make a Pomodoro more effective is to use the first few minutes to review what you’ve done before. Other methods are discussed in the book.|||

Do more and have fun with time management. The Pomodoro Technique isn’t like any other time-management method on the market today.