Potential teachers with a bachelor’s degree have to complete three steps to become certified: gain admission to a teacher preparation program, complete that teacher prep program (which usually includes some student teaching, but not always), and complete a certification exam. But many teacher prep programs have low admission standards and are far too easy to complete. In Texas and several other states, for example, anyone with a college GPA of 2.5 or higher can get an online teaching degree from a for-profit company like iTeach in as little as 12 weeks.

This means that the certification exam is the last chance for states to weed out unprepared teachers before they start teaching. But so far, these exams are doing a poor job: pass rates vary by state and subject, but 94 percent of test-takers pass the Washington State math exam that I took on the first try — and those who fail can take it over and over again until they pass. Luckily, Washington State also requires a portfolio review of sample lesson plans as part of teacher education programs, but many states never assess a candidate’s teaching skills before they enter the classroom.

“We don’t actually have a test that looks at whether they can explain content to children, whether they can manage a classroom, whether they can talk sensibly to parents,” said Deborah Loewenberg Ball, a faculty member at the University of Michigan and founder of TeachingWorks, one of the programs working to improve teacher training and assessment.

Each state sets its own standards for teachers, including which exams they have to take for certification.

And when the exams do ask questions about teaching strategies, they are often just as useless. The Oklahoma State teacher certification exam recently had a multiple choice question that essentially asks the following: Your students’ tests come back showing that most of them have not mastered the skills you taught in your last lesson. Should you adjust your plan to reteach these skills or keep going as planned?

If our country’s teacher preparation programs were on par with the world’s top-performing countries like Singapore and Finland, where admission into teacher education programs is extremely competitive and all the programs are highly rigorous, then the licensing exam teachers have to pass wouldn’t matter much — they would already have passed a high bar. But here in the United States, where we have thousands of teacher education programs and no common curriculum to prepare teachers for the classroom, our certification exams could do a much better job of keeping out candidates who lack sufficient preparation.

Here’s what a better question for potential elementary math teachers might look like: Think of a situation or model to divide the fractions 1¾ by ½.

This one’s a lot harder. I don’t know about you, but I can’t think of anything.

Here’s one possible good answer, according to Ball, from the book Building A Better Teacher: “A recipe calls for ½ a cup of butter. How many batches can one make if one has 1¾ cups of butter?” The answer, three-and-a-half batches, represents a meaningful and useful number (especially if you like cookies, I might add).

Unfortunately, most teachers are not tested this way. The National Council on Teacher Quality, an independent nonprofit research organization in Washington, D.C., grades each state on teacher preparation, including the way states certify teachers. In their most recent report, NCTQ gave states a C- grade for teacher preparation. They found that

According to NCTQ, exams for elementary math teachers are getting better. Recently, Massachusetts adopted a new certification exam called the MTEL (Massachusetts Test for Education Licensure) that has harder math questions and also tests candidates on how well they know the underlying principles. “In 2015, for the first time ever, we saw the majority of states actually meeting our elementary teacher mathematics goal, and it was because they adopted the Praxis II Multiple Subjects exam. It is not as rigorous as the MTEL exam, but it’s more rigorous than what they had been using previously,” says Elizabeth Ross, managing director of state policy for the National Council on Teacher Quality.

I took MTEL’s current elementary mathematics practice test to see what the most rigorous exam for potential elementary teachers looked like. But I was surprised to find only questions about math content. I’ll admit, it was much more challenging than the Washington State exam questions that test only elementary- and middle-school-level math. Instead, the test resembled high school or college-level math exams. But it still didn’t test potential teachers on any skills related to teaching. And it certainly didn’t have any questions like the ones Ball has devised.|||

If you want to become a middle school math teacher, you might need to answer a question like this one to pass your certification exam before you start teaching: If a person can buy up to 3 times as…