Is the Comodo SSL replacement for my Symantec SSL really free?

 Yes! You do not have to pay in advance or commit to any subscription. We are offering a free Comodo SSL for the duration of your Symantec SSL certificate. When that period ends, we will email you to invite you to extend your certificate. If you would like to extend your Comodo SSL with Namecheap, you simply need to pay a fee based on the remaining months of the certificate. If not, we will not charge you anything and your existing certificate will be revoked.

Am I obliged to buy a new SSL from Namecheap?

 No, you do not need to commit to buy anything from us. We are replacing your SSL for free. We will not ask you to provide your credit card or any other payment method for the free replacement period.

So how exactly does this work? Can you give me an example?

 Sure! For example, let’s say you bought a single domain Symantec SSL for your online shop through another provider. It expires in three months. By signing up with Namecheap now, you can replace that SSL with a Comodo SSL for those remaining three months for no additional cost or obligation.

 

 Once you sign up, Comodo will issue your site a new certificate for 24 or 36 months, depending on the level of validation. At the end of the free period, you can choose to extend your SSL. And don’t worry, we’ll send you a reminder email with the option to extend. At that point, you can choose to extend for one year or to the end of the certificate period, or, if you wish, you can let the certificate expire with no further obligation.

How will I be able to extend my Comodo SSL after the free period ends?

 We will send you a reminder email and you will be able to visit our website to extend the current certificate for the remaining months on the certificate at the current price. If you choose to extend your certificate, there will be no additional paperwork required.

How much will I have to pay after the free period ends to purchase a new SSL?

 At Namecheap, we always offer competitive prices. For example, we currently sell the Comodo EV SSL for $88.88/year. You can view our current offers at any time on our website.

When can I expect my new certificate to be issued?

 Because of the nature of SSL validation, it takes the Certificate Authority some time to process all requests. Below we list the time it should take for your new Comodo SSL to be ready.

Why should I buy an SSL from Namecheap?

 We offer top-notch customer service and the lowest prices anywhere. Namecheap is committed to security and privacy for all users. We’re proud to be your trusted partner in online commerce.

Why should I get a Comodo SSL?

 Comodo SSL is the #1 SSL Certificate Authority in the world, and Comodo certificates are recognized as secure across all browsers. With Comodo SSLs, you can: Reassure your customers that they are on a trusted site|||

