As someone who’s had a startup not work out as planned (cough fail cough), one thing I’ve noticed is that we first-time founders always say “we wish people had told us this before” when we fail. We’ll write post-mortems full of the same old clichéd startup advice that’s being going around for years. Focus on one thing. Sales are the key. Solve a problem people actually have. Don’t raise money until you need it. We are completely oblivious to the fact that many people probably told us every single one of these things before we started. We just didn’t take it in.

When I think about why we don’t listen to this advice before we start a company, two things come to mind:

I liken this ignorance to the way people talk about having children. When you talk to someone who has kids, they tell you lots of things about how it changes your life, things are never the same, how hard it is to deal with sleep deprivation, and so on. And for the person without kids, they’ll never actually understand this until they have kids themselves. Then they are the ones rolling out the clichés. It’s the same with founders. You can’t understand the struggles until you go through them yourself.

Gracefully, I think the children analogy also applies to startups in a more positive way. Doting parents will always tell you about that feeling of being a parent — the sense of unconditional love and joy you get from your baby. It’s truly amazing but completely impossible to understand until you experience it yourself.

I believe there is a similar positive you extract from running a startup, even one that eventually fails. The euphoria from the highs, the adrenaline from the thrill of the chase. The joy from seeing other people use and love something you’ve built, and showing you how much with their hard earned cash. Above all the learning and knowledge you gain — not just about running a business and building a product, but about yourself and what you want from life.|||

As someone who’s had a startup not work out as planned (cough fail cough), one thing I’ve noticed is that we first-time founders always say “we wish people had told us this before” when we fail. We…