Long ago Enlightenment was just a project to make a Window Manager for X11. It has grown a lot since then to well over 1 million lines of C code in just the EFL libraries alone, as well as a Window Manager, and a set of applications. There is a vibrant and active community of developers and users who work on the code, use it every day and enjoy their environment.

The original reason Enlightenment exists - The Window Manager. From here everything else spawned. This is really the flagship product, closely followed by EFL itself. The window manager is a lean, fast, modular and very extensible window manager for X11 and Linux. It is classed as a “desktop shell” providing the things you need to operate your desktop (or laptop), but is not a whole application suite. This covers launching applications, managing their windows and doing other system tasks like suspending, reboots, managing files etc. We are moving towards Wayland as the base display system where Enlightenment is being worked on to become a full Wayland compositor on its own. This of course takes time and has its rough edges along the way, but we are not standing still, and one day will leave X11 behind. Of course Enlightenment is built on top of EFL, using the libraries we wrote for it to do its UI as well as to run the entire compositor itself. This means that any improvements to EFL turn up in the compositor as well. Enlightenment also is the Window Manager and Compositor for Tizen due in part to its efficiency and feature-set. See our page about Enlightenment for more details.

Our libraries are commonly known as EFL (Enlightenment Foundation Libraries), which include EFL proper as well as Elementary which is a high-level layer with widgets and portability foremost in mind. We primarily work on Linux, which means that most Linux distributions and OSs like Tizen should be well supported out of the box. There are efforts to also work on Windows and Max X. There are varying degrees of completeness here. For windows please see our Windows development wiki page, or see Win-Builds which ships EFL for Windows and even uses it for the package updater . For MAC X information, please refer to the EFL on Mac OS X page. Enlightenment libraries already power millions of systems, from mobile phones to set top boxes, desktops, laptops, game systems and more. It is only now being recognized for its forward-thinking approaches, as products and designers want to do more than the boring functional user experiences of the past. This is where EFL excels. Free.fr has shipped millions of set top boxes in France, powered by EFL. The Openmoko Freerunner sold thousands of devices with EFL and Enlightenment on them. Yellow Dog Linux for the Sony PS3 ships with Enlightenment as the default. EFL has been used on printers, netbooks and more. It powers the Samsung Gear watches, is behind the Samsung Z1 Phone and the Samsung SUHD Smart TVs that run Tizen. Cameras also use Enlightenment and EFL such as the Samsung NX1 and the Samsung NX300M smart Camera. Also GPS units such as models from Coyote Run EFL on a lean and mean RTOS. Also Web conference cameras such as Biscotti use EFL to do their work. EFL covers a wide range of domains from IPC to Graphics through to Audio and even location. Some of the covered domains are: IPC locally and across the internet Data structures for C (Lists, Hashes, Trees etc.) See our page about EFL for more details.

We also write applications that use EFL. You can take these as examples of what EFL is able to do and of how to drive it to be useful for you, but not just that. To be actually useful applications day in and out.

The first application a hacker really needs all day, every day, is a terminal emulator. Terminology is not just a simple stripped-down terminal to get the job barely done. It's bristling with features you find in the more advanced terminals and then with many found nowhere else. Tabs, splits, 256 color support, Wallpapers - even animated ones, Inline display of media (click on a file path to a video and watch it play inline), link detection, compressed scrollback in RAM, translucency and a gorgeous look and feel that lets you think of terminal screens of old. See the Terminology page for more details.

Need a clean and simple video player much like MPlayer? Then look no further. Not only does it focus on video by not filling your window with controls and menu bars and what not (simply displaying them overlayed on mouseover), but it also does thumbnails of the timeline of a video as well as a live playlist which will show all videos in it actually running and playing. It has full keyboard and mouse controls as well as supporting Drag and Drop to add more files to your playlist. Oh and it also has an audio-only mode to grab album cover images and cache them. See the Rage page for more details.

Ephoto is an image viewer and editor written using the EFL. It focuses on simplicity and ease of use, while taking advantage of the speed and small footprint the EFL provide. Ephoto can browse your images via thumbnail, single view with editing features, or moving slideshow. There are many neat filters for you to style your photos with too! They range from gaussian blurs to intricate sketches. This application has it all with the versatility to be the perfect option: From simply viewing your images to powerfully managing them, Ephoto does it all. See the Ephoto page for more details.|||

