As per USCIS website, Optional Practical Training (OPT) is temporary employment that is directly related to an F-1 student’s major area of study. Eligible students can apply to receive up to 12 months of OPT employment authorization before completing their academic studies (pre-completion) and/or after completing their academic studies (post-completion). However, all periods of pre-completion OPT will be deducted from the available period of post-completion OPT.

OPT Extension was implemented in two phases. First phase was a 17 month STEM Extension Rule which expired on May, 9, 2016. The second rule was implemented through an Presidential Executive Order (EO) extending the OPT Extension to 24 months for each STEM degree obtained by F1 Students. The STEM designated degree programs are listed in this ICE publication.

What is the STEM OPT ?

STEM OPT is another name for permitted extended period including the original 12 months temporary work authorization.  This program allows for practical work experience in designated degree programs. The earlier rule allowed for a maximum of 29 months (12 months of “Regular” OPT plus a 17-month extension). The new OPT allows for maximum of 36 months (12 months of “Regular” OPT plus a 24-month extension).

STEM OPT Extension was signed by an Executive Order which was followed with a Rule Making Process. We have already explained the Rule-Making process elsewhere, however duplicating it here for benefit of all.

STEM OPT Extension  is a rule based on President Obama’s Executive Order which permits STEM students in selected fields of study to temporarily work in the United States for a maximum of 36 months (1 Year Original + 2 Years Extension) for each successfully completed degree program. Students who complete two degree programs can work for additional 36 months.

Former President Obama had issued an Executive Order after which a “Proposed Rule” was issued by the administration. . OPT STEM Extension was not authorized by the Congress and hence, it is not a Law. STEM OPT is an Administrative Rule. Most of the Executive Orders (EO’s) and even laws are followed up by creating an Administrative Rule. Administrative Rules are aimed at improving communication and handshake between the various agencies involved in implementing the rule. The Administrative Rule making Process is explained below.  Executive Order based Administrative Rules can only be created under the confines of US Constitution. Executive Orders cannot be used to create Laws. They can only be used to provide guidance to administrative agencies how to act with the confines of existing statutes. Laws can only be made by the Legislative branch.

The Administrative Procedure Act (APA) defines “Rule-making” as “formulating, amending, or repealing a rule”. Under APA, it is mandatory for agencies to publish a notice of proposed rule-making and seek comments from “interested parties” on the proposed rules. A minimum period of 30 days is set to seek comments, although no maximum period is defined. Agencies can keep comments open for months in some cases. The process of issuing an Executive Order to revoke OPT STEM Extension will follow the path indicated in the figure below. The process of repealing any EO based rule can take anywhere from 30 days to atmost 60 days, unless of course, if there are any court challenges.

Once a rule has been finalized, the new administration is required to undergo the same rule-making process to change or repeal all or part of the rule. The congress can also make a legislation to revoke or repeal the rule. Executive Orders act as guidance to agencies to create or repeal rules.

In a ideal situation or best case scenario, the administration can involve an exception to the 30 days notice and release the final rule to be effective 30 days later. In the worst case scenario, administration issues a notice (30 days-60 days), issues a final rule which becomes effective 30 days after publishing. In maximum 60 days, OPT Extension can be repealed. In summary, as OPT Extension was created under an Executive Order , which then went through the rule making process, it will take anywhere from 30 days to 60 days to revoke OPT Extension. It cannot be done sooner than 30 days unless an exception clause is cited by the agency.

Do note that revocation/repeal of rules is much faster than creating a rule. Reason is that inputs and preparatory actions from multiple agencies are required during rule creation and agencies have to be prepared for rolling out the new orders. The suspension of H1B Premium Processing in 2015 was done to incorporate new policies and procedures before the final rule of OPT Extension could be released. Till USCIS is not ready which involves releasing SOP’s (Standard Operating Procedures) to related agencies, Final Rule cannot be published. Rule Revocation is much simpler as one of the steps in the process e.g accepting applications for OPT Extension is stopped while the rest of the closing work can be carried out in some time. Also note that the 12 months OPT program was authorized by a congressional statute and will require a repealing of the law through the congress.

Wash Tech i.e. Washington Alliance for Technology Workers filed a lawsuit against the DHS final rule permitted F1 students additional 24 months extension. The plaintiff complained that OPT regulations were a workaround the caps on H-1B visas. They also claimed that OPT and STEM OPT allowed foreign STEM workers who might be unable to get an H-1B to find through the F1 Visa router. WashTech had alleged that the 2008 OPT rule exceeded the DHS’ statutory authority. Wash Tech lost the first lawsuit as DHS quickly modified the initial EO and replaced it with another one making the case moot. The plaintiffs filed another appeal on the new case and the case comes up for hearing soon. As with H4 EAD Save Jobs lawsuit, if DHS strikes a deal with the plaintiff, the OPT Extension could die a natural death in effect revoking the Executive Order automatically.

On Thursday, 30 March, 2017, a District Court Judge Judge Reggie B. Walton’s denied parts of Wash Tech’s Visa rule challenge while granting parts of it. The judge issued a brief order which will be followed up by a detailed memorandum within the next 30 days. This case needs to be watched as it could end up the same way. The extract of the order is cited below.|||

What does Trump Presidency mean for OPT STEM Extension.