The competition regulator has rejected an application by the banks to collectively negotiate with technology giant Apple over access to the iPhone's "near field communication" (NFC) controller. Commonwealth Bank of Australia, Westpac Banking Corporation, National Australia Bank and Bendigo and Adelaide Bank had asked the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission for permission to form a bloc in order to give them more negotiating power in discussions that would have asked Apple open the NFC to their own digital wallets. Apple has not made such a move for any bank in the world.  But ACCC chairman Rod Sims said on Friday the regulator was concerned that allowing the collective discussions "is likely to reduce or distort competition in a number of markets." The ACCC said if the banks were to get access to the NFC, it could reduce competition between Apple and Google's Android phones, could reduce competition for payments devices other than smartphones, and could reduce the competitive tension between the banks in the supply of payment cards.  The ruling is particularly significant because, despite the popularity of phones running on Google's Android operating system, Apple is by far the largest single supplier of phones in Australia. The banks want their own digital wallets to access the NFC to enable contactless payments to be made through them. Apple only allows its digital wallet to access the NFC. But the banks have refused to do a commercial deal with Apple, effectively locking three-quarters of Australia's card holders out of Apple Pay. The decision means each of the applicant banks will have to negotiate bilaterally with Apple if they want to provide Apple Pay to their millions of customers.

Apple welcomed the ACCC decision. "We believe the ACCC's decision is great for Australians who want the easiest, most secure and private payment experience possible with Apple Pay. Today, millions of users from 3,500 banks in 15 markets enjoy using Apple Pay and we look forward to continuing to work with individual banks in Australia and around the world to bring Apple Pay to their customers too," an Apple spokesperson said.

The banks said they are "disappointed" with the decision. In a statement, they said it could stifle their ability to compete in the future market for digital wallets, which are stored on mobile phones. The banks also say it will limit the continued innovation of mobile wallets not just by banks but retailers, mass transit organisations and government entities.  Nevertheless, Westpac said it would not walk away from Apple Pay, and would look at re-engaging with the tech giant. "We remain open to partnering with Apple and we'll review our position in order to best serve our customers," the bank said.  Yet it was disappointed with the decision because Westpac said it believed open access to the NFC function on iPhones was needed to enable real choice and real competition for its customers. "Our application attracted strong support from many of Australia's leading retailers and other financial institutions who also recognised the public benefits of open NFC access and broader industry benefits," a spokeswoman said. Mr Sims said the ACCC accepted "that the opportunity for the banks to collectively negotiate and boycott would place them in a better bargaining position with Apple, the benefits would be outweighed by detriments". However, if the banks got access to the NFC, this would affect Apple's current integrated hardware-software strategy for mobile payments and it "could artificially direct the development of emerging markets to the use of the NFC controller in smartphones," he said. "This is likely to hamper the innovations that are currently occurring around different devices and technologies or mobile payments."

The regulator also pointed to digital wallets and mobile payments "being in their infancy and subject to rapid change". And while the whole banking industry is currently looking for ways to facilitate switching of cards and accounts to facilitate competition, Mr Sims said Apple wallet and other multi-issuer digital wallets could increase competition between the banks, "by making it easier for consumers to switch between card providers and limiting any 'lock in' effect bank digital wallets may cause."  In its most recent study research firm Telsyte estimated that there were 8 million iPhone users in Australia at the end of 2016, or 43 per cent of the smartphone user base. Telsyte also believes that phones are just an early gateway to greater adoption of mobile payments via wearable devices, where Apple is also in a strong position. It found over 50 per cent of smartwatch sales in the second half of 2016 were for Apple Watch. Its research also showed that half of Apple Watch users have used Apple Pay, 80 per cent use it regularly.    Telsyte managing director Foad Fadaghi said Apple's concerns about reduced security through opening up its NFC chips was difficult to deny in the light of consumer concerns about payments security. He said now the ACCC ruling had been made he expected more banks to join ANZ in moving on Apple Pay. ANZ Banking Group has already done a deal with Apple to allow its customers to use Apple Pay; so has Macquarie Bank, ING and many mutuals, who are paying an undisclosed fee to Apple.

"It won't be in the best interest of any bank to publicly come out and say that they are refusing to deal with Apple, given the potential to lose customers by taking a fixed stance," Mr Fadaghi said. "Apple customers tend to be early adopters and it will be increasingly be difficult for banks to ignore this large group of influential technology users." Each bank will also have to decide whether they appeal the decision to the Australian Competition Tribunal or the Federal Court although this seems unlikely.  A spokesperson for the banks, Lance Blockley, a payments consultant who advised them on the application, said it had been made to ensure banks can participate in the future of mobile wallets "and not have the course of development for mobile wallets in Australia dictated by a single overseas corporation".

"The application attracted strong support from many of Australia's leading retailers and other financial institutions who also recognise the public benefits of open NFC access, and the subsequent flow on benefits for mobile wallet innovation and competition in Australia."  "Mobile wallets are currently overwhelmingly focussed on mobile payments, but will soon take in loyalty programs, mass transit ticketing, access, identity and a great number of other future innovations.  Ultimately there is no technical barrier standing in the way of our entire physical wallet becoming digital," he said. "Apple has a stated desire to own the entire mobile wallet, and will use the beachhead into mobile wallets afforded to them by complete control over mobile payments on iPhone to exert control over the rest of the digital wallet.  This in our view is aimed at increasing the services revenue they can earn from iPhone users."  Commonwealth Bank meanwhile declined to comment on the ACCC ruling individually, instead directing media enquiries to Mr Blockley.|||

The ACCC rejected an application by the banks to collectively negotiate with technology giant Apple in a fight over over control to digital wallets.