Well, "refactoring" is for the Java people, I simply rename things. Just today, I had to do a big rename operation related to the release of lispy 0.22.0. Below, I'll share some functions and packages that I used for that.

I've cloned my branch into its own git repository inside the original repository. This way, I can rename functions in the code and the documentation simultaneously.

It can be done like this:

After version hits, any time you call by its now obsolete alias , you'll get a message:

So now, since I'm releasing version , I can remove even the alias declarations. I gave people one week of warnings to adjust (just rename to the new name) any of their code that's calling the currently obsolete functions.

Taking advantage of the repository setup, I can:

is a fine function, I wonder why it's not bound by default; I bind it to , taking advantage of my weird key mappings (I'm actually pressing the physical keys).

wgrep is a fine package, I wonder why it's not more popular. Since it's so similar to (one of the best things since sliced bread, btw), I like to bind the starter to and the finisher to as well:

iedit is an amazing package, it's crazy-good. Here's how I bind it, since once is on, you can move to the next occurrence with :

In order to change really every occurrence in the buffer, I need to mark the thing that I want to change, before . Otherwise, will automatically add symbol bounds (a nice feature, actually), so that e.g. will not match .

Finally, I interactively, char-by-char, rename e.g. to . The experience is similar to the popular multiple-cursors, which I also like to use, just for different purposes.

True, but do note that all three tools can be used on their own for various other tasks. See for instance my other "refactoring" demo, that uses to unbind a -bound variable in Elisp (should also work for Common Lisp, since the syntax is the same).

There's beauty and utility in having such composable tools. A lot of the time, it's better than to just have one "Rename" button. For instance, when only one buffer is involved, the - step can be skipped and I can rename stuff with only.

Or, when the playground for renaming is less than a buffer, I can:|||

