At the start of WWII the US armed forces used various means for enciphering their confidential traffic. At the lowest level were hand ciphers. Above that were the

cannot be set at W since this rotor does not have this letter. We discard that letter and move to the next. Next one is O which is available at rotor 3 so we set it at that. Rotor 4 is set up on I, rotor 5 at N and rotor 6 at P. We will encipher the message with the wheels at positions QPOINP. Let’s say that we choose to set the 6 rotors at positions LAREIQ. Then we select the letter J to encipher 12 times. The output is QPWOINPONMML. Now we set the rotors at the position indicated by this output. Rotor 1 will be set at Q, rotor 2 at P, rotor 3be set at W since this rotor does not have this letter. We discard that letter and move to the next. Next one is O which is available at rotor 3 so we set it at that. Rotor 4 is set up on I, rotor 5 at N and rotor 6 at P. We will encipher the message with the wheels at positions QPOINP.

The July ’43 report of Referat 1 says that the AM-1 device was judged to have adequate security since without mistakes in encipherment and messages in depth solution was deemed to be impossible. The Germans suspected that the US authorities had taken notice of their use of the Enigma machine and that is why they introduced their own cipher device. 



If it was not possible to find messages with the exact same indicator then there was also the possibility to use messages whose indicator differed by one or at most two letters. Another method was to look for messages where the indicators (wheel positions) differed by one or two letters equally on all wheels (4).

The German cryptanalysts developed several methods for identifying if messages were in ‘depth’, regardless of the indicator (5). The most elaborate method used clear text and cipher text trigram analysis. The trigram technique is described in TICOM report DF-120 (6) and was similar in concept to Friedman's Index of Coincidence and Turing's Bamburismus (7): From solved M-209 messages from Africa, out of 10,000 letters the 300 most frequent clear text trigraphs ware counted (taking into account the separator letter "Z’’) and the clear text intervals of these trigraphs to each other were determined, The differences found correspond to the negative cipher intervals in messages in depth. The triple number (Zahlentripel) which arose was weighted with values built up simply from the product of the frequencies of their occurrences, since the probability that two definite clear text trigraphs will appear over each other is equal to the product of the frequency of the percentage of their occurrence. From these differences a table was prepared which indicates for us the corresponding weight for every possible Zahlentripel. One now finds each interval triple which appears in the two cipher messages, in the upper as well as in the lower message, and adds up the weights which apply to them. The sum is then multiplied by 100 and divided by twice the number of positions being investigated. It is multiplied by 100 in order to get a relationship to 100 positions, and divided by twice the sum of the investigated positions since we have looked up each position twice - once in the upper and once in the lower message. For this reason the different sign of the intervals for the clear and cipher text has no moaning. The final result then gives us a point of departure for telling whether the messages being investigated are in depth or not. Experience has shown that values of 50,000 or more make depth probable. Values under 40,000 speak against depth, and with numbers in between 40,000 and 50,000 one can count on either possibility. Of course, in doing this, scattering (Streuungen) and coincidences must be taken into account, These things can make a considerable distortion of the picture, especially in short messages,. Nevertheless, up to now, we have, in general, been able to depend on the results, particularly In rather long messages. 

 At times German work was assisted by captured material. In Sicily and in Normandy key lists were captured and all messages read (8):

Because of those results the interception of such messages was stepped up considerably, from about 50-200-300 messages a day, with priority over other tasks. On the invasion starting, the GAF cryptanalytic section too was finally moved from Potsdam to Paris (14/3 formerly W control 3) and close co-operation in cryptanalytical work was established with the army. After the start of the invasion some interesting messages about the losses of the 101st Airborne Division were decoded; apart from that the decoded messages were of greater value to the Army than to the GAF. Cryptanalysis was, as far as I remember, made more difficult later by the fact that the individual service groups (armies, commands) no longer used the same cipher setting, so that they had to be worked out separately. As far as the GAF was concerned, therefore, each individual command was monitored and worked on in turn with all available resources. Good results were achieved in the case of IX Air Defense Command (details of A.A. units) and the IX Eng. Command (extension of airfields, effect of the V 1 bombardment on Liege airfield). The monitoring of the networks of the Tactical Air Commands also brought results: e, g. the forming of the XXIX Tactical Air Command became known from a decoded message. The original of every message was sent to Potsdam, one copy to the Army. The army got better results.Because of those results the interception of such messages was stepped up considerably, from about 50-200-300 messages a day, with priority over other tasks. On the invasion starting, the GAF cryptanalytic section too was finally moved from Potsdam to Paris (14/3 formerly W control 3) and close co-operation in cryptanalytical work was established with the army. After the start of the invasion some interesting messages about the losses of the 101st Airborne Division were decoded; apart from that the decoded messages were of greater value to the Army than to the GAF. Cryptanalysis was, as far as I remember, made more difficult later by the fact that the individual service groups (armies, commands) no longer used the same cipher setting, so that they had to be worked out separately. As far as the GAF was concerned, therefore, each individual command was monitored and worked on in turn with all available resources. Good results were achieved in the case of IX Air Defense Command (details of A.A. units) and the IX Eng. Command (extension of airfields, effect of the V 1 bombardment on Liege airfield). The monitoring of the networks of the Tactical Air Commands also brought results: e, g. the forming of the XXIX Tactical Air Command became known from a decoded message.

The only other explanation is gross negligence on the part of the cipher clerks.

After the Allies landed in Normandy a significant number of M-209 messages continued to be read revealing the Allied order of battle. The messages for the days of 6-9 June were solved thanks to captured cipher material.

By reading the messages they got tactical information and were able to identify units and build the enemy OOB.

At times the M-209 was used for high level traffic and details of future operations became known to the Germans.|||

