This is going to be a quick down and dirty post on how to effectively create cloned websites on the fly by using mitmdump and letsencrypt for valid certificates. We'll use a reverse proxy in front of a site in order to create very convincing and advanced phishing campaign. This is a great way to capture two factor authentication pins and attempt automatic VPN logins.

There are plenty of different approaches when it comes to acquiring a domain for your phish. Ideally, you will want it to be very similar to your target. Alternative TLDs are an easy way to make convincing phishing attacks. You may also look into recently expired domains that can be acquired. For this tutorial, I'm going to set up blog.chokepoint.net instead of purchasing a domain for demonstration sake, and demonstrate a phish by setting up a reverse proxy for shodan.io.

CatMyFish is an excellent tool that relies on expireddomains.net in order to find potential expired domains.

Let's encrypt is a free, automated, and open CA that's available to anyone that owns a domain or subdomain. They have done a lot of work in helping to create secure connections for millions of websites. While they provide a great and legitimate service, it's often abused by criminals and red teams as well. Certbot is a cross platform tool for validating that you do indeed own a domain prior to issuing any certificates.

Now simply run the following command, and choose "Spin up a temporary webserver (standalone)"

Follow the prompts for your e-mail address and domain as appropriate. Your certificates will be placed in /etc/letsencrypt/live/site.domain.here. In order to prepare the certificates for use with out reverse proxy MITM attack, simply concatenate the private key and fullchain certificates into one file.

Mitmproxy recently went through some large upgrade that may not have made it into your distribution's repository list yet. We'll go ahead and grab 0.18.2 using pip, as some features regarding the certificates seem to be broken in 2.* versions.|||

