Today music became an unseparated part of our offices. With the advent of open working environments it’s rare to find someone who doesn’t have a pair of headphones at their workspace. But a question arises: Does listening to music boost productivity?

It's an interesting question. Well, we're sure some people really think it really affect their productivity. For example, music is used in restaurants and  other service-type businesses,  to affect the moods and behaviors of their customers. But we here are more concerned about personal productivity. Can listening to music help increase focus or raise efficiency or boost your work productivity?

It’s a fact that many people use background music during worktime. Research shows, that music impacts brain and behavior functions. If you want to choose a music, which will make your  job successful, there are certain aspects, that must be thought about. Research shows, that  music can affect the productivity, especially when doing a repetitive works.

The main problem in modern open-space offices is distracting noise, which in fact, confuse you and hamper the working process.

Dr. Lesiuk's research showcases the way how music affects workplace performance. In one study with IT specialists she offered to listen to instrumental music to eliminate distructive noise and improve their mood.

Music is also ideal for creative workers: they enjoy listening to music during creative sessions, which creates an productive atmosphere.

In another study researchers found that natural sounds, such as wood noise or wave sounds improved workers ability to concentrate.

Say “no” to lyrics, when doing mental work

For physical tasks, music with lyrics are ok. But for mental hard work, when a concentration is must, lyrics are destructive.

Research shows that a person loses a focus, when listens to lyrics. It is mainly coused, because a person tries to figure out what someone else is saying. Language focused tasks are not well with songs either. They are a disaster for such cases.

Let us check out a music genres, to answer the question why they work well.

Mainly there is no lyrics in classical music and often it is considered the finest genre, a piece of art, actually, that boost your productivity best. One study shown that Baroque-period classical music boost productivity in a best way.

However, there are classical music pieces that are not proper for listening, when working.  For example Bach's Toccata & Fugue in D minor hardly can usefull during a work. Choose Beethoven's Für Elise, instead.

Electronic music works for productivity, as it is  repetitive, which is ideal for our working brains. Unlike the unpredictable picks of symphonic music, there are masters, who create  soundscapes, which stresses a selected melodies and  build them on each other. Repetetivness of this genre can help you to focus.

Game music is a serious genre and it is created in a way that enhances the experience, while not distracting. One of the most popular game music examples is  SimCity soundtrack, which is perfect for concentrating.

Many people prefer a total silence, when trying to concentrate on their work. This is what they need for the best productivity. In this case use SimplyNoise, where low pitch white noise is played and RainyMood to get focused.

In the end, it is your choice to pick a genre that most suites your work, taste and mood. We hope this article was helpful. So what do you listen, while working?|||

In open working environments, it&rsquo;s rare to find someone who&nbsp;doesn&rsquo;t&nbsp;have a pair of headphones with a nice tune. But, does listening to music boost&nbsp;productivity? | en |