Applications for the STIR 2017 cohort are now closed. If you would like to hear about future STIR opportunities, sign up for our email list and we’ll be in touch!

Do you believe city services can be improved? Finding more foster care parents? Tracking critical city assets online Digitizing forms and processes to enhance disaster recovery?

This is Startup in Residence (STIR), STIR connects government agencies with startups to develop technology products that address civic challenges. Over 16 weeks, startups and government work together to co-develop a solution that creates real impact.

The 2017 STIR application is now open to startups passionate about improving government. Participants in the first two cohorts gained access to government insights that helped them co-develop impactful products with a solid market fit, and many acquired their first government contracts.

For our third cohort, we are pleased to share 20 civic challenges from across our Regional Partner Cities: San Francisco, Oakland, San Leandro and West Sacramento as part of the competitive application process.

Learn more about the 20 civic challenges here

Applicants may propose technology-based solutions to other City challenges not listed. However, those ideas will not be considered for the 2017 San Francisco cohort but will be considered for the 2017 cohorts in Oakland, San Leandro, and West Sacramento.

STIR is the first program that allows startups to work with city partners to build, refine and/or co-develop products that address critical and meaningful civic challenges.

Learn more about the benefits of being a STIR Startup here.

Your application should take only 30-60 minutes to complete, so please focus on substance, do not worry about polish. You can expect to hear from us regarding your application after the deadline in April.

Before you apply, please be sure to review the timeline for the program and the competitive application process terms and conditions for the participating cities:

If you have additional questions, please submit them by April 1, 2017 via-e-mail to Amardeep Prasad, STIR Program Manager amardeep.prasad@sfgov.org with the Subject: STIR 2017 Questions. Please note that all questions submitted through the email, will be stripped of all personal information and the responses will be published on the FAQ. If you have questions regarding the Terms and Conditions of the 2017 Civic Challenges- please contact the City contact, listed above in the Terms and Conditions Overview.|||

