Collaborate on presentations, documents, design, and solve technical problems as if you were in an open space together. Bring collaborative decision making to the next level!

Teams of any size and in any industry can benefit from screen sharing as it facilitates collaboration across departments located on different floors or on different continents. You will no longer need to send screenshots with explanations — with screen sharing you will discuss all issues immediately and make sure others understand exactly what you mean.

Screen sharing is a powerful tool to bring your co-workers located literally anywhere to the same page with you. Instantly show presentations, organize product design brainstorming, view and discuss videos, market your products to customers — and more.

While voice calls in Telegram are making news, we also have a great collaborative feature added that brings secure calling and conferencing experience to a more productive level. Starting today, VIPole desktop users can use screen sharing to show and discuss projects right away.

Screen sharing is effective for easy and productive collaboration within companies, and it helps to establish productive and trustworthy connections with business partners and customers.

When you show your screen, other members of your team or your clients see exactly how you interact with your computer in real time. You can show presentations and speak about them during a conference call, speak about your presentations or design samples and be sure they look the way you intend them to be seen and are not distorted in any way. Unlike static presentations, screen sharing is much more flexible. Switch between the tabs of different programs easily and quickly while keeping all your documents in a single environment. Emphasize the details that you consider important, clarify issues if questions arise and get the job done faster to have more time for fun. As soon the work is updated and finally flawless — send it to the team chat or to the customer.

Screen sharing helps you to avoid miscommunication and irrelevant debates. Stay precise and goal-oriented, this will make communication more satisfying.

If you are a software developer and provider, show the benefits of the solutions you offer and speak in details about the features clients are interested in. When you market a product, showing the way it works or looks is much better than describing it.

Screen sharing is also great for technical support and consulting to help customers get started and stay in touch as their needs evolve. When your customers how to get the most of your product, they are loyal. Within the team, you can take an advantage of screen sharing to demonstrate bugs and decide together how to deal with them.

One of the key conditions for using screen sharing for business is ensuring security of your shared data. It is crucial to organize collaboration in a way for your know-how, commercial data and personal data to stay within the secure perimeter, and well as confidential data of customers and partners, due diligence documents, medical history necessary for telemedicine and other sensitive information.|||

While voice calls in Telegram are making news, we also have a great collaborative feature added that brings secure calling and conferencing experience to a more productive level.