After creating an online course, your first thought is usually, “how am I going to promote it?”

After all, you spent so much time working on the content, you’re likely chomping at the bit for customers, and will do just about anything to get them.

For most us of, the seemingly “obvious” way to get eyeballs on your course is with paid ads.

And while your gut may not be wrong, there could be a simpler (and much cheaper!) workaround you may want to consider.

Khuram Malik, strategist and founder of stratagem.io, was in this situation no too long ago.

Khuram created his “Idea to launch” Masterclass and created a 2-minute video to promote it. When it came time to leverage the video, he thought (like any of us would), “I’ve got a video asset, so the natural place for me to promote it is on YouTube, right?”

According to Khuram’s results, it wasn’t paid YouTube ads (which totally failed, btw), but free Facebook promotion that got him 55 signups for his Masterclass.

So what’s his secret? How can getting a boatload of signups be as simple as sharing something to your social networks?

Khuram tells us all about it (and shares a bunch of helpful advice for other creators) in the recap below.

Q: Before we get into the story, tell who you are and what you do.

A: I’m the chief strategist and founder at stratagem.io. Stratagem is all about making the lives of founders and CEOs easier.

Q: Tell us about your product, “Idea to launch” Masterclass.

A: It began as a live webinar, which I ran about two months ago. People were loving the content (the response rating was 12 out of 10!), so I decided to cut up the content from the webinar into a “Masterclass” within Coach. By the way, I really love your platform. If you shut it down tomorrow, I will have a real heart attack.

Q: How did you get some of your initial customers for your product, and where did the idea come from?

A: I had a bit of brand leverage beforehand from my book, Billion Dollar Muslim, which was published in Fall 2016. The book has 5-star ratings, so that helped in terms of initial customers and credibility. In terms of the idea itself, that came from the many conversations I’ve had with people who’ve lost money when they started their businesses. I decided to turn that common problem into a “problem-solution” video, where I offered my Masterclass as the solution.

Q: How did you make the video?

A: I spent some time looking into camera tech, lighting, visuals, color-grading, and all that kind of stuff. I even spent some time storyboarding, and tested it a few times until it felt right. When finished, I put the video up on my Facebook page (which only has about 150 people on it), posted it to a few groups, and people began responding positively. I think I got about 600 views on the video, which had a link to my Masterclass in the description.

Q: Have you run any paid Facebook ads since then?

A: No, we haven’t run any. The 55 signups were all organic. We do want the class to get more exposure though, so we’re thinking about testing Facebook ads next. We already tested YouTube ads and they were useless. They didn’t really work for us.

Q: Tell us more about your experience with running YouTube ads.

A: With YouTube ads, you can’t really target that well, but on Facebook, you can target people of this age, people who have this interest, people who have this, and that, etc. You can tune it quite well. YouTube’s targeting is more like, “roughly this interest” and “roughly this age,” and that’s about it. We also found it to be really, really expensive, and it hardly got any click-throughs. I think it got about 800 views and maybe 2 click-throughs.

Q: What other things are you doing to get exposure?

A: We’d like to do some media exposure as well. I have a media strategist, and she’s found some publications where I can share my content. I’m going to use the same content from my Facebook video, but in writing, post it, and say, “if you want to know more about how to solve this problem, we’ve got a free Masterclass,” and that’s it. Our aim for each Masterclass is 100 people. That’s it. If we can get it to 200 people, this Masterclass is working.

Q: If you had to start the whole process of “Idea to Launch” over, is there anything you’d do differently?

A: Yeah, I would have had better sound quality on the Masterclass. I would have said “um” and “ah” less during the recording, which is something a couple of people complained about. I also would have set up my drip email campaign before I brought people in. That was a big mistake.

Q: What do you think was your biggest advantage when you launched “Idea to Launch”?

A: The biggest advantage is I had delivered that type of content before, so I felt confident knowing it would received very well. I’m not doing videos or classes on stuff that I’m “just okay” at because I want it to really resonate. And obviously, my book, which is all about encouraging people to consider entrepreneurship as a primary career choice, makes the Masterclass a bit of a natural segue.

Q: What advice would you share with other aspiring online course creators?

A: One piece of advice I’d share is to use video to drive people to your products. Video seems to be very, very powerful, so if you can, put a lot of effort into getting that video right. I probably redid my video about 12 times. I recorded it, edited it, and then I sent it to my team, and they were like, “this is no good.” And then I did it again. And it was originally 12 minutes, and then I cut it down to 6 and then 4 and then 2, and then…then my lighting was wrong and my background was not right. But once you get it right, it’s all worth it.

Another thing to think about is the storytelling aspect, meaning, how good is the story you’re telling? How authentic is your performance? Are you comfortable in front of the camera? These are all important aspects to consider.

Q: Where can our readers learn more about you?

A: They can go to my personal website, which is where I have the Masterclass and my book. They can also go to my Coach course page from there. If they want to find out about my company, they can go to stratagem.io.

As Khuram proves, you don’t need a huge audience or promotional budget to get a lot of signups for your online course.

If you have the time to spend on creating a video (whether it’s an intro video, a problem-solution video, etc), it can make a huge difference in terms of conversion.

If you’re interested in learning more about promotional videos, check out this 8-step guide from our copywriter, Annie, who shares her insights into how to script, storyboard, and produce a promotional video. Just FYI, the article is geared more toward companies, there are a lot of tips you’ll likely find helpful.

As always, if you have questions, comments, or want to share your own story of success with us, you can comment below or reach out to us at hello@withcoach.com.|||

After all, you spent so much time working on the content, you’re likely chomping at the bit for customers, and will do just about anything to get them. And while your gut may not be wrong, there…