Visible Measures has been acquired and today is my last day with the company I love. I started working on what would become Visible Measures during the summer of 2004, right before business school. This was before YouTube, before the iPhone, before Facebook got to 100,000 users, before video ad networks became large and then fell out of favor, before the rise of programmatic advertising, and before media spend consolidated with The Duopoly and agency trading desks. It was a simpler time :)

We had a dream to create a currency for video — a standardized way to benchmark performance and value video reach. A lot of people believed in us and some fantastic angel investors and venture capital firms enabled us to pursue this dream. We grew a lot. I am very proud of what we built as Visible Measures evolved into a leading platform for video measurement & activation. As we grew, we navigated tectonic shifts in the advertising landscape and some internal struggles. But some of the challenges in our industry are evident in that after almost 13 years, video still does not have a true currency. Perhaps companies and brands will throw more weight behind Attention as a metric — we will see. At a later time, after some decompression, I will share more about some of the lessons we learned at Visible Measures. Above all, I am so grateful to have had the opportunity to pursue this dream with some of the finest teammates, advisors, investors, clients, and partners one could ever hope for. And we really did live the VMC motto of WORK HARD / PLAY HARD.

I am happy that so many VMCers have a new home with our acquirer, AcuityAds. Despite what is a bittersweet ending, we definitely made an outsize impact along the way: Launched the first video analytics solution for publishers Granted over a dozen patents ranging from distributed aggregation of analytics data to audience targeting using video viewing behavior Built True Reach into a metric used by thousands of marketers to evaluate video campaign performance Invented the 1st and still only way to competitively benchmark all brand competitors in 281 industry categories in terms of viewership, time spent, AND dollars invested I am so grateful for my team (particularly our OGs Ron, Seraj, Meng, and Gary; and my staff Jeff, Perry, Annalisa and Meaghan), our board (special thanks to Larry and George from GC, Bill from MDV, Prof. Roberts and Kurt A.) and our all of our investors. Your unwavering support, incredibly hard work, innovative thinking, and perseverance meant the world to VMC. It has been an amazing journey. I owe so much to this experience for what it has taught me, the people I have met, and the opportunities it afforded. I am sincerely honored to have had the priviledge of being the Founder & CEO of Visible Measures and I know that I will look back on this time as the most formative of my career.|||

I started working on what would become Visible Measures during the summer of 2004, right before business school. This was before YouTube, before the iPhone, before Facebook got to 100,000 users…