Unless you have been living under a rock for the past 12 months, you will be aware of what virtual reality is and probably have an idea of how big the virtual and augmented reality market is going to be.  I am going to tell you anyway to make sure you know now…

By 2035, Citi Financial Estimates the vCommerce industry to be worth $1.3 trillion.  Yes, that is trillion with a “T”, we’re talking 4 comma club!  Now that is a massive number and surely not all of this is from virtual and augmented reality… or is it.  According to VR evangelist and author of the Fourth Transformation, A book about the transformative potential of VR/AR, Robert Scoble suggests ‘Users will start expecting brands to have mixed reality experiences in 2018. The big money will show up in 2020’

Below is a list of as many ways that brands are using VR and AR right now to tell their brand story and I have done my best to attach an estimated price of what this might cost to give you the best understanding of how you can use this incredible new technology to make your brand stand out in a sea of marketing clutter.  I have broken this down by industry in order to make it easier to get to what is relevant for you.  Also included in this list is a section called Utilitarian which refers to tools made by brands that are actually useful.  This last section is the one I see the most promise in.

Before you get to the list, if you have any questions about what you read below or if you want to know how Virtual & Augmented Reality can impact your business, please feel free to email me directly at alan@metavrse.com or if you are like me and you want to read more about us, visit www.MetaVRse.com.



Lucara Diamond Mine uses VR/360 to show investors the mine site without travelling

Joining the VR Mile High Club – UploadVR article on using VR in an airplane

United Airlines and Matt Damon show you the new Business class Boeing 777 before it’s built

AT&T “It can wait” anti-texting and driving 360° VR campaign

Using VR to ease stress of dental procedures

Using VR to help seniors experience more

How VR is shaping the healthcare industry

See inside the Human Eye in VR before surgery

How VR is improving the Criminal Justice System

 



If you made it this far, congratulations!  The above list is as comprehensive as we could make it and we will continue to update this blog to ensure this resource is always relevant.  I hope you found some value in the article.  Again, if you have an idea for how to use VR in your business, but don’t know where to start, feel free to email me and get the conversation started.  alan@metavrse.com|||

