Over the years, time and efficiency pressures on doctors have created an ongoing sense of urgency which has led to hurried, interrupted or completely missed patient communications.

Research evidence shows that there is a strong connection between a healthcare provider’s communication abilities and a patient’s capacity to follow his medical recommendations and adopt preventive health obligations. The physician’s communication skills have a profound impact on the functional and biological health outcomes of a patient.

With the introduction of episode-based value care models, and patient engagement software, patients are beneficiaries as they themselves are expected to participate in their treatment procedures. For an episode of care, our interests are much beyond just an initial dialogue between the patient and the provider. The intent is to closely monitor patient’s treatment progress and be available whenever the patient is in need — throughout the patient’s continuum of care.

It is not just about the initial communication— there has to be a structural approach to the patient-provider communication that ultimately improves healthcare delivery. Digital health and value-care are the trend of today and even healthcare has moved toward digital to an extent where patients and providers do not meet in person, still are so closely connected and the exchange of documents, disease summaries and patient history is performed virtually. There are some software platforms that bring everyone together – the health-care givers and patients — and allow them to have a dialogue, share information, and schedule virtual meetings and visits.

This is not easy to accomplish - matter of fact, this is the most difficult challenge for providers — how to coordinate a patient across providers throughout the patient’s continuum of care, understand patient’s treatment adherence, and gain visibility of related episode costs. This specific problem is Lifecycle Health platform’s focus — helping the provider follow the patient throughout the patient’s continuum of care.

Today, most of the patient-provider relationship is made during the diagnosis phase, which is the initial most interaction between the two parties. Diagnostic procedures and decisions are usually made after the history-taking component.

Patient portals have made it possible to send images, reports, and other medicine information that is critical for the physician to know before initiating the therapy. A quick note on our viewpoint of patient portals - a portal is not “patient engagement” as some EMR vendors claim. From our viewpoint, a portal is more of a self-service tool and not a very effective way of engaging in a 2-way exchange with a patient. Are patient portals valuable? Yes - absolutely, or at least they can be - if the user experience of the portal is easy and intuitive. (This is a separate blog topic altogether).

These initial patient diagnosis activities are a critical phase for the doctor-patient relationship because this time is when the patient starts building trust in the healthcare provider. However, studies revealed that patients are often not allowed to share complete details of their medical history; rather the physicians interrupt with a quick diagnosis or explanation, which leads to potential diagnostic inaccuracy but more importantly, when patients are interrupted, it hinders the relationship at the first visit.

The extent to which patients conform to the doctors’ recommendations is called “treatment adherence”. Certainly, this is one of the most common practice issues in healthcare – patient non-adherence. Some disagree with the clinician’s terms, some worry about the cost, some find the instructions too difficult to follow, some cannot handle with inconvenient locations, and some feel that the prescription is against their personal beliefs.

Episode-based care has placed even more importance on this monitoring of treatment adherence, or treatment compliance by patients because the outcome — financial and the health outcome — depend on the patient’s adherence.

Currently in healthcare, many physicians only know if a patient is following suggested treatment actions after the next patient visit — after weeks pass by — and some may never know. Even if the physician can find out before the next visit, it is probably through informal mechanisms such as if they remember to contact the other downstream provider (if they have the time, and if it is convenient), or ask the patient in the next visit. Some challenges occur when asked during the next visit as it depends on the patient telling them the exact truth— think about your typical answer of “flossing” given to your dentist — not always the most accurate when the direct question is asked during a visit.

With episode-based or value-based care, the hospital or responsible physician has more responsibility to follow the patient activities and adherence patterns, and also has more risk (financial and outcome risks) if there is treatment non-adherence.

Communication among the people involved in either side of the treatment procedures plays an active role in strengthening the relationship leading to a better healthcare service. Any kind of miscommunication may lead to dangerous results in patient care. When patient-provider communication is clear and effective, patients are expressive and more participative in the treatment procedures resulting in an overall positive therapy. Outcomes are better — physician ratings are better.

Patients want to be better informed about their medical condition, care methodology, specific care paths, and the care provider team members involved, so that they know they are in safe hands and are continually observed. With innovative care models, patients are becoming more knowledgeable and satisfied with the care episodes they come across. Even though there is a lot of medical expertise involved throughout the patient’s continuum, communication barriers may ruin the patient-provider relationship.|||

Lifecycle Health enables healthcare to provide patient visibility with an 
improved patient provider communication with patient engagement software, 
effective care transition journeys and deliver care outcome data analytics.