Google Search is an amazing tool. It works so well you don’t notice that you are using it, only that you have used it.

In my experience, there are a roughly three different categories of Google searches, and the third one highlights some room for (specific) improvement.

In the first case, what you want is a set of results, which can include a set with only one member. Like if you want to look up the phone number for a restaurant. In the second case, what you want is an ordered list of relevant links and information. The third type of search is when you are researching a topic and you find yourself edging close to the frontier of human knowledge. If you are at the frontier, what you want is a node-link graph.

Google currently works great for the first two types of searches. However there is room for improvement for the third type. To see how, let’s dive into a specific case, using a google product specifically optimized for research – Google scholar — and explore how its UX might be improved.

Say we use google scholar to look for research related to Edward Webb’s 1915 Ph.D. thesis about the measurement of “character” and “intelligence.”

What we get is a small set result:

Now, if we have read it, and we want to know more, we click on the “Cited by 340” link. Voila, we are presented with this screen, which looks like the ordered list result:

Yet we don’t really want an ordered list. Because essentially we have found one node in the entire graph of academic papers, and we are now looking at five of its connections.

If we were to click on the next “cited by ____” link, we’d be crudely traversing through parts of a node-link graph. If you click on “Cited by” enough times, you’ll travel through a small part of humanity’s structured scientific knowledge. And if you know what you are looking for, you’ll get close the frontier of human knowledge.|||

Google Search is an amazing tool. It works so well you don’t notice that you are using it, only that you have used it. In my experience, there are a roughly three different categories of Google…