Multi-tenant Turing Machines are a fairly accurate model of how modern computers physically work. All the information flowing around and being read, written, or modified can be very nearly modeled with this sort of device. Even latency expectations can fit into this model.

However, what I want to talk about are a subset of Multi-tenant machines: the adversarial kind. Imagine a Multi-track turing machine with all the read heads and tracks moving around, but rather than working in unison to accomplish a given task, they work to optimize their own rewards. I assert that this generally models most natural ecosystems, where species and individual animals are in competition for resources.

What we have created here is blockworld in it’s most general form. All physical interactions can be translated into a transfer or modulation of information: Cause and Effect. If we want to get more specific, we can disallow time travel and put the whole world on a linear turn-based loop. Just to note, turn-based does not imply that every player gets to make a decision at each turn. The next turn is simply when the next decision gets made. Personal observational clocks can desync, but the world clock moves only forward, one or more decisions at a time.

Every rule beyond this defines physics for our block-world. Is the world balanced or does the world revolve around a singular entity? What cultures and creatures exist? What is the topology of matter? Is the world restricted to only Euclidean distances? What is the maximum velocity of matter? What is the maximum velocity of information?

Of course, when we go to implement these things, all design decisions carry a burden of computational energy and time. Some of these decisions are already made for us, but to just design a game, there are still many open paths for creativity.

For me, I am optimizing for complexity and depth of in-game npc AIs. This is what holds my creativity right now. I believe there is value in creating an environment to nurture and test Artificial Intelligence. Some believe this is a path to AGI, but I doubt that claim. My goal right now is to create a more vivid game experience through character depth and mechanical plausibility. Most failures in gaming may be caused by graphics, but not all of them, I hope.|||

Multi-tenant Turing Machines are a fairly accurate model of how modern computers physically work. All the information flowing around and being read, written, or modified can be very nearly modeled…