Companies like Facebook, Google and Dropbox have done an amazing job bringing useful and entertaining mobile applications and services to their users. But as these mobile apps take off in popularity -- and more interaction moves from the web to native mobile apps -- there's concern that the open web is “dying.” This is an issue that the founders of the web have thought about for a long time.

From where I sit, open app development standards won’t save the open web if data is consistently locked away. What really matters is whether personal information, photos, blog posts, documents, writing, and art is openly available. And more importantly, whether users own and control that data. Even the original inventors of the internet are looking for ways to unlock siloed data, open up the confines of today’s app-centric internet, and make the web more permanent.

As the co-founder of a company that helps developers build responsive mobile apps, I know how important it is to give users access to their data. At my firm, we try to empower developers to tap into the underlying databases that power responsive apps, and I believe what is needed to do this better is the adoption of a common data layer that can deliver information and experiences across the web and modern mobile apps.

Saving the open web is not a new discussion. The moment we moved from simply browsing documents to creating web apps was where open standards could not follow. Suddenly, we needed not just text with markup, but complex and ever changing object graphs that could interact within the code. Developers came up with workarounds, but they didn't address the fact that this new complexity locked data up in silos that were impenetrable outside of these individual sites and apps.

Mobile apps have continued that trend. In the rush to create the next blockbuster app or service, incentives and technological barriers have made it difficult to stay true to the original vision of the web as an open network. While Facebook and the like have created amazing apps, those companies effectively own and control all of the data -- our data -- which further locks down the web and mobile environments. For consumers, this means that all of the photos, profiles and content that they create within an app is inaccessible and they must create new identities from scratch on new apps.

Even in the most open-standards-compliant web and mobile environments, that data is spread out in isolated fragments. Everything from forum posts and news comments to Instagram photos, Quora answers, Facebook posts and tweets was created by someone, but controlled by the services hosting those apps. There is no way to browse or search through these posts and pictures outside of the apps, and the data is largely inaccessible to other services.|||

The dream of a truly open web is still alive and well. Here's how it would look in 2017.