Modern cloud applications are highly services-driven and leverage a lot of APIs including external APIs such as Twitter Auth API, Twilio API, Google Maps API, and various PaaS APIs. In a previous blog post, we had talked about the shift from monolithic architectures to microservices and the implications of that change from an operational perspective for Site Reliability Engineers (SREs) and DevOps engineers.

In this blog post, we focus on the golden signals of monitoring that are the foundation of service-level observability for large-scale production applications. These golden signals ultimately help measure end-user experience, service abandonment and impact on business. After discussing these signals, we describe how we have approached their measurement in a way that is fundamentally different from the existing approaches that primarily require code-embedded agents or instrumentation of code.

The four golden signals of monitoring are latency, traffic, errors, and saturation. These have been championed by the Google SRE team and the larger web-scale SRE community as the most fundamental metrics for tracking service health and performance.

Here is a brief description of these four golden signals:

By focusing their monitoring and alerting on these golden signals, SREs and DevOps can effectively support the Service Level Objectives (SLOs) for the services and APIs that make up their production applications.

The Netsil Application Operations Center (AOC) is an observability and analytics product used by SREs and DevOps who run API and services driven cloud applications.

While the programming languages and web frameworks used to build the services change frequently with time, service communication protocols such as HTTP remain relatively constant, acting as the glue between them. Leveraging this insight, Netsil captures service interactions in real-time as its source-of-truth, without instrumenting the application code. Netsil’s specialized stream-processing technology analyzes these interactions and automatically discovers the service topology map of the application, overlaying it with operational metrics (including the golden signals). A previous blog post covered our architecture in more detail.

Code-based application monitoring tools require upfront investment in the form of instrumentation of code before they can provide value. Further, they do not give visibility into calls made to external APIs as they cannot instrument them. The Netsil approach works seamlessly for both internal and external APIs, and the lack of upfront investment leads to fastest time-to-value.

The service-level KPIs tracked by Netsil include the golden signals of latency, traffic and errors. Let’s take the example of HTTP REST APIs. Each signal is tracked at the granularity of individual REST endpoints, which are automatically discovered from service interactions. Here is how Netsil measures them:

Many application health issues are rooted in problems related to the underlying network or infrastructure. These include issues being experienced by the cloud provider. Out of the golden signals, Saturation is a signal which is related to the underlying infrastructure. Saturation is measured by looking at infrastructure metrics such as Disk I/O, Network I/O and System Memory.

Figure 3 shows these infrastructure metrics being tracked in the Netsil AOC.

The AOC also allows you to look at network flows including TCP retransmission rates, connection drops, round-trip-times and out-of-order packet counts. If your cloud provider is having issues (say a networking issue in the datacenter or VMs being overloaded), network packets will start getting dropped. By tracking the average TCP retransmissions per second and TCP out-of-order packets per second, you can quickly identify this issue. Figure 4 shows how network flows are presented in the AOC.

Bringing It All Together

In conclusion, the Netsil AOC is built from ground-up for powering observability and analytics in modern cloud applications that use APIs and services. The product brings together service-level KPIs and infrastructure metrics in a way that allows SREs and DevOps to efficiently measure the four golden signals of API health and performance. Further, the Netsil approach of using service interactions as the source-of-truth rather than code instrumentation allows seamless monitoring across internal & external APIs and fastest time-to-value.

We welcome your comments on this post and also encourage you to try the Netsil AOC at https://netsil.com/.|||

Modern cloud applications are highly services-driven and leverage a lot of APIs including external APIs such as Twitter Auth API, Twilio API, Google Maps API, and various PaaS APIs. In a previous…