For all of the flack that Microsoft gets in the high tech industry, they offer an extremely powerful machine learning tool. Microsoft has been investing more and more into their cloud computing technology known as Azure both in terms of services they offer, and introductory discounts to hook people into using them.

Ironically, Azure ML is actually a much more robust system and is actually much better suited for real machine learning development and exploration than IBM Watson. You can either choose from a wide variety of preloaded datasets, or load your own. The catch being, of course, you have to purchase a Microsoft Azure account and host all the data there. You also have to output it to their cloud in their special format initially making it hard to integrate into dashboards or your own internal processes. Thus, working inside of Microsoft’s sandbox is great. But trying to take that knowledge outside of it is hard.

For those who are unfamiliar with Azure, having to use their system versus your own means that you have to upload all of your own data to Microsoft’s cloud. Now, although their systems are robust and secure, this requires you to be comfortable enough with doing that. Also, you have to take care of that process yourself, which may be simple if you store all your data in Excel sheets. But for those with more sophisticated data warehousing solutions, it means that you can’t leverage your entire hardware infrastructure that you already paid an arm and a leg for to have implemented. Kind of a pain.

Also, there is a learning curve to use the software. It’s not as intuitive of a drag and drop as you might expect from the picture about. You still have to know exactly what a ‘Decision Tree’ is versus a ‘Decision Forest,’ or whether or not you’re going to want to generate a classification or regression model. In that case, it may be good for your in-house statisticians that want to dabble more into machine learning, but you are still going to have to have them spend a few days learning the software, fiddling around, and figuring out the concepts involved.

Lastly, the biggest pain is that Azure does not allow you to leverage high powered computing. Instead, you get a slow cloud compute instance. What takes our in-house training machine 4 seconds took Azure a minute and a half, and this was on a very simple problem. Thus, Azure cannot handle high workloads because the time to compute would be on the end of weeks to months, which is not feasible for testing model parameters and the general exploration process of machine learning

If you want to fiddle around in a software suite to try some powerful machine learning algorithms for an afternoon or two, then Azure is right for you. However, if you want to integrate that into a business process to save time and money, or make critical business decisions against a stream of incoming information, then look elsewhere.

Azure is for the small to medium enterprise that has high tech statistical talent in-house and sees no immediate application for machine learning in their own business

As discussed above, Azure is good for toy modelling and learning the basics of machine learning. When you want to take that into an applied setting, the limitations of the Azure Cloud, slow computational times, and the inability to integrate models in your dynamic work settings means that it’s not a serious option for real applications.|||

There are a lot of misconceptions and assumptions about machine learning in general and the mysticism of certain services that the big tech players on the market are currently offering. In this…