This blog states all that you need to know about data backup, the statistics of data loss across all platforms because of not backing up the data and the benefits of taking a backup of data this World Data Backup Day 2017.

With the world moving forward towards storing all data in digital storage devices, instances of data loss due to accidental deletion, formatting, natural disasters, or any hardware and software corruption issue has increased considerably. The factors responsible for data loss are as follows:

Although no one wishes to be in a data loss situation yet, you have to face such situations at one time or the other. When this happens, data being one of the significant assets for you or your organisation, its recovery becomes imperative . However, a much better way to keep your data protected is to create a backup of all your data. The question then arises as to what a backup is. Let’s delve into it.

A backup is another copy of all your data stored in a safe and secure manner. Here, you can keep the copy of your data at any other place other than your computer.

It is also important to check how frequent are you backup your data. Creating a backup yearly or even monthly is not adequate for your valuable data. This is because data loss is not a defined situation, and cannot be predicted every time. It can occur at any time even when least expected. Thereby, creating a backup of your data on a regular basis is a must, and this is the emphasis on this World Data Backup Day 2017 .

The World Data Back-up Day that is celebrated every year on March 31 helps raise awareness among people to regularly back up their data. This, in turn, will ensure full-proof safety and security of your data. Started six years ago in the year 2011, 2017 is the sixth year of World Data Backup Day, which is a day the Reddit users proclaimed to remind everyone to back up their data or else people would face several instances of data loss. However, even after celebrating World Data Backup Day for some years, approximately 40,000 cases of data loss are reported each year across the globe . Thus, by continuing to celebrate this day every year, the chief objective is to promote creating a backup as much as possible so that the number of instances for data loss can be minimised.

World Data Back-up Day was formerly sponsored by some companies that were into producing and selling backup products such as hard drives or services such as cloud backup. In that sense, this day is driven by corporations that want to sell their stuff. However, it is not only about selling products and services but about educating users that having a backup is one of the best methods to prevent data loss .

Although it is not a widely celebrated day, nonetheless, it is an important day in which users all across the globe including in the UK are encouraged to backup data on a regular basis. It is a day to focus on creating awareness of having a backup so that more and more people start backing up their data and prevent situations of data loss if they don’t, or for those who do – to have a better method or strategy for the same.

31% of IT professionals believe that issues in hardware or system failure cause incidents of data loss in the business environment. 29% believe that data loss is due to human error, whereas another 29% believe that malicious code such as a virus, malware, or ransomware, etc. leads to loss of data.

When asked about the most affected devices or the ones that are more likely to fail and cause data loss, 39% IT professionals said that laptops are the most affected, 26% said the servers are the worst hit, while the remaining 26% fell under desktops. Only 4% IT professionals talked about failure and data loss in mobile devices such as tablets and smartphones.

Still, most believe that discussions on data loss and backup are unnecessary as they rarely occur. They are complacent that they or their organisation will never be affected by such a situation and, therefore, decide not to back up their critical data. But the recent statistics as shown below by several organisations on data loss and backup will make people rethink their opinion –

From the above statistics, one can easily figure out as to how important it is to backup data.

Here are several tips that you can employ to keep your data safe and secure on this World Data Backup Day.

What If You Do Not Backup Your Data or your Backup Gets Damaged?

Have you ever imagined a situation wherein you did not backup your data regularly or if it has become damaged? Does such a situation signify that you have lost your data forever? On the contrary, No. The reason being, the data still exists unless it gets overwritten by another. Therefore, data recovery is possible. Further, there exist alternative solutions to tackle data loss situations. Here, data recovery service by professionals can address data loss situations be it due to hardware or software failure in the data storage devices .

Established in the year 1993, Stellar Data Recovery is one of the best and reliable data recovery service providers for individuals as well as Enterprises. It is an ISO 9001:2008 certified company that caters to all data recovery requirements across the globe, be the need of recovery from hard drives, external hard disks, SSDs, USBs, optical media, and others. It offers complete, guaranteed, and proven data recovery service especially for recovering data from physically failed media devices. Next, it offers several other features such as:

Last but not the least, on this World Data Backup Day, let’s resolve to back up our data regularly so that we do not have to face the repercussions of a data loss situation!|||

On March 31st, as we celebrate World BackUp Day take a pledge to backup data regularly. Avoid data loss and be prepared!