This shift from the fee-for-service (i.e. volume-based care) payment models to value-based care compel health systems to blend operational, financial, clinical, and other data to improve quality, control costs and managing provider networks, and patient access. The U.S. Government is building a new payment landscape and creating a new paradigm which underscores the responsibility of coordinating complete episode care along with bearing the risks of costs and quality outcomes.

Value-based care has emerged as a successful model with the refinement of information technology and application of strategies to the traditional fee-for-service (i.e. volume-based) payment mechanism that ruled healthcare for the last several decades. Value-based Care is a highly integrated program and includes the medical Shared Savings Program, value based payments to the hospitals, and others.

Reshaping the healthcare models, a multitude of new payment models have been established, out of which the most important is Value-based Reimbursement. The Obama Administration introduced and implemented multiple Value-based Reimbursement verticals including bundled payments, medical home models, variations of Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) and special incentives to physicians for care coordination, giving way to many more innovations.

MACRA’s sweeping payment reform provisions comprise of several steps to facilitate providers to participate in Alternative Payment Models (APMs) for initial bonus payments, exemption from Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) requirements, and other potential conditional incentives. The healthcare providers participating in APMs are eligible for higher annual payment updates for their fee-for-service revenue stream beginning in 2026. Further, MACRA also establishes a 2-track system for identifying qualifying participants

1) Beginning in 2019, if they receive a significant share of APM revenue in Medicare alone; or

2) Beginning in 2021, if they receive a significant share of APM revenue through Medicare or a combination of Medicare and other payers.

The Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) aims for transitioning 30 percent of the fee-for-service Medicare payments to value based care models by the end of 2016 and expects 50 percent of traditional payments undergo this care transition by 2018.

Also called as episode based payments, this introduces a single payment for services provided under a complete episode of care. The Value-based Care initiatives are being appreciated by care-givers, payers, and other stakeholders.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) instituted the Comprehensive Care for Joint Replacement (CJR) Model for Medicare patient joint replacement treatments into basically a fixed-fee with incentives arrangement in which hospitals are accountable for both quality and financials.  There are many details on this program but it seems to be the start of the transition to a Value-based Care mindset for years to come.  This program alone is looking to save CMS over $340 million over 5 years.  MACRA extends and consolidates some of the those type of programs over the next 5- 10 years with incentives to providers along the path.  Many more procedures are in process for review and incentive payment models being determine.|||

Lifecycle Health enables the movement to a value based care or 
accountable-care, value based healthcare model that requires an 
organization to manage the patient care continuum, continuum of care. Value 
based healthcare system basically a fixed-price payment model for a medical 
procedure and all related services for a period of time after discharge.