Forget the General Tso's chicken, chop suey, beef & broccoli and skip the fortune cookies, please.  Chinatown's are gastronomic wonderlands. Skip the tourist food and explore the real eats. Where to start may seem overwhelming to some but worry not. You can start with these, the 8 most popular dishes you should eat in Chinatown:

is a Chinese noodle soup made of stewed or braised beef, beef broth, vegetables and wheat noodles.

A Hui man (Mao Baozi's (马包子, 1870-1955) who sold the hot soup noodles with meat in the city of Lanzhou amid the Qing Dynasty is credited with inventing the dish the way we know it today.

A staple in in Taiwanese-style bubble tea houses in most Chinatown's around the world.  Beef noodle soup is considered a national dish in Taiwan. Some

Beef Noodle spread when Chinese soldiers from Sichuan province fled to Taiwan in 1949.

Taiwanese consider the beef noodles in Hong Kong to be saltier and oilier.



 Shanghai-style dumplings, filled with hot broth and meat. Xiaolongbao, a most loved of foodies around the world, are thought to have originated in Shanghai and the area just to the north of it in the south Jiangsu province in the nineteenth century.



 Legend has it that this incredibly famous soup dumplings that started as a test by a cake shop proprietor in Nanxiang who chose to experiment with his famous steamed bread.



 It is perfectly fine to lift each gem with your chopsticks, place on spoon, bite a piece, slurp, then eat.

One of the classic dishes of the China, dating back to the  weet and sour pork is included in Zhejiang cuisine, Shandong cuisine, Sichuan cuisine, and Cantonese cuisine. The style of Shandong-cuisine is much more popular than the others.

You can find Sweet and Sour Pork all over the world. The taste and flavor will vary  from restaurant to restaurant, the same way it would vary in different regions or villages in China. In America it's more sweet than that in China.



 It would be impossible to go to a Chinese restaurant anywhere in the United States or Europe and not see Kung Pao Chicken on the menu.  Kung Pao Chicken is considered a part of Sichuan food, yet nowadays you can get the dish at most eateries in China, and practically every Chinese eatery outside it. Despite that, its is a very real traditional Chinese dish.

Originating from northern China, wontons are similar to dumpling and are usually served in soup.  Wontons date back to the Han Dynasty over 2000 years ago. Wontons are crescent shaped and were originally used in activities of sacrifice and worship. During the Winter Solstice Festival of the  Song Dynasty (960 － 1279), shops would close temporarily ehilr every family made wontons as sacrificial offerings for ancestor worship. Afterwards all the family members shared the wontons.

Jiaozi are a kind of famous tradition northern Chinese dumpling, commonly eaten across Eastern, Central, Southern and Western Asia. Though considered part of Chinese cuisine, jiaozi are often eaten in many other Asian countries.

According to research, the dumpling originated from the Northern Dynasty as moon-shaped ravioli and in the Southern to Tang Dynasties as "dry meat Jiaozi , dating from more than 1,400 years ago.

"There are two things you must do in Beijing: eat Beijing Roast Duck and see the Great Wall."

Peking duck is a celebrated dish from Beijing, appreciating world acclaim, and considered as one of China's national dishes. Peking duck is relished for its crispy skin.

The dishes listed above are a good intro to some traditional Chinese dishes.

Tasting and learning about them and will get you excited and open you to try new things.|||

The best dishes to try in Chinatown