When people ask me to recommend a good fantasy read, The Name of the Wind is always the first book on my list. Hell, I like it even more than Lord of the Rings.

Now that the book has sold millions of copies and hit all the bestseller lists, every young fantasy writer wants to be Patrick Rothfuss.

But I bet they wouldn’t want to be Rothfuss when he was still twenty years old and over a decade away from publication.

And write he did.

From start to publication, it took Rothfuss 14 years to finish his book.

When an interviewer asked Rothfuss what his advice to new writers was, he replied:

Well, that’s not inspirational at all.

This is good advice, but there’s a danger here.

Young (or not-so-young) dreamers might assume that living frugally is the only way to get where you want to be.

Frugality is only one way to arrange life so you have the time — and freedom — to pursue passion projects.

For example, here’s ex-trader and NYT best-selling author Nassim Taleb in Antifragile on how European writers support themselves:

My first and only real job was as a civil servant in Japan. The job was incredibly low stress, and I was usually done with work before lunch. The rest of my days were spent studying martial arts, teaching myself programming, or dabbling in whatever else interested me at the time.

So no, low pay in poor conditions is not the only way to spend time doing what you love.

To the resourceful, many paths are open.

So you’ve got something you are excited about — something you’re willing to dedicate a sizeable portion of your life to. Maybe it’s a company. Maybe it’s a novel. Or maybe you just want to spend more time with your kids.

Below are some techniques you can use to free up time in your life. I’ve tried all of these in one form or another:

And these options are just the ideas that popped into my head. I’m sure there are dozens, if not hundreds, more.

But if all of the above still sounds too difficult, you can always take the easy way out:|||

When people ask me to recommend a good fantasy read, The Name of the Wind is always the first book I recommend. Hell, I like it even more than Lord of the Rings. Now that the book has sold millions…