Let’s be honest: extreme weather conditions appear to be the new normal.

For our two California-based firms – Mindtribe, an engineering consultancy and Matter, an industrial design firm – climate instability has hit us close to home. We’ve seen our state go from an intense 5-year drought to the wettest year on record with widespread flooding in 2017. And, despite record rainfall, 10.5 million California residents are still affected by drought. Consequently, water rationing mandates have gone into effect and the cost of water has gradually increased.

With these conditions in mind, our two teams came together to develop a solution that would help address the perils of water depletion and the rising cost of home water consumption.

Very early on in this collaboration we discovered a major hurdle in our effort to encourage water conservation; that is, most households have little to no visibility of their actual water usage. Ask anyone how many gallons a month they actually use, and chances are they will be a magnitude off. It’s not surprising; when your water bill eventually arrives it is not even measured in quantities most of us are readily familiar with. Instead, it’s billed in “Units”. A Unit is 100 cubic feet of water.  (Still staring blankly? 100 cubic feet of water is 748 gallons, or about the size of a large hot tub). How can you effectively save water if you have no idea how much you use and where?

The challenge of demystifying water use and empowering consumers to manage the way we use our natural resources is ripe for innovation. Smart home devices such as Nest have paved the way for useful and actionable insights in managing one’s home, yet a comparable tool for water management has remained elusive, until now.

We put Mindtribe’s IoT hardware engineering experience together with the ID and UX chops of Matter, and in six months we designed and prototyped an integrated system that will help individuals and households change the way they consume water.|||

Mindtribe and industrial design partner Matter are excited to announce the creation of Well™, a smarthome technology designed to demystify water consumption and