Twitter is a sinking ship, and Medium is heroically stepping in to take its place. Now, the next question needs to be asked — is Medium up for the task?

We’ve seen Twitter slowly dying before our very eyes. Though this is hard for many, it’s the sad reality we have to face.

Twitter was never the ‘Stories’ type of platform, but more of a curated distribution platform. When everyone else jumped on the stories train, Twitter stood there wondering where everyone else went.

It has become a dated platform flooded with confusion. Twitter has no clear way to solve for the detrimental problem they face, which is the chaotic information overload users face on their platform.

The cold hard reality is Twitter, isn’t going to be here for the long haul. Someone needs to step up and rise to the challenge of our compulsive content ingestion.

Twitter has been moving sluggishly in user experience advancements for quite some time. Just when everyone else started rolling out stories features, Twitter just rolled out a native live streaming feature (Facebook introduced this feature in April of 2016.)

Somehow Twitter has managed to dig themselves a hole they just can’t get out of. The platform has become virtually unusable. I often times refer to it as the ‘walking zombie’ of the social media networks meaning — I post to it just because I always have, but I don’t actually use it.

Twitters day has come and gone, and now there are much more appealing solutions. We know the younger generation is going to use Snapchat and Instagram (or should I say Finstagram) so they can keep a handle on who sees their posts. Older folks and families stick to Facebook for the functionality and ease of use. Crafty and DIY creatives roam around on Pinterest.

So where does that leave Twitter, the middle child stuck in the mud?

Twitter has become a network of people looking to distribute 99% of the time and then consume 1% of the time. The imbalance has proven to be destructive. It has become impossible to navigate Twitter in a productive manner.

Now there needs to be a solution with a more balanced approach, and I believe Medium is just that. By keeping the content native to Medium, it helps to control the imbalance.

It’s not as simple as dropping a link and a title and then walking away on Medium. Things need to be well thought through, planned out, and then written.

Although distribution on Medium is much more limited than it is on Twitter, it should be perceived as a benefit. Limiting distribution is one of the reasons Medium is going to overthrow Twitter.

In the end, people are too shameless in plugging themselves. Medium does a great job of preventing it simply be making users put the effort forth to grow their audience.

Recently Medium has been positioning themselves as an ever evolving social platform. With the release of their new ‘series’ features, they are creating a new way to engage different users.

Series helps to tell stories in a whole new way and is exclusively catering to mobile audiences. With the rising number of mobile users, this was a smart move on their part.

The success of chat styled storytelling apps like Hooked has proven younger generations consume content on mobile in a unique way. Series can step in and provide valuable content to people who use digest stories on a mobile device.

When you invest as much time as we have on Twitter, it’s hard to let go. Twitter has grown near and dear to us, but it’s just not getting the job done anymore.

It’s time to move on to a more vibrant and engaging platform.

Thanks for the memories Twitter, but get better or get gone.|||

Twitter is a sinking ship, and Medium is heroically stepping in to take its place. Now, the next question needs to be asked — is Medium up for the task? We’ve seen Twitter slowly dying before our…