A few years ago I wrote about how I make small Common Lisp projects. With the availability of Quicklisp and ASDF2, my process has changed quite a bit. Here's what I do lately.

Get a comfortable environment (done only once, not once per project). First, as part of setting up my CL environment, I install Quicklisp and add it to my SBCL startup file. That means downloading quicklisp.lisp and then running a couple commands:

After that, Quicklisp loads automatically every time I start Lisp, and I have more than 300 libraries available to add as easy dependencies of my project, if needed.

Since I use Emacs and really like slime, I also usually install quicklisp-slime-helper with as one of my first steps on a new system. Emacs isn't required to follow the project-creation steps below, though.

Second, Quicklisp includes ASDF2. I like to set up ASDF2 to scan a particular directory tree, , for local systems. To do that, I create a config file named that has this in it:

With that file in place, I can add new projects to that directory tree, and after an the project's systems will be loadable with . I can unpack tarballs, check things out from source control systems, or create new projects and they'll all be easily available for loading.

ASDF2's default setup also scans a directory called , so if you don't mind putting projects there, you can use that without any additional configuration.

With Quicklisp installed and ASDF2 configured, here are the steps I follow when I get an idea and I want to explore it in Common Lisp.

note In the following examples, I use pathnames like to mean . Most CL implementations allow this shorthand, but if yours doesn't, you will need to use the full pathname, e.g. .

Create a project skeleton with quickproject and load it. Quickproject is part of Quicklisp, so if it's not already loaded, I can just use this:

For this example, I'll make a project called swatchblade that generates rounded-rectangle PNGs of a particular color, and makes it available as a web service with Hunchentoot. To create a project skeleton for the project, I use this:

The last part of the directory name is used as the new project name. I could choose a different name by passing the option explicitly.

creates several files in the swatchblade directory:

It also adds the directory to your ASDF configuration, so you can immediately load the skeleton project and its dependencies:

will automatically install required libraries if they're available in Quicklisp.

Write some code. I open the newly-created and start hacking.

I define variables with defvar and defparameter, functions with defun and defgeneric, macros with defmacro, classes with defclass, etc. As I write each one, I compile it immediately with C-c C-c and occasionally switch over to the REPL to run some code.

As I use symbols from other projects, I update the form in to import symbols. For example, I might want to use several Vecto symbols without package prefixes, so I could do this:

I don't put any library management code directly into Lisp source files. If I decide to use more external projects, I edit and add to the list, e.g.:

Reloading the system with will install (if necessary) and load any newly-required systems.

Reorganize. For small projects, sometimes a single file suffices. Most of the time, though, I end up splitting code up into multiple files. In this example, I might make a file called , a file called , and a file called , and update the system definition from this, the system automatically created by quickproject:

...to be something like this:

When the option is present in the defsystem, files are compiled and loaded in order. You can get more complicated in expressing inter-file relationships, but I haven't found it worth the trouble. I just organize my files so that functions and macros needed in later files are provided in earlier files.

Reuse. With something like swatchblade, I would probably re-use it by starting Lisp, loading the project with , and running a function to start Hunchentoot with the swatchbade handler in effect. The final package definition might look something like this:

The session then might look something like this:

With a project that is meant to be used more as a library, the package would likely have many more exports, and I would re-use it by passing it with the argument of , e.g.:

From there I can go back to the "Write some code" step and continue the cycle.

If I want to reuse a project as a standalone program I can run from the command-line, I use Buildapp.|||

A few years ago I wrote about how I make small Common Lisp projects . With the availability of Quicklisp and ASDF2, my process has changed quite a bit. Here's what I do lately. Get a comfortable environment (done only once, not once per project). First, as part of setting up my CL environment, I…