So, you want to write a game? And run it in the browser? Do you like Rust? Great! I’ll show you how to write a sample program in Rust using SDL2 and how to compile it with Emscripten.

Best way to install Rust starts here: https://www.rustup.rs/

Will also need an additional target to compile our program to javascript.

Now we have Rust!

We will also need Emscripten. It’s a compilator that takes any LLVM compatible language and outputs a javascript.

There is a tool, which will manage Emscripten installation for us.

You’ll have to install SDL2 on your system.

On other linux distributions try something similar.

Cargo will create a new project for you, for example:

We have it. Hello world up and running.

We need to add these dependencies to

And modify like this:

A few explanations. In this example, we’ve created a sample application to move a white box using cursor keys. Simple enough.

Great! A window appeared, and the box is moving. 

If you see you have to check if SLD2 is installed correctly on your system.

Time to modify our code to run in also in javascript.

We will need a wrapper around emscripten API. There is no working solution in the Crate (package manager for Rust). But we can find few on the internet.

And modify our to look like this:

We need to alternate our code when we are compling to javascript. We will use to define lines that will used for javascript build and for standard builds.

Just to be sure, let’s check if all the things are working for standard builds?

If we want to compile something to javascript that uses system libraries, we need to compile those libraries with emscripten. But emscripten provides us few precompiled libraries. You can check them with:

There is SDL, great! We don’t need to compile it ourselves. We need to use because we’re using version 2.0.

Before we will add any empscripten compiler flags to our environment we need to compile our dependencies itself

Now we can set environment variable to

Now we will try to compile

Got it! Take a look

One big javascript file. That’s it? How to run it?

You have to create another file  :

This is a wrapper that will download generated javascript code and run it in the browser. Look at line there is a link to this javascript file.

Let’s open index.html in the browser.

Works! You can use cursor buttons to move the little white box.

As you can see it’s fairly easy to generate working javascript from Rust code and run it in the browser. Now you should create some more interesting program or even game!

Here is a github repository with all code that we’ve just created. Hope you enjoy it!|||

So, you want to write a game? And run it in the browser? Do you like Rust? Great! I’ll show you how to write a sample program in Rust using SDL2 and how to compile it with Emscripten. We will also…