While we try to maintain a stable API, sometimes it is not possible. Buffalo is also not yet at , which mean we are treating the “minor” version of the release as the “major” version. Version is a big release, and an awesome one at that. To help pushes us towards our goal of we had to change somethings in the API, but I think you’ll agree, that they only make Buffalo better!

If you have an existing Buffalo application, please read through what has changed below so you are aware of the changes you will need to make for your application.

Since Plush is now the default for older applications that were built using Velvet will need to either update all of their templates to the Plush syntax, or change their template engine to use Velvet. I would, personally, recommend updating your templates as Plush is far superior to Velvet.

Should you not want to use the awesome-sauce that is Plush, you can continue to use Velvet as your template engine. To change your template engine to Velvet update the accordingly:

Be aware that as Buffalo develops it will be taking advantage of the power of Plush with new features, these features may or may not be available on other template engines.

Everyone who spent any time with Buffalo has come across this issue at least once:

It’s an annoying issue caused by the package we were using to bundle assets such as templates, JavaScript, etc… into the binary with . The package, , also had other problems besides it’s use of . It’s use of packages such as meant that it was a hindrance towards our goal of getting Buffalo to work on GAE.

To that end we have removed entirely from the Buffalo framework and instead have replaced it with https://github.com/gobuffalo/packr. Packr gives similar functionality to but without the panics, and using packages that won’t impede getting GAE support.

What’s more, because of these changes we are able to clean up the generated file and thin out the requirements for the package.

We are also able to clean up the file to use Packr directory for serving assets.

We have also completely removed the package since, with Packr, there is no longer a need for such a package.

The following options have been removed:

Because these options have been removed from , you might get errors similar to the following:

The fix for this is to simply remove the offending lines of code from .

This middleware was removed due to it’s lack of use.|||

Like every software release, this is the “best one yet”! Buffalo v0.8.0 is really a great release, and that is due to all of the great community driven work that has been done on it. I would like to…