Use of pedometers, received by post, resulted in a sustained increase in walking of around 650 steps a day, equivalent to about one km or 30 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity per week. The study was set in London general practices and achieved similar results whether or not people had additional support from a practice nurse.

The number of people agreeing to participate was low. Of the 11,015 people invited, 1,023 took part, a take-up of just 10%. Some contacted were already meeting physical activity guidelines. Participants were mostly women and on average undertook about 80 to 100 minutes of moderate or vigorous physical activity a week. The additional steps noted in this trial were less than in other studies that had more contact with advisors. These noted an increase of about 2,000 to 2,500 steps daily.

This NIHR-funded large-scale study of people not meeting current guideline levels of moderate physical activity showed that a simple intervention can have small but lasting effects. It might be a low-cost way to motivate people to hit physical activity targets. The message delivered to participants in this trial was to aim for an additional 3,000 steps in 30 minutes on at least five days a week. This could become a measurable goal for existing public health physical activity advice and confirms the benefit of self-monitoring for some people.|||

Use of pedometers, received by post, resulted in a sustained increase in walking of around 650 steps a day, equivalent to about one km or 30 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity per week. The study was set in London general practices and achieved similar results whether or not people had additional support from a practice nurse.The number of people agreeing to participate was low. Of the 11,015 people invited, 1,023 took part, a take-up of just 10%. Some contacted were already meeting physical activity guidelines. Participants were mostly women and on average undertook about 80 to 100 minutes of moderate or vigorous physical activity a week. The additional steps noted in this trial were less than in other studies that had more contact with advisors. These noted an increase of about 2,000 to 2,500 steps daily.This NIHR-funded large-scale study of people not meeting current guideline levels of moderate physical activity showed that a simple intervention can have small but lasting effects. It might be a low-cost way to motivate people to hit physical activity targets. The message delivered to participants in this trial was to aim for an additional 3,000 steps in 30 minutes on at least five days a week. This could become a measurable goal for existing public health physical activity advice and confirms the benefit of self-monitoring for some people.