The best way to organize your knowledge and thoughts. Visually.

We’ve all run into the same issue surfing the web or doing research on an important topic — at some point, you always seem to end up with countless open browser tabs. And what about all those other tabs? Those interesting articles you were going to read a bit later. The beautiful photo you wanted to keep. And that video you wanted to watch after work, once you get home. To stay focused, it’s important to close browser tabs as soon as possible. But you’re never quite ready to close those tabs. After a while, they start haunting you because you’re never able to focus on them. You want to get rid of that habit, but haven’t found a better approach yet. To stay focused, it’s important to close browser tabs as soon as possible. This was just one of the reasons why we developed webjets.io. Webjets is a visual tool that helps you collect, organize and share anything.

Collect content on the fly and organize later What if you had some kind of universal inbox, to just throw everything in? Out of sight, out of mind – to concentrate on what’s at hand. All you have to remember is that there’s a place where everything is being kept safely, for you to organize later. In Webjets there are many ways to collect content: What if you had some kind of universal inbox, to just throw everything in? Out of sight, out of mind — to concentrate on what’s at hand. With that Website or note you wanted to remember in your inbox, you can close the tab. Just like that. Then, you can move on, relax, and concentrate. A card isn’t much different from an index card, postcard or sticky note, holding only the most essential information. It can contain text, images, videos, whatever you stumble upon. Cards can be expanded, to reveal more detailed information. Or you can minimize them, for a better overview. Over the last couple of years, the concept of cards has taken over the web, for presenting easily digestible chunks of information. Especially since they play well with varying mobile screen sizes and touch interfaces. With cards, content immediately looks simple and organized. Google, Apple and Microsoft are using it inside their Operating Systems. And many Websites, such as Twitter and Facebook, are utilizing that approach. Intercom wrote many years ago why cards are the future of the web. Why cards are the future of the web - Inside Intercom

Content being broken down into individual components and re-aggregated is the result of the rise of mobile technologies…blog.intercom.com We strongly believe Cards are the most effective approach to managing any kind of information. Whenever you feel like it, you can start organizing your inbox. In Webjets there are two types of objects: Start organizing the inbox by dragging each card into a collection. Quickly create new cards or collections, whenever you want.

While cards hold your data, collections are containers to structure your data. For each project or area of interest, you can create your own collection of cards. One of the advantages of Webjets is the power to build endless structures of interlinked information. Like neurons connecting in the brain. One of the advantages of Webjets is the power to build endless structures of interlinked information. Like neurons connecting in the brain.

This technique of storing and relating notes using cards is based on a method known for hundreds of years. The famous German sociologist and thinker Niklas Luhmann has written countless books and articles this way. Creative people like Jean Paul, Vladimir Nabokov and many more have structured their work using the “index card” method (German: “Zettelkasten”). The use of modern technology has made everything a lot simpler. Different types of information should be represented differently, in the way that seems most natural. Different ways of representing things can also be used to highlight different aspects. This is why Webjets lets you display your collected content in many different ways: List, Grid, Table, Canvas and Mindmap — and there are many more to come. Cards are more than just representation of data Cards can hold static text or be highly interactive. A card can host a YouTube video or hold a Google Document, to be edited in Webjets. Any card can process business logic or connect to a third-party service. No matter if it’s another website or a professional business application. As such, a card is basically an independent app. Webjets is an application to manage other applications and information equally. You could say that Webjets is a tool to manage Web-Applications. Finally, there is a way manage all your content spread across different web services. No more signing in on all those countless sites, no more searching for your content, lost in the depths of the internet. Webjets is an application to manage other applications and information equally. We like to think of Webjets as an information-centric operating system. This is just the beginning. There is a lot to come. And you can part of shaping it. Sign up today and get a life-time pro account Webjets is currently released as an Alpha version and under continuous development. If you sign up, be aware that some things might not be running as smoothly as they should yet. Also, some things may change significantly. Still, no need to worry, your data is safe. We want you to start using Webjets now. We are open for your feedback and happy to hear about your personal experiences. As a goodie we will be giving a life-time pro-account to the 50 most active users, once we reach Beta. Just sign up here. If you like concept, please show us your love by clicking the ❤ on the left.|||

We’ve all run into the same issue surfing the web or doing research on an important topic — at some point, you always seem to end up with countless open browser tabs. And what about all those other…