Many people can talk a good cloud game, but when it comes to building cloud applications, it’s another matter.

That’s why the Cloud Foundry Foundation and The Linux Foundation is creating a cloud developer education and certification initiative: The “Cloud Foundry Certified Developer” program.

In a recent survey, the Cloud Foundry Foundation found that “64% of IT professionals and executives agree that the developer shortage is a real threat.”

Cloud Foundry is an open-source platform as a service (PaaS) cloud. VMware created Cloud Foundry, and it is now part of Pivotal Software. The new certification, available in June 2017, is designed to help developers set themselves apart

Employers want this type of reassurance. Certification is the best way to verify that job candidates have practical experience with Cloud Foundry across any platform, including Huawei FusionStage, IBM Bluemix Cloud Foundry, Pivotal Cloud Foundry, SAP Cloud Platform and Swisscom Application Cloud.

· A free introductory course offered via the edX online class platform.

· A training partner program which includes licensed materials for in-person Cloud Foundry developer classes, offered by member companies including DellEMC, EngineerBetter, IBM, Pivotal, Resilient Scale, SAP, Stark and Wayne and Swisscom.

At launch, training will be offered by more than a dozen technology, education and systems integration organizations. These include EngineerBetter, IBM, Pivotal, Resilient Scale, SAP, Stark and Wayne and Swisscom. The Linux Foundation, which has trained more than 800,000 students in critical Linux, development, system administration and OpenStack skills and certifications will offer the online eLearning infrastructure for the initiative.

You can register for the free introductory course on edx.org in early May. The self-paced eLearning course “Cloud Foundry for Developers” will be available to the public on June 13 for $500. The certification exam takes up to four hours to complete and can be taken online for $300. The exam will also be offered in-person at the Cloud Foundry Summit Silicon Valley on June 13-15, 2017.

Topics covered in the exam will include:

In short, this exam will not be a certification cake-walk. Anyone who gets a Cloud Foundry Developer Certification can be proud of it — and pretty darn certain that they’ll find a company ready to hire them.

Puppet: One of the best cloud DevOps tools

The 5 biggest cloud developments to watch in 2017

Cloud Foundry is ready for your platform-as-a-service needs|||

