We are working on porting this laptop to Libreboot. Click here for information about current research that we are working on. The shipping date for this product is ETA December 2017 (earlier, if possible) but it is available now for pre-order. Your pre-order will further fund the work that we are doing to port this laptop to Libreboot.

Did you know that most modern Intel and AMD computers come with backdoors implanted by the NSA and other agencies? You do now, and it isn’t pretty. And it’s getting worse. Since the Snowden revelations, we know that most hardware platforms contain backdoors or have insecure software that can have exploitable bugs. Most hardware manufacturers intentionally place insecure backdoors into their systems, for profit. With most systems from the large manufacturers, your company is at risk of data theft, corporate espionage or worse. The Libreboot X220 from Minifree changes that!

The Libreboot X220 is a business-grade, secure owner-controlled laptop that safeguards your privacy, security and freedom. It uses dual-core Core i5-2410M CPU (or higher), Intel HD 3000 graphics and supports up to 16GiB RAM, making this an ideal high-performance workstation with the Intel QM67 sandybridge chipset. It runs 100% entirely on free and open source software, from the BIOS, right up to the operating system, drivers and applications. It comes with the free and open source Libreboot BIOS replacement, and Debian GNU+Linux, or any other GNU+Linux distribution of your choice.

Your Libreboot X220 obeys you, and nobody else! The Libreboot X220 comes without the Intel Management Engine or AMD PSP!

Shipping worldwide via UPS! (Europe, USA, Canada and Asia included. 2-5 day shipping to most of the world), with a 2 year warranty as standard, and free technical support. Prices are in EUR; if you want another currency, use xe.com currency converter and simply pay in that amount in the other currency, at your local bank. Xe.com provides accurate exchange rates.

We also sell extra Libreboot X220 batteries:

 click here

We also sell Libreboot X220 docking stations separately (useful if you want a 2nd HDD/SSD):

 click here

This comes with the Core i5. Core i7 model is available for an additional 500 EUR (these models are rarer, so it takes more effort to source them and they cost much more); ask for it in the textbox on the checkout page, and we’ll send a custom invoice in PDF format. Core i7 model adds HyperThreading support, in addition to a single USB 3.0 port (support not yet available/tested in Libreboot), and somewhat better performance depending on use-case scenario (e.g. photo editing).

Libreboot is free software which initializes the hardware in the system and boots your operating system. It replaces the non-free BIOS usually found in most laptops.

Minifree’s founder is also the main libreboot developer (and founder of the libreboot project). Profits from Minifree sales directly fund the libreboot project.

Debian GNU+Linux operating system comes preinstalled. Debian comes with all the standard applications for Web browsing, instant messaging, office and productivity, graphics editing, multimedia and more. Thousands of extra applications are also available to install from the Debian repositories, using the apt-get package manager provided. It even has games!

The version of Debian that we ship is Debian Jessie, with the MATE desktop.

We will also install any other distribution that you prefer, on request, e.g. Ubuntu, Linux mint, Arch, Parabola, OpenSUSE, Mageia, Manjaro, etc – request it in the textbox on the checkout page

We can also supply a USB drive with the Debian installer on it. This is useful, if you wanted to install Debian onto another computer. This is the full DVD-1 ISO, not the net installer.

Tor Browser Bundle can be preinstalled in Debian (or whichever distro you choose), at no extra cost. Let us know during checkout (custom notes textbox on the checkout page) if you want this. Alternatively, you can download it yourself from torproject.org.

We can also supply a Tails USB drive. Tails is a live system, which is configured for secure, anonymous internet access by default. This is useful if you live under an oppressive regime, or you need uncensored internet access in a place that implements internet whitelists/blacklists (E.g. school, work, etc).

Qubes OS will also be compatible with this laptop, with full virtualization and vt-d support.

This fast, 12″ laptop is built with a strong chassis and shell, guaranteeing that the laptop will last many years.

The default option for the Libreboot X220 comes with 4GiB RAM and a 160GB HDD for storage. Minifree also provides upgrade options; up to 16GiB RAM, and a 480GB SSD or 1TB HDD.

An SSD can bring with it faster application and OS load times, while also slightly increasing battery life due to lower power consumption. Meanwhile, if you need more than 480GB storage, the 1TB HDD is a good option. If you want extra performance and storage (more than 480GB), one option would be to use the 480GB SSD, and get an external 1TB (or higher) USB HDD for extra storage, which GNU+Linux will automatically recognize when you plug it in.

The 16GiB RAM upgrade is useful, because more RAM means that you’re less likely to rely on the “swap” partition on the HDD or SSD (use of swap reduces system performance, because the HDD/SSD isn’t as fast as the RAM). This can be useful for people with more demanding requirements; software developers and graphics designers, for instance. For regular usage, it also means that you can run more applications simultaneously.

The SATA slot for the CD/DVD RW drive on the docking station (sold separately) can have a second HDD or SSD installed, replacing the CD/DVD RW drive. Minifree can provide this, in one of the following configurations:

If you want a 2nd HDD or SSD, but you also want a CD/DVD RW drive, there are USB CD/DVD drives that you can purchase online. These are all generic, and will work automatically in GNU+Linux.

The docking station is sold separately:

 click here

The Libreboot X200 and T400 both have the same CPU, GPU, northbridge, southbridge and other components, based on the same chipset design (and by the same ODM, Wistron). In fact, the libreboot source code for X200 and T400 are almost identical, except for a few minor differences. X220 has many improvements over X200/T400:



 You won’t find cheap aluminium in these laptops. These heatsinks are made of copper, and are matched with excellent fans. Ventilation is also vastly superior compared to most laptops.

Minifree also applies a fresh layer of Arctic MX-4, one of the best thermal compounds on the market, to ensure optimal cooling performance on every laptop.



 The Libreboot X200 from Minifree ships worldwide!. The AC-DC adapter (charger) is 100-240V auto-switching, so it will work in all countries. Minifree will include an EU, UK or USA power cable, depending on your shipping address.

If your country uses another type of power plug, Minifree can provide you with a €5 EUR reimbursement (on request) to cover the costs of purchasing the appropriate adapter. Alternatively, Minifree will source the appropriate adapter (or an actual cable) that will work in your country, and include it in the package. More plug types will be available by default, at a later date.

Do you travel? Minifree can provide extra power cables for €10 EUR each (e.g. EU and US cable). If you need extra cables, mention it in the “notes” box on the checkout and they will be included on the invoice. Extra chargers are also available, for €30 EUR each.

Libreboot stickers are also available to purchase. This raises extra funding for the Libreboot project.

Free tech support is also provided, for all customers. If you ever have any questions about your laptop, or need help with anything, Minifree is always happy to answer them via email, using the information on the contact page.

When new libreboot versions are released, it is possible to update to those newer versions using software (no disassembling required). Full instructions are provided.

The Libreboot X220 is a modified ThinkPad X220 containing reconditioned parts, with libreboot and GNU+Linux preinstalled.

We are working on freeing the Intel Management Engine on this platform, by removing it. It is possible to use the system without a Management Engine, but with a 30 minute reset which makes the system unusable. There are already half-solutions to this problem; we are researching full solutions (full ME removal, without 30 minute reset).

We are doing the following to free this laptop and add it to Libreboot:

More updates here and on the Libreboot website can be expected as time goes on.|||

