In the US, and in many other Western countries, we have a serious problem of capital allocation.

For example, the way that capital is allocated in the US tends to be overly conservative. Nowadays, capital tends to flow only from a minuscule set of highly risk-averse investors. Modern investors, especially in the tech capitals of Silicon Valley and Wall Street, choose to chase only after 100x profits, otherwise sitting on their money. Gone are the days of investors putting their interest into small business that might see a more stable return. Unless your start-up has a one-in-a-million appeal, you won’t hope to see a dime.

It gets worse. In too many cases, the only way in which investors see themselves making money is by getting OTHER investors to put money into the same thing, and so on, until valuations explode. On and on this pathological investment scheme goes until the whole bill of good can be sold to the greatest fool of all — the investing public. Maybe you could call this the ‘hot-potato start-up phenomenon.’ Whatever it is, it is a suffocating environment for small businesses people who want to produce something of value rather than temporary glamour.

In a discussion with the F# community, Don Syme (creator and Benevolent Dictator of the F# programming language), explains the following -

The Don mentions — with 100% accuracy — that what much accounts for our present technological inertia is cultural resistance. Ideally, functioning markets have an effective mechanism to overcome this inertia. In a functioning market, new businesses pop up all the time due to capital flows that arrive as a consequence of investment risk appetite. With new businesses come new ways of thinking, and adoptions of new technology exactly like F#. Unfortunately, as explained above, the risk appetite that we would see in a functioning market is not present in the US, nor in much of the West. And this is a huge problem for meritorious technologies like our own.

Now, as a conservative / libertarian I have some opinions as what can be done to unlock the US economy. But I don’t have any reason to state them here because, frankly, I don’t think anyone here has sufficient influence to affect any of the changes that are needed. This is macro-level stuff — beyond all our pay-grades. We’re technologists, after all.

So let’s instead talk about what we, as individual contributors and open source engineers, can do.

We have to understand that, in all but the most pathological cases, even locked up markets do eventually resolve issues. While an unlocked market might adopt new technology in a year or two, locked-up markets like our own often takes 5–10. Sometimes significantly more. Sadly, that’s just how things are in our type of economy — everything is in slow motion — including adoption of our most important new technologies.

For us as engineers, then, it must all be about keeping a stubborn long view and continuing to invest ourselves in to what we know is the right thing. It takes a lot of faith and grit to work for a future that is years away — but that’s the nature of our economy’s timeline.

What are your thoughts on how we can improve our adoption timelines?|||

For example, the way that capital is allocated in the US tends to be overly conservative. Nowadays, capital tends to flow only from a minuscule set of highly risk-averse investors. Modern investors…