While everything around us is accelerating, air travel has slowed down over the last 15 years (since Concorde was retired) and terrorism has made our journey through the airport to get on a plane a LONG and tedious exercise.

Boom Aerospace has just taken a step closer to making supersonic passenger planes a reality after securing $33million (£26million) funding from investors. Like everything in this super fast world in which we live, speed is the currency of winners! With Boom securing this investment they are getting much closer than their competitors to bringing back civilian supersonic air travel to the world.

Boom Supersonic is set to build its XB-1 Supersonic Demonstrator – which could pave the way for the world’s fastest passenger airliner and a VVIP private jet version.

Boom claims its jet will fly from New York to London in just three hours and 15 minutes, with air travel costing $2,500 each way.

The XB-1 is due to take off on its first test flight later this year and the firm aims to launch commercial flights sometime in 2020.

Rigorous testing will take place near Edwards Air Force Base in Southern California in partnership with Virgin Galactic’s The Spaceship Company.

With Virgin boss Richard Branson already having optioned to buy 10 of the supersonic Boom jets this project looks like the winner of them all.

The jet is expected to cost more than $200 million (£160 million) to build.

Boom engineer Kenrick Waithe said they are trying to build a supersonic airliner that’s economically viable, the way that the Concorde was not.

The prototype was unveiled last year at Centennial Airport in Denver and has been subjected to more than 1,000 simulated wind tunnel tests.

The XB-1 features a tapered carbon fibre fuselage (allowing a lower weight, hence lower operating costs) and is powered by three General Electric J85-21 turbojet engines.

The prototype’s avionics are from Honeywell and its carbon fibre shell comes from Tencate.

So overall, we are heading towards a breakthrough for air travel with supersonic returning to the skies until we see hypersonic take us even faster. While there are other similar projects out there like Skreemer, Concorde 2, Spike Aerospace, Aerion and others the one that will win this supersonic race will the the first to get to market and this is all about having the MONEY and right now Boom Aerospace have taken the lead...

Fabrizio Poli is Managing Partner of Aircraft Trading Company Tyrus Wings. He is also an accomplished Airline Transport Pilot having flown both private Jets and for the airlines. Fabrizio is also a bestselling author and inspirational speaker & has been featured on Russia Today (RT), TRT World, Social Media Examiner, Bloomberg, Channel 5, Chicago Tribune, Daily Telegraph, City Wealth Magazine, Billionaire.com, Wealth X, Financial Times, El Financiero and many other Media offering insight on the aviation world. Fabrizio is also regularly featured as an Aviation Analyst on Russia Today (RT) and TRT World. Fabrizio is also aviation special correspondent for luxury magazine, Most Fabullous Magazine. Fabrizio is also considered one of the world's top 30 experts in using Linkedin for business. You can tune in weekly to Fabrizio's business Podcast Living Outside the Cube available both in video & audio. You can also follow Fabrizio's aviation videos on Tyrus Wings TV. Fabrizio's latest book "Health4Flyers", the first natural-health book for pilots, flights attendants and frequent flyers is now available worldwide.

You can contact Fabrizio on:|||

