Suffering Alexa Seary got teased every day because of her surname - then Amazon launched a voice service called 'Alexa'

Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

STUDENT Alexa Seary gets teased every day because her surname is pronounced Siri — like Apple’s personal assistant.

The 21-year-old has put up with years of jokers instructing her to carry out tasks.

Then just as she was getting used to that, Amazon launched its own Echo household system — with an assistant named Alexa.

Both use voice technology to accept requests to play music, set reminders and find directions.

Alexa said: “All my family started to get jokes when Siri came out in 2011. For me it started off at my part-time job in a restaurant.

“It would be, ‘Siri, do this, Siri do that’.

“I work with a headset so I was getting told over it to do things as though I was a machine. But it was when Alexa started getting popular I realised I’d really run into a problem.”

Amazon has sold more than five million devices with Alexa, and there are one billion iPhones.

Alexa and her family, of Ventnor City, New Jersey, US, all have the handsets.

She added: “Thankfully, no one in my family has an Alexa so far — I think that would be a complete disaster.”

“When Siri first came out I honestly didn’t realise that it was pronounced the same was as my last name I thought it was ‘sir-ee’.

“It was only when people began telling me otherwise that I realised I was in for some jokes.

“My manager referred to me strictly as Siri when he asked me to do different tasks so that gave everyone at work a laugh I actually started to get used to it.

“When the Alexa started getting really popular is when I realised I’d really run into a problem.

“I work with a headphone so I was literally getting told over the headphone to do things as though I was a machine.

“I’m stuck with this name. I’m hoping it all dies down a little bit but I don’t think I’d change it.”|||

Suffering Alexa Seary got teased every day because of her surname - then Amazon launched a voice service called 'Alexa'