When I begin to learn a new programming language, I will try and master the debugger for it as early as possible. For example, in 2013, while I touched the Go, there seems only gdb for use. Although itself is not a good choice (From Debugging Go Code with GDB):

But at that time there was no other choice. So after delve came out, I switched to it without hesitation. Though I am not an expert of code, I still try my best do some contributions to make become better: improve documents, report issues, etc. Why am I so keen on debugger? The answer is it is a really irreplaceable and necessary tool for software engineers. The reasons are as follows:

(1) If the statements are the only debugging method of a programming language, it will make feel upset. I.e., if a bug is fully reproduceable, but from the logs you can’t figure out the reason. If there is a debugger which can help you step into every statement and inspect value of every variable, I think you can get the root cause quickly.

Certainly, the debugger isn’t omnipotent. E.g., the nasty multi-threads bug (If you are interested in this topic, you can read this post which describes an experience I have undergone.). If you can’t find reproduce condition of this issue, and adding logs still fails, you can try to add some statements which are triggered when the issue happens again. Then you can get the file which records the scene of crime, and use debugger to analyze it. You can see the debugger plays an important part in this scenario yet.

(2) “Debugger is a perfect unit-test tool”, the words come form my director when I got my first full-time job after leaving school. The reason is when you finish a code segment, you can use debugger to check whether it is correct through step-in mode: check value of every variable, mock the conditions which can’t easily be constructed in black-box test, inspect the stack and registers, etc. By means of this, you can fix many corner bugs.

(3) Debugger is a good tool to help you understand code. When I dive into some big projects, I find so many channels, interfaces, goroutines, and they sometimes make me crazy. But by way of using debugger, I can set breakpoints, then once the program is stopped, I can understand the code logic better through watching the calling stack.

Based on the above, debugger is an invaluable tool for everyone who lives on writing code. Try know and master it better. Maybe one day, a colleague can’t find reasons for one bug, then you use a small debugger trick and spot the root cause immediately. Isn’t it a cool stuff? 🙂|||

When I begin to learn a new programming language, I will try and master the debugger for it as early as possible. For example, in 2013, while I touched the Go,