Hold the phone. Now you can swipe from any browser, on any device, anywhere in the world.

For many of us, Tinder has always been nearby—in your pocket, on your nightstand, or quietly racking up new matches at the bottom of your purse. But for some, using Tinder hasn’t always been as simple as reaching over, tapping the app and messaging your matches.

Let’s face it: not all places on earth have 4G. Some people can’t get bundled services, while others don’t have enough memory to support Tinder on their mobile phones. For all those who’ve ever been stuck in a lecture hall or had to endure an eight-hour workday without access to Tinder—this is for you.

Introducing Tinder Online: a fun, new web experience and your English professor’s worst nightmare. Mobile phones not allowed in class? Just fire up your laptop and swipe incognito. Cubicle life got you down? Now you can toggle between spreadsheets and Super Likes in a flash. “Not Enough Storage?” Not a problem. Don’t let life get in the way of your Tinder game. With Tinder Online, you can swipe anywhere in the world you have an internet connection. And while the online experience is slightly more limited than the mobile app experience (for now), it’s still the Tinder you know and love.

It’s easy. To start, visit Tinder.com from any browser and you’ll instantly recognize the same familiar flow. If you’re new to Tinder, login through Facebook, choose your best photos, write your perfect bio and start swiping. Once you see that signature “It’s a Match!”, it’s time to start messaging. And that last step is more seamless than ever before if you’re on your desktop: it’s an experience specially designed for messaging, displaying your match’s profile as you chat.

Tinder Online is currently being tested in a handful of countries: Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Indonesia, Italy, Mexico, Philippines, and Sweden.

We know that some areas have limited access to Facebook, too. So we are testing the ability to login via SMS directly from your mobile phone in various markets.

It’s all part of our ongoing effort to make Tinder more accessible to the global community.|||

