In the grand tradition of making technology available to pets and pets owners, the team of volunteers behind Open Food Facts and Open Beauty Facts is proud to introduce a solution to the looming overweight issue with pets.

Although Open Food Facts went from 100k to 300k products in just a few months, indexing all the food in the world proves to be a sizeable challenge: there are still millions of products not yet indexed all over the world. As a result, we decided to focus on a task easier to achieve: Pet Food. And while we love all pets equally, in order to make our objective reachable, we have to focus only on one kind of pet: dogs, or cats or birds, etc.

But the good news is that you get to decide which pet that is, by participating in our worldwide competition: 1 New Pet Food uploaded to Open Pet Food Facts = 1 Vote for the Pet Food type of your choice Realtime results:

One person can send as many votes as they want (in the form of a scanned product) and all votes must be sent before tonight at 24:00 GMT. So, if you want to help your cat, for example, eat healthy and keep that belly size under control, scan as many cat foods as you can in order to increase the chances of the Cat food to win and turn Open Pet Food Facts into Open Cat Food Facts. Or Open Dog Food Facts. Or Open Bird Food Facts.

You can also voice your support by sharing Open Pet Food Facts to your friends. Make sure to include #OpenPetFoodFacts and either #Dog #Cat, #Platypus or the animal that should be the king of Open Pet Food Facts. We're counting tweet activity as well in the competition: three retweets will count as one vote so don't keep them only for yourself.

The Open Pet Food Facts app is available for Android, and for iPhones Android version (also available on F-Droid for people without the Google Pet Store) iPhone/iPad version coming soon, use Open Food Facts app (Don't worry: we'll move all your pet products from Open Food Facts to Open Pet Food Facts, and uploads will also be counted)

Open Pet Food Facts was created by Yaki and Tori, the 2 free range hens living in Stéphane Gigandet's garden who were upset that nothing was being done about open data for pet nutrition. They initially wanted to name it OpenChickenFoodFacts (not to be confused with OpenFriedChickenFoodFacts, which they disapprove of), but the neighboorhood stray cat somehow persuaded them to widen the scope of the project to other pets.|||

Introducing Open Pet Food Facts. In the grand tradition of making technology available to pets and pets owners, the team of volunteers behind Open Food Facts and Open Beauty Facts is proud to introduce a solution to the looming overweight issue with pets. Meet...