** Note that a lot of other things are going on in this Comey story. The reporter used facts about Comey to figure out the setup, and also some clever inference. But this clever inference exploited a specific information leak from the secret follows list to the recommendations list, and this post focuses on this kind of leak.

Even though cybersecurity is one of the hottest topics on the Internet, my specific area of research, information flow security, has remained relatively obscure. Until now, that is.You may have heard of "information flow" as a term that has been thrown around with terms like "data breach," "information leak," and "1337 hax0r." You may not be aware that information flow is a specific term, referring to the practice of tracking sensitive data as it flows through a program. While techniques like access control and encryption protect individual pieces of data (for instance, as they leave a database), information flow techniques additionally protect the results ofInformation flow bugs are usually not the kinds of glamorous bugs that make headlines. Many of the data leaks that have been in the public consciousness, for instance the Target and Sony hacks, happened because the data was not protected properly at all. In these cases, having the appropriate access checks, or encrypting the data, should do the trick. But "why we need to protect data more better" is harder to explain. Up through my PhD thesis defense, I had such a difficult time finding headlines that were actually information flow bugs that I resorted to general software security motivations ( cars rifles !) instead.Then along came " This Is Almost Certainly James Comey's Twitter Account ," an article I have been waiting for since I started working on information flow in 2010. The basic idea behind the article is this: a journalist named Ashley Feinberg wanted to find FBI director James Comey's secret Twitter account, and so started digging around the Internet. Feinberg was able to be successful within four hours due to being clever and a key information leak in Instagram: when you request to follow an Instagram account, it makesbased on who to follow. And in the case of this article, the algorithmic suggestions for Comey's son Brien included several family members, including James Comey's wife--and the account that Feinberg deduced to be James Comey's. And it seems that Comey uses the same "anonymous" handle on Instagram as he does on Twitter. And so Instagram's failure to protect Brien Comey's protected "following" list led to the discovery of James Comey's Twitter account.So what happened here? Instagram promises to protect secret accounts, which it (sometimes*) does. When one directly views the Instagram page of a protected user, they cannot access that person's photos, who that user is following, and who follows that user. This might lead a person to think that all of this information is protected all of the time.It turns out the protected account information is visible to algorithms that suggestusers to follow, a feature that becomes--incorrectly--visible toviewers once a follow is requested, because, presumably, whoever implemented this functionality forgot an access check. In this case the leak is particularly insidious because while the profile photos and names of the users shown are all already public, they are likely shown as a result of a computations on secret information: Brien Comey's protected follow information. (This is a subtle case to remember to check!) In information flow nomenclature, this is called an. When someone is involved in a lot of Instagram activity, the implicit flow of the follow information may not be so apparent. But when many of the recommended follows are Comey family members, many of them who use their actual names, this leak becomes more serious!In the world of information flow, this article is a Big Deal because it so perfectly illustrates why information flow analyses are useful. For years, I had been jumping up and down and waving my arms (see here and here , for instance) about why we need to check data in more places than the point where it leaves the database. Applications aren't just showing sensitive values directly anymore, but the results of all kinds of computations on those values! (In this case it was a recommendations algorithm.) We don't always know where sensitive data is eventually going! (As was the case when Brien Comey's protected "following" list was handed over to the algorithm.) Policies might depend on sensitive data! We may even compute where sensitive data is going based on other sensitive data! In a world where we can search over anything, no data is safe!Until recently, my explanations have seemed subtle and abstract to most, in direct contrast to the sexy flashy security work that people imagine after watchingor reading. By now, though, we information flow researchers should have your attention. We have all kinds of computations over all kinds of data going to all kinds of people, andin the code. Even though digital security should be one of the main concerns of the FBI, Comey is not able to avoid the problems that arise from the mess of policy spaghetti that is modern code.Fortunately, information flow researchers have been working for years on preventing precisely this kind of Comey leak**. In fashionable BuzzFeed style, I will list exactly five research ideas Instagram could adapt to prevent such leaks in the future:I don't know how much this Twitter account leak upset the Comeys, but reading this article was pretty much the most exciting thing that I have ever done. Up until now, most people have thought about security in terms of protecting individual data items, rather than in terms of a complex and subtle interaction with the programs that use them. This has started to change in the last few years as people have been realizing just how much of our data is online, and just how unreliable the code is that we trust with this data. I hope that this Comey leak will cause even more people to realize how important it is to reason deeply about what our software is doing. (And to fund and use our research. :))|||

