In this episode, I answer three questions all related to buying gas stations and how to understand the numbers and if the stores are really making money or losing money. I think you may find this episode helpful if you are in the market to buy a business. Here I analyze some sales numbers and see which ones are making money and which ones are not. Stay tuned.

Welcome to Gas station business 101 podcast, I am Shabbir Hossain, and this is episode 59. This is the show where we discuss how to start, run and grow a gas station business successfully and give you an inside look at many real life case studies so you can follow and be successful in this business.

First my apology once again for not coming up with an episode sooner, I was busy with a few projects and had to put the blog and the podcast on the backburner for just a bit, but I am back, and hopefully I will be posting new episodes sooner rather than later. I still haven’t forgotten about the episode I promised you where I would share the new P&L of the subject store I helped some investors buy about 14 months ago. I have some new updates on that store and recorded that episode halfway through already, which I will share soon I promise.

Now as for this episode, I had to do this one first because I have had way too many emails lately where many of the blog readers and podcast listeners have been asking me various due diligence questions, and it is hard to answer them via email. So I have decided to pick just 6 out of them since they are mostly all similar in nature, and I thought by sharing them with rest of you, it will benefit everyone. For various privacy reasons, I have decided not to mention any names of the people that sent me these emails here.

I need your advice about the valuation for the store based on the following information.

Store located in small town and mostly neighborhood business.

What would be the price we should go for?

Shabbir, here are few questions.

Please note that I do not have prior experience, so how can I convince them that I am serious and are there any training provided by gas companies?

Now at the end of the year when I will file income tax, which option will give me bigger return? What is the best way to approach companies which own multiple stations around me?

Glad, I ran into your website. I found a gas station business for sale for

$85K. We did our due diligence to look into the traffic, etc.  Mostly the sales are from Cigarettes and Beer.  The other items are pretty much a stand still.

In addition, this station the gas is unbranded. They are selling like 700

Gallons per day, inside the store with the majority of sales been Cigar and

Beer. The sales is about 40K revenue and 35% profit, and expense is about

9.5K. Profit is about $2,750 is what I am estimating.

Is the goodwill they are asking outrages? Currently, the owner is not opening the store properly and wants to sell it

If you have any question, feel free to send me an email at shabbir@gasstationbusiness101.com, or you can post it on my Facebook group page by going to shabbirhossain.net

Don’t forget to sign up for my very important newsletter; you can simply sign up for it by going to http://gasstationbusiness101.com/subscribe

In the meantime, if you haven’t subscribed to this podcast, feel free to do so, and if you like this show, I would love to see a review from you on iTunes or where ever you download this episode from.

Here is a link to my podcast page on iTunes, if you follow this link you can give me a review right on that page. Trust me it will make my day and won’t cost you anything other than maybe 30 seconds of your time.

Thank you once again for joining me in this episode; I will see you in the next one.|||

