Content chatbots live and die by their personality and the stories they tell.

When I say personality, I do not mean your chatbot should say it is Juan de Marco, a 36 y.o. former real-estate agent living in Denmark who found his true calling as poet while being dumped by his ex-wife in front of a windmill.

Pretending to be an actual human does not work and angers people.

Chatbot personality means it has a certain tone of voice, attitude, view on the world and even values. I strongly advise sitting down and writing who your chatbot is in a paragraph or half a page. A good way to do this is to think of your chatbot like a writer thinks about his dearest character. With a clear character, the stories the chatbot tells, the content itself, become clear.

Good chatbot content is like the alchemy stone: it comes from multiple ingredients, but is greater than the sum of its parts. The ingredients are:

The last one is what is both difficult, and exciting. Success means that the user feels he or she is having a natural conversation with your chatbot, not navigating an app or using an interface.

Does this mean you should use natural language processing and discard menus? For certain no. Despite all the hype, AI is very far from being able to have a natural conversation even for giants such as IBM or Google. You need to use menus: clear, structured options with which the user answers.

However this does not mean you can ignore open responses. People will type. This is a given. You have to plan for it. Take the most popular open input (such as ‘how are you?’ or the very frequent ‘no’). Then the most probable input in relation to your stories. Build answers to all these inputs. These are as much part of the content as the scripted stories.

Many of the resources on chatbot design put emphasis on user experience. I agree this is critical. However, the user experience design depends on the platform used. And the platforms will likely change as chatbots evolve. I feel the basis of good user experience is in crafting the content as good conversations. If you get this right, the rest should be gravy.|||

It seems like everybody and their brother are developing chatbots. There are over 30,000 chatbot developers on Facebook. There were over 35,000 chatbots active on Facebook Messenger. And yet for all…