As Brexit begins and the government starts the laborious process of cutting and pasting the repeal bill, what should Britain do about the tech giants? There is a fissure growing between European and US attitudes towards these global super-platforms – “the Gafa” as Brussels calls them (Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon) – and the UK will soon need to decide on which side it sits. Will we continue to let these corporations and their services grow unchecked? Will we try to challenge their dominance and impose obligations on them? Or will we “take back control” and find a third way?

The approach we take to Google, Facebook and their Silicon Valley peers will affect us all. Who can honestly say that they go through a day without using one of these companies’ services? We wake to their alarms on our phones; we check our emails on their platforms; we do our shopping on their browsers; we navigate by their maps; they host our virtual identities.

What we do about them is not just an economic or competition question, nor simply about privacy – important though these aspects are. It is a question about what sort of society we want and what sort of politics. It is a question that will help define the type of country we live in, post Brexit. This is because these tech superpowers are playing an increasing number of civic roles in our lives that affect our ability to participate in society and to communicate freely. With these civic roles they gain civic powers. This includes the power to communicate news, the power to enable collective action and the power to influence how we vote.

How did you find this article? Maybe you are reading it in a printed version of the Observer. If so, you are in a minority. Perhaps you found it at theguardian.com. Or maybe, like more and more of us, you came to it via Facebook, Twitter, Google News, or another social media platform. More than half of us now use social media as a regular source of news. Newspapers are losing their role as editors and gatekeepers. On Facebook, for example, the news agenda is not set by an editor, but by an algorithm. The implications are profound.

The brave new world of platform news is one of DIY news. It is a world in which we – the user – produce, publish and promote the news ourselves. It is a world in which we rely on our peers and on those we follow to discover stories. It is one in which we verify news rather than relying on established news organisations and journalists to do it for us. For some, this is an exciting, democratised new digital world. For others, it sounds exhausting, chaotic – a world of fake news and filter bubbles.

As well as relying on the tech giants for our news, we are using them to organise ourselves. This includes running political campaigns, fundraising for social causes or co-ordinating collective action. It might mean as little as changing our profile picture or adding a hashtag to a tweet (#wearethe48, #brexitbritain, #remoaners). It could mean trying to save a local library or stop a bypass. Or it could mean starting a major protest movement. Wael Ghonim, who was closely involved in the Egyptian revolution of 2011, thanked Mark Zuckerberg. “This revolution started online,” he said. “This revolution started on Facebook.”

Organising our political activity through these tech platforms will become the norm. For some, it has already. But are we, as a society, comfortable with this? Are we happy that they know which political causes we share or like, who we donate to, which we join, and who we are associated with? These are not public spaces, they are commercial private spaces, with their own rules and their own means of enforcing them.

The tech giants’ dominance means that they are also becoming central to election and referendum campaigns. The Conservative party did not spend anything campaigning on Facebook in the run-up to the 2010 election, but in 2015 it spent more than £1.2m. “Facebook is a phenomenal campaigning platform”, said Craig Elder, who was the Conservative’s digital director during the campaign, “and we really, really exploited that”.

During the referendum campaign, both the remain and leave campaigns relied heavily on the tech platforms to deliver their messages – including provocative and emotive videos. Yet, the way these platforms are being used, and the messages that are being sent through them, challenge both the principles and rules that have made British elections fair and open since the 19th century.

As we spend more and more of our time using these platforms and their services, so their power grows. Those of us who use Facebook or one of its subsidiaries like Instagram, WhatsApp or Messenger, now spend almost an hour a day on them. Commanding so much of our attention means that they can start to take on public functions. After the terror unleashed by Khalid Masood on 22 March, Facebook activated Safety Check, prompting those in the vicinity of Westminster to alert their network that they were safe. Facebook does the same after natural disasters. This is clearly of public benefit, but it is also the type of activity we used to associate with a public broadcaster like the BBC, rather than with a private commercial company.

None of this would be such an issue were it not for the remarkable dominance of these companies. Despite their youth – established in 2004, Facebook is barely a teenager – these organisations now bestride our world like colossi. Their dominance stretches far beyond the commercial world into the political and the civic. We therefore need to decide how best to respond to them.

Will Britain follow the route taken by Europe, and challenge the power of these tech superpowers? The European commission began antitrust action against Google in 2015. The German government is drafting legislation threatening fines of up to €50m if social media platforms do not remove offensive content. Will we take the laissez-faire route of the US and simply accept the dominance of these organisations as the price of a free market? Or will we find a third way, perhaps more progressive than either Europe or the US? As we untangle the Gordian knot of Brexit, Britain will need to decide.

Martin Moore is the director of the Centre for the Study of Media, Communication and Power at King’s College London, and author of Tech Giants and Civic Power|||

Google, Apple, Facebook and Amazon are taking more control of our lives. Will post-Brexit Britain let it continue?