Comcast may sell graphical display, text, and other ads, and deliver promotional offers for its products and services, on the Comcast Web Services and other digital properties. These ads and promotional offers may be based on information that you have provided to Comcast or its affiliates (such as the ZIP code of your XFINITY Internet service address), information about your current subscription or use of Comcast’s or its affiliates’ products or services, or other generally available information about you. To opt out of or opt back into these customizations, you’ll need to sign in first. You will still see ads and promotional offers, but they won’t be customized to the likely interests of certain groups of customers. Comcast may also present graphical display ads within the e-mail tab of the XFINITY Connect e-mail service. To turn these ads on or off, you’ll need to sign in first. This option only applies to the graphical display ads within the e-mail tab. It does not apply to sponsored text links on any XFINITY Connect pages or to graphical display ads on the XFINITY Connect homepage. We may also use one or more advertising networks and/or other audience segmenting technology providers to help select and deliver content on the Comcast Web Services, and advertisements sold by and promotional offers from Comcast on the Comcast Web Services and other digital properties. These providers use non-PII elements of Your Data shared with them by Comcast and its affiliates (such as the type of Comcast products and services that you purchase), and other information that they independently collect from your interaction with the Comcast Web Services and other digital properties that contain their technology. If we share non-PII elements of Your Data with these providers, they will keep this information confidential and only use it for specific purposes determined by Comcast. But the information that these providers independently collect through their pixels, cookies, and other technologies described in Section 8 of the Web Services Privacy Policy, is subject to their own privacy policies, not Comcast’s Web Services Privacy Policy. If you do not want the benefits of the customization offered by these providers, you may opt-out here: Third parties, such as our content partners or advertising networks, may present customized ads on the Comcast Web Services based on information that these companies independently collect through their pixels, cookies, and other technologies described in Section 8 of the Web Services Privacy Policy. These companies collect and use information (which may include personally identifiable information or information that can be used to contact you online) under their own privacy policies. More information about these companies, their privacy policies, and the opt-outs they offer can be found here: Content providers that sell ads on the Comcast Web Services If you have any questions about this page, please call 1-800-COMCAST

Comcast may sell graphical display, text, and other ads, and deliver promotional offers for its products and services, on the Comcast Web Services and other digital properties. These ads and promotional offers may be based on information that you have provided to Comcast or its affiliates (such as the ZIP code of your XFINITY Internet service address), information about your current subscription or use of Comcast’s or its affiliates’ products or services, or other generally available information about you. To opt out of these customizations, click the OPT OUT button below. This option only applies to these customizations of ads and promotional offers. You will still see ads and promotional offers whether you use this option or not. You are currently opted out of these customizations. To opt in to these customizations, click the OPT IN button below. You have currently turned on graphical display ads within the XFINITY Connect Email tab. To turn off graphical displays ads within the Email tab of the XFINITY Connect Email service, click the TURN OFF EMAIL ADS button below. This option only applies to the graphical display ads within the “Email” tab. It does not apply to sponsored text links on any XFINITY Connect pages or to graphical display ads on the XFINITY Connect homepage You have currently turned off graphical display ads within the XFINITY Connect Email tab. To turn on graphical displays ads within the Email tab of the XFINITY Connect Email service, click the TURN ON EMAIL ADS button below. We may also use one or more advertising networks and/or other audience segmenting technology providers to help select and deliver content on the Comcast Web Services, and advertisements sold by and promotional offers from Comcast on the Comcast Web Services and other digital properties. These providers use non-PII elements of Your Data shared with them by Comcast and its affiliates (such as the type of Comcast products and services that you purchase), and other information that they independently collect from your interaction with the Comcast Web Services and other digital properties that contain their technology. If we share non-PII elements of Your Data with these providers, they will keep this information confidential and only use it for specific purposes determined by Comcast. But the information that these providers independently collect through their pixels, cookies, and other technologies described in Section 8, is subject to their own privacy policies, not Comcast’s Web Services Privacy Policy. If you do not want the benefits of the customization offered by these providers, you may opt-out here: Third parties, such as our content partners or advertising networks, may present customized ads on the Comcast Web Services based on information that these companies independently collect through their pixels, cookies, and other technologies described in Section 8 of the Web Services Privacy Policy. These companies collect and use information (which may include personally identifiable information or information that can be used to contact you online) under their own privacy policies. More information about these companies, their privacy policies, and the opt-outs they offer can be found here: Content providers that sell ads on the Comcast Web Services If you have any questions about this page, please call 1-800-COMCAST

Comcast may sell graphical display, text, and other ads, and deliver promotional offers for its products and services, on the Comcast Web Services and other digital properties. These ads and promotional offers may be based on information that you have provided to Comcast or its affiliates (such as the ZIP code of your XFINITY Internet service address), information about your current subscription or use of Comcast’s or its affiliates’ products or services, or other generally available information about you. To opt out of these customizations, click the OPT OUT button below. This option only applies to these customizations of ads and promotional offers. You will still see ads and promotional offers whether you use this option or not. You are currently opted out of these customizations. To opt in to these customizations, click the OPT IN button below. You have currently turned on graphical display ads within the XFINITY Connect Email tab. To turn off graphical displays ads within the Email tab of the XFINITY Connect Email service, click the TURN OFF EMAIL ADS button below. This option only applies to the graphical display ads within the “Email” tab. It does not apply to sponsored text links on any XFINITY Connect pages or to graphical display ads on the XFINITY Connect homepage You have currently turned off graphical display ads within the XFINITY Connect Email tab. To turn on graphical displays ads within the Email tab of the XFINITY Connect Email service, click the TURN ON EMAIL ADS button below. We may also use one or more advertising networks and/or other audience segmenting technology providers to help select and deliver content on the Comcast Web Services, and advertisements sold by and promotional offers from Comcast on the Comcast Web Services and other digital properties. These providers use non-PII elements of Your Data shared with them by Comcast and its affiliates (such as the type of Comcast products and services that you purchase), and other information that they independently collect from your interaction with the Comcast Web Services and other digital properties that contain their technology. If we share non-PII elements of Your Data with these providers, they will keep this information confidential and only use it for specific purposes determined by Comcast. But the information that these providers independently collect through their pixels, cookies, and other technologies described in Section 8, is subject to their own privacy policies, not Comcast’s Web Services Privacy Policy. If you do not want the benefits of the customization offered by these providers, you may opt-out here: Third parties, such as our content partners or advertising networks, may present customized ads on the Comcast Web Services based on information that these companies independently collect through their pixels, cookies, and other technologies described in Section 8 of the Web Services Privacy Policy. These companies collect and use information (which may include personally identifiable information or information that can be used to contact you online) under their own privacy policies. More information about these companies, their privacy policies, and the opt-outs they offer can be found here: Content providers that sell ads on the Comcast Web Services If you have any questions about this page, please call 1-800-COMCAST|||

XFINITY is your home page for news, sports, video, entertainment, Comcast TV listings, Email and much more!