Before jumping into the essence of this think piece, it might be beneficial to explain what set me down the path of introspection that culminated in this written body. You see, I like certainty. I also love life. But here’s the catch, life is ephemeral and no one is certain about what happens once it ends. That made me sad. Up until the age of eighteen, I kept this truth buried in the deep abyss of my conscious thoughts, much like everyone else does. Life was good. However, it didn’t stay buried for long; it propagated back up like a bubble of air determined to resurface from its water imprisonment.

Like most of you, at the age of eighteen I was immediately expected to discover my life’s purpose and pursue it over the course of the next decade, so I set about completing this stressful task. What followed was an intense reflective period during which I thought deeply about my life, my interests, and society. What were my fundamental interests? What were my strengths? How could I contribute to a better future? I ran into problem. I liked a lot of things, I had many strengths, and I did not know with certainty what the future had in store. I liked to paint. I liked to build. I liked to compose music. In essence, I was and still am drawn to any process by which knowledge and creative intervention result in the emergence of some novel product. You could literally copy-paste that onto a plethora of present day professions. The future was also likely to spawn a slew of other exciting professions that would pique my interest.

This led me to obsess over the concept of time, hoping one day that humans would be able extend it, so that one day I could do everything I’d want to do in my lifetime. It was the juxtaposition of my desire to do it all with the realization of time’s ephemerality and the prospects of new professions emerging from technological advancements that set me on a cascading search for truth and a solution to my woes.

“But what is this truth and that point or whatever you want to call this epiphany?” I came to realize that technology is a powerful tool. It is the most powerful tool in humanity’s arsenal. It’s the only explanation a feeble species like ours was able to reach the top of the animal food chain. But here’s the thing, technology alone does not provide the key; it is merely a tool used to achieve our goals. These goals are conceived through the interaction between our needs and the conditions imposed by the physical environment of modern society. I’ve already outlined in detail human needs - these are summarized in Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs. But what about modern society? In my opinion, I think it is flawed and is in need of radical transformation. We live in a world of individualism, rampant hoarding, and excess consumption, all fueled by the pursuit of wealth often at the expense of others.

Zero-Sum Game / ˈzirō səm ɡām / compound noun 1. A mathematical representation of a situation in which each participant’s gain or loss of utility is exactly balanced by the losses or gains of the utility of the other participants. If the total gains of the participants are added up and the total losses are subtracted, they will sum to zero.

We live in a zero-sum society where the gains of few are at the cost of many, and if it’s not at the expense of people, it’s at the expense of the natural environment. This is not our fault. We are simply optimizing modern society’s utility function; the more financial wealth you attain, the more influence you gain in society and the closer you get to achieving self-actualization on the hierarchy of needs. There are no terms in the function that penalize you for damaging the physical environment, negatively affecting the lives of others, or over-consuming. More so, financial wealth can be inherited through time, so it makes sense to strive to maximize one’s financial wealth so that one’s progeny may reap the benefits too and focus on self-actualization needs in their lifetime instead of concerning themselves with basic ones. The problem with inheritance is that it often presents beneficiaries power in the absence of wisdom. It’s essentially entrusting a child (in wisdom) the influence to make decisions that could be significant enough to make a lasting impact on humanity’s trajectory.

Education, the acquisition of information, seems to be the only way to succeed if one is born in unfavorable circumstances. The problem with education is that it requires considerable activation energy, a threshold of resources, to entertain. It also requires time to acquire. Converting transactive memory into mental contents is a prolonged process. This needs to be done all while satisfying all your basic needs, because as Maslow remarked, higher-level needs cannot be met unless lower level needs are satisfied. All this needs to be achieved before you die, because nature’s objective function does not factor in knowledge acquisition and transfer as essential for survival. As a result, one must acquire, act on, and accumulate financial wealth all while satisfying their basic needs.

“What happens when groups are unable to satisfy their needs?” The system breaks. If people cannot satisfy their basic needs, they succumb to theft and if nations cannot satisfy their basic needs, they go to war. You see, most wars have been fought for resources, albeit under altruistic pretenses.

It all leads back to the fact that we live in a world fraught with scarcity. While we are able to organize ourselves and collectively work to drive the machine when our needs are met, as soon as we lack resources we regress to a survival of the fittest mentality and a fight for available resources.

“So why is this the case then?” After running a root cause analysis on modern civilization, I found the following issues to be the fundamental cause of humanity’s problems:

Put bluntly, scarcity leads to war, theft, hunger, and poverty. Individualism leads to hoarding and excess consumption in spite of disproportionate need fulfillment amongst humans. Perpetuation of outmoded ways of thinking is our inclination to be complacent in the presence of a seemingly functional system. “Okay wise guy, anyone can simply ramble about the problems in the world, but how exactly do you suppose we solve these issues?” I’m glad you asked that question. Simply put, technology coupled with a large-scale mindset shift. That is the “point” I’ve mulled over all this time.

“So what do you suggest we do to get ourselves out of this mess, Afika?” So here’s how I see us getting ourselves out of this plight. And so begins my proposal for steering humanity towards some best-case utopian future. There are a number of burgeoning future technologies that have the potential to liberate us from all the problems we’ve faced as a civilization since the dawn of man and help us transcend modern civilization to its next stages. There are however two for which I am a notable proponent and believe hold the solutions to our problems, and others that I believe will make a large impact on human civilization, but are less necessary for change or rely on the adoption of at least one of the two other technologies to be effectively implemented. The two technologies in question are the brain-computer interface and the adoption of wide scale automation coupled with the abandonment of financial institutions, representative money, and individual ownership in what is often described as a post-scarcity economy.

Life is ephemeral, meaning we all live for a finite amount of time before leaving Earth. This was a reality that truly set in when I was eighteen trying to find my life’s purpose. This lead me to channel my frustrations into art:

I wasn’t quite sure if I’d ever live see a cure for death, so I decided to preoccupy my mind with constructive thoughts, until one day a realization dawned upon me. If death is inevitable, meaning life is ephemeral, in order to accomplish as much as possible within your life, you would have to make efficient use of your time. This meant minimal procrastination, ensuring all life activities had long-term impact, and planning and thinking in broad timescales. It was that I likely was never going to truly live in the moment and that I would be making present-day decisions on the basis of a future that could or could not exist. I understood and acknowledged this, and have lived with the outcomes ever since. Even so, I continued to be obsessed with time efficiency, and then in 2016 after viewing a Recode interview with Elon Musk, the same interview above, I began to think deeply about the technology Mr. Musk proposed and how it could save me considerable magnitudes of time.

“So what exactly did Elon Musk propose?” He proposed the brain-computer interface, sometimes called the “Neural Lace”, a technology that would deliver a digital extension to the human brain. The primary justification for having such a device is to create a more direct interface between ourselves and our digital devices. Elon Musk calls it “eliminating the I/O constraint”. “What exactly does I/O mean?” In the IT industry the term I/O stands for Input/Output. An input to a computational device acts as a sensor for physical stimuli from the physical world. This could be a camera on an iPhone and or a mouse on a desktop computer. Computational devices use output devices to perform physical operations in the physical world through actuation. In a robot, this would be the movement of its legs to traverse through physical space. By eliminating the I/O constraint, it would be easier for humans to acquire information (eliminate the input constraint) and to act out our thoughts (eliminating the output constraint).

Still confused? Let me elaborate in more detail using some of the nomenclature we’ve developed over the course of this think piece. Humans have brains that receive input from its five senses. These five senses are the only input channels to our brain; they allow us to see, hear, smell, taste and touch. Each sense varies in bandwidth, with vision outperforming every other sense. The human brain is connected to humans’ limbs via the central nervous system, which enable humans to traverse their physical environment and manipulate objects in it. In addition their limbs, humans have the faculty for speech, which combined with spoken language equips them with yet another process with which to interact with their physical environment. Their limbs and speech faculty combined comprise the total sum of their output channels. In addition humans’ input and output channels, they have able to store information as mental contents, and process and run logical deductions on them.

The brain-computer interface seeks to accelerate the rate of information transfer between the brain and interfaces external to it. An interface could be a computer, the internet, another brain (and the human attached to it), or any digital processor. Currently our senses, speech faculty, and limbs are the only methods with which we are able to convey (send) and receive information; all methods suffer a lack of latency and throughput performance in some form.

As I mentioned earlier, the drawbacks to spoken language as an output channel are 1) information is susceptible to alteration as information is transferred from encoder to decoder and 2) there is a dissemination limit set on how far one’s information can travel in both space and time controlled by the reach and connectedness of human networks. I’m going to mention two more drawbacks to language as a form of information transfer. The first additional drawback is that the latency of transfer of information from the encoder to the decoder is fairly high. When an information source develops mental contents they want to communicate, the source must first convert that those contents into an equivalent message in spoken language. Often this process takes time because there is no one-to-one mapping from a thought to a sentence. This results in many sentences with similar semantic meaning but varying levels of information loss. Consequently, the encoder needs to perform a quick search for the translation with the least error. Additionally, humans are better at recognition than recall, so they might spend time attempting to recall words that would better minimize loss further exacerbating the process. Once a message has been successfully encoded by the source into spoken language there is the latency between information dispatch (by the encoder) and information acquisition (by the decoder), namely the time it takes to verbally communicate the message. Finally, once the entire message has been heard by the decoder, it must be converted from spoken language back into mental contents before the information is truly acquired. While the second additional drawback varies in magnitude between different languages, all are burdened by it to some extent. This drawback is throughput. As explained above, throughput is the amount of units of information a system can process in a given amount of time. For most languages, the unit is a word; for other languages such as Chinese, they use characters, which often represent more information per character compared to those in other languages. As a result, Chinese would have higher information throughput than English. But even so, the benefits of a higher throughput are often counteracted by the effort needed to memorize several thousand ideographs and the sets of ideas they can represent.|||

I have found myself thinking a lot about death recently. I know, what a morbid topic for a young adult at his physical peak with a potentially prosperous career and life ahead of him to preoccupy his…