Messaging has surpassed social media in almost every major category in 2016. In 2017 we can expect for messaging to widen the gap between social media and grow at an explosive rate.

Social media has become too cumbersome, and people are opting to keep their online footprint relatively small. Instead of sharing things for the world to see, people are choosing to send messages to individuals and small groups.

The rise in stories and disappearing content has stemmed from the fears of people regretting things they post later in life. Growth in these new channels also comes from the constant chase of parents attempting to figure out what their kids are really doing.

Kids running from their parents online and fear of regret have led to the rise of Snapchat who IPO’d in 2017. It has also lead to the evolution of Finstagram / Sinstagram (when someone creates a fake Instagram account under an alias and shares personal posts with a very small group.)

The world has a more holistic approach to the digital landscape we face today. People grow up speaking a digital language natively and understand in a comprehensive manner what implications their online actions have.

With the ability to speak a digital language natively, younger generations are embracing privacy as opposed to connectivity. We can expect to see this trend continue in 2017 and see people embrace keeping a tight and intimate circle of friends.

This makes sense considering the number of people the average person can have in her social group is a hundred and fifty. As science and reality clash, most people’s online friend groups are going to shake out to around a hundred and fifty people.

In the end, it’s intimacy and the cultivation of personal relationships that will continue fueling messaging’s meteoric growth.

Take a look at the infographic below to see some of the stats on messaging vs. social media for 2017.|||

Messaging has surpassed social media in almost every major category in 2016. In 2017 we can expect for messaging to widen the gap between social media and grow at an explosive rate. Social media has…