Did you ever want a more secure way to store your valuable files? FileNgin is for those who need a protected cloud storage platform to keep their private files private. We encrypt all your files before committing them to disk, so even on a large scale data breaches like DropBox Hack , we can guarantee that no one can access your private data. Almost all cloud storage providers encrypt your files using their own password (key) which allows them to access your content when it is required. Unlike, Google Drive, DropBox or Microsft SkyDrive, we encrypt your data using your own key. Without it even we can not access your files.

We store your files on the cloud so that you will get the fastest download speeds and up-time. With added redundancy in cloud storage infrastructure, you are protected against data theft as well as data loss due to hardware failures.

Generate a link and share with anyone. By default, all your files will be private. But we made it much simpler to share your files with your peers by allowing you to remove protection from each file.

We keep your files encrypted and only decrypt them when you actively request a file download. You can only download your private files after login to our platform. With AES 256 cipher, we can guarantee that no one other than you will be able to access your files.

All packages provide enterprise level data protection. We protect your file against data theft and HDD disasters so you can have a peace of mind.

A: We are using a well-known encryption algorithm to encrypt your files. It is known as AES-256. It's a symmetric cipher that allows individual users to define their own key (password) for their files. We derive keys based on your password so that each key is unique to each user.

A: There is no way we can recover your private files. We can only recover your public files for you. It is an unfortunate situation but to guarantee total privacy to all users, we do not keep any backdoors open. I.e. NSA retrieving information from Microsoft, Google, Apple, Facebook and etc.. https://techcrunch.com/2013/06/06/report-nsa-collects-data-directly-from-servers-of-google-apple-microsoft-facebook-and-more/

A: You can reset your account but it will take few munites before you can actually download your files. Since we need to decrypt and re-encrypt your files with the new password.

A: Due to the CPU intensity of file decryption and to seek file pointer on every 206 request, we prohibit this type of download requests.|||

