I did attend my first Coderetreat event and I wanted to share my learning experience and also give tips for those who are considering to attend it for the first time.

A Coderetreat is a day-long, intensive practice event, focusing on not getting things done, but on process quality of doing it.

I went to the event open minded having pretty low expectations:

The event started early morning 9 am until 5 pm. It was consisting of sessions with the same length of 45 minutes.

The problem we were solving was to create a Pacman game.

The sessions had combinations of challenges and Constraints:

The last one was really fun me - especially when you are not familiar with German keyboard and are not used to PC keyboard :)

While solving the problem under different constraints I did find following learnings:

I’ve learned about the existence of the product JetBrains Toolbox. For me as the IntelliJ fan that was still a surprise.

One more thing - I really didn’t expect that the code without / / statements can be so satisfying. Oh yea!

I’ve heard some phrases which did stick to my mind and are worth mentioning:

Have positive mindset about the event. You will learn many things. Optionally you can aim to gain certain knowledge:

If you don’t know well certain frameworks or languages - it’s not a problem. It is a learning event. Everybody is coming to improve on these topics.

Before coming to the event spend a time on setting up the development environment for the languages you want to develop with. There will be no time for this during the event. Only the failing test is needed.

There is a repository with many languages prepared for this type of event already - https://github.com/swkBerlin/kata-bootstraps

The attendees gave positive feedback about the event and the sessions. I did not hear a single person who didn’t like the event. From my side, you probably already see that I loved it. I will definitely do it again.

Also, I do recommend to every software engineer to attend at least once a Coderetreat event. You will learn a lot of stuff for sure. The only question is how much you will remember. These are events happening globally. You can find one closest to you.

I really want to thank the organizers - Software Craftsmanship Berlin for such a great event! Thanks a lot!

Next step for me - apply learnings in the day job.|||

Sharing the learnings after attending Coderetreat event for the first time