Just when you think you’ve seen or heard it all, the rumor mill throws up a juicy bit of fresh info on Microsoft Corporation (NASDAQ:MSFT) Surface Phone. In March, interest in the Surface Phone started to wane after rumors hinted that the device might not make its debut until 2018/2019 at the earliest. The rumored Surface Phone is supposed to be Redmond’s attempt as springing a comeback to steal market share from iOS and Android in the global smartphone market.

Microsoft is currently flying on a new lease of innovation as its Surface team continues to dazzle us with an impressive mix of software and hardware. The Surface Pro, Surface Book, Surface Studio, and Surface Dial have enjoyed rave reviews and the only thing lacking in the Surface brand is the Surface Phone. Interestingly, the firm is keeping mum on its plans for the Surface Phone but the tech rumor mill is always squeezing out every bit of info on the device. Latest rumors suggest that the Surface Phone will be smashing success from a design standpoint.

Samsung has already released its Galaxy S8 device and the war of words is already raging on about whether Apple Inc. (NASDAQ:AAPL)‘s iPhone 8 will be a worthy rival. While the mobile market is fixated on the obvious rivalry between the iPhone 8 and Samsung Galaxy S8, Microsoft is scheming to launch a surprise comeback with the rumored Surface Phone.

Of course, Microsoft (NASDAQ:MSFT)  execs won’t confirm or deny their plans for the Surface Phone but all the clues suggests that the firm is not giving up on mobile, yet.  Windows Mobile OS now sits at a negligible third position behind Android and iOS in global smartphone market share; hence, the mobile ship might have sailed and the firm might never become a serious contender in the smartphone wars. Nonetheless, Microsoft still has a loyal fan base, and a stunning Surface Phone could keep the flames of its fandom burning.

A new patent filing released to the public on Monday reveals that Microsoft (NASDAQ:MSFT) is pushing for a stunning bold design on this Phone. The patent filing reveals Microsoft’s plan for a multi-layered phone display with tiled panels and curved edges. This new patent filing should not be confused with or mistaken for the patent filing that we reported in January. The January filing hints at a foldable device with different form factors that could function as a tablet and a smartphone.

The new patent filing will possibly yield a smartphone with multiple active displays giving off the feel of a single seamless image. The new design could make it easy for the Surface Phone to sport a foldable design without breaking up the perception of what’s being showed on the screen because of the joints in the hinge.

Another interesting point to note in the patent filing is that it talks about how the “hinge may allow for the display panels to be moved (e.g., rotated, angled, folded and/or otherwise displaced) relative to one another.”In essence, the patent might make it possible for the Surface Phone to work create a kind of Surface tablet/laptop hybrid. Of course, there’s no guarantee that the patent will make it to life in the Surface Phone; yet, there’s no denying the fact that the Surface team is not afraid to push bold innovative designs.|||

Just when you think you've seen or heard it all, the rumor mill throws up a juicy bit of fresh info on Microsoft's Surface Phone.