One of the two classes I'm teaching this term is our sophomore-level "modern physics" class, which richly deserves its scare quotes. "Modern physics" in an educational context means, essentially, "Physics from 1900-1950." It's a brief introduction to Special Relativity, followed by some introductory quantum physics, and a smattering of applications (solid state, nuclear) as time permits. Some of the examples we use to illustrate key points are modern in the more colloquial sense -- there have been a lot of spectacular basic-quantum-physics experiments in the last 20-ish years -- but the core principles of everything we talk about were locked down in the first half of the previous century.

This course is one of the major fronts in an endless battle within physics circles about, as the post title says, whether we spend too much time teaching historical physics. The argument against "modern physics" is basically that this material is more intrinsically interesting than the classical mechanics blocks-on-inclined-planes stuff that leads off the traditional curriculum, so we shouldn't hold to the quasi-historical order of topics that puts "modern physics" in the sophomore year, but instead put it right up front.

As someone who has written extensively about relativity and quantum physics, and who sometimes gets a little tired of teaching introductory classical mechanics, I have some sympathy for this view. On the other hand, though, I've been having a difficult time with the class this term because the book I'm using (held over from a colleague who adopted it in the several years since I last taught "modern physics") isn't historical enough and as a result makes introductory quantum physics more confusing than it needs to be. And I think the issues I'm having with it illuminate the central problem of the "less historical physics" approach.

The approach I'm used to is to present the development of quantum physics in approximately the order in which it occurred: Planck's model of black-body radiation (from 1900), then Einstein's heuristic model of the photoelectric effect (1905), followed by Compton's X-ray scattering (1923) to demonstrate the particle nature of light, then backing up a bit to pick up the Bohr model of hydrogen (1913), then de Broglie's introduction of matter waves (1923) and finally the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and Schrödinger equation (1926-7). In this progression, each step is motivated by an experimental result, which is solved by a new physics idea that leaves an open question that ties into the next development.

The progression in the textbook I'm struggling with, on the other hand, presents these same topics in a weird order. It starts with the assertion that photons exist, citing the photoelectric effect as proof, then backing up to get black-body radiation and the Compton effect. Then it jumps right to the assertion that electrons behave like waves, justified by reference to diffraction experiments, and uses this to introduce wave mechanics. Only after a chapter on the Schrödinger equation does it back up to talk about line spectra and the Bohr model of hydrogen.

I'm finding this order frustrating in large part because it's presenting the physics in a way that badly misrepresents how science works. That is, the material is presented as a series of bold assertions from authority (light behaves like a particle, electrons behave like waves) followed by experiments that justify them. This tends to leave students hung up on questions like "Why in hell would anybody think to assert that in the first place?" Questions that are naturally answered by putting things in proper historical context.

I think this is a fundamental problem with the ahistorical approach to teaching physics. As much as I like the idea of trying to draw people in with cool and counter-intuitive material from quantum physics, it's hard to avoid an element of "Because I said so" when presenting the exotic ideas. We used the Matter and Interactions curriculum in our intro courses for many years, and while I liked a lot of things about the approach, this was an aspect that always bothered me. They lead off with the full relativistic definition of momentum, and introduce energy in its full relativistic form, but both of those end up being just assertions that "This is the formula that gives the right answer, learn it and use it."

This sort of approach is not unpopular with many students, of course, those who view the more scientific (to my mind) historical approach as just a speed bump on the way to the formulae they need to memorize. Some of them, though, get badly hung up on the "why" behind those formulae, and those are often the best students in the class. A more historical presentation gives a natural answer to those questions, and the students who just want to memorize formulae for plug-and-chug can still do that.

This is not to say that approaching quantum physics as a set of principles whose consequences you then develop can't work -- it's essentially what we do in the upper-level quantum classes. The approach there is to treat the subject as a sort of mathematical game, starting with some facts about the formal structure of the theory, and working through the consequences to show that they correspond to important aspects of reality. That approach, though, necessarily presumes some advance knowledge of the real-world applications -- that is, the historical content -- to provide context for the abstract mathematical manipulations. I don't think it works well in a first course covering these issues.

And, stepping back a bit from specifically modern physics to intro physics in general, the fundamental issue is that "historical" physics works. If you want to describe the physics of everyday objects -- and that's essential for a lot of the majors we serve -- you don't actually need any physics developed after 1900. The physics of blocks sliding down inclined planes hasn't changed since the days of Newton, but it's still relevant to lots of scenarios, and useful to introduce concepts that are essential for understanding more interesting and exotic fields. And intro-level classical mechanics doesn't have to be boring-- see Rhett Allain's blog for proof that applying really basic concepts can, in fact, be fascinating in the right context.

So, while I have some sympathy with the people who want to get more engaging material up front, in practice I end up finding most of the attempts I've seen to abandon the historical approach dissatisfying. Where presenting ideas more or less in order provides a coherent flow and a good illustration of the process of science, ahistorical treatments all too often fall back on assertions from authority and in end up misrepresenting what physics is.

Chad Orzel is a physics professor, pop-science author, and blogger. His latest book is Eureka: Discovering Your Inner Scientist (Basic Books, 2014).|||

A long-running argument in physics education says that we shouldn't be so tied to the historical order in which physics developed, but most attempts to ditch history end up misrepresenting the nature of science.