Vulcan, currently in development, is United Launch Alliance's next-generation launch system. Vulcan was conceived out of the need for a new, cost-competitive launch vehicle as well as to end reliance on the Russian RD-180 engine. It is intended to replace the Atlas V and Delta IV launch vehicles by combining capabilities of each rocket family.

Two engines are being cosidered to power Vulcan's core stage: Blue Origin's liquid methane/liquid oxygen (“methalox”) BE-4 or Aerojet Rocketdyne's RP-1/liquid oxygen ("keralox") AR1. While BE-4 is the leading contender, the AR1 remains a backup option with the final decision to be made in Spring 2017. Regardless of the selection made, Vulcan's core will be powered by two engines.

Two options are being worked for Vulcan's core stage based on the engine chosen. If the BE-4 is chosen, Vulcan will feature a 5.4-meter diameter core stage derived from Delta IV's Common Booster Core. If the AR1 is chosen, Vulcan will use a stretched version of Atlas V's 3.8-meter diameter Common Core Booster.

Vulcan can be augmented with up to six Orbital ATK GEM-63XL solid rocket motors (four on the variant with a 4-meter fairing). The GEM-63 XL is a stretched version of the GEM-63 booster that will soon replace Aerojet Rocketdyne's AJ-60A used on Atlas V.

Initially, Vulcan will fly with the same Centaur upper stage and payload fairings as Atlas V. In 2015 ULA began a partnership with Ruag Space, the Swiss manufacturer of the existing 5-meter Atlas V fairing. Ruag will set up manufacturing facilities on-site in Decatur, Alabama to manufacture Atlas V and Vulcan fairings. This proximity and partnership is expected to result in substantial cost savings.

Centaur will be replaced by the Advanced Cryogenic Evolved Stage (ACES) around 2023. ACES will be powered by up to four RL10, BE-3U, or XR-8H21 engines, and will feature the same balloon tank design as Centaur. ACES will also use an innovative Integrated Vehicle Fluids (IVF) system, which will extend its on-orbit lifespan from hours to weeks. Vulcan, flying with 6 SRBs and the ACES upper stage, can surpass the lift capability of the existing Delta IV Heavy. You can read more about ACES on its dedicated wiki page.

Once the Vulcan booster and ACES upper stage are operational, ULA will focus on what they call "Sensible Modular Autonomous Return Technology," or SMART reuse. The system will recover Vulcan's first stage engines through the use of a hypersonic inflatable aerodynamic decelerator (HIAD) and mid-air capture by helicopter. The HIAD increases the surface area and drag of the engine pod, serving to slow it down during atmospheric reentry. This protects the engines from the intense heat and aerodynamic forces they would otherwise experience. Mid-air capture is a system that has been in use since the 1960s, when it was used to recover film canisters from spy satellites. The technology for in-flight engine separation was perfected in the late 1950s by the original Atlas missile, which dropped its booster engines during ascent. Regeneratively cooled liquid rocket engines are inherently reusable, as they sustain no significant damage under normal operating conditions.|||

reddit: the front page of the internet