NEW DELHI: Three years ago, technology giant Amazon introduced Echo, its range of wireless speakers, into an already crowded market. Leaning on its in-house technology and marketing muscle (the etailer has made waves previously with its Kindle and Fire devices), Amazon has sold over eight million units of Echo.For a company best known in India for its ecommerce platform, success of private labels such as Echo is useful in a cutthroat battle. In India, the behemoth is locked in a bruising tussle with homegrown rival Flipkart The ecommerce market is expected to grow from $26 billion ( Rs 1.7 lakh crore) currently to $103 billion ( Rs 6.8 lakh crore) by 2019-20, according to Goldman Sachs. Private labels could help Amazon reel in new cost-conscious customers, especially from smaller towns, from where etailers get half their business.Amazon and Flipkart are following contrasting strategies in their pursuit of private labels. The Seattle-based Amazon, which launched its ecommerce platform in July 2013, launched AmazonBasics in September 2015 in the consumer electronics category, home and kitchen brand Solimo in early 2016, followed by fashion offerings Myx and Symbol in the latter half of the year. "Private brands play a role in providing great value to the customer by reducing costs from the value chain (optimised design for ecommerce) and providing this as value to the customer," says an Amazon India spokesperson. "There are customers who are willing to try out a new brand, provided it offers a reliable product at an attractive price point." Globally, Amazon, with sales of $136 billion in 2016, has had success with private label offerings.AmazonBasics and Elements babycare products control a quarter to a third of their respective markets in the US. Across categories as disparate as electronics accessories and baby care, Amazon has built a robust private label unit, helping ecommerce firms squeeze additional margins — 15-20% more than competing-third party brands — from this business.At Flipkart, which is reportedly raising some $2 billion in much-needed funding, private labels may be a good booster shot on its journey to profitability. As both companies duel for supremacy in India's ecommerce market — and try to wean off discounting and other freebies — private labels could offer a more sustainable way of doing business."Private labels will be one of the important pillars for their efforts to become profitable," says Kartik Hosanagar, John C Hower professor of technology & digital business at The Wharton School, US. "While Amazon has experience from US, Flipkart can draw on its experience from Myntra.i" The fashion etailer, which Flipkart acquired in May 2014 for $300 million, expects a fourth of its business from private labels by the end of next fiscal year; in March it opened its first offline store to push sales of its Roadster clothing label. For Myntra, some private labels have grown strongly; HRX (devised in association with actor Hrithik Roshan), is a Rs 120 crore unit and others such as All About You and Rapido are growing too, providing learnings for Flipkarti¦s own ambitious private label push.However, as Flipkart dukes it out with Amazon, it may be too early to forecast a winner. "While private labels will be key to profitability for both, I doni¦t think any of them has an edge on the matter," adds Hosanagar.Flipkart is chasing this opportunity. "We considered hundreds of categories while evaluating private label opportunity and are focused on segments with significant price, specification and quality gaps," says Adarsh Menon, head, private labels, Flipkart.The company has been building its private label business. Since December 2016, under the Flipkart Smart Buy brand, it has had over a dozen offerings, starting with mobile phone chargers and cables. By year-end, Flipkart could have many as many as 80 private label products listed.Meanwhile, Amazon India, which has committed $5 billion to its India business, wants to give its users the widest choice at competitive prices -- and it hopes to use its private labels to help meet these goals. "All of Amazon's private brands are created to give customer satisfaction -- choice, value and convenience. Creating products for specific categories enables us to increase the overall selection available to Amazon customers," says an Amazon India spokesperson.As the battle for control of India's online shoppers intensifies, Amazon India chief Amit Agarwal told ET that the firm is positioning itself as a onestop-shop for consumers, especially in the hinterland. Providing cheaper in-house labels may be one way to reach these value-conscious consumers. "We want customers to be able to find, discover and buy anything online and any seller to sell anything online that is compliant and legal," he said in an interview.Like offline retailers, online marketplaces led by Amazon India and Flipkart are warming to the promise of private labels (also referred to as private brands, in-store brands/ labels). These labels are typically designed and sourced inhouse, with the final product licensed to thirdparty manufacturers. By having greater control of the entire process, ecommerce companies can price these products lower and, using their technology platform, squeeze more profits from them.As these etailers bolster their private-label offerings, experts suggest that they need to learn to think less like operators of technology marketplaces and more like oldschool retailers. "While I see no reason for these technology-centric etailers not getting 15-20% of their business from private labels, they will need to quickly learn oldschool retail skills of sourcing, design, manufacturing and quality control to compete in this market," says Pragya Singh, vice-president, Technopak, a retail management consultancy.The shift towards private labels will push the Amazon-Flipkart battle in a fresh direction. Experts expect both companies to start with low-hanging fruit and quickly scale up their businesses to target higher value items such as consumer electronics."Amazon has the advantage of being highly innovative in all of its processes and it will bring to the table the same style and flavour of innovation," says Anindya Ghose, professor at the Stern School of Business, US. "It's this focus on innovation that would enable these online retailers to take on these big (offline) giants and they do have the advantage of having streamlined costs of distribution over many years."The Amazon spokesperson says:"Our private labels fulfil customer need gaps and our entire selection is geared to meet customer needs and make Amazon an everyday store. We evaluate the performance of our entire selection regularly to ensure it remains customer-focused." Flipkart executives, meanwhile, don't believe in playing for second place. " We studies private label businesses across the world, especially at leading brick-andmortar retailers such as Walmart and Costco," says the company's private label head Menon. "To be sure, in a category with high brand concentration, it is much tougher to build a successful private label brand)." Despite these challenges, Flipkart has made some progress — half the sales of cables and chargers on its platform come from its home label.According to industry experts, ecommerce firms face a challenging balancing act as they seek to expand their private label businesses. For one, they have traditionally built themselves as brand-agnostic technology platforms with consumers zeroing in on them not only for selection, but quality, price and convenience.While private labels may provide cheaper offerings to browsers, ecommerce companies risk antagonising large brands by introducing homegrown products to compete with them. "Large horizontal ecommerce platforms need to balance their relationships with large clients by deciding which specific opportunities they are focusing on, rather than diluting their private brand foray by spreading themselves thin across disparate categories," says Singh of Technopak. It may even make sense to focus on brandlight online categories such as furniture, lingerie and fashion jewellery.The other challenge is to lure brand-conscious consumers from aspirational brands to a more unfamiliar territory. "While it's true that consumers seek aspirational brands, our data tells us that there are customers willing to try out a new brand, provided it offers a reliable product at an attractive price point," says the Amazon India spokesperson.According to experts, this private label duel between India's top two ecommerce companies has happened in step with shifting consumer behaviour. "Consumers have gotten more comfortable with private labels and consider them as interchangeable with national brands," says Ghose of the Stern School of Business. "It is this change in consumer behaviour that online retailers like Amazon and Flipkart have capitalised on and are leveraging and harnessing to the full extent."Globally, private labels have made significant headway. According to estimates from Private Label Manufacturers Association, an industry lobby in Amsterdam, these products account for 21% of retail sales (in Italy) to as much as 52% in Switzerland. Private labels account for nearly a fifth of US sales, with these products accounting for 20-25% of sales for top retail names such as Walmart.Experts like Rajat Wahi, a partner with KPMG , are bullish on private labels' potential in India (See "Private labels work..."), stating in a recent column in ET that they could account for as much as half of organised retail sales in the country, assuming the organised segment accounts for 30% of the overall market. It's this kind of optimism that has pushed Flipkart and Amazon to dive into this market.|||

The ecommerce market is expected to grow from $26 billion ( Rs 1.7 lakh crore) currently to $103 billion ( Rs 6.8 lakh crore) by 2019-20, according to Goldman Sachs.