Google’s April Fools’ Day jokes have come to be expected over the years, and this year they haven’t missed a step. Open up Google Maps today and you’ll be greeted with a pleasant surprise: the option to play Ms. Pac-Man on any set of streets in the world. While Google also offered Pac-Man back in 2015, given that gameplay is only available for one day at a time, the novelty of exploring the world through such a hungry, two-dimensional lens has far from worn off. I spent a couple of hours playing early this morning, and chose five of my favorite locations around the world to play, included here with direct links to the maps so you can try them out yourself. [UPDATE April 3, 2017: Try out these 5 insanely tough Google Maps locations for playing Ms. Pac-Man]

How could I leave Lombard Street off of this list? “The crookedest street in the world” according to many, Lombard Street was actually straight when it was constructed in 1922, but residents complained it was too steep to drive up with their newly-acquired automobiles. To lessen the automotive burden and make the street more usable, eight tight curves were added and Lombard Street went from a nail-biting 27% grade down to more manageable 16% grade. Luckily for you, Ms. Pac-Man zips straight through Lombard with no troubles at all. This is a good spot to get warmed up before the real test of your abilities come into play.

Like both São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, which play home to some of the world’s coolest neighborhoods in Santa Teresa and Vila Madalena, Brasília is a beautiful city in its own right. Its tropical climate has a permanent hug on Brasília's delicate cityscape—wonderfully designed by the late Oscar Niemeyer—and offers an ecstasy difficult to replicate outside of Brazil. Take Ms. Pac-Man on a leisurely waltz through the flowing, ribbon-like drives of Jardim Burle Marx.|||

Today only, you can play Ms. Pac-Man on any set of streets in the world thanks to Google Maps. Here are five of my favorite locations to play.