Welcome back to my third post of the “How to Test” series. I have already written on how to test a

. My testing mission for this post will remain the same as I have mentioned in the first post of the series. You might want to

. Here I am going to generate and write down few test ideas (NOT test cases) on how to test a pen [An instrument for writing or drawing with ink or similar fluid]!



Note: These were few questions that popped up in my mind before I could start thinking of any test ideas!



1. What kind of pen is it? A reed pen, a metal nib pen, a fountain pen, a ballpoint pen, a felt-tip pen, a rollerball pen or any other type?

2. Is it intended to be used only with paper or other writable surface too?

3. Who is going to use it? A student, a teacher, a writer, a poet, a doctor, a bus conductor, a mountaineer, a scuba diver, a desert dweller, an Eskimo from Antarctica or an astronaut?



Here I am assuming that I am going to generate some test ideas to test a ballpoint pen which comes in 2 different forms – pen that uses oil-based paste ink, pen that uses gel ink.



Test Ideas:1. See if the different components (the barrel, cap, unscrewable head, refill, spring if any etc) of the pen are fitting perfectly. [Installability Testing!]

2. Test the dimension of the pen. Its shape and size should be ergonomically designed so as to result in a comfortable writing experience.

3. Test by writing on a piece of paper. See if you can write smoothly. It should not be writing and stopping with breaks! [Usability Testing!]

4. Test the width of the line drawn by the pen to test the specified millimeter range [FYI: Ballpoint Pens come with different millimeter specifications like - a "point five millimeter" (0.5 mm) pen has a ball that will produce a line that is 0.5-mm wide, and a "point seven millimeter" pen (0.7 mm) has a ball that will produce a 0.7-mm line. Ballpoints even come as tiny as "point one millimeter" wide ("ultra fine")] [Validation Testing!]

5. Test the writing capacity (the amount of writing that is possible from a single refill) of the pen. [Capability/Reliability Testing!]

6. Test if you can carry the pen in your shirt pocket using its cap. The cap extension should be firm enough to grip your pocket! [Robustness Testing!]

7. Test by writing on different types of surfaces like: coarse paper, hard board wrapper, packaging material, glass, leather, cotton, wood, plastic, metals like aluminium or iron, polythene sheet etc. [Compatibility Testing!]

8. Write something on a paper and keep the paper for a reasonable duration of time. The written letters should not fade away over time. Also test by applying water on the writing/drawing made by the pen. See if the ink is water-proof!

9. Test if the ink leaks from the refill under normal circumstances.

10. Test if the ball of the refill head fits into the socket with just enough space to move freely.

11. Test if the ink flows unevenly. Uneven flowing of ink is a common problem with badly designed pens.

12. Test if the ink is slow to dry. The ink is exposed to the air while it is flowing through the pen, so test if it cannot dry quickly or it would clog the pen.

13. Keep the pen without using for a considerable duration of time. Test if the ink does accidentally dry in the pen. In case the ink gums the whole thing up, test if it requires meticulous cleaning or can be cleaned easily. [Recovery testing!]

14. Test if the pen can be used in outer space and low gravity environments. If it is a gel pen, then it should be capable of this. [As usually the ink used in gel pens is of extremely thick consistency] [Capability testing!]

15. Drop the pen from a reasonable height (may be the height of a study table) and see if it breaks, ceases to write or continues to work without any damage. Also test by putting the pen in a “clothes dryer” (ever left your pen in your shirt pocket before sending it to laundry!). See if the heat is sufficient to cause a leakage! [Stress Testing!]

16. Test if the pen is made up of recyclable material.

17. Test how the pen performs under different climatic conditions, different room temperatures, and different room pressures. [Performance testing!]

18. Test if the pen leaks ink if it is carried in a flight. [Performance Testing!]

19. Test if the pen is usable with different brands of similar refill. [Compatibility Testing!]

20. Test the pen by writing with different angles of use. Also test if you are able to write on a vertical surface [sticky note stuck on a notice board!]

21. Test if the materials used in the manufacturing of the pen are harmless if chewed or licked! It’s a general tendency among users to put the pen in mouth while writing.

22. Test if the writing head is too sensitive and is easily broken while writing. [Robustness Testing!]

23. Test the ability to write on one sheet of paper on a hard desk. Look for the quality of writing.

24. Test the pressure needed to be applied to the pen to have it write cleanly. [Load Testing!]

25. Test if the ink blots the paper (especially in case of gel pen). [Usability testing!]



These were few test ideas that popped in my mind when I sat down to generate few test ideas to test a pen. I am sure there can be lot more interesting test ideas to test a pen. I am waiting to see your test ideas. I would really appreciate if you can leave behind your test ideas as comments. Anybody ready to take this Testing Challenge? :)



Happy Testing…|||

