At Optimove, we use machine learning to identify gaming VIPs as early as possible. In this article we propose a method you can try yourself

VIPs exist in every industry, whether a company defines them as such or not. Mostly, they are a relatively small group of players which generates a large portion of the company’s revenue. Across different business verticals the top 5% of customers are responsible for an average of 60% of revenues, and in iGaming – up to 80%.

Most companies use pre-defined rules for defining players as VIPs. These rules can be simple or complex, and based on fixed or dynamic thresholds - each method has its pros and cons.

Flagging a player as “VIP to be”, or scaling his VIP potential while he’s still new (two weeks from first deposit), can be valuable to the company. Although it can be tricky to identify the diamonds early on, treating these players as VIPs from their first steps can ensure a long term and very beneficial relationship.

So how to identify a VIP player fast? The idea is to use supervised machine learning to identify early behavior patterns which hint at future VIP status. These patterns can later be coded into rules which will flag players as potential VIPs as early as two weeks from first deposit, and enable marketers to provide them with the appropriate treatment that will ensure this result or give the right push to bring it to fruition.

This can be done using different methods and tools, including, but not limited to, correlation analysis, decision trees, random forests and logistic regression. Below is an outline of one of the methods we use at Optimove. It involves data prep, running decision tree algorithms in R and extracting appropriate rules.

Obviously, sometimes the data set requires additional preprocessing, like variable standardization scaling. We will not elaborate on that process here.

Run the algorithm on the test set – you can fine-tune the training set according to the results, just refrain from over fitting. The screenshot below will easily guide you how to do it in R using existing packages. We start with loading packages and importing the data into R:

Now we have our table stored in "TreeInput". The next step is to split it into training set and test set:

In this case, the training set will consist of 75% of the data, and the test set - of 25%.

Now, all that’s left to do is to create the tree:

After running the first 3 lines of code, your model is stored in tree.mod. The next step is pruning the tree. Pruning helps us focus on the more important parts of the tree by removing redundant parts. This is a result of a tree we generated (only the first level):

Let's look at the first node: the first variable the tree chose was deposit amount. We can also see that the sample size is 45e+3 (45K new players), and that 3.6% of them became VIPs. When splitting this sample by a deposit amount lower or higher than $192, as the tree suggests, we get two new groups:

First, we need to create a confusion matrix in R:

The above code inserts the predicted results on the test set, using the model tree.prune we created, into pred. Then, it inserts a comparison between the prediction to reality to confusion. Notice that now you predict on the test set, using the model built on the training set.

These are the numbers:

In order to decide whether a model answers our needs, we can measure additional parameters such as sensitivity, specificity and type I & II errors. In our case, we would prefer type II errors (non-VIP identified as VIP) over type I errors (VIP identified as non-VIP). There are two reasons for this:

Looking at the numbers, we can see that despite using a simple rule (the first split of the tree), it identifies 60% percent of the players who eventually turned into VIPs.

 Keep in mind that this number might go up, since you can now motivate these players to increase their activity.

There’s no doubt that a player’s initial activity (first deposit, first day purchases etc.) can imply his chances of becoming a VIP in the future. Sometimes, surprising connections can be found between future VIPs and certain games in the product, specific sport disciplines, favorite platform or even demographic attributes like origin country. Finding a connection like this can help you flag a potential VIP even on his first day.

At Optimove, the process outlined above helps us discover hidden VIPs and communicate with them in a way that ensures VIPs are nurtured from the very beginning.|||

Optimove uses machine learning to identify gaming VIPs as early as possible. Learn how you can use this method to detect VIPs on your own.