

 Welcome to the Apollo Forum This forum is for people interested in the APOLLO CPU.

 Please read the forum usage manual.

VISIT APOLLO IRC CHANNEL 

 



 The team will post updates and news here

 

 The Vampire 600 pre-order list has been fulfilled. Customers all over the world have either received their card or have been informed via email that they are part of the next batch to be shipped. This is an important milestone for Apollo Team and is part of our continued commitment to this project. If you are on the list but did not get/see an email then please be so kind and double check your Spam folder.

  

  



 Good job to all.

My 500 Vampire is on the way, presumably from Serbia.

Interesting Amiga times.



 Lots of fun times doing  gfx and seeing developments are they arise from the inside! Here's to a good run on the V500 range of Vampires. We quickly went from nothing to being spoiled for choice when it comes to accelerators.





 This is great news! Congrats to the team and all owners of the Vampire V600.



 Great!

What is current intrest number where you are now?

I'm waiting A500 V2+. Is the email coming from @apollo-accelerators.com domain? My email is quite heavily spammed and I don't want to miss when it comes my time!



 

Great!

  What is current intrest number where you are now?

  I'm waiting A500 V2+. Is the email coming from @apollo-accelerators.com domain? My email is quite heavily spammed and I don't want to miss when it comes my time!

 V600 is handled by Kipper2K.

V500+ is Handled by Majsta, also with the V500+ clearing of open orders should go a lot faster now.



 People who showed interest in the Vampire a500 v2+ in late 2016 are receiving their accelerator boards now. I applied on Dec 4, 2016 so maybe I'll get one soon! Then I can save up some money to buy the a1200 version. The production process should go more quickly now that they can focus their efforts on the a500 version. Go team! :-)

  

  



 Now that the design and production process is moving along nicely, I look forward to a time when the Super-AGA chipset and Apollo Core have matured and the standalone board (name?) is being produced and sold. I would like to put a standalone board in one of these:

  

  EXTERNAL LINK 



 I wish I could agree. I paid for mine last year and still haven't received. Is there any way to contact kipper2k that he will answer? I've tried email and forum messages including the one he used to set up the order. I got messages quite a while ago but no package or tracking number. It's very frustrating. Igor sent my Vampire 500 the day after paying which is excellent service. 



 

I wish I could agree. I paid for mine last year and still haven't received. Is there any way to contact kipper2k that he will answer? I've tried email and forum messages including the one he used to set up the order. I got messages quite a while ago but no package or tracking number. It's very frustrating. Igor sent my Vampire 500 the day after paying which is excellent service. 

 That is very unfortunate to hear. My recommendation is to join the IRC channel. Look for kippa, kipper2k or appik.

He is online most of the time and answers on and off there.





 How is Majsta shipping these? Carrier or Postal?

Interested because mine is coming to my business.



 

  How is Majsta shipping these? Carrier or Postal?

  Interested because mine is coming to my business.

  

  

  Well Majsta is only dealing with the V500 V2+, Kipper is handling the V600 V2s, which came postal. 



 Hi,   I accept responsibility for this, i didnt/still dont have the custom chip for the psx cadapter so was unable to complete the order and forgot about you. i will figure out the revised cost and we will sort it out. I have some v600s here

  



 

Hi,

  

  I accept responsibility for this, i didnt/still dont have the custom chip for the psx cadapter so was unable to complete the order and forgot about you. i will figure out the revised cost and we will sort it out. I have some v600s here

    

 Thanks. Yes, I got your email and delivery is set. I'm excited to get it! 



 I paid for my Vampire 600, Mars 25. Will I recive a mail trackingnumber? Sometimes here in Norway the mailservice here dont send out notifications that I have got a packet. You'll receive a tracking number in your mail from the Canadian post.

Kipper usually ships a batch at once every week.

If you think you do not get your tracking number from kipper fast enough, or maybe it got caught in your spam filter you can always contact kipper on IRC, (he's almost online every day) do mind the time difference :) 



 As far as the vampire 500, mine has yet to arrive in the states two weeks after shipping notification.

No info or tracking provided.



 

|||

Find answers on the topic of the Next Generation APOLLO CPU.