Maybe the single most impactful learning in all of this post. #Engineering #Management

Read Ben Horowitz’s “Hard thing about hard things” at least ten times. #Recruiting #Leadership

Refuse to finish a meeting with a tap in the back. Everyone needs to be accountable for doing something. If someone (or everyone) just “listened” either question the need of the meeting or the people in the room. #Productivity #Meetings

“You’re great…” (bread=positive) “…but I was expecting differently and we need to work more on this…” (meat = needs improvements) “…But good effort.” (bread — positive). #Feedback

Personal growth, career and skill-wise, is as important as growing your startup. In the end of the day, it’s not salary or stamp, it’s how best equipped you become to deal with the future. #PersonalGrowth

Since we learned this approach from Dropbox our brainstorming meetings have never been the same again. Align everyone that the problem exists (and what actually is) and only after jump into solutions. #Strategy

This includes your CEO, your managers, your team leaders, and even that mouthy intern. Culture in a startup is either a bacteria or an antibiotic, and it will spread: deal with it every opportunity you get, with everyone. #Culture #Leadership

You need to get it done. There is no “under staffed”, no “under resourced”, no “there’s no time”. If you don’t do it, your competitors will. And they will win. #Hustle

Stop over complicating and over engineering: there is ALWAYS another way. Don’t reinvent the wheel when you don’t have to. #Product

Absorbing learning at an amazing pace is a key indicator of really good people. Care for them as, not only they contribute more, but also stay longer. #KeepingPeople #Rockstars

The closer you are to overall strategy the more important is to slice an elephant in smaller pieces and eat one at a time. #Productivity

Newsflash: you need clear, concise, “set-in-stone” stuff to build a user story. Period. Visions and missions are pretty and all, but when you need to ship, PM’s need to know what to do now, not in the future. #Product

And one of the greatest lessons you can offer to young people when they join a startup. #TimeManagement #Focus

It’s quite easy for a startup to mis-hire. Either people were young and inexperienced, maybe someone suddenly took too much responsibility or you actually did a bad hire, when some level of incompetence hits don’t focus so much on the loud complainers (open wounds), these are treated with stitches and band-aids. Look for the head’s down that seem off, demotivated, losing energy. These are internal bleedings and they will drop you even before you saw it coming. #Management

Don’t assume you know it all (yes it’s OK to predict but) just hear people until the end. Let them express it all, it gives them buy in, it shows you care. And often you will see their last word is the one that actually matters. #People

Really recommend reading Jeremiah Dillon post on Time Management. Time to think is some of the most underrated and necessary moments of your week. It will change the quality of how you address obstacles. #TimeManagement

Hey, Mark Cuban knows a thing or two. #Hustle

Stop over-engineering. Think with less complexity. Act more pragmatically. Communicate more directly. Use simpler words. Simplify because startups are already fucking hard enough, no need to make everything else as hard. #Efficiency #TimeManagement #Communication

Read Gary Vaynerchuk and Daniel Kahneman’s “Thinking, Fast and Slow”. Learn how your mind works, learn to reflect and let others know. It will deeply help you. #PersonalGrowth

Every company has their “Still-Airborn-Icarus”: that company that is a role model, whether because of their innovation, design, model, brand or technology (even if they might burn and die in the future). “How-did-X-solve-this?” will penetrate your meetings, your decision making, your roadmap assessment. This can be good and bad: you get focused, you waste less time reinventing stuff, you have a quality benchmark, but it can be really bad as often you assume “they know what they are doing” and they might not. You also become capped in your innovation and glued to that competitor as a copycat. #Strategy #Competitors

If you’re having a hard time getting everyone in the same page, or to get your point of view across the board, try communicating through analogies: people relate to the concepts faster. #Communication

80/20. Time and time again you will see this is the new dynamic that drives your life: 80% of X is generated by 20% of Y. And it’s not just marketplaces, it’s everywhere. All of your key metrics at scale will tend to 80/20: 80% or product engagement comes from 20% of features. 80% of revenue comes from 20% of your accounts. 80% of acquisition comes com 20% of channels. #Strategy #Data

Building foundations is not a waste of time, don’t see it as busy work or being unproductive. The earlier you are, the more frustrated you will be with stuff that seems like losing your most precious currency — time — but forgetting this will really create “debt” in the future. #Product

The problem existed way before you arrived, and your (future) customer is already solving that problem some way, you just believe you can solve it in a better way. So how can you start pushing your solution? (aka “what marketing channels should I use?”) The ones your audience already searches to solve their problem. It’s likely free, someone else does the acquisition for you (the expensive one), and it guides your narrative (because there is context). #Marketing #Growth

It’s either cache, cookies, local storage or wi-fi speed☺ (what are your equivalents PMs?) #Product #Engineering

Getting responsibility in a startup is a magnet to being questioned and bashed. It’s part of the package. #Management

And, founders: teach your people why this is a growth opportunity, even though they will see it a slap in the face. #Recruiting #Leadership

It’s unlikely that you will make great decisions early on a startup, so don’t spend a lot of time back and forth: try more things and learn faster. The time you waste being indecisive is more expensive than the failed attempts. You will also get more data by trying more and failing than sitting in a room discussing assumptions and theories. #Strategy

Early on you have little to offer aside a good employee title. Using this “free” perk is tempting but there are no free lunches when you need to scale hiring, especially in seniority. From what I learned: use it; it’s better to pay now and deal with it in the future, than losing someone and having no future. #Recruiting

Welcome to startup governance 101. Just don’t let the title get to their head (pun intended) and make them work harder than interns. #Management

Ask yourself: if you could only do 2 things, was X really on that list? Save everyone’s time by knowing this and pick your fights. #Strategy

Be ready to switch your mindset based on who drops by. Your speed of self-contextualizing (aka accessing your server-side memory for previous conversations with that person) defines the quality of your decisions as a PM. PS: This gets better with experience. #Product #Communication

There are dozens of product manager types: the storyteller, the operational, the technical, the macgyver, etc. Although there is no “best type”, there is a “best for the moment” and each type has some weaknesses and some strengths. You can choose to focus on weaknesses and get PM’s more generalists or focus on strengths and get PM’s to split and complement. From my experience, early on focus on weaknesses and share knowledge, and later focus on strengths and complementing each other. #Product

Always confirm what was understood, especially if it’s 1) complex, 2) critical and 3) people from different areas. #Communication

Protect yourselves, align yourselves, team above all. No need to say how important trust is within your circle. #Trust

We are all underwater, we are all doing more than what we are supposed to but trust me when I say there is no room for “that’s not my job”. It’s your job. It’s everyone’s job. Surviving is a group effort: survive together. #Hustle

It took us 2 years to include product estimations in our delivery capacity. It is transformative once you see it. If you don’t do this, product will be the real bottleneck for not shipping. Nothing else. #Product

Before jumping into a solution, get around the problem and what actually solves that problem right now. You can be as granular as a single initiative from your content marketing team, to a massive strategic initiative. #Strategy

This is especially true in moments of misalignment. Until everyone is fighting for the same vision and goals, it will always seem like a fight about “who has it bigger”. #Management #Alignment

Jacks are self-learners, ambitious and energetic. They will ramp up at nearly every field to 70% of masterful expertise. But when you need optimization, double-down, look for unit economics, those last 30%, these are not your guys or gals. They will fail, and be frustrated (as they are not used to “failing”). Know what you are trying to hire for. #Recruiting

Do you know when you watch a movie and something smells wrong and you analyse every line, every expression, every smile or look for hints on how all is gonna roll down? Understanding people and predicting their agendas requires the same mental approach. #Management

This was taught to me by my first manager at Uniplaces while running marketing: the best way to priorize is force ourselves into a fire-drill scenario. For marketing it was understanding what would we bet and shut down if we only had 10% of runway. In product it can be engineering/design bandwith. It really puts things in perspective. #Strategy

If you try random, error-prone reinvention you are burning resources in the wrong places. #Strategy

This is linked with #25: after deciding what you won’t reinvent, copy from the best. #Strategy

Sometimes jumping a level is the only way to find how good (or bad) are your managers. Take the PM approach to product iteration. #Management

The history of a position determines its importance and your own future expectations #Career

Evan Spiegel was quite clever in getting everyone at Snapchat a copy of the Art of War. #Strategy

If there is one thing I learned working between designers and front-ends is that screenshots are not dynamic and life in design is. #Product

You may want to be design driven, product driven or tech driven, but if your user values something else, that is what you should be driven by. #UserResearch

I bet every PM at a startup has thought “This is madness, we must be doing something wrong, this must be different in other companies, I bet they don’t have so much chaos”. You’re wrong: product management is about managing chaos, not eliminating it. A product organisation without chaos is either too rigid or not pushing hard enough. #Product

It’s either due to infrastructure debt, product performance or “because in the future it will be much faster to build everything else. Believe me”. (what are your equivalents PMs?) #Product #Engineering

You have no idea how much more productive we became. It was a magnitude of difference. Use it for everything, brainstorming, understanding requirements, explaining concepts. It’s fluid and mind-boosting. #Productivity

And read “The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People” by Stephen R. Covey. #Productivity

Lunches where everyone shares what they believe is wrong works both as a solution think tank and a motivation alignment tool. #Alignment

This is really important for 2 reasons: 1) Respect people’s time by not being late to meetings. Back to back meetings make everyone late. 2) Save time to process the meetings. It makes you more effective around action points (read #47) #Meetings

Many startups suffer from MOD (meeting overload disorder). Over time, when people’s time becomes really expensive you need to get meetings really efficient. There are two ways: 1) make them short with an agenda (intra-efficiency), 2) Invite people that will contribute with knowledge or because they will take action afterwords (inter-efficiency) #Meetings

Again, really recommend reading Jeremiah Dillon post on Time Management. Optimising peak mental times, both weekly and daily have transformative aspects. Find yours and push the hardest problems to those moments. #TimeManagement

Oxygen gives you an upper hand. Actually learned this from James Altucher on how Carl Icahn wins negotiations through this tactic. #Negotiating

For young companies, products like Google Tag Manager, Analytics tools (Google Analytics, Mixpanel, etc) and data aggregators (like BIME, Chartio, etc) are game changers to understand your users' behaviour and company health. Be early at setting them up as data is the foundation of sane decisions. #Data

Apply this mentality for everything: selling, hiring, support, requirements, all of it. And build phone skills, both listening and speaking. It will get you far. #Sales

The most overlooked thing about the startup life: have fun. Embrace the moments when you are reminding yourself of “that time”. Get your “veterans” together and cheer to the crazy stories, the “this wouldn’t happen anywhere else”. Remember the mad people, the missed people. All of this ends faster than you think. #StartupLife

It’s not on purpose, sometimes it’s their way of standing out, other times it’s their way to challenge authority. Give them feedback and understand why they feel those are the right forums to bring up those issues and fix it. #Management

Constantly ask for feedback about the all-hands even if that means changing the format ever other week. In a company with 100 people, every 10 minutes saved is 16 hours earned. #Meetings

Be straightforward: if you don’t know something say it, if it’s bad news say it. This also ties close to #73. #Honesty

The “growth” position is one of the strangest blessings invented in the startup era: it means nothing (duh, it’s a position named after a result), but it means everything (it’s what everyone seeks). This makes it an open canvas for invention and leeway to innovate. Don’t shy away from creating it if you think it makes sense. (PS: have you imagined having a “Head of Profitability” or a “Chief Positive Margin of Contribution Officer”?). #Growth

It’s true that the majority of ideas will fail, but in a world where there’s little more than dreams and visions applying realism in controlled doses is key, otherwise you will see people shutting you off. #Culture

You might believe something is “that one thing that will definitely change the company” (aka a silver bullet). Piece of advice: it’s likely not. Growth is achieved by sustained, incremental, impactful innovation on the core experience, not crazy ideas, gimmicks and temporary spikes. #Growth

Often founders have a strong vision to disrupt an industry and tend to push for significant high-risk initiatives. Maybe they just love how competitors have solved something and push for you to build it as well. Filter the “this is the silver bullet” by understanding how this can be tested and optimise your resources to help them achieve that goal. #Founders #Growth

For more, read here. #Founders #Leadership

It doesn’t really matter if everything is 100% true, it just needs to be mostly real and really exciting. #Communication

It will be a waste of money and time. If you need advice, get advisors and reward them with vesting equity. #Advisory

Especially if they are 1) young, 2) first time managers, 3) need to manage a young team. #Training

Especially if there were more than 2 people in the meeting. Written is written. #Meetings #Productivity

Especially if the first reaction is “You know that is not possible to change…”. Think this way: building a startup is already questioning how a problem is being solved. Why not keep doing it? #Strategy

This is the only area were you should not have an agenda. Focus on learning. Pass the learning. What goes around comes around. #Networking

Winners predict and solve before anyone needs to tell them what to do. #Strategy

Everyone has access to information, everyone should have a word and a vote, everyone should trust product managers around the final decision. #Product

This is particularly important if you are a young manager of a growing team — this might mean hiring a boss for yourself. #PersonalGrowth #Recruiting

First lesson in marketplaces. In the beginning forget everything else: supply supply supply supply. #Marketplaces #Strategy

Know what you are aiming for. #Strategy #Growth

Don’t be fooled, the PMs life is as much about strategy, stories and shipping as it is about dealing with fires, emergencies and slippery grounds. When estimating get yourself time for bugs, buffer time for the unexpected and “bitaites” (aka “what if…”). #Product

It’s more than what you say or how you say: it’s how it fits with what everyone says, and what everyone thinks. Become an expert at designing narratives. #Communication

A company is just a combination of people. Care more, and they will give more. #Management #People

All product builders love the word “ship”, but forget that, once a ship leaves the harbour, it still needs to get to the destination. Intact. Don’t ship feature and forget about them: iterate, evolve them, prove them (right or wrong). Don’t deliver Titanics and don’t become a Feature Factory. #Product

Every relevant problem in the world, from macro to micro, has already been solved by some form of service or product. Someone with a problem already hires a solution to solve it. What really matters is: the majority of solutions are not efficient, especially in a world ripped by technology disruption. This is why you see dozens of startups aiming at the same market and industry: they believe they can solve the same problem more efficiently and become the hired option. Focus on the problem and find a way of solving it more efficiently (whether by saving money, solving it faster, or adding more pleasure to the “solving”).

This was taught to me by Christian Miccio. If you want to know where you should focus and plan your path, try writing your obituary: it will make you think how you want people to remember you. This will be your goal, deconstruct into variables to achieve it.

This is the ultimate drive against adversity and obstacles.

Get on board the Elon School: whatever you want to build, company , feature, program, start with the units that drive behaviors and actions. This helps deconstruct the problems and create a plan of action from the ground up.|||

Refuse to finish a meeting with a tap in the back. Everyone needs to be accountable for doing something. If someone (or everyone) just “listened” either question the need of the meeting or the people…