Nothing beats the madness of DarkPsy form of Psychedelic trance music. Once you are hooked, there is no looking back! Get started with these Top 10 DarkPsy albums of all time, and best of everything, they are free for download! All these albums are available legally free to download.

Rest In Pieces is a relentless trip into the dark heart of extreme psychedelic trance. Apart from the breakneck pace, the style of this release is marked by ripping acid leads and the bewildering interplay of sinister atmospheric sounds.Spectacular all-time favorite which should definately be heard by everyone!

Download this DarkPsy album for FREE!

2 CDs of pure punk! A fresh take at what could be described as punkadelic psytrance! Undercurrents of Hardcore rule this psychotic compilation from a new label from Italy known as Dark Ultimate Records.

Download this DarkPsy album for free here.

Spore Destruction is a journey from the dark ages today to the imminent final war of tomorrow. Rapid fire, laser guns, ion beams and nukes will teleport you into the most aggressive battlefield.

Download this free DarkPsy compilation

Visions of extremely detailed organic structures are hallucinated in extreme detail so as to encode the very path these new structures will take to continue the expansion of the universal forces in the direction of extreme pleasures, to fulfil lost desires, to live and to survive, they danced in the desert..

Download this hallucinatory DarkPsy compilation for Free!

One of the biggest DarkPsy albums from 2011, this is a really special compilation with sinister sounds from some of the biggest names in DarkPsy music today.Download this authentic DarkPsy compilation for free!

A new cycle began in the mystical lands of Central America with Earthdance Guatemala 2010 — Night Time’s release, a darkpsy/psycore compilation assembled by Biijah Records to expand the consciousness of people all across the globe. Featuring tracks by Artists such as Pharmacore, Becoming Intense, Aghori Tantrik, Tsabeat and more!

Download this amazing DarkPsy compilation for free!

24 Psycore/ Dark Psy tracks including some really twisted dark steps from Fatal Discord, Oxezy, Olien, -Z-, and more! 148–333 bpm. Download now!

Released by Lonely Planet Records (Japan), This compilation is A Dark Psychedelic Parade compiled by Dj Mussy & Yosi with high-tech psytrance masters such as Ape Rape, Lizergik Brain, Aghori Tantrik, & more and also Parade 2 consisting of great tracks by Synthetic Forest, Griboz Project & Metamorphose among others.

Download it free from Sonic Tantra

“Tell me, O muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wide after he had sacked the famous town of Troy. Many cities did he visit, and many were the nations with whose manners and customs he was acquainted; moreover he suffered much by sea while trying to save his own life and bring his men safely home; but do what he might he could not save his men, for they perished through their own sheer folly in eating the cattle of the Sun-god Hyperion; so the god prevented them from ever reaching home. Tell me, too, about all these things, O daughter of Zeus, from whatsoever source you may know them.”

Download this twisted story from the Greek Label for Free!

9 Dark Psychedelic Trance & Psycore tracks tastefully compiled by OSCAR MEROVINGIO AND MR. HADES, mastered by Arcek with intense musical works by artists such as Stitch, Nap, Hishiryo, Blind Fury, aGh0Ri TanTrik & Many more!

Download this free DarkPsy album for free here.|||

Nothing beats the madness of DarkPsy form of Psychedelic trance music. Once you are hooked, there is no looking back! Get started with these Top 10 DarkPsy albums of all time, and best of everything…