During my time at Textr and now Prattle, I’ve seen a lot of trends in communication and conversation. I want to talk about the direction we are going and what I feel needs to be added…

One of the roots of this issue is from the online environment we live in. Current social media and messaging has created an ego-first culture that solely focuses on who you know.

A lot of the current platforms we use epitomize this ego-first culture. People create the perfect one-liner or best image and watch the likes pour in. As addicting as this virtual ‘“high” can be, it can be equally empty.

While there is no doubt that current social platforms have added tremendous value to the world, we need to take a step back and look at the bigger picture. The reality is we have an amazing ability to connect with who we know, but little ability to connect with who we don’t know.

I want a place where people who share all forms of ideas can come together and discuss viewpoints. I want a place that goes beyond a post, beyond a like, beyond a re-tweet. I want real discussions, I want people to gain a more holistic insight of the world. I want people to walk away from conversations with new friends and a more educated and informed mindset.

Live is all about spontaneity — and since Prattle is live it’s less focused on the perfect post but more focused on free flowing discussion. Prattle is also interest-based, which means people connect regardless of whether they know them or not.

People who would have never connected are now forming friendships and gaining more insight into the world. People who already knew each other are re-connecting in entirely new ways.

I believe that the more conversations there are the more opportunities there are for people to engage and form a better understanding of others. With a deeper understanding comes a better sense of connection, and a more connected world is a more educated world which is a better world.

Feel free to add me on Prattle @Sam and click here to read about our focus on quality, openness, and accessibility. Check out our website to learn more about Prattle and my two awesome co-founders, Brayson and Jacob. Want to learn more about our process? Check out this piece by Brayson.|||

During my time at Textr and now Prattle, I’ve seen a lot of trends in communication and conversation. I want to talk about the direction we are going and what I feel needs to be added… One of the…