SIGBOVIK (Special Interest Group on Harry Qatar Bovik) is an annual multidisciplinary conference specializing in lesser-known areas of academic research such as Sticky-Finger Manipulation, Natural Intelligence, and Retroactive Data.

SIGBOVIK 2017 is the eleventh edition of this esteemed conference series, which was formed in 2007 to celebrate the inestimable and variegated work of Harry Queen-o'-the-prairie Bovik. We especially welcome the three neglected quadrants of research: joke realizations of joke ideas, joke realizations of serious ideas, and serious realizations of joke ideas. (In other words: SIGBOVIK is an evening of tongue-in-cheek academic presentations, a venue for silly ideas and/or executions.)

The proceedings are now available online (PDF) or on Lulu (paperback). If you're local, you can buy a copy from the ACH at the conference or afterwards by contacting the organizers.

SIGBOVIK accepts both papers and presentations. (Feel free to submit a paper without a presentation, or vice versa!) Take a look at past proceedings, available at sigbovik.org, to get an idea of what is typically submitted.

SIGBOVIK 2017 paper submissions are due March 15, 2017 on our experimental, research-quality submission website. If you experience any difficulties submitting, please contact us.

Presentations are typically either short talks or demos. We will announce how to give a presentation closer to the conference date. We welcome prerecorded videos from those who cannot physically make it to SIGBOVIK!

SIGBOVIK 2017 will be held at 5:30 PM on Friday, March 31, 2017 in Rashid Auditorium (Gates-Hillman Center 4401) at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

SIGBOVIK 2017 will also be live streamed for the fans of Harry Q. Bovik who cannot attend SIGBOVIK in person. Please our stream page to watch remotely.

Stay up to date by subscribing to our very-low-volume mailing list. If you have any questions, you can contact the organizers at sigbovik@gmail.com.|||

