Miki Agrawal, co-founder and “She-EO” of menstrual underwear phenom Thinx, raised eyebrows when she stepped down from her role in the company in early March. Agrawal had long been infamous for her company’s boundary-pushing ads and her well-publicized hesitance to use the word “feminist.” Within days of Agrawal’s announcement, Racked published a gripping article examining corporate dysfunction and alleged sexism at Thinx, and Agrawal struck back with a lengthy post on Medium that detailed her “incredible ride” with the company. “I didn’t put HR practices in place because I was on the road speaking, doing press, brand partnerships, editing all of the creative and shouting from the rooftops about Thinx,” she wrote. Less than a week later, Agrawal was accused of sexual harassment by a former employee.

Such is the power of the corporate hit piece: Fueled by eyewitness accounts, scorned ex-employees, and juicy tidbits about a CEO’s bad behavior, a corporate identity that took years to build can unravel in days. These piquant stories might smack of a slow-motion trainwreck, but they satisfy more than our inner gossips and gawkers. Today, the myth of a CEO is often of their own making—once minted by years of climbing the corporate ladder, now CEOs are made in weeks or months. CEO, we are told, is less a work status than a state of mind.

We may be living in the golden age of the corporate takedown, where failure is now a measure of success. Late-stage capitalism has made us more aware than ever of our being beholden to our office-bound overlords, while changing communication styles also demand that CEOs be authentic and accessible. Reporters eager to document executive meltdowns are just a tweet away, and anyone can pull out a smartphone to record a tongue-lashing or an inappropriate remark. Our increasing dependence on an unstable and unhealthy gig economy has created an insatiable desire for CEO schadenfreude, where the corporate horror story has become bedtime reading for the exhausted worker.

When an overhyped CEO fails, a certain “I told you so” makes the fall that much more riveting. Roderick tells the story of Dan Price, the Gravity Payments exec who decided to pay everyone in his company $70,000 a year. Lauded as a savior, Price quickly went from a corporate evangelist to a lone wolf despised by the people he loved most.

The more grandiose the executive, the harder the fall. When self-made billionaire Elizabeth Holmes went from the next Steve Jobs to a pariah with worthless stock, we couldn’t stop reading. Nick Bilton’s report (following stellar investigative reporting by The Wall Street Journal‘s John Carreyrou) chronicles the black-turtlenecked exec from ambitious start to embarrassed finish.

In hundreds of interviews with the media and on panels, Holmes honed her story to near perfection….But her reverence for Steve Jobs was perhaps most glaring. Besides the turtlenecks, Holmes’s proprietary blood-analysis device, which she named “Edison” after Thomas Edison, resembled Jobs’s NeXT computer. She designed her Theranos office with Le Corbusier black leather chairs, a Jobs favorite. She also adhered to a strange diet of only green juices (cucumber, parsley, kale, spinach, romaine lettuce, and celery), to be drunk only at specific times of the day. Like Jobs, too, her company was her life. She rarely ever left the office, only going home to sleep. To celebrate her birthday, Holmes held a party at Theranos headquarters with her employees. (Her brother, Christian, also works at Theranos.) But the most staggering characteristic that she borrowed from the late C.E.O. was his obsession with secrecy.

There’s a sick satisfaction in watching a well-loved, altruistic brand go kaput, and the demise of American Apparel scratched that itch. Berfield checked in with the company after its CEO, Dov Charney, was removed after a corporate coup. Or was it a bold rescue of a brand now tainted by its loathsome leader? You be the judge.

Silicon Valley manages to attract its own brand of intensity—like Khalid Shaikh, who ended up trying to take down the company he helped build. Helm weaves a sobering tale of how Shaikh turned on his own tech company, and the price he paid for his revenge.

In Khalid’s view, it was a power grab, plain and simple. The termination sent a clear message to him: He was powerless. Khalid had no significant equity, no brother around for support, and no authority–a notion that was confirmed when he was voted off the board a few months later. “He got shaken,” says Amir. In the next few months, friends and co-workers noticed an embittered side of Khalid Shaikh’s personality emerging. He sent an e-mail to Mahler bemoaning how much faster YouTube was growing, even though it had gotten funding months after YouSendIt had. “We had our chance,” he wrote, calling YouSendIt a “deadbeat company.” “He felt that you couldn’t be good and be successful,” says Amir. “He would say, ‘You have to survive.’ “

Sometimes, a new CEO just isn’t enough to save a sinking ship. That’s what Marissa Mayer learned when she was brought to Yahoo to perform corporate CPR. In return for her outsize ambition, she was rewarded with a spectacular failure and a buyout that broke the glass ceiling for female execs and their golden parachutes. This detailed takedown by Nicholas Carlson, shows the overreaching executive in heartless high-res.

Some corporate juggernauts seem rescue-proof. That was case with J.C. Penney, a once legendary retailer that’s been embattled for decades, watching a parade of would-be saviors fail. In Fortune, Reingold turns her sights on Ron Johnson, the ex-Apple exec who was eventually ousted from the company and replaced by the predecessor he had been hired to outperform.

Certain CEOs are just too easy to vilify, like “pharma bro” Martin Shkreli who made a name for himself by buying the patents to lifesaving drugs then jacking up their prices. But the most fascinating takes on Shkreli treated him as more than an easy mark—like this piece by Bethany McLean, who went for a more nuanced look at Shkreli and ended up drawing a deeply weird portrait of a naively evil exec.

But it’s hard to know which manifestation of Martin is authentic. What muddles the picture even more is the arena in which he operates: small biotech companies, some of which thrive thanks to loopholes, legal frauds, pipe dreams, and stock promoters—and a smattering of real science, just enough to ignite fantasies of fame and fortune. Those who know how to game the system can make huge profits without creating anything of value. “Welcome to the underworld,” says one investor. Shkreli is unquestionably brilliant, and he has an almost cult-like group of true believers, both online (“You’re a god,” wrote one Twitter follower) and in the real world, where he has engendered tremendous loyalty among some investors and employees. But in his wake he has left a tangled trail of blowups, lawsuits, disillusionment, and outright hatred.

Not every executive is evil—but that doesn’t mean it isn’t entertaining to watch their strange machinations and wonder what on Earth they were thinking. Case in point: Zappos’ CEO Tony Hsieh, who erased all forms of management at his company and gave the employees a system to make their own decisions. Roger D. Hodge profiles the well-intentioned but impractical CEO who decided to turn his multibillion-dollar company into a holacracy run by, well, everyone.

Super-involved executives are one thing, but what happens when they sit back and rake in the cash without doing anything? That’s what happened to Reddit when it was acquired by Condé Nast—and as Felix Gillette and Gerry Smith tell it, what happened next is an example of benevolent neglect gone horribly awry.

Sometimes the most effective takedown is not a direct attack, but a seemingly innocuous one. In an article that focuses on Uber’s new logo, Jessi Hempel managed to reveal quite a bit about CEO Travis Kalanick’s priorities, personal motivations, and the company’s woes, which range from tussles with cities to claims of sexual harassment and strike-breaking. Kalanick’s desire to make his company “grow up” sound particularly hollow a year later, and give the piece a fascinating subtext even for those who aren’t design nerds.

Sometimes a takedown is unintentional: The CEO simply doesn’t know when to top talking. When Bowles visited 30-year old Tinder founder Sean Rad, she had to reconcile what she had heard about him (“The app reflects the personality of Sean…it’s a 1-to-1 correlation,”) with a deeper understanding of his need for power and attention.|||

Why do we love reading about CEOs behaving badly? Perhaps it’s because we identify with their exhausted workers.