JVC's KD-R950BT CD receiver lets you customize the illumination color in three different areas of the faceplate for any combinations you can think of. Then, take advantage of the multi-level brightness and dimming controls to work with your palette. Combine that with super-clean CD playback, a USB input for charging devices and playing your music files, and Bluetooth® for hands-free calling and audio streaming, and you've got a solid receiver to go along with the visually-stunning display.

Bluetooth serves as a wireless bridge between your smartphone and this JVC. Once you pair up this JVC with your smartphone, you can harness Bluetooth's full potential — you'll be able to receive text message notifications, stream the stored music on your phone, or access Internet radio stations, depending on your phone's features. iPhone® users can even communicate with Siri without picking up the phone.

If you enjoy Internet radio on your smartphone, you'll really enjoy playing music from Pandora® and iHeart Radio® on this great-sounding receiver. You can scroll through your stations, bookmark songs, and give a thumbs-up or thumbs-down right from the receiver's face. Load JVC's Smart Music Control app and you get access to your receiver's settings, illumination, EQ, and sources directly from your smartphone.

JVC upped the power in their USB port, which lets you keep your smartphone charged, even when it's doing several tasks at once. Drive Change allows you to connect a memory card reader or USB hub to the receiver's USB input and select music from up to five memory cards or USB flash drives. You can also connect just about any portable audio player using the KD-R950BT's front aux input.

Once you're playing what you want, shape your sound with the onboard 5-band parametric equalizer. If you're adding amplifiers or a powered subwoofer, the two sets of 2.5-volt preamp outputs provide you the clean signal you need.

In most vehicles, you can use an adapter (not included) to connect your vehicle's steering wheel controls to this JVC stereo. Connect a few wires, then program the adapter for your particular car and the JVC, and you'll retain the convenience of your steering wheel controls. Check the "Accessories" tab for compatible adapters.

Bluetooth note: Use of this receiver's Bluetooth features will depend upon your phone's Bluetooth capabilities. Learn more in our 



App Note: iHeartRadio playback and control requires the "iHeartRadio Link for JVC" app on your smartphone.

iPod/smartphone note: If you're going to use your iPod or smartphone with this receiver, be sure to check "Details" for compatibility information.|||

JVC's KD-R950BT CD receiver lets you customize the illumination color in three different areas of the faceplate for any combinations you can think of. Then, take advantage of the multi-level brightness and dimming controls to work with your palette. Combine that with super-clean CD playback, a USB input for charging devices and playing your music files, and Bluetooth® for hands-free calling and audio streaming, and you've got a solid receiver to go along with the visually-stunning display.