Stoicon is an annual international conference on applying Stoic philosophy to modern life, organized by Modern Stoicism. It’s now in its fourth year. Stoicon 2017 is scheduled for Saturday 14th October, and will take place in Toronto, Canada. NB: Ticket prices are therefore listed in Canadian dollars. If you’re interested in Stoic philosophy, whatever your background or occupation, this conference is meant for you. Our aim is to make Stoic philosophy accessible to everyone by highlighting its practical relevance to the everyday challenges people face in different aspects of modern life. You may also be interested in attending our Stoicon-x Toronto 2017 event the following day, on Sunday 15th October.

We open this year with a brief introduction to Stoic philosophy followed by a series of talks by some of the leading authors in the field. In the afternoon, you will be able to choose between different parallel sessions, including an introductory workshop for newcomers to applied Stoicism. The day concludes with the keynote presentation on Stoicism and Emotion by one of the leading experts in this area, Margaret Graver, Professor of Classical Studies at Dartmouth College. This year's theme is Stoicism at Work. Discounted tickets are available for students in full-time education and seniors.

Serenity Amid the Storm: Human Nature and Stoic Calm

Prof. Margaret Graver, author of Stoicism and Emotion

There will also be an additional (optional) Stoicon-x event on the Sunday in downtown Toronto.

NB: Please note that details of the Stoicon event may be subject to change.

How can I contact the organizer with any questions?

Email us via admin@modernstoicism.com or use the contact form on our Modern Stoicism website.

We will offer a full refund for Stoicon 2017 tickets if the request is made at least two weeks prior to the event. After this date, you may send an alternate to the event without additional charge as long as you notify us at least 48 hours prior to the event.

Will tickets be sold at the door?

Tickets are currently only available online.

The conference venue is the Holiday Inn Toronto-Yorkdale hotel, who will provide accommodation at a discounted rate if you're attending Stoicon 2017. We cannot guarantee that rooms for all delegates will be available at the Holiday Inn. However, there are several other hotels nearby where you can stay.

Use the link below to obtain a discounted rate for rooms at the Holiday Inn Toronto-Yorkdale:

What were previous Stoicon conferences like?

You can watch this YouTube video about one of our previous conferences, and some of the previous talks are available online.|||

Eventbrite - Modern Stoicism presents Stoicon 2017: Modern Stoicism Conference - Saturday, 14 October 2017 at Holiday Inn Toronto-Yorkdale, Toronto, Ontario. Find event and ticket information.