There are a few basic skills which everyone should know irrespective of where you work or what technologies you work upon. These are bare minimum skills for technology geeks.

You can put up your applications on Azure cloud too. It gives far more resources for free for a month. All you need is an email address and phone number.

I do not have much idea about it but you can start with Proff Andrew Ng's course . You can pick up rest by reading books about statistics, data analytics, R language Python etc. You can try your luck on Kaggle and build a profile for such a role. NLP too is similar to ML and is in great demand for making bots. Python NLTK is a great library for learning it.

For data analytics, Hadoop and Spark are well known platforms and are used extensively for data analytics. You should know how to use them. But more important is understanding the mathematical concepts behind each kind of operation.

Android and iOS are the two platforms which are famous and each has enough tutorials to start with. Once you pick up the concept, it is fairly easy to build apps. But making games, efficient apps etc require learning gaming engines and frameworks. Knowledge of threads is also important to run various processes asynchronously.

Server management is a great task and several tools and methods are used to tune the performance of servers. Linux Bash Scripting is a must to set up, configure and debug servers. There are lots of commands to determine memory utilisation, usage, bandwidth etc.

Setting up and configuring nginx and apache servers too require bash scripting.

So try following one of the paths. Learning is far more important than an internship but if you get one, you are good to go. Few of the concepts will be new and might take time to learn. But once you grab hold of things, rest of it is pretty smooth. I will advice against online course certificates. No doubt they are a great resource to learn but the certification doesn't really add anything. They work on a small set of problems and is common to all participants of the course. Real world problems are way different and require time and skill to solve.

 

 To be frank, I have found books to be more descriptive. Explanation of everything is important. For example, you will see mention of binary trees and BST everywhere but it is seldom mentioned that they are used within operating system for various scheduling purposes. These things are important to know. Hence I sometimes avoid online tutorials unless I need to know frameworks. Frameworks are made up using the native language at core. But internal structure of a language is quite different.|||

internship in first year, internship in 1 year, internship tutorial, startup internship, skills for internship, python internship, rails internship, java internship, frontend internship, must haves for internship, internship guide, best internship skills