Today, we are filing the Certificate of Dissolution for Staffjoy. Since announcing our shutdown, I have been busy. I helped our former team transition, and they now all have accepted stable contract work or jobs. I open-sourced ten repos of our code on Github (see below). I published the pitch decks we used to raise $1.7M in funding and our Y Combinator Fellowship application.

Our small business customers transitioned to different scheduling tools, like Homebase. Our large customers deployed Staffjoy on-premise using the open-source code. I returned 90% of our cash to investors last week. We will pay out remaining cash after completing final obligations (like taxes).

I learned a lot through starting Staffjoy. Even though it failed, I am glad that our team had the opportunity to go through this experience together. I’m optimistic about the future, and excited for next steps.

We are leaving our homepage online to help provide teams with open scheduling options. The two Staffjoy apps are now free and open-sourced under MIT licenses.

This app focused on automated scheduling, which reduced costs. Early customers emailed us spreadsheets, which we ran through calculations and returned. We went on to build a web app, mobile apps, and new algorithms . We kept each service in a different code repository, which is why there are so many links below. We stopped active development of this product in July 2016. An early architecture overview of the architecture is available here.

This app solves a communication problem for small business scheduling. You can learn about our V1 to V2 journey in Tommy’s blog post. V2 provides a simple click-and-drag interface for managers. Workers receive shifts through text messages. We put all microservices in the same “monorepo” for simplicity. An overview of the V2 architecture is available here.

Our biggest problem while building Staffjoy was getting good technical talent. We shut down with $1M in the bank, in part because we could not spend the money quickly enough.

We solved this problem in part by hiring part-time contractors. One contractor was bootstrapping a startup, and worked one day a week to cover living costs. Another was a public school teacher who wanted to keep coding on the side. Many had day jobs, but wanted to experiment with new technology in their free time.

Recently, I co-founded a new company called Moonlight. Moonlight is a marketplace for software engineers and designers to find part-time work. The company is in its early stages, and we are matching workers to projects by hand right now. (You can apply to work or start a project). Our first projects have been providing support and modification of Staffjoy’s open-source code. We plan to launch a full marketplace app by the end of the summer.

In the past few weeks, I started freelancing to better learn the industry and live the lifestyle. The future of labor is remote, so I am moving to Mexico City for the summer. I am using this time to research remote work and to find time for deep focus while building Moonlight.

I’m seeking connections while in Mexico City — please feel free to email me. If you need help building software, or if you want a part-time software job, check out Moonlight.

This may be the final post on the Staffjoy blog. But, we can still stay in contact through my personal newsletter or Twitter.

Thanks to everybody who worked so hard to build Staffjoy! I look forward to hearing about your future successes.|||

Today, we are filing the Certificate of Dissolution for Staffjoy. Since announcing our shutdown, I have been busy. I helped our former team transition, and they now all have accepted stable contract…