In this article, we have listed some of the best free machine learning books that you should consider going through (no order in particular).



 Based on the Stanford Computer Science course CS246 and CS35A, this book is aimed for Computer Science undergraduates, demanding no pre-requisites. This book has been published by Cambridge University Press.

This book holds the prologue to statistical learning methods along with a number of R labs included.

This Deep Learning textbook is designed for those in the early stages of Machine Learning and Deep learning in particular. The online version of the book is available now for free.

This book introduces you to the Bayesian methods and probabilistic programming from a computation point of view. The book is basically a godsend for those having a loose grip on mathematics.

For the mathematics- savvy people, this is one of the most recommended books for understanding the magic behind Machine Learning.

Deep Learning tutorial using Theano is a must- read if you are willing to enter this field and is absolutely free.



 Exploring statistical learning, this tutorial explains the use of machine learning techniques with aim of statistical inference. The tutorial can be accessed online for free.

This book has a lot to offer to the Engineering and Computer Science students studying Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence. Published by CRC press and written by Stephen Marsland, this book is unfortunately not free. However, we highly recommend you to invest in this one. Also, all the python code are available online. These code are a great reference source for python learning.

This book is also not available for free but including it serves our list justice. It is an ultimate hands-on guide to get the most of Machine Learning with python.

These are some of the finest machine learning books that we recommend. Have something else in mind? Comment below with your list of some awesome machine learning books.|||

In this article, we have listed some of the best free machine learning books that you should consider going through (no order in particular).