I was a particularly precocious (and insufferable, and annoying, and several other totally accurate adjectives) teenager. Like most people of that age-group, I didn’t have all that much time for rules and established codes of conduct, and I always looked for shortcuts.

This manifested itself in a whole bunch of ways. Like when I was sixteen, I used to slip out of the classes I didn’t particularly enjoy and walk towards the nearest Starbucks. You can blame my middling (at best) A-Level grades on this.

And when my white-plastic MacBook packed up – predictably, weeks after my AppleCare policy expired – I thought about how I could get my laptop fixed without asking the Bank of Mom and Dad for a loan.

At the time, I was a huge technology nerd. I read all the blogs, and listened to all the podcasts. And I vaguely remember reading about someone who wrote to Steve Jobs with an issue, only for the turtlenecked-kingpin himself to write back with a promise of help.

Granted, I also knew Jobs had a reputation for a temper. When someone emailed him to complain about the Genius Bar quoting $300 to find out if it was possible to fix a waterlogged MacBook Pro, Jobs replied:

Anyway, I thought I’d take my chances. Worst case scenario, he either ignores my email, or tells me to fuck off. And even that doesn’t sound particularly bad. As a tech-obsessed teen, I’d be pretty thrilled to be told to get fucked by technology royalty.

So I wrote Jobs a letter. An actual letter – on paper, and with a stamp that I’d licked personally, and I mailed it to Apple’s HQ in Cupertino, California.

I don’t actually have the original letter. It was about ten years, and several laptops, ago. What I do remember is that I tried to come across as serious and ‘adult’ as possible. But from the things I said, and the way I said them, it was plainly obvious I was a teenager.

And you know what happened next? I got a reply. Not from Jobs, but from someone he – or more likely, the person who reads his mail – delegated to respond to me.

It was a nice one, too. Even though it was plainly clear from my original letter I was an irritating, idiot teen, I was treated with respect.

Since then, I’ve always had a healthy admiration for Apple’s customer-centric approach.

While Apple has undeniably lost its way when it comes to product, this emphasis on user satisfaction has remained constant, and is as much a part of Apple’s identity as the letter ‘i’.

Read next: Apple is now building its own graphics processors for the iPhone|||

Apple's customer service has always been incredible. Always.