Latte Dock v.0.6 has been released!!! The first stable Latte release has been just landed!  



if you dont want to build it yourself, another alternative would be to wait for a few days to launch on your distro repositiories! Many packagers have shown such interest.

if you dont want to build it yourself, another alternative would be to wait for a few days to launch on your distro repositiories! Many packagers have shown such interest.

You may ask, what is Latte and why are you so enthusiast about it?

At this point I would like to thank a lot @audoban for the fantastic achievements, discussions and cooperation we achieved all this time we interact through the project!!! My girlfriend of course for her patience and support during the last development cycle!! :) and a big thank you to the many fantastic users, translators and enthusiasts that use the project through the master branch and are helping us discovering bugs very early, pointing us in new directions and becoming persistent when something is very important from a user point view and not that much from the developer’s one !!! :)

As an author of Now Dock it was around late of November that I felt Now Dock to have reached its pontential as an internal plasma panel and plasmoid. At the same time @audoban author of Candil Dock reached me and pinged me to do something rare in the open source communities… and that was,. Combine Candil’s fundamental philosophy of a standalone dock living outside plasmashel with Now Dock’s familiar interface for the dock and use only kde and plasma libraries in the process. That was enough for me to decide that the change worthed the effort. Time passed and in every step I am more than happy with that decision.

You are the blood of the project without which a body becomes cold….

The new project was called Latte Dock   and the artwork and logo of course were created by the majestic @varlesh !!! :)

I think you had enough of my chattering around the history of the project :), let me outline some of the most important features:

Meaning that in the rare case of crashing your plasmashell, your panels will still be there to interact with, and of course the other way around

Single configuration window to rule them all

there arent two different windows anymore, offering various choices for the user, one for plasma and one for the dock. The

Latte is not a single dock but rather a dock manager. You can have as many dock instances you want around your screen..

Latte offers a new experience for your docks concerning your multi screen setup. A dock can be set always On Primary screen or always at an Explicit Screen.

On Primary: your dock will always mo based on which screen has been set primary at each time. In the case of an explicit dock occupies that specific edge in that screen the explicit dock gets the advantage.

On Explicit: your dock will be activated only when that screen is present at your system. Meaning that i you connect your laptop at work at a specific screen over there, each time you connect it that dock will appear and in no other case.

concerning the above design decisions Latte trys to follow some rules. It will never leave you without at least one dock having the tasks latte plasmoid in it.

the user can interact with tasks and applets and can add launchers and applets from the official plasma widget explorer

the user can add/move/delete applets and config Latte

Your settings are always available if you create backups and of course the users can share their different configurations!! So a user can create configurations for Unity, Plasma, Gnome layouts and share them with the community

Latte offers various alignments for your applets, Left, Center, Right, Fill docks gain the priority to fill the screen and ones will try not to leave free space if it is not needed… Unity paradigm is set very easy and it is auto adjusted...

maximum length set by the user is used e.g. 90% of screen and not the current running size of the dock.

Sometimes the way you organised your panels is not sufficient. You are travelling or you just want an alternative layout for specific cases. Switch to your alternative session and organize your work at your preference. Welcome the Alternative Session, a fully functional secondary state!

Now Dock a special produced plasma theme was needed from plasma 5.8 in order for the dock to gain its transparency. This works directly now without needing from the user to do anything around that.

Execute Latte and you are ready to go.

For cases that the user does not like the transparency provided from the plasma theme, the user can choose from the Latte settings, a solid background to be used instead

All features of Now Dock are already supported

Latte is not trying to break your previous workflow but rather to make your life easier concerning panels. make that happen with an elegant not a disturbing one. The familiar interaction concerning launchers in different activities, window previews, shadows, different coloring for different states etc are already present…

Τhank you all for being part and mak|||

