STUFF YOU MAY LIKE

We all know that Galaxy Note 7 ended up as one of the most disappointing tech stories in the history of Samsung.

But can the tech giant be able to redeem its image with the recently announced Galaxy S8? Will Samsung be able to correct its mistakes and then win back their lost customers?

There are so many Android-powered smartphones in the market today but can the new Samsung Galaxy S8 raise the bar? Can the Android mobile phone offer what the consumers are looking for in a smartphone?

SEE ALSO: Samsung Galaxy Tab S2 9.7″… The Best Android Tablet Right Now?

From design to specs, Galaxy S8 is undoubtedly a stunning smartphone that will surely compete well. But the main task now is for Samsung to convince consumers to trust them again.

Can Samsung actually prove a point with the new Galaxy S8? The popularity of Android as a preferred OS for smartphones has grown exponentially. More smartphone manufacturers – and even NOKIA – have now adopted Android OS.

Get it from Smartphone Company Get it from Phones.co.uk

“After the Note 7 fiasco, Samsung’s latest launch could be a make or break moment.”

Galaxy S8 is a phablet – a really big Android smartphone that comes with excellent computing hardware and really pleasing physical design you will surely love.

As a popular tech company known for quality products across the globe, Samsung would have you believe it has redefined smartphone design with its latest top-end handsets, the Galaxy S8 and the S8+. Hopefully, Samsung’s new Galaxy S8 will not disappoint you.

Galaxy S8 and the S8+ are elegantly designed phones. There are no seams, only the barest of camera bumps, and everything seems milled down to sub-millimetre tolerances. Galaxy S8 features a 5.8-inch, 1440 x 2960 pixels (~570 ppi pixel density) screen powered by Android OS, v7.0.

On the other hand, Galaxy S8+ features a 6.2-inch, 1440 x 2960 pixels (~529 ppi pixel density) screen powered by Android OS, v7.0. However, they both come with Exynos 8895 Octa chipset and Octa-core (4×2.3 GHz & 4×1.7 GHz).

SEE ALSO: Best Android Camera Phones You Can Buy Right Now

Both handsets are expected to be available in Midnight Black, Orchid Gray, Arctic Silver, Coral Blue, and Maple Gold. Galaxy S8 and S8+ feature 64GB storage (with a dedicated microSD slot, up to 256GB) and powered by 4GB RAM. They both come with 12 MP primary camera with phase detection autofocus, OIS, LED flash as well as a 9 MP secondary (selfie) camera.|||

Samsung Galaxy S8 & Galaxy S8+ are beautifully designed Android smartphones with a large screen display and they both feature 64GB memory and 12 MP camera.