Reddit compiles its Transparency Reports to ensure that we provide you with as much information as we can about the requests that we receive for your user information, or that ask us to remove your content from the platform.

This is the third year that Reddit has published a Transparency Report (past reports can be found here). The 2016 Transparency Report provides some new data, such as information about Non-Governmental Requests and Copyright Removal Requests.

Disclaimer: All reasonable care has been put into compiling the information provided in this report, however, given the volume of requests, our report may not be 100% accurate.

This section summarizes requests, from US and foreign governments or law enforcement authorities, to produce private user account information.

Reddit receives requests for private user account information from governmental authorities in the form of legal process, including subpoenas, court orders and search warrants. Reddit also receives real-time monitoring orders and emergency disclosure requests. Such requests typically concern criminal investigations.

In accordance with our Privacy Policy, Reddit provides notice to the relevant user whenever we receive legal process that requires us to produce information, unless we receive a valid non-disclosure order prohibiting disclosure.

For more information about the different types of US legal process, refer to “Types of Domestic Requests” in the 2015 Transparency Report.

In 2016, Reddit received 170 requests to disclose user account information from US and foreign law enforcement authorities, a 73% increase over the requests received in 2015. The overall number of users affected by these requests decreased slightly, while the percentage of requests on which Reddit produced user account information increased slightly. (For clarity, a user account was “affected” if private information about the account was produced to law enforcement.)

The figures below do not include Preservation Requests, which do not require Reddit to produce user account information.

This report is split into four sections, reflecting the main categories of requests Reddit receives:

In 2016, Reddit received 131 requests for private user account information from federal and state law enforcement in the United States.

Reddit experienced a significant increase in the number of search warrants in 2016, with slighter increases in the number of subpoenas and emergency disclosure requests.

The 3 miscellaneous requests noted above were requests for information made by law enforcement that were not a Subpoena, Court Order, Search Warrant or Emergency Disclosure Request. As these requests were not in the form of valid legal process, Reddit did not produce user account information in response.

In 2016, Reddit received 38 requests for user account information, by way of requests for information and Emergency Disclosure Requests, from Foreign Law Enforcement.

Below are the countries from which the above foreign requests for information (excluding emergency disclosure requests) originate:

In 2016, Reddit received one order to conduct real-time monitoring of the frequency of a Reddit user’s communications, in the form of a Pen Register / Trap and Trace Order. A pen register is “a device or process which records or decodes dialing, routing, addressing, or signaling information transmitted by an instrument or facility from which a wire or electronic communication is transmitted, provided, however, that such information shall not include the contents of any communication . . .” 18 U.S.C. § 3127(3). Reddit complied with this order.

In 2016, Reddit received a total of 38 Emergency Disclosure Requests from US and Foreign Law Enforcement authorities, an increase of 16 requests over the number received in 2015. Reddit disclosed user account information in response to 6 (16%) of the Emergency Disclosure Requests received.

In 2016, Reddit received 41 preservation requests, an increase of 21 over the number of preservation requests received in 2015.

Reddit preserved user account information in response to 34 (83%) of the requests that we received.

In addition to receiving legal process from governmental entities, Reddit also receives requests for information from non-governmental parties, such as civil litigants and criminal defendants. These requests often take the form of civil subpoenas duces tecum, criminal defense subpoenas and/or court orders.

Generally, non-governmental parties may only obtain non-content information about a user and not the content of any communications of a user. This means that, subject to other objections, Reddit may be required to produce information such as:

Depending on whether the request relates to a Federal or State court matter, Reddit can make a number of objections, many of which are procedural (for example, if the request is too broad or burdensome). However, Reddit mainly focuses its attention on substantial constitutional objections regarding First Amendment rights, such as the rights to free and anonymous speech and expressive activity, to associate with others, and to discuss ideas.

In 2016, Reddit received 6 requests from non-governmental entities for private user information. We provided user information in response to 2 (33%) of those requests, as they were legally valid and the litigants were able to resolve our objections.

Reddit objected to the remaining 4 requests for the following reasons:

This section summarizes requests received from governments and other parties to remove or to block access to content appearing on Reddit.

In 2016, the number of foreign government removal requests decreased by 60%.

Russia - We received one request (and 14 duplicate requests) to remove content from the Federal Service for Supervision in the Sphere of Telecom, Information Technologies and Mass Communications (Roskomnadzor), in conjunction with the Federal Drug Control Service, with respect to a post which allegedly "contains appeals to mass riots, extremist activities or participation in mass (public) actions held with infringement of the established order." The content was blocked from Russian IPs.

Turkey – We received 6 requests for the removal of one post and 6 subreddits which contained material that fell under the scope of “obscenity” in the Turkish Criminal Code which, in turn, constitutes grounds for a website to be blocked under the Turkish Internet Law. The post and subreddits were blocked from Turkish IPs.

Reports received of alleged copyright infringement and any counter notices that are received from the users that posted the content on Reddit.

Reddit removes content in response to valid requests for removal under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (“DMCA”). For a request to be valid, it must comply with the statutory requirements outlined in the DMCA. Requests can either be sent to us via our webform or otherwise as outlined in our user agreement.

Each DMCA takedown notice is reviewed carefully and, in circumstances where content is actually hosted on our servers, we assess whether the existence of the content on Reddit can fall under an exception, such as “fair use” of the copyrighted material. If we believe that the existence of the content can be defended or falls under an exception under copyright law, then we may request further information from the requesting party that will assist us in our review.

As briefly discussed in the 2015 Transparency Report, we directed much effort towards accurately recording the volume of requests received. Reddit is therefore pleased to be able to provide you with some information about the DMCA requests received last year.

Reddit was required to remove content from the platform in response to 610 of the above requests (19%). No counter notices were received from the users that had posted the allegedly copyrighted content. As such, no content was required to be restored in 2016.|||

reddit: the front page of the internet