Hypertension nephropathy is a special disease in the type of nephropathy, and hypertension nephropathy treatment requires a higher, patient should pay more attention to things. Especially in the diet, to be more stringent control, otherwise it will only make their own condition more serious. Experts summed up the following points Hypertensive nephropathy diet control precautions, take a look.

Hypertensive nephropathy daily salt intake should be strictly controlled at 2-5 grams, or about a teaspoon. Also, the amount of salt should be subtracted from the sodium contained in the cooking sauce (3 ml of soy sauce is equivalent to 1 g of salt). Sauces (salted vegetables), fermented bean curd, bacon, pickled products, clams shellfish, shrimp, preserved eggs, and chrysanthemum vegetables, grass head, water spinach and other vegetables are high sodium, should eat or eat as much as possible.

To ensure the intake of carbohydrates to supplement the body's calories, such as rice, porridge, surface, noodles, Gefen, soup, taro, soft beans food, generally to maintain the ideal body weight as the standard. Chengdu Kangfu Kidney Disease specialist hospital experts pointed out that because these patients tend to have lipid metabolism disorders, so also need to properly reduce fat intake, not only help to control calories, but also improve metabolic disorders.

Tea polyphenols have an important role in human fat metabolism, can detoxify, anti-inflammatory sterilization, soften the blood vessels. Long-term continuous high blood pressure easily lead to kidney disease, or even deterioration of renal failure.

Protein is essential nutrients the body, but if the protein intake is too high, it will increase the burden on the kidneys, increase kidney damage; if intake is insufficient, it will affect the body's nutritional supply. Therefore, the patient should be based on renal function to determine protein intake. Chengdu Kangfu Kidney Disease specialist hospital experts pointed out that the intake of protein per kilogram of body weight 0.3-0.6 g supply, the use of high quality protein, such as dairy, eggs, fish, chicken and so on. Five, high vitamin

Vitamins involved in metabolism, necessary for life activities, should be fully supplied, especially vitamin A, B1, B2, C and folic acid and other renal dysfunction is particularly important.

In addition, according to the study found that patients with hypertension 1 gram of calcium per day, 8 weeks after the decline in blood pressure. Therefore, patients with high blood pressure but not kidney disease should eat more calcium foods such as soybeans, sunflower seeds, walnuts, milk, peanuts, fish and shrimp, red dates, fresh cabbage, garlic, seaweed and so on. In addition, elderly patients with high blood pressure plasma iron below normal, so eat peas, fungus and other iron-rich foods, not only can lower blood pressure, but also to prevent the elderly anemia.

Hypertensive nephropathy is caused by essential hypertension in benign arterioles of renal arteriosclerosis (also known as hypertensive renal arteriosclerosis) and malignant arterial nephrosclerosis, accompanied by the corresponding clinical manifestations of the disease. Experts remind the majority of patients with hypertensive nephropathy, under the guidance of a doctor on their own diet analysis, change the bad eating habits, limit certain foods, through a reasonable diet to control the disease, to ensure quality of life. Good control of blood pressure delay a variety of complications, especially heart and brain complications.|||

