Ten years ago, our inboxes were flooded with marketing spam. Fortunately, technology (in the form of spam filters) and the law (in the form of email regulation) caught up, and now our inboxes are mostly clean from marketing spam.

Unfortunately, ambitious sales and sales development reps found that emails they send from their individual mailboxes could get around these legal and technical barriers to reach their targets’ inboxes. And then new sales email tools emerged to automate the process of sending lots of these sales messages. Lo and behold, a new category emerged, and now our inboxes are flooded with unwanted messages asking for the “right person to talk to about whatever I have to sell” and wondering why I haven’t responded to all their prior crappy sales emails.

Marketing spam was bad enough, but this ‘sales spam’ is far worse. Why?

Sales spam pretends to be personal and relevant while being exactly the opposite.

Here are four examples of sales spam (it’s embarrassing):

These kinds of tactics are bad enough for small deals. For the big opportunities, you’ve got to raise your game. It’s so easy to hit the spam button – why would you ever risk your ability to communicate with the most important people from the most important accounts by sending them a generic, irrelevant message?

I’m here to say that it’s naive to think that technology and regulation won’t find a way to block these unwanted, templated sales emails, just as they stopped marketing spam. If you are relying on outbound sales to drive your business and you want to keep getting into the inbox, it’s time to find a way to do better.  It’s time to start making real, human connections.

There’s no mystery to the kinds of things that make people lower their Sales Defense Barriers and listen to your Account Development Reps (ADRs):

These are the same things that made content marketing replace old-school, broadcast-style, interruption-based advertising. And they work just as well in a sales context.

The three most important factors in an enterprise decision, according to the ITSMA:

In other words, the best prospecting messages prompt Challenger Sale-style conversations that bring true commercial insight. Account Based Sales Development is the ideal enabler of The Challenger Sale, a breakthrough concept summarized in the excellent CEB book with the same name. The book shows how the best sales reps are those who are comfortable as Teachers and Tailors.

This approach is far more specific and tailored than generic ‘thought leadership’. In fact, it’s something far more valuable: customized commercial insight. The best sales development teams are the ones who best deploy this kind of commercial insight. Specifically, they demonstrate an understanding of the prospect’s world.

They don’t just claim an understanding, they prove it and back it up with evidence. They also disrupt the prospect’s world view, breaking the frame of reference to expose a flawed assumption, challenging the status quo.

There’s a lot of noise for SDRs to cut through, but if they succeed then they get to the real commercial insight that can make a prospect lean forward.

Here are the differences between the old way and the new Account Based Sales Development way.

How is your team declaring war on Sales Spam and embracing these new ideas?|||

Sales spam pretends to be personal and relevant while being exactly the opposite.