We already know about 3D printing, what it is, its history and possible origins, its many uses and advantages in many fields and how it works. We have already discussed how convenient it is for building large structures at low costs and how it is used in medicine for prosthetic and organ printing among other uses in general. However, there is a question we have not asked yet: what should everyone know about 3D Printing?

First of all, there are a series of steps to take into consideration when dealing with 3D printing. There is the Modelling phase, the Printing phase and, of course, the Finishing phase.

In the Modelling phase, you need to get your hands on a 3D printable model to be able to use the 3D printer. Most printable 3D models are created through the use of 3D designing tools such as 3D scanners, 3D design software, CAD tools or previously made 3D or STL (StereoLithography) files. Modelling is a key phase because if the printable file is not optimal, its results are not going to be the best. Modeling can also be done manually through the creation of a 3D model of what we want to print.

After thoroughly checking the printable file for errors in the Modeling phase, it is time to start with the Printing phase, which takes place when the actual printing of the object takes place. How is it done? Well, the printer receives a series of instructions to create layer after layer of the object, which has been divided into many printable layers. It is a process that takes time (it may take days or even months depending on the complexity of the object being printed, the quality of the printer used and some other factors).

Finally, after all the Printing phase is fully completed comes the Finishing phase, which basically consists of giving the printed object the finishing touches to complete it.

Depending on the type of process used, the printer and the materials, the finishing phase is different. For example, metal 3D printers in general, need you to cut the metal component off the substrate after the job is completely done.

The second thing everyone should know is that there are a variety of 3D printers available in the market. The main difference has to do mostly with the different processes and materials involved in getting the job done. Printers can be classified by type in Extrusion, Light Polymerized, Continuous Liquid Interface Production, Powder Bed, Laminated, Powder fed or Wire.

Another thing you should know about 3D printers is that they are kind of expensive. Hopefully, in the near future, that will change for the better, but in the meantime, if you are still interested in having a 3D printer, you can build your own. There are many kits and instructions for free online. You just have to check them out.

There are many other things to know about 3D printers; nevertheless, the best way to learn about them is to get your own and start using it. It may be more worthy than you think.|||

We already know about 3D printing, what it is, its history and 
possible origins, its many uses and advantages in many fields and how it ...