Usually journalists writing about Silicon Valley have a hard time getting deep enough into the subject to keep me interested. But I really liked The Everything Store by Brad Stone, which covered the rise of Amazon. So I was excited when I saw that Brad wrote another book about the tech scene, The Upstarts, which focuses on Uber and Airbnb.

I feel like I already heard a lot of the “Airbnb legend” via the YCombinator mafia in one way or another, but most of the Uber stuff was new to me. So as I read it, I was trying to do this Straussian reading thing and think, what secrets about Uber are hidden within this book?

This book has a wealth of anecdotes - let’s investigate some of them.

First off, four months after it launched, back when Ryan Graves was the CEO, the California and San Francisco government together tried to shut down Uber:

Presumably most companies respond to a cease-and-desist from the government by ceasing and desisting. For Travis Kalanick this reminded him of his time with Scour and so his reaction was:

After some stressful legal battle, Uber got to keep operating their service without any changes. Meanwhile, competitors like Taxi Magic and Cabulous kept obeying the previous rules.

In Washington, D.C. the taxi industry was powerful and a city councilwoman proposed a law that would prevent Uber from lowering prices to compete with taxis:

DC ended up allowing Uber with no restrictions. Internally, Uber codified this strategy, with a principle called “Travis’s law”:

Uber doesn’t actually publicly promote this law. But they worked with Brad Stone, they gave him a lot of access, and Brad’s calling it “Travis’s Law” in this book. So it has to be what Travis and a big chunk of Uber really believes, right? And it doesn’t sound that bad on the face of it, does it?

The one part of this law which feels a bit roundabout is the phrase, “any place in the world where government has to be at least somewhat responsive to the people”. What does that mean, exactly? Does that just mean “a democracy”? It seems like it is trying to be a bit more expansive and include not just democracies but also societies that are half democratic or even “somewhat” democratic.

So flip that around. If you believe in Travis’s Law, and you notice that Government X does not allow Uber, what do you conclude - that Government X must not even be “somewhat” a democracy?

I kind of knew about Uber fighting the government a lot. What I didn’t realize before reading this book is that there were times when Uber took the strategy of “not fighting the government”.

In particular, in 2012 Uber required every driver to be commercially licensed. At the time, that was a clear legal requirement, and even Uber didn’t want to fight that law. When Jason Calacanis asked Travis if he would consider using unlicensed drivers:

At the time, Lyft was a small competitor, but they were willing to break that law. A year later, in 2013, the California government gave up their fight against Lyft, and Uber realized they had made a key mistake.

There’s a lot more in this book and it’s really a fascinating story. I could have written a section for Fighting New York City and Fighting London. And half the book is about Airbnb! So if you’re interested in this sort of thing I really recommend buying The Upstarts.

To me, this book explains Uber’s culture. At every turn, they were rewarded for breaking the law, and punished for obeying the law. A culture that can survive that Pavlovian conditioning seems dangerous. And yet a hundred years of Taxi Magic competing with Cabulous may have just led to nothing. Perhaps Uber is not the startup we need, but the startup we deserve.|||

Usually journalists writing about Silicon Valley have a hard time getting deep enough into the subject to keep me interested. But I really liked The Everythi...