The 12th International Conference on Urban Regeneration and Sustainability addresses all the aspects of urban environment aiming to provide solutions leading towards sustainability.  The Sustainable City 2017 conference follows a series of very successful meetings that started in Rio (2000), followed by Segovia (2002), Siena (2004), Tallinn (2006), Skiathos (2008), A Coruña (2010), Ancona (2012), Kuala Lumpur (2013), Siena (2014), Medellin (2015) and Alicante (2016). The meeting always attracts a substantial number of contributions from participants from different backgrounds and countries. The variety of topics and experiences is one of the main reasons behind the success of the series.  Papers presented at these meetings are archived online in the WIT eLibrary (http://www.witpress.com/elibrary) where they are easily and permanently available to the international scientific community. Urban areas result in a series of environmental challenges varying from the consumption of natural resources and the subsequent generation of waste and pollution, contributing to the development of social and economic imbalances. As cities continue to grow all over the world, these problems tend to become more acute and require the development of new solutions. The challenge of planning sustainable contemporary cities lies in considering the dynamics of urban systems, exchange of energy and matter, and the function and maintenance of ordered structures directly or indirectly supplied and maintained by natural systems. The task of researchers, aware of the complexity of the contemporary city, is to improve the capacity to manage human activities, pursuing welfare and prosperity in the urban environment. Any investigation or planning on a city ought to consider the relationships between the parts and their connections with the living world. The dynamics of its networks (flows of energy matter, people, goods, information and other resources) are fundamental for an understanding of the evolving nature of today’s cities. Large cities are probably the most complex mechanisms to manage.  They represent a fertile ground for architects, engineers, city planners, social and political scientists, and other professionals able to conceive new ideas and time them according to technological advances and human requirements. The Sustainable City Conference addresses the multidisciplinary components of urban planning, the challenges presented by the increasing size of the cities, the amount of resources required and the complexity of modern society. The following list covers some of the topics to be presented at Sustainable City 2017. Papers on other subjects related to the objectives of the conference are also welcome. The community and the city The Prigogine Gold Medal 2017 Award Ceremony will take place at the University of Seville on Wednesday 20th September 2017.

Publication of Papers Papers presented at Sustainable City 2017 are to be published by WIT press in a Volume of WIT Transactions. Selected papers will appear in a special Issue of the International Journal of Sustainable Development and Planning (ISSN:1743-7601; Digital ISSN:1743-761X). Reviews To ensure the quality of our publications, abstracts and papers are peer reviewed by members of the International Scientific Advisory Committee and other experts, with manuscripts processed through CrossRef Similarity Check. Open Access WIT Press is an advocate of Open Access which offers maximum dissemination of your work.  WIT Transactions and Journal papers can be downloaded for free (www.witpress.com/elibrary).  Indexing and Archiving Papers presented at Wessex Institute conferences are referenced by CrossRef and have appeared in notable reviews and databases. Papers are submitted to various indexing services such as Thomson Reuters Web of Science, Google Scholar*, Scopus and ProQuest. All conference books are listed in the British Library and American Library of Congress. Conference Proceedings Delegates will receive a copy of the papers presented at the Conference on a USB Flash drive. The USB will, in addition, contain papers from previous conferences in this series. Following the Conference, authors will receive an electronic copy of the publication in which their paper has been published. Digital Archive All conference papers are archived online in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com) where they are easily and permanently available to the international scientific community. Networking Participants can present their research and interact with experts from around the world, becoming part of a unique community. Reduced Fee for PhD Students The Wessex Institute believes in the importance of encouraging PhD students to present and publish innovative research at their conferences. As a result, the Institute offers PhD students a much reduced conference fee. 

*Google Scholar Indexation  WIT Press has made all its conference and journal papers open access in an effort to help its dissemination within the scientific and technical community. This means that you are now able to download any paper in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com/elibrary) totally free and without having to pre-register. This major development has the added benefit of allowing the Google Scholar search engines to fully index all WIT papers. Google Scholar is a search engine created specifically for researchers to facilitate the indexation and citation of academic papers free of charge. This service is becoming the most accepted comprehensive benchmark and quality standard. In Google Scholar you will be able to see the number of citations of your articles as well as the ‘h-index’ ranking for both author and publications. The h-index is the largest number h such that at least h articles (by the author or in a publication) were cited at least h times each. The impact of your work is given by the ‘i10 index’ which refers to the number of publications within the last 10 years that have at least 10 citations. You can also easily create within the system an Author’s Profile which helps to highlight your achievements. Google Scholar is becoming the most popular system in the world and its metrics are independent and unbiased. Unlike other ranking systems, it is free.

Abstracts of no more than 300 words should be submitted as soon as possible by clicking on the 'Submit an Abstract' button found at the top and bottom of this page. Abstracts should clearly state the purpose, results and conclusions of the work to be described in the final paper. Once your abstract has been reviewed, you will be notified of the acceptance of your abstract and be given a submission date as well as instructions on how to prepare your paper. Final acceptance will be based on the full-length paper, which if accepted for publication, must be presented at the conference. We encourage early submission of abstracts and papers to facilitate registration and travel arrangements. The language of the conference will be English.

Papers presented at Sustainable City 2017 are to be published by WIT press in a Volume of WIT Transactions. Selected papers will appear in a special Issue of the International Journal of Sustainable Development and Planning (ISSN:1743-7601; Digital ISSN:1743-761X). All conference papers are archived online in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com) where they are easily and permanently available to the international scientific community. WIT Transactions have since 1993 been publishing exceptional conference papers which are referenced by CrossRef and have been indexed in international databases. All conference books are catalogued and archived in the British Library and American Library of Congress. WIT strongly believes that removing the barrier to research published online will greatly aid progress in all scientific and technical disciplines, as well as all other spheres of knowledge. Most WIT conference and all journal papers are freely available online.

Seville is the capital of the Andalusia region and is situated on the river Guadalquivir. The city is approximately 2,200 years old and has a distinct personality and a large and well-preserved historical centre. The old town contains three world heritage sites: the Minaret of La Giralda, the General Archive of the Indies and the Alcázar Palace. The city is also home to many convents, churches, palaces, museums and gardens including the Museum of Fine Arts, Parque de María Luisa and the Gothic Cathedral which is the site of Christopher Columbus’s tomb. It is believed that flamenco originated in Seville, and there are many flamenco shows on offer all over the city, as well as the museum dedicated to the art. This airport has great connections to other Spanish and European cities such as Frankfurt, Paris, London, Rome and Lisbon. For full information on airlines and destinations from this airport, visit the airport website http://www.aena.es/es/aeropuerto-sevilla/index.html Bus: The airport is connected to the city with a bus that runs from 5.20h to 1.15h every day. The journey takes 35 minutes and the cost is €4 for a single ticket, €6 for a return journey. The airport bus stop is situated in Prado station, 5 mins walking distance from the hotel. Taxi: There is no need to book this in advance. The average price from the airport to the hotel would take around 20 minutes and cost €25 Slightly smaller than Seville airport, Jerez is very convenient for delegates travelling from Germany. Please visit the airport website for full information on airlines and destinationshttp://www.aena.es/en/jerez-airport/index.html Train: Jerez Airport is connected by national rail service (RENFE) with Seville. Trains stop eight times a day at the Jerez airport station. The journey to Seville is 1 hour and 11 minutes and a single ticket would cost approximately €17. Once you arrive to Seville train station (Santa Justa), you can take a taxi to the hotel (€6) or bus number C1 and C4 to San Bernardo stop which is 5 minute walk to the hotel. For delegates arriving from outside Europe, this will be the most convenient airport to flight to and either continue the journey by plane or by high speed train to Seville. For information on all airlines flying to Madrid, visit the following website link

http://www.aeropuertomadrid-barajas.com/ Train: In order to take the high speed train to Seville, you need to take the train C-1 at Terminal 4 that will take you to Madrid Atocha train station from where you will be able to take the high speed train (AVE). The line that connects the airport with the city centre runs from 05.58h to 22.27h and a single ticket will cost you around € 3. We recommend that you buy the ticket for the high speed train (AVE) to Seville in advance on the Spanish railway website. The prices will vary depending when you buy the ticket. Visit http://www.renfe.com/ for further information. Once you arrive to Seville train station (Santa Justa), you can take a taxi to the hotel (€6) or bus number C1 and C4 to San Bernardo stop which is 5 minute walk to the hotel. Seville Santa Justa station is connected via high speed train to cities like Madid (2.5h), Barcelona (5.5h) and Malaga (1.5h). For timetables and fairs, visit Spanish railway website http://www.renfe.com/ Once you arrive to Seville train station (Santa Justa), you can take a taxi to the hotel (€6) or bus number C1 and C4 to San Bernardo stop which is 5 minute walk to the hotel. Please note that all information included above is correct at September 2016. All prices and travel details are subject to change.

A Schengen Visa is the document issued for visiting/travelling in and within the Schengen Area. The Schengen Area is comprised of 26 countries that have agreed to allow free movement of their citizens within this area as a single country. Schengen visas are issued by the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and Liechtenstein If you intend to visit one of the Schengen countries for business, as a tourist or for a personal/private visit, you must first obtain a Schengen visa, unless your country is part of the Shengen territory or has a special agreement. You can check which whether citizens of your country require Shengen VISA here: http://www.schengenvisainfo.com/who-needs-schengen-visa/ You should apply to the Embassy or Consulate in your country of residence (unless you are resident in Ireland). If you intend to visit only one Schengen country, apply to the Embassy or Consulate of that country. If you intend to visit several of the Schengen countries, you must apply for a visa at the Embassy or Consulate of the country in which your main destination is situated (longest duration of stay). Processing time: Your application should be lodged at the Embassy or Consulate at least 2 weeks before the proposed journey is undertaken. Requirements for a Schengen visa may vary slightly between the different Schengen countries. Please visit the following link for further information: http://www.schengenvisainfo.com/ Important information: Please notice that although every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the above information, it is your responsibility to check that the visa and travel requirements with the corresponding Embassy in your country. If you require a letter of invitation for your visa application, please submit a request for a letter of invitation to the conference secretariat. Registration fees must be paid in order to be issued an invitation letter. Please make sure you read the cancellation policy stated in the registration form before sending your payment. All letters of invitation will be sent to you by email and regular mail unless otherwise specified.  Please provide the following information in your request: Your full name (Please specify family name and given name) Additional information such as if you are presenting a paper at the Conference We cannot provide visa letters for spouses or guests, however we can include their name on your letter|||

The Wessex Institute (WIT) is a research and advanced training centre with an international reputation for excellence in engineering and physical sciences.  It organises the well established programme of international WIT Conferences published by WIT Press.