I was given task to create unlimited log pipeline that can scale easily. So the plan is using aws kinesis firehose and S3 as the destination.

Here is overview what we are going to built.

The producer, can be any application. But remember, kinesis firehose is not available yet in every region. So, if your application is in Asia, there will be latency to US / EU around 180 - 250ms.

One big question in my mind is, “How can I scale this firehose after see the limitations?”. Technically, 5000 records/second is not a small number. But right now, data can increasing without notice to us first. Especially when we want to save log of application. So, my choice is using S3 to save the log. I skipped on using object lifecycle, you can read more about object lifecycle aws version and terraform version.

Amazon Kinesis Firehose has the following limits.

I use mac os version, so to install it just type :

And my terraform version is .

For another OS, you can refer here.

This is list of variables that we want to use on our terraform project. Here I name it, . More information on this, https://www.terraform.io/docs/configuration/variables.html.

This is list of resource that we want to use on our terraform project. We plan to add 1 S3 buckets, 1 new rule and 2 kinesis firehose delivey stream with same S3 destination. Here I name it, . More information on this, https://www.terraform.io/docs/configuration/resources.html

And after we are done with the configuration, we can try .

Then if we are confident with the plan, we can try to apply the plan with command .

Go to aws console, and this is what we get.

And this is what we get

This is the python code, we will test using 1 delivery stream first.

And this is what we get

After we are confident with the code, we can try this

As you can see, we are randomizing the delivery stream, let’s checkout the S3.

You need to empty the S3 bucket first.

And after the bucket is empty, you can use terraform command.

This is just a proof of concept, and if this is going well, when I want to add new delivery stream, what I need to do is edit and change the value of into desired value. Type check if it return error, and . Then add list of current delivery stream to . Creating delivery stream is taking time, so need to be careful about deploying your new code.|||

