So you’ve decided to start a company. You have a super idea, a monstrous market and you’ve just managed to convince a few people with more money than sense to give you a quarter of a million bucks to spend chasing your dreams.

What will you do with the money, they ask. Shit, what will we do with the money, you start to think. You were so busy daydreaming that you were going to launch a product, get millions of users and make a fuck ton of money that you completely forgot to think about exactly how you’d actually do so.

So you rush to think about the gaps in your founding team. These gaps are almost always either product people or sales and marketing people. Two groups of people who will empty your bank accounts faster than you can blink. Engineers that can build your product will cost a fortune in wages and AWS invoices. Not to mind the $5k in gear they’ll demand, as well as back-friendly chairs, standing desks and all sorts of other precious fuckwittery. You’ll probably need a games room too for the 75% of the time they spend outside of their “flow” just so they are happy for the short time they actually are productive.

Hiring sales people is a wonderful experience. Even the shittiest of sales people are good at selling one thing – themselves. So chances are you’ll end up with some idiot who will rack up air miles so fast you’ll smell the carbon footprint they leave a continent away. And when they don’t reach their targets you’ll get some spiel about how the product just isn’t there yet. To which the product team will tell you that the sales people are trying to fuck up the overall vision by actually landing real customers and revenue. How dare they stray from our goal of making the world a better place through web-based feline broadcasting!

And don’t get me started on marketing. While their salaries aren’t too bad and they don’t typically get commission, they’ll have no problem making you broke by spending a few grand a month on HubSpot, Intercom, Salesforce and a bunch of other tools that do their job for them. Not content with paying through the nose for products that should cost way less than they do, they’ll spend another few thousand dollars getting training over the phone from someone who knows about as much about the product as they do themselves. And of course they’ll then need to spend at least $10–20k getting some Web design agency to butcher WordPress into what they think is a pretty website with janky parallax scrolling, 25 megabyte background videos and ensuring every visitor leaves fucking infuriated with the giant modal overlay you popped up just as they started to read the regurgitated bullshit content marketing your employee decided to paraphrase.|||

So you’ve decided to start a company. You have a super idea, a monstrous market and you’ve just managed to convince a few people with more money than sense to give you a quarter of a million bucks to…