I signed-up for an account on 21.co. I think I found 21.co through a Medium post. The tag line was something like “monetize your Internet presence”. That sounded pretty attractive to a regular user like me.

I established my account and signed-up for the Slack channel. Slack channels are “the thing” to have for blockchain projects.

21.co gets you started with a few small tasks. They pay a little for each task. This way you get your account past $0 pretty fast. You get engaged with the platform.

I thought this was pretty clever on 21.co’s part. My account now had a non-zero balance. I imagine 21.co builds this into their user acquisition costs.

I asked 21.co support to send me a few sample profiles. I wanted to see how other users are using the service. Support responded quickly. They sent me this profile —

But what I’m I a regular user, not a celebrity? A number of others posted a similar question to the 21.co Slack channel.

I didn’t find many regular user profiles to reference. I decided to experiment instead.

Then I confronted the big question. What would someone actually pay to contact me? I had to make the assumption that someone WOULD pay to contact me to get to this point.

I settled on $1. Then upped it to $5 a week later. Nobody bit…

I’m learning the power of connection. I’ve gone from being as closed as closed can get to trying to expand into the world. This means being open to connection.

Putting a paid gate between me and connection felt contradictory.

During this time, I needed to hire an iOS developer. I tried directly follow-up inquiries to my original post to my 21.co profile. I figured sales and biz dev people would pay $1 to increase their chances of receiving a response.

I also had to decide whether to get paid or donate. I was on the fence about this one. Since Just Rolling with It doesn’t mean I’m rolling it it, I decided to split the difference.

I decided to donate 50% of my 21.co income to the ACLU. This isn’t an official 21.co donation option. Right now the official options are all-or-nothing to one of three charities.

This didn’t feel right as time passed. I then switched my profile back to $1. I decided to donate all my earnings to Black Girls Code.

I revisited my profile last week. I decided to update my profile. It’s now targeted more toward people who found me through other channels. I decided to make 21.co an option for people who wanted to contact me.

People who want to contact me can now donate $1 to do so though 21.co. Or, they can opt to contact me for free via the link in my profile.

This feels right for now. Let’s see how it develops over time.

P.S. — I see 21.co is selling surveys of its high profile members. This leaves me wondering more than ever, what’s in it for the regular user!|||

I signed-up for an account on 21.co. I think I found 21.co through a Medium post. The tag line was something like “monetize your Internet presence”. That sounded pretty attractive to a regular user…