For those of you who don’t know about the ISP Privacy Bill or S.J.Res. 34, here’s a quick brief so that we can advance to the real discussion:

This bill will allow big internet companies like AT&T, Comcast, Charter Communication and Verizon to collect and share your data with Advertising companies without your explicit consent. Now, one may argue that giants like Facebook and Google are already harvesting information like that and showing ads to its consumers, so why even bother if your ISP also starts doing it. Well, that is where the element of your “choice” comes in.

You see, you can always switch your search engine or opt out of Facebook to escape this intrusion of privacy, but when it comes to your ISPs, American internet users have little or no choice left but to agree to this clause and surrender their most precious possession, their privacy to the ISPs.

In Obama Era, the rules were made to protect user’s privacy and had a very clear approach to encourage the permission marketing concept, so the ISPs were bound to obtain the below-mentioned information only and that too with user’s legal consent:

But, with the latest amendments done by the Congress and backed by the Trump Administration, your ISP can:

It’s going to become a rat race for user’s data as soon as the Bill officially becomes the law. Scary, right?

Now, the big question is, how to protect your treasure trove (Your Data) from getting in the hands of your ISPs? Well, first you have to understand that there are very few surefire ways that’ll help you completely eradicate this ISP spying menace. But, with that said, you can go for several methods to protect different aspects of your online activities from being spied upon by your ISP or third-party advertisers. Here are some:

It’s a real dilemma that the leaders’ American citizens have elected, sold out their privacy and care less about them and more about their vested interests. But it’s time for American Internet users to rise up and take some action. Internet users of today care more about their data and want to take complete control of what they want to share and what not.

Online Privacy and Security experts all over the world have given their verdict of using a VPN to protect themselves from ISP spying as by far this is the most effective method in sight. And after this whole rigamarole, industry have seen a huge spike in the search term for the word “VPN”.

So, now that you know what to do; do the right thing. It’s time to take your privacy game to the next level. Fight for your online privacy as ‘The Power is Yours.”|||

ISP Privacy Bill or S.J.Res. 34 is soon going to be signed by President Donald Trump. Before it goes official, here are things you need to know to be on the