If you like Ambar please it!

Ambar is a simple document management system with automated crawling, OCR, deduplication and ultra-fast full-text search. Imagine having billion of files in different formats like xls, doc, txt, pdf, ppt, etc..., in any encoding. Ambar securely stores them and gives you an ability to search through their content and metadata in milliseconds. It is very lightweight, simple and intuitive, but yet very fast and powerful in terms of data amount and scaling. All the rocket-science is hidden behind the simple UI.

It's full-featured latest Ambar, hosted on our servers. All the accounts and data is secured and carefully stored. You can connect Ambar directly to your Dropbox account and enjoy Ambar powerful search over your Dropbox. Trying Ambar Cloud is a perfect way to get the taste what Ambar is.

Self-Hosted Ambar can be installed as a set of Docker images. Community Edition is available for free. It's a tiny version of Enterprise Edition with limited number of pipelines and crawlers and disabled authentication, though preserving full functionality. Also you can request a trial for Enterprise Edition, drop us an email on hello@ambar.cloud

Docker images can be found on Docker Hub

Yes, almost every Ambar's module is published on GitHub under Fair Source License 1

Yes, Community Edition is forever free. We will NOT charge a penny from you to use it. Basic cloud account is also forever free.

Yes, it performs OCR on images (jpg, tiff, bmp, etc) and PDF's. OCR is perfomed by well-known open-source library Tesseract. We tuned it to achieve best perfomance and quality on scanned documents.

Supported languages: Eng, Rus, Ita, Deu, Fra, Spa. If you miss your language, please create an issue on GitHub and we'll add it ASAP.

Nope, we working on it. As a workaround you can use folders hierarchy as a set of tags.

Yes, it can search through any PDF, even badly encoded or with scans inside. We did our best to make search over any kind of pdf document smooth.

Yes, please create an issue on GitHub.

We're working on it. Be patient.

It's limited by amount of RAM on your machine, typically 500MB. It's an awesome result, as typical document managment systems offer 30MB maximum file size to be processed.

Basically Ambar CE is a downscaled Ambar EE. For more details check this

Submit an issue or chat with us on https://ambar.cloud|||

ambar - Ambar: Document Search System. Index and search your files contents (SMB, FTP, Dropbox)