No secret that it’s hard to sell from business to business online. I decided to test several digital advertising tools to make this complex task simpler. I hope this case will be useful for others that wonder how to simplify their b2b advertising.

According to CMO Survey analysis, 10–12% of budget in enterprise b2b companies goes to marketing; from 7.5% to 9% of sales in b2b comes from internet. So, companies invest lots of money into digital advertising, but use mostly only content and e-mail marketing tools.

Of course, the best result can be achieved through complex promotion with various tools used. We are constantly experimenting to get the better results. Trust me, our first attempts were not all successful, but in the end we managed to find a balance of using traditional b2c advertising methods for b2b. I hope these tools will be helpful for you too, even if you’re working with long sales tunnel in b2b (it was exactly our story).

We tested various tools on our real projects and didn’t know what results wait us ahead. That is why we used limited budget and focused on maximizing results with minimal costs.

First complexity we needed to overcome was planning our ads according to our sales tunnel. It’s common for internet marketing to adjust your ads to it, but in our case it was too complicated.

It takes long time for a user to transform into a customer (it may take days or even months), high percentage of users leaves after seeing the costs of your services, the target audience isn’t that wide (we focus on startups, health&beauty and retail) for the first contact attraction.

So, let’s start with something simple to support the highest level of our sales and marketing tunnel. First thing to pop up in mind is context. Here you can work using the standard b2c scheme: look for keywords, cross out the minus words, test ads and analyse its’ effectiveness.

It’s common to think that context ads are great for quick lead generation. When you’re working in b2b and sell mobile apps instead of dresses and bikes, the common scheme needs to be revised. There is wide range of primitive problems that can arise. For example, you advertisement will be shown by the irrelevant keywords choice. It happens due to usage of wide groups of keywords (in our case it was ‘mobile app’ keyword), due to the lack of operators that help getting the right phrase (quotations, brackets, etc.) and due to bad minus words choices. If you’ll use all mentioned above the problem with irrelevant placement will be resolved in no time.

Here is what we got after placing our first ads in Google Adwords:

There is almost no difference between b2c and b2b segments: it’s quality of clicks that is important, not the number of it.

The main problem lays not in leading irrelevant traffic to our website, but in conversions and leads tracking after the ads. We have several goals to track the conversions on our website: clicking the mail, phone, opening the presentation and enquiry form.

Can you imagine what part of people that clicked on the ad is actually reaching these goals? Now imagine the number of people who decided to buy our services with minimal costs from several thousands of dollars. Psychology told us all about it many times, — if the purchase is expensive, it’s hard for a user to make a decision to buy it quickly. He’ll think twice before making a final decision: look at the company ratings, ask his friends on Facebook and so on. It’s possible that he’ll reach the buying decision, but analytical system will index him coming through direct or organic search, not the ads. Of course, account managers can always ask him directly how did he find us, but you can never be sure to hear ‘I came from Google Adwords searching results’.

It’s really hard to track the right statistics.

One more great tool to find your target audience online is media advertising. From one hand, it’s hard to reach our target audience with media placements, because of the long sales tunnel in b2b. From the other hand, it’s easy to attract user to the website with some creativity. The question is how to make him stay and convert him into client.

This is our solution. We generated creative ads and launched some banners.

The traffic we got was mad. We filtered users that stayed on our website longer than 7 seconds and then started a remarketing campaign on Facebook. It helped us to filter the target audience as great as we could and fuel the hype.

From the very beginning we understood that we can get many irrelevant traffic, but to strike with our main message to develop a mobile app was too risky. That is why our next step was to create an ad that will suggest users to sign up to our useful newsletter about the digital world news and trends. Also, we decided to test how users will react to beautiful ads with collage images of our works. Before the actual placement we adjusted the remarketing audience to an age, location and language we needed to reach.

We seldom use general target ads in social networks. From the whole variety of tools available we are interested in two things — ads in Facebook and LinkedIn. In Facebook we use interesting option to place an ad to a lookalike audience (people that are similar to users who liked our company’ page). Pros are low click cost, low CPA, great increase of traffic to the website. Cons lay in low level of conversion percentage. This problem can be solved with remarketing advertising once again.

In LinkedIn we found only cons: expensive, low CTR and CPA. That is why we eliminated this option from our ads routine.

It’s way more complex to track effectiveness of these ads than just create them.

First of all, you cannot estimate every channel by average metrics, because every channel has its own unique goal from traffic generation to getting a relevant lead. All these channels require different metrics that accumulate them to reach the final goal of the advertising campaign.

Secondly, it’s hard to track ROI due to complexity of profit calculating from our advertising budget. It takes from 4 to 6 month in average from first call to the end of the project. This is why it’s hard to count the investments we got from the user that reached us through some advertising tool. Probably, we could count the ROI in the future, but this data will no longer be relevant.

Drawing a line after our tests, I can say that b2b advertising campaigns can become a great help in lead generation. Even when you have minimal budget it can still work. After a detailed analysis of our advertising campaigns we got these results (6 months period):|||

No secret that it’s hard to sell from business to business online. I decided to test several digital advertising tools to make this complex task simpler. I hope this case will be useful for others…