For the past decade, New York has worked to overtake the Bay Area as the US’s #1 startup hub.

New York startups have doubled their relative share of dollar volume invested into new tech companies nationwide since 2006 (source: Mattermark), and are now potentially staring down the opportunity to carve out a larger slice of that pie. Recent breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence will enable tasks that were once thought impossible for a computer to accomplish. In the way that mobile made Uber (via GPS chips) and Snapchat (via front-facing cameras) possible, AI is believed to be the technology that will set off the next wave of massively successful start ups.

The most interesting thing to see over the next few years is how New York’s startup community will weather the hype surrounding artificial intelligence. Over time, the only AI startups that will attract capital from investors and top talent from companies and universities, will be those that achieve revenue traction. John Frankel of ff Venture Capital and Steven Kuyan of Future Labs believe New York’s startup community has the characteristics necessary to survive the hype:

As the hype and funding around AI ramps up, you can expect startups to focus on their technology, potentially at the expense of solving a customer pain. Steve considers an AI-first startup to be one that solves a customer pain with AI at the core of what they do — not as an afterthought that is integrated into the product later on. At some point, the novelty of AI will wear off, and New York will still be a “show me your revenue” startup community. x.ai and Clarifai are good role models for New York’s newly-founded AI-first companies.

Both x.ai and Clarifai have built deeply technical teams that excel, respectively, in natural language processing and visual recognition. Clarifai uses that expertise to help companies algorithmically identify objects in photo (think NSFW image detection for media companies), and their recent $30m Series B points to the fact that they’re solving a major problem. x.ai uses natural language processing to power a bot that schedules meetings for you, and closed a $23m Series B nearly a year ago. Only time will tell if the AI-first startups demoing at the Future Labs AI Summit will experience similar success, but they seem to be off to a good start:

Many tech investors believe that the massive amounts of data acquired by large tech companies gives them an unfair advantage over startups in creating AI-first consumer applications. If that’s the case, startups will need to turn to the enterprise to generate the revenue they need to survive. John’s basically saying that New York’s landscape is perfect for AI-first startups since it’s home to the most Fortune 500 companies of any state in the US, and they’ll will be willing to pay for AI-enabled solutions to protect themselves against disruption that AI-enabled services could cause.

John’s thought here is that New York’s AI startup community will benefit from the bleeding edge research that is happening within the walls of university’s lab. As New York’s colleges and startups work together, you can expect to see theoretical AI techniques being commercialized much faster. The benefits of this are many-fold. As an example, students exposed to startups while studying AI at NYU, Columbia, or CUNY could be more likely to spin out their own companies than to work at the highest paying bank. As the caliber of AI talent founding (and joining) startups continues to climb, so too will the quality of companies.

And that, is the way New York’s AI community will survive the hype.

If you’re interested in learning more from the AI leaders at Facebook & IBM Watson how AI will impact our society, I hope I get to meet you at the Future Labs AI Summit.|||

New York startups have doubled their relative share of dollar volume invested into new tech companies nationwide since 2006 (source: Mattermark), and are now potentially staring down the opportunity…