**Note : As of 2 P.M EST, 11 May 2017,  there has been no final ruling by the court on the case. We will update this post as we hear more.

Today has been the “Triple Punch” day for immigrant workers. Meanwhile, similar to H4-EAD court challenge, a separate court case development in the STEM OPT case is suddenly rearing its head. In four separate developments, it is becoming clear that significant tightening of immigrant worker programs is on the cards.

First, In an unexpected and surprise move, in a court filing today, DHS asks District of Columbia Appeals Court to hold the Save Jobs USA H4-EAD case in abeyance till 27, Sep, 2017. The court had directed all parties to submit their motions by 03, Apr, 2017 on how proceed with the Save Jobs USA Appeal. It was widely expected that the DHS would either settle the case with Save Jobs USA or allow the appeal to proceed by weakly defending the case. Instead, DHS today filed a petition asking for more time in responding to the appeal in Case No 16-5287 in District of Columbia Appeals Court. The development provides a temporary breather to those directly impacted by any changes in H4-EAD rule. Save Jobs USA has opposed the DHS motion for abeyance. The court has not granted or denied the DHS motion as of now. Save Jobs USA is represented by John M. Miano, Dale Wilcox and Michael Hethmon of the Immigration Reform Law Institute. DHS and Federal government is represented by Erez Reuveni, Chad A. Readler and William C. Peachey of Department of Justice (DOJ).

Meanwhile in a surprise development, USCIS issued guidance that junior level computer programmers may not be automatically eligible for H1B Visas. Only highly skilled workers, who pass the scrutinizing eyes of USCIS, Department of Labour and DHS will be eligible to use H1B. These new changes will be effective 2018 onwards. The memo and guidance is likely to increase scrutiny of existing H1B applications in 2017 and we can expect large number of refusals or denials. Finally, in a somewhat expected move as discussed in our prediction seven months back, DHS and USCIS outlined their “Americans First Policy” while announcing enhanced measures to combat H1B Visa Fraud. These measures include a “Whistleblower Hotline”, Site Visit Audits as well as increased scrutiny of existing and new H1B applicants. USCIS is also increasing oversight over the EB-5  (Investor Visa) program. Last week they announced a regional audit program to detect EB-5 Abuse. All these events may seem disconnected, however, are a result of a coordinated policy shift.

Read the Text of the Appeal.

Accordingly, the Department requests the Court hold this case in abeyance for 180 days to permit the Department time to reconsider the H-4 Rule and whether issuance of a notice of proposed rulemaking relating to it is appropriate. The Government will update the court every 60 days concerning the Department’s review, and will inform the Court promptly should it determine new rulemaking is or is not appropriate before 180 days elapse. – Court Filing

The case involved Administrative Procedure Act (APA) challenge against DHS’s Executive and legal authority to issue the H4-EAD rule through the “Comment and Rule-making” process. The court had issued an order on 10 Feb, 2017 to hold the case in abeyance for 60 days accepting the DHS petition. The filing was due today, 03, Apr, 2017.

DHS has emphasized in it’s petition that it is actively considering whether to revise the H4-EAD rule through the “Comment and Rule-making” process. In our earlier post “Can Trump Administration repeal/revoke the H4-EAD process”, we had provided an outline of the “Comment and Rule-making” process to create or repeal a rule. It seems the administration has decided to revise this rule through the same Rule Making process which can be executed in maximum 60 days from the date of start. It is unclear at this time, whether the administration has decided to completely repeal the rule or to revise the H4 EAD program with major changes. The timing of the final changes will most likely coincide with impending changes to the H1-B program. In a separate court case on OPT STEM Extension (between DHS and Wash Tech USA), also signed through an executive order, it is possible that the administration will take the same route to resolve the case. Incase the court denies DHS’s motion for extra time, the Trump Administration may have to take a decision much sooner on the H4 EAD authorization.

For now, Save Jobs USA has weakly defended the DHS Motion indicative of the fact that there may have been bi-party discussions on the way ahead, however disagreements remain on the timing of those decisions. Save Jobs USA has asked the court to set a new date for Briefing & Oral Arguments so that the issues around the case can be clarified.

H4-EAD workers have bought themselves more time till the new administration and the court takes a final decision on this case. However, it increases the uncertainty around the work authorization. The petition also confirms that DHS and Trump Administration is seriously considering revising the H4-EAD rule. DHS has promised the court that it will update the court every 60 days on progress in this matter. Hence, we expect some major announcements to be made within the next 60 days around this work authorization. It is possible that DHS may significantly revise the rule or completely revoke/repeal the rule. The petition also provides a further indication of the intent of the administration in wanting to side-step the courts. In it’s filing, DHS makes an argument, that by considering revising or revoking the rule through the Rule making process, it may save time in the judicial review of the matter.

It is to be seen where this case heads, however, as we predicted in our detailed prediction “Trump Uncertainty Principle”, the writing is clear on the wall. We expect significant changes and tightening of the “Foreign Guest Workers” program by Q3-2017. An announcement was made by Department of Justice around the crack down of B1-Visa Fraud and settlement with Sistemas Globales S.A, an Argentina Technology company.

We eagerly await the final decision of the H4-EAD case. Meanwhile, we can get some indication of the outcome looking at case law and previous judgments by District Judge Tanya S. Chutkan. The judge empathized with the H4 spouses in the previous rulings and interpreted the laws favoring the government position.  In her 2015 ruling in the same case, she ruled in favour of the Obama Administration. She wrote in her 12 page ruling that the damage to the technology workers from work authorization issued to spouses of foreign guest workers was “highly speculative”. In another ongoing legal wrangling in the STEM OPT Case, DHS cited Chutkan’s decision emphasizing that DHS does have unequivocal authority over rule making process In all her rulings so far, she has sided with the government indicating that the government does indeed has the authority to create or repeal rules within the confines of the constitution.

Recently she sided with the government in EPA lawsuit, but also gave them a rap for not following plaintiff’s timeline.  She, however, took a lenient view in the case and allowed the government three years to update it’s records.

It is very likely that she will side with the government in the pending H4-EAD case. Given that she has already provided 60 days to DHS previously to update the court, she may not award 180 days abeyance. She may direct DHS to inform the court within 60-90 days on the status of the H4-EAD Rule. Unless of course, the Trump Administration has valid and compelling grounds for seeking 180 days abeyance. Some legal analysts claim that the administration may keeps the comments file open for 90 days and allow the proposed rule making process to run for 180 days (including atleast 60 days for the final rule to become effective).

If the Trump administration releases a proposed rule in the near future, all parties including the affected H4-EAD holders as well as anti-immigration side will be allowed to submit detailed comments on the proposed rule. In this case, it is likely that DHS will chose to respond to all those comments to ensure that they followed due process. As such, some lawyers believe that if majority of H4-EAD visa holders chose to comment on the proposed rule, it will take DHS anywhere from 30 to 60 days to respond to those comments individually. I would also like to emphasize that the administration may not necessarily revoke the rule, but modify it to make it more stringent before an EAD can be issued. They may reduce/remove the unlimited work mobility available to H4-EAD workers and may also permit those running legitimate businesses on this visa to continue to operate all profitable ventures with a minimum number of employee (s) to maintain status.

We are actively following this case and will be first to update this post as more details are available from the court filings. You may bookmark this page and check back for updated commentary on this topic.

Comments have been closed for this post. You can contact us through the Contact Page , Twitter or LinkedIn.|||

DHS requests for 180 days abeyance in Save Jobs USA case till 28, Sep, 2017 while it considers whether to revise the H4 EAD through comment and rulemaking.