Planted is a recruiting service that connects non-technical people with jobs in the startup industry.

They offer a double-sided reward of $100 in Amazon Credit for anyone you refer who gets a job through the service. The email is clean, cute, and direct—nothing distracts you from the call-to-action (CTA).

This referral email is practically frictionless. They make the incentive clear, give you a unique referral link within the email, and they also have a big, eye-catching button where you can see who you've invited, who's joined, and who's been offered a job. Once you click the “Track My Referrals” button, they also offer you templates for email, Twitter, and Facebook sharing.

While the templates are customizable, the email template seems a little bit spammy, and might get flagged in someone's inbox. It's weird to use hashtags and @-mentions in an email to a friend.

What You Can Steal: It's possible to make your email beautiful, simple, and effective all at once. The big “Track My Referrals” button is a clear call-to-action, that is much more eye-catching than hyperlinked text. But a button that stands out in one email, isn't going to stand out in the next.

Use an email service with a drag-and-drop interface, so that you can try out different email designs that are appropriate for your brand but also direct focus to the call-to-action button. Try using an email design tool, like Campaign Monitor, to send out different iterations and then A/B test to find the CTA that's most effective.

CareerFoundry offers online courses that give people the skills they need to break into the tech industry.

They sent this email to contract employees who mentor and teach the courses—many of whom acquired their skills by taking a course themselves. By asking teachers, who understand on a personal level the value of the program, to refer their friends, they're guaranteeing themselves both positive and targeted referrals.

Their program offers massive double-sided benefits, which incentivizes advocates to talk up CareerFoundry, and incentivizes their friends to listen.

But to take advantage of this service, you have to go through the extra step of signing up for their referral program. The referral program links take you to a dashboard which helps you manage your referrals (to see both who you've invited and who's accepted the invitation), which is useful—but this process of signing up causes friction. Make your referral program barrier-free by giving them an easy-access personalized link instead.

What You Can Steal: Targeting the people that know first-hand the value of your program (in this case, its teachers) increases the likelihood that they'll sing your praises. You can target people at specific times in their relationship with your company where they're most likely to refer using an email service like Customer.io, which specializes in customer segmentation. For example, you could target referral requests towards frequent buyers who just made a purchase.

The Hustle is a daily newsletter that keeps you up-to-date with the latest tech and business developments.

They sent this email out to subscribers to encourage them to refer their friends. If subscribers reach certain referral benchmarks, they get Hustle merchandise, like stickers or a duffel bag.|||

Email is the most popular referral method. In this post we'll share with you the right tools and tactics to maximize referral potential through email.