Creating an emergency response plan for schools is crucial. Knowing how to protect our children from all of the violence in today’s society is our primary focus. So, let’s dig into what an emergency response plan for schools is and how to start putting one into effect for your facility.

People may argue with me, but there is a big difference between a safety plan and an emergency response plan for a school.  A security program includes all safety concerns that can happen on a daily basis. However, an emergency response plan for schools focuses on the main events that could have a severe impact on the quality of life for you and your staff. An emergency response plan for a school should be simple and to the point.  The biggest thing that can be accomplished by an emergency response plan for a school is giving your staff a proactive way to respond to a reactive crisis.  People always go back to the way they were trained in high-stress situations.  Not being trained could result in an unneeded panic that leads to a sizable increase in the potential for an injury.

The mission of an emergency response plan for schools is to use advanced technology and response tactics. Also, the mission should provide a safe environment through the addition of a practical and efficient emergency response plan. Moreover, all of these actions combined will create a community response to any situation that threatens their quality of life.

[Your Facility] includes the option of choice, to either run, fight, or hide during an active shooter or violent attack crisis.  This method will require all current and future faculty members, as well as patrons, to be trained.  Training through presentation should be completed monthly.  Practical training should be at the attention of the management.

[Your Facility] uses a response options method when responding to armed criminals, active shooters, and deadly attacks. This process will allow faculty members any likely assistants or patrons, to guide themselves and others who are in lockdown to make the best decision possible under the given circumstances.  It is recommended that faculty members, assistants, and patrons first trigger lockdown mode in the event of an active shooter or deadly attack.  Once in lockdown, the decisions under the circumstances require them to follow one of the following options:

The goal is to give staff options when responding to any threats. Providing options allows them to create a survival mindset should they be in a dangerous situation.|||

Creating an Emergency Response Plan for Schools is a top priority in the safety of our children. Read further to learn more.