Both my children are well aware that we live on a budget now. Their father pays child support and I’ll get alimony for a few years, but part of our agreement is that I earn a certain amount per month, and over time my support will be decreased down to nothing. When they were younger I tried to shield my children from my financial insecurity, but I’m now more open about it. They see me working all the time, and they understand it’s because I need the money to make ends meet. And they know that I’m worried about my future, when the support ends.

Still, I don’t want them to feel anxious, so I’m careful about how I phrase things. If one of them wants an expensive item I don’t say, “I can’t afford it,” I say, “It’s out of my budget.” I am trying to teach them that financial stability is about choices. We could live in a larger house in a different town, but I choose to live here for the schools.

I heat our house with wood to save money on heating oil, which takes a lot of work but I’m rewarded not only with lower costs, but also with a sense of accomplishment. I feel the same way about shoveling my driveway in the winter. When my children beg me to hire a snowplow so that they don’t have to help, I say that I would rather have the money for us to spend, and besides, shoveling builds character.

I am teaching them practical skills, like checking unit prices at the grocery store to determine the most economical size of a product, and I’m constantly reminding them to turn off the lights and take shorter showers to save on utility bills. They know how much (or little) I’m paid for the stories I write and how long it takes me to write each one. I want them to understand the connection between what we use or buy and what it takes to earn the money to pay for it all.

It’s difficult to grasp a lesson in the abstract, however, so I also ask them to make choices with their own money. They both get an allowance, and my daughter has worked an after- school job for the past two years. For most of their lives I always picked up the tab. Now they have to pay for extras, and I don’t make loans. If my son wants to order an item online, he has to bring me the cash before I hand over my credit card. If we’re out shopping and he wants to buy something but doesn’t have his wallet, I tell him we can go back another day. Once he has time to think over the purchase, he usually changes his mind.

Actually, I tease my son about being the quintessential Dutch banker, like his father, because he is so obsessed with saving. He is loath to spend money, so weighs every purchase as if it will be his last, and this often produces anxiety. I recently suggested that he put about $500 of his savings into a retirement account, explaining that if he contributes just a little money every month, by the time he is ready for retirement he’ll have a nice nest egg, but he refuses. He doesn’t want his savings balance to dip below a certain figure. (From the time they began getting an allowance, I’ve insisted that my children save at least 20 percent and give the same percentage to charity — an idea I took from John D. Rockefeller.)

Where my son is frugal, my daughter has traditionally been something of a spendthrift. She used to rent numerous movies on demand and make online clothing purchases without my permission. Even though the bills were usually manageable, I made her reimburse me, if only so she’d think twice the next time before hitting “buy.” I’ve also given her a clothing budget, so she learns how to make choices for herself; and she has to pay for gas to run the 2002 Honda I bought her last year.

She’s also more open to the idea of attending college in her father’s native Holland (where my dual-citizen children can attend college for a fraction of the cost in the U.S.). When we started the discussion she dismissed my insistence that she not take out any student loans, but now that she has had to live within a budget, she has a much better grasp of how onerous monthly payments can be. Having had to work my way through college, and then struggle to pay off my loans, I’ve always been determined to give my children a debt-free education; and I haven’t given up on that dream.

On a more philosophical level, I am encouraging them to choose a career that they love, and work hard to take care of themselves, no matter what. They have both joked about marrying a rich spouse, and I remind them of what happened to me. I worked all through my marriage, but I never thought about saving my own money or having a back-up plan. You always need a back-up plan, I tell them.

So much of parenting is leading by example and modeling behavior. Regardless of what we say, our children are watching what we do — and don’t do. Perhaps the lesson that will stick with my children the most is not how to find the cheapest size of laundry detergent, but the importance of planning for the financial unknown, and realizing that they can adapt and survive no matter what happens.

Bright is made possible by funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Bright retains editorial independence. The Creative Commons license applies only to the text of this article. All rights are reserved in the images. If you’d like to reproduce this on your site for noncommercial purposes, please contact us. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.|||

For most of my marriage, I led a very exotic existence. We lived all over the world — my husband was an executive with an international bank, and I was a foreign correspondent — and our life was like…