When working on a project where we need to run software that typically runs on another operating system, virtualization can be a very useful tool. On macOS, VMware Fusion is an excellent choice for this; it has many time-saving features, and its compatibility is top-notch—especially if you need to run Windows or macOS itself in a VM.

By default, Fusion provides several basic virtual networking options that can satisfy most requirements. If you need a little more, customization is fairly easy, though undocumented—and information on how to customize is scattered. The Pro version has a network editor, but if you don’t need the rest of what that version offers, or you’re just curious how VMware Fusion networking works, this article can help you.

A brand-new VMware Fusion installation (8.5.4 at the time of this writing) offers a handful of networking options:

In my case, the latter option was what I went for first—but it didn’t turn out to be quite what I’d hoped for. The virtual machines I was using were already configured to talk to each other using their own IP address scheme and could see each other just fine over —virtual networks don’t care what protocols you use over them. However, my Mac could not talk to those machines, as it was using an IP address (issued by the DHCP server Fusion runs by default on that network) that was not in the same subnet.

I found I could make it work temporarily with a quick , but the next time Fusion restarted, the Mac’s configuration had reverted. That didn’t stop the DHCP server, either, which could have caused problems if a virtual machine tried to use it!

The key to customizing Fusion’s networking is the directory . In there, you’ll find a file called , which is the master configuration file for Fusion networking. You can edit this file with when Fusion is shut down (which also tears down any virtual networks); changes will be picked up and applied the next time you start Fusion.

A brand-new file looks similar to this:

In this file, the answers correspond to , the included host-only network, and is for , the NAT network that all virtual machines that need Internet access use.

I recommend you don’t change either one of these networks’ configurations. Instead, you can add your own networks, supplying new directives by adding lines for , , and so on. You can make additional networks past , too—just skip to , , and so on. (I don’t know how far these go, but I haven’t run out yet!)

In my example, I needed a new host-only network where I could attach my virtual machines. This network would not have DHCP, and I would want my Mac to have a fixed address on that network. I added these lines to , which—once the virtual machines were configured appropriately—allowed my Mac to talk to the other virtual machines (on 10.0.0.1 and 10.0.0.253, in the 10/16 subnet):

Here’s what every setting in the configurations above means. I haven’t needed any more than these settings to establish the configurations I need.

If these aren’t enough for you, you can also peek into the directories that are created and edit some of the network configuration files, like and . The former may be particularly useful if you want Fusion to give DHCP configurations containing, say, custom name servers. Heed any warnings in the files carefully, though! Fusion’s autoconfiguration can create a confusing situation if you don’t.

Once you’ve got the network configuration the way you think you want it, start Fusion again. If your networks have on, you’ll be able to see them when you run .

Connecting your virtual machines to your new virtual networks is done in the settings for each virtual machine. You can reconnect an existing virtual network adapter to a different network at any time (much like you can unplug a network cable from a network port and plug it into a new one on a real computer).

If you want to add additional virtual network adapters to your virtual machine, you’ll have to shut it down. You can then use the “Add Device…” button to add as many as you need—or at least eight, which is where I stopped trying.

Once your virtual machines are running, you should be able to them both ways, assuming no firewalls are in play. And if that works, you should be good to go.|||

How to customize VMware Fusion's virtual networks and create a virtualization setup to support just about any development task.