Marketers love Twitter as it is one of the last platforms that allows you to organically reach 100% of your audience. Tweet about a new blog article, and it will pop up in every follower’s Twitter feed (unlike on Facebook where your posts’ organic reach is around 2% and dropping).

Twitter’s a great place to engage with your customers in real time, and drive considerable web traffic to your blog or landing pages.

Which leads us to the Big Question haunting every social media marketer: how to get higher engagement for your tweets and build an engaged Twitter audience?

We wanted to answer this question in a scientific manner, so we requested a scientist’s backup.

Markus Lippus, Co-founder and CTO of the AI solutions company MindTitan, collected and analyzed 23,858 tweets by 145 MarTech (marketing technology & software) Twitter accounts by comparing the top-performers vs. low-performers; and investigating every single word, hashtag, mention and much more.

We did our best to stick to cold, hard numbers and not to run into conclusions based on wishful thinking, and we discovered some fascinating stuff.

Among other treasures, we discovered that…

Want to learn how to get higher engagement on Twitter? Read on!

One can find multiple tweet analyses on the web. Some focus on Top Twitter accounts, Twitter ads or 10,000 randomly chosen Twitter profiles. The first challenge we met was the question: “Which tweets should we analyze?”

After giving it some thought, we settled on the profiles of 187 top marketing tools for it being a well-defined group with consistent tweets and fewer outliers (e.g. one tweet with 20 000 likes while the account average is 5 likes). And who wouldn’t want to know (and copy) how the beloved marketing tools such as Moz, Buffer, Hootsuite, and HubSpot engage with their Twitter audiences.

To find the Twitter profiles, we scraped the lists of best marketing tools found via a quick Google search. As a result, we had 187 Twitter profiles of PPC, SEO, CRO, and other marketing tools to analyze.

And that’s where the fun began. At least for Markus, doing the hard part (in my opinion) – writing the code. In his own words:

 We used Twitter’s public REST API to download one month worth of tweets made by the profiles of 187 top marketing tools. Accounts were filtered so that every user in the analysis had at least 2000 followers, and tweets were filtered by creation date to make sure that all tweets examined originate from the same period.

TLDR: We ended up with 23,858 tweets by 145 Twitter profiles, containing 118.7 characters and one hashtag on average.

Which are the marketing tools with the highest number of followers, the highest engagement per tweet, and the most engaged fans? And most importantly, how could other marketers replicate their success on Twitter?

Out of the top 145 MartTech Twitter profiles, 17 had over 100,000 followers. Hootsuite’s followership (7.8M followers) exceeded all other profiles by order of magnitude. So much so that we had to exclude their tweets from some parts of analysis to keep the results objective (noted as required). Sorry, Hootsuite!

Other accounts with 100k+ followers included Klout, HubSpot, Buffer, Moz, Tweepi, Kissmetrics, etc. All of these tools are known for sharing high-quality content and insights, which shows that putting lots of effort into scaled inbound marketing will pay off on social media.

But not all Twitter accounts acquire their followers over years of consistent work. Marketers are way too impatient to bet on organic growth. So, they use follow-unfollow tools to follow large batches Twitter users and get their follows back.

As we’ve recently seen many brands engaging in the follow-unfollow practice to acquire new followers, we were interested in how many no-followback fans are truly engaging with the brands on Twitter.

Here’s how a follow-unfollow tool looks like: you can follow new users, and unfollow the ones who didn’t follow you back.

Which MarTech brands use the follow-unfollow method and is it actually working for them?

We analyzed the correlation of three Twitter relationships to identify the cases where follow-unfollow practices are used:

We can’t say 100% for sure, but there’s a good chance the brands on the graph whose red/purple columns form 30% or more of the blue columns are trying to actively increase their followership by following new people and unfollowing the ones who aren’t following back.

Think about it: Why would a MarTech tool follow hundreds of thousands of Twitter accounts. Unless they’re trying to get more followers…

As you look at the brands with the most followers – Klout, HubSpot, Buffer, Moz – they all have a large set of loyal followers (blue column) while following back a small set of chosen profiles.

 Brands like Tweepi, VerticalResponse, and Pressfarm have a high concentration of mutual following relationships. Moreover, these accounts follow thousands of users who aren’t following back.

It is quite common to acquire new followers by using the follow-unfollow tactic. And it’s working.

Out of 145 MarTech Twitter accounts analyzed, 48 are potentially engaging in follow-unfollow tactics. That’s 33.1%! Three of these accounts have 100k+ Twitter followers, and 13 have 10k+ followers.

Here are the Top 15 MarTech tool Twitter accounts with a high concentration of users whom they follow but who aren’t following back. This graph’s to show that it’s common to use the follow-unfollow tactics as they can help you amass quite a followership.

Using the follow-unfollow method to get more Twitter followers is highly efficient. But there’s a good chance that the people (or bots) that follow back are not actually engaging with your shared content.

In AdEspresso, we ran an experiment of using bots to gather more Instagram followers. As we compared the engagement per post for followers attained with the bot method vs. other Instagram best practices, the regular method returned twice as many results. You can’t bot your way to business.

We were quite surprised that the concentration of respected MarTech tools using the follow-unfollow method is so high. Were we the only ones taken aback by these findings?

Out of sheer curiosity, we also checked how many of the TOP 20 MarTech Twitter accounts organize regular Twitter chats. We found that Buffer, Hootsuite, Sprout Social engage with their followers in Twitter chats.

We compared the average tweet engagement of the Twitter chat posts to the regular tweets and came to a surprising finding:

Overall, it can be said that putting lots of effort into organizing weekly Twitter chats won’t necessarily bring you higher Twitter engagement. However, these chats can help to increase brand awareness.

As a sidenote, we also noticed that MailChimp attended Twitter for Business’s chat #TweetHour and saw high engagement on their answers.

Our findings revealed that Twitter chat tweets do not get significantly high engagement.

While people engage with these tweets by posting an answer, there’s still evidence that conducting Twitter chats might not be worth your time, especially if you don’t have a large followership. Instead, try contributing to other Twitter chats.

Does tweeting multiple times per day decrease your tweet engagement?

We set out to solve the mystery, and the answer is: Yes. And no.

Here’s a graph comparing the average number of tweets vs. the average tweet engagement.

As you look at the graph, several groups draw out:

The optimal number of tweets/days is around 8-10. And if you wish to copy the best, check the Twitter accounts of MailChimp, Moz, Marketo, Sprout Social, and WordStream. They’re clearly doing some things right.

Writing a perfect tweet is something that marketers struggle with every time they share something on Twitter. According to Copyblogger, 80% of people only read through the headline.

So naturally, we wanted to know how to write a tweet that gets more clicks, likes, retweets, and replies.

When analyzing the impact of various tweet elements (hashtags, mentions, numbers, words, etc.) to engagement, we divided all tweets into three groups:

As you can see, the top 5% performed twice as well as the top 5%-10%. We set to find out whether using specific tweet elements can increase the likelihood of getting into the Top 5% compared to the chance of ending up with no significant tweet engagement.

How can you publish more tweets that get the engagement levels of the top 5% high-performers?

There have been several analyses describing the best words to include in a tweet. But these analyses didn’t really reflect on the word order in tweets.

When scrolling down their Twitter feed, people rarely read the entire tweet before deciding whether it’s worth their time and attention. So it seemed appropriate to analyze the first words of tweets.

After we excluded all the retweets and @ mentions (popular ways to begin a tweet), the most popular first words of top 5% highest engagement tweets were:

Of all the 5% high-engagement tweets, almost 7% started with the word “How.” Other popular words to begin a tweet with were “The,” “Learn,” and “We.”

But what if all the tweets start with these words, not just the top 5%? This hypothesis proved true. Here’s a graph of the most popular first words of all tweets analyzed:

As you can see, many of the words in top 5% tweets are also widely used in all tweets. However, there were a few outliers!

To find out which words truly contribute to higher engagement rates, we modeled the distribution of the popular words in top 5% tweets on all tweets using the binomial distribution. Put in human language; we checked which words have a higher likelihood of landing your tweets in the top 5%.

Here are the words that have a statistically significant higher possibility to get your tweet noticed and engaged with:

Test the words “Thanks,” “Top,” “We,” “Congratulations,” “Learn,” and “Great” at the beginning of your tweets to reach higher engagement.

Hashtags are what get your tweets found by potential audiences and will skyrocket the number of likes, retweets, and replies. At least that’s what we’re all used to thinking as marketers.

Of the 23,858 tweets analyzed, 59.38% contained at least one hashtag.

The most widely used hashtags in all tweets were #SEO, #marketing, #contentmarketing, and #socialmedia.



 The most popular hashtags in the top 5% high-engagement tweets were the same as in all tweets: #SEO, #marketing, #contentmarketing, and #cmworld (slightly more popular in the top 5% group).

As you can see, marketers like their marketing jargon and corresponding hashtags.



 Could use a particular hashtag give you a significant edge to receive higher engagement on tweets?

We modeled these as we did the words and found that the following hashtags have a higher potential to land a tweet in the top 5% high-engagement group:

According to a study by Buddy Media/Salesforce, one or two hashtags can get you up to two times more engagement than tweets without hashtags. This guide was written in 2013. We’re all into 2017 now. And the results we found this time are dramatically different.

Can more hashtags get your tweet to the top 5% high-engagement club?

We set out to answer this question by analyzing the effect of the growing number of hashtags on tweet engagement.

To check whether more hashtags results in higher engagement, we ran a test using OLS linear regression. We found that there is no meaningful correlation between the number of hashtags and the engagement value.

Every extra hashtag adds 0.00015 to tweet engagement. That’s like a drop in the ocean, e.g. using more hashtags does not significantly contribute to higher tweet engagement.

When looking at the engagement vs. the number of hashtags of the top 5% high-engagement tweets, there’s no linear correlation between the growth of tweet engagement and the number of hashtags.

However, using two hashtags is the golden number as the average engagement value is the highest at this point.

Using marketing-related hashtags like #SEO, #contentmarketing, and #customersuccess can lead to higher engagement by Twitter users interested in marketing.

The number of hashtags in your tweets has no significant impact on your engagement rate.

(Although if you really want to use hashtags and get higher engagement, it’s most likely that two hashtags will work best). As with many things in life, it’s about the quality, not quantity when it comes to using hashtags in tweets.

List posts with headlines using numbers are considered to have a higher engagement than other types of articles. According to Koechley, tests show that traffic to content at Upworthy can vary by as much as 500% simply because of the headline.

So what about using numbers in your tweets?

We found that out of the top 5% high-performing tweets, 33.4% included a number. Out of all tweets analyzed, 29% contained a number.

The most popular numbers used in all tweets were 5 (919 occurrences), 3 (549 occurrences), 10 (500 occurrences), 7 (497 occurrences), and 6 (479 occurrences).

The most popular numbers used in the top 5% high engagement tweets were the same as in all tweets: 5, 6, 10, 3, and 7.

When analyzing the most popular words to begin a tweet with, we noticed that many tweets started with a number. Most of them probably promoted a list post.

Which made us curious: Does beginning your tweet with a number increase the likelihood of more likes and retweets?

We found that the average engagement of tweets beginning with a number was 9.4% higher compared to tweets starting with regular text.

However, there is no correlation between the size of the number used and the engagement level. Sharing the post “5 Twitter Hacks” vs. “55 Twitter Hacks” will not result in higher tweet engagement. (But if you publish a good article, it will eventually get more shares from readers).

We compared the numbers in Top 5% tweets with the numbers in all tweets to find whether some numbers have a higher potential of getting traction.

We learned that the numbers 1, 2, 8, 20, and 100 were more likely to land a tweet among the 5% high-performers in terms of engagement.

Other than that, the exact number you use has no significant effect on your tweets’ engagement.

Out of 23,858 tweets, 9,828 (41.19%) included one or more @ mentions. 288 tweets started with @ mention while 9540 tweets had @ mention later inside the tweet.

When analyzing the effect of mentions in tweets, we decided to not count the @mentions that tweets began with. This way, we were able to exclude @replys and focus on real in-tweet mentions.

Most of the tweets (59.4%) included no mentions, followed by one mention (41.19%). 6.7% of the tweets analyzed included two mentions.

If you look at the mentions in the Top 5% of high-engagement tweets, only 45.7% include no mention (compared to 59.4% of all tweets).

We decided to dig deeper and found that using mentions in your tweet can significantly increase tweet engagement.

On average, using 2 mentions in a tweet results in 84.2% higher engagement than using none. Using 4 mentions in a tweet will give 335.7% higher average engagement compared to 0 mentions.

In case you were wondering, the most frequently mentioned Twitter accounts were those of Forbes, B2Community, and Search Engine Journal. As you look at the graph below, you’ll notice that mentioning influencers in tweets is also popular in the MarTech space.

Many marketers like to use a social media scheduler to keep track of their upcoming posts and tweets. If you’re working with a scheduling tool, an evident question pops to mind: “What’s the best time to publish our posts?”

We did our best to find the answer to the question:

When should you tweet?

By analyzing all the tweets by 145 Twitter accounts, we mapped the tweet engagement per each hour of the day.

According to our findings, the best times to tweet are the morning commute, the time before the lunch, the evening commute, and the time between 9 p.m. and midnight.

For a point of reference, here’s what Buffer’s optimal scheduling tool suggested to me:

These two graphs look reassuringly similar. But remember: our graph was based solely on the Twitter accounts’ time zones. This doesn’t take into account where the audience – the people engaging with the tweets – live.

There’s a good chance that most of your followers live in the same time zone as you. The best times to tweet are the morning commute, the time before lunch, the evening commute, and between 9 p.m. and midnight.

Tweeting about a new blog post only once might seem like a missed opportunity to reach a wide audience across multiple time zones. It’s a common practice to tweet about the same news, articles, etc. multiple times.

We were curious to find out whether re-posting the same tweet can lower your chances of gaining traction and engagement.

We found that after re-posting the same tweet for the fourth time, the average engagement-per-tweet made a sharp fall.

Disclaimer: “It would make sense to assume that there is some chance involved as we also included tweets which have been posted twice. If the first one was left unnoticed and the second was posted at a more opportune time, it would count as a strong positive.

For the second round of analysis, we only included the tweets that had been posted at least 3 times.

It seems like 4 and 7 are the magic numbers a tweet should be posted. When posting the same tweet over seven times, the average tweet engagement starts to decrease.

Alright, it’s time to wrap up the analysis and review all the ways to increase your Twitter engagement.

But before you go… Here’s what we suggest for growing your Twitter account and having more meaningful conversations with your Twitter audience:

Do you have any other questions that could be found out by analyzing tweets?

Drop us a line in the comments, and maybe we’ll have a look at these mysteries sometimes soon!|||

