Hey everyone. Recently there was a post about the relation between gut health and mental health, and it piqued my interest in creating a stack to help facilitate healing and microbriome regrowth. After diving into google scholar articles and acknowledging the relation between gut health and mental acuity, I'm convinced this is the best stack to assist with repairing your microbiome and gut health. I started a variation of this stack a couple months ago in addition to some other noots/peptides, and it's made some subtle but perceptible improvements in my life already. Hopefully it helps ya'll too.

In addition to this stack, I'd also recommend BPC-157(which I just started 2 days ago), to further assist with systemic healing and improved overall gut health.

EDIT: Per /u/Prototek, adding some studies about the other supplements and their gut healing benefits. Also lowered the nighttime drink dose of L-Glutamine per a recommendation.

Quercetin - Tighter junctions between intestinal cells in gut. Less permeability = less systemic inflammation

Omega 3s - Tons of benefits, but primarily it influences the good butyrate producing bacteria.

ZMA/Magnesium - Not as much research, but I personally find it helpful.

Forgot to mention EDIT: For those of you who eat a lot of bad food, be aware of a possible Herxheimer reaction if cutting a lot of sugar/carbs in conjunction with this stack. A year ago, I went hard into keto after being on a very high sugar/high carb diet, and I had what is typically called "the keto flu", but I believe this effect is more due to the massive die off of bacteria in your gut that feeds on sugars and carbs. I've had a few friends try this similar stack(high sugar diets), and have a "sick" couple of days in the beginning even though they only cut back on some sugary stuff. Light migraine, sore throat/tonsils, and general fatigue. Feels like a 100% manageable flu, but it's still unpleasant. Anti-inflammatory supplements help with this but only so much. This typically lasts a day or two.

I think this stack covers a large majority of the bases required to propagate gut flora and increase general intestinal health, while providing nootropic benefits in relation to social fluidity, mood, mental energy, and emotional health. Starting with the probiotic, I chose Garden of Life(100 Billion CFU) for a variety of reasons. First it has all the popular beneficial strains, in addition to a diverse amount of subtly mood boosting strains. After doing some googling, it looks like there is a decent balance between the histamine increasing/reducing, the immuno-modulator, nutrient absorption promoting, mood boosting, anti inflammatory, and stool improving strains. Taking GOL in addition to the prebiotic strain from Vitamin Shoppe provides all the prebiotic goodness to help facilitate the beneficial flora to grow and actually populate the gut long term.

Glutamine, NAG, Quercetin, Collagen, and Aloe Vera juice all help grow the intestinal mucosa back to its normal state, and regrow the Microvillus that gets damaged with chronic bowel disease. For the good bacteria to stick around long term, it needs that mucous layer for protection. Another important factor that most people overlook in gut health is digestive enzymes. Certain strains of bacteria can change the acidity of your stomach and intestines, which can cause all sorts of problems with digestive effectiveness and as a result, your nutrient absorption. Super enzymes are a staple in any one of my stacks, simply because you can never digest food too well, right? The last 3 supplements are Caprylic Acid/Coconut Oil, Omega 3s, and Vitamin D. Omega 3s and Coconut oil both assist with Butyrate production, which provides tremendous benefits with "how you feel" via its anti-inflammatory action. It also helps with weight loss and insulin sensitivity. Vitamin D is also a general fix all and something everyone should be taking. Unless you work outside for a large majority of your day, you're probably not getting enough vitamin D. 4000IU is the recommended daily allowance, so 5000IU should be fine for everyone. Vitamin D is also essential for gene functions that pertain gut flora, as well as anti-inflammatory pathways regulated via the VDR receptors. Hopefully this helps you folks with gut problems get back to guaranteed regularity, it's certainly helped me.

Forgot to add my Dr. Rhonda Patrick plug. She's the coolest and has a great video on the subject. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqyjVoZ4XYg|||

Hey everyone. Recently there was a post about the relation between gut health and mental health, and it piqued my interest in creating a stack to...