STUFF YOU MAY LIKE

Surely, email marketing is still relevant and it remains one of the best means to directly market a business to potential clients or customers.

Effective email marketing campaigns can encourage customer loyalty as well as inspire new potential clients. It is one of the cheapest forms of direct marketing that offers better returns on investment.

This type of online marketing solution helps businesses to engage subscribers, target an audience, send beautiful, responsive emails and easily track results.

But email marketing success also largely depends on the timing of the campaign. This is why it’s so important to know the best time to send marketing emails for optimum performance.

Choosing the right email marketing services providers depends on your needs and the size of your business. It also depends on what you wanted to achieve with your business email marketing campaigns.

Surely, there are countless email marketing services providers out there to choose from and luckily, they all have plenty of reviews to give an insight into how well they are performing.

They all have their own benefits and drawbacks depending on your specific needs. They come with marketing automation tools, customisable email templates, list building features, and more to help you get the most out of your email marketing campaigns.

SEE ALSO: How To Create Captivating Marketing Emails For Business Marketing

Although there are multiple options available for those looking to start their own newsletter or email marketing campaigns, below is a list of some of the best email marketing services providers you can use.

GraphicMail.com is powerful email marketing software with behaviour-based email marketing automation that offers a complete set of outstanding next generation features.

The company is now known as SharpSpring Mail+, a new platform with extra marketing automation. It features such as basic marketing automation functions, website tracking capabilities, dynamic list builder and more.



Almost everyone knows MailChimp.com. It is arguably the most popular online email marketing solution to manage subscribers, send emails, and track results. It also offers easy integrations with other really useful programs.

This is one of the best email marketing services providers and it’s used by more than 15 millions of people and businesses across the globe. It offers both premium and free packages – it’s free for small business with up to 2000 subscribers to send out email campaigns.



VerticalResponse.com is another email marketing services provider being used by thousands of small businesses and popular brands to send marketing email campaigns.

The email marketing software also helps businesses to send email newsletters, offers, invitations and autoresponders.

VerticalResponse offers full-featured free plan and premium account for big and small brands.



Marketo.com is another popular email marketing services provider that helps brands and marketers to easily master the art and science of digital marketing.

The company is one of the leaders in digital marketing software and solutions for both small and big brands. It provides easy-to-use, powerful, and complete marketing software that propels fast-growing small companies and global enterprises alike.



Silverpop.com is another powerful email marketing provider you can try out. It provides deep, behaviour-based customer insights and personalised interactions for improved customer engagement, lead management, email marketing and mobile communications.

The company which is now part of IBM digital marketing solutions, delivers exceptional experiences for customers across the buyer journey.



CampaignMonitor.com an elegantly simple email marketing software that makes it easy to create, send and measure the impact of your email marketing campaigns.

The software lets you create stunning and engaging email marketing campaigns with simple drag-and-drop tools.

Your design is guaranteed to look amazing in every inbox, on every device.



BenchmarkEmail.com is one of the best professional bulk email marketing services for small businesses and big brands.

The marketing software lets you send email campaigns to up to 2,000 subscribers for $0 per month.

You can access every feature and only upgrade when you need to.



GetResponse.com is also a powerful and one of the best easy-to-use email marketing tools.

It is built to help small businesses and top brands achieve maximum success in their marketing efforts.

The marketing software is perfect for anyone whether you are a small business owner, professional blogger, or marketing agency and whether you are a beginner or an advanced pro.



If you are looking for affordable and easy to use email marketing and autoresponder tool for your business marketing, AWeber.com is another popular tool you should try out.

You can easily create and send beautiful, engaging emails in just a few minutes with this popular email marketing tool. Its features include drag and drop web form builder, RSS-to-email converting and many more powerful features.



Their feature-rich platform makes it easy to roll out integrated campaigns, quickly and effectively.

With smart message delivery options that streamline the email marketing process, you can create a campaign once and deliver it to email, social and the web with the click of a button.|||

There are so many email marketing services providers out there to use. Here is a list of best email marketing services and software providers for business marketing