"This partnership reflects the significant commitment Aflac has to maintaining a world-class investment platform that will generate sustainable risk-adjusted net investment income despite the headwinds of very low interest rates impacting our general account," Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Aflac Incorporated Frederick J. Crawford said. "We are pleased that we will be investing in assets that will provide solid margins and less volatility after accounting for hedge costs for our Aflac Japan dollar program."

"NXT Capital is very pleased to partner with Aflac and to offer Aflac access to the diversification benefits and attractive risk-adjusted returns that middle market private debt provides," said Robert Radway, NXT Capital's Chairman and CEO. "We appreciate Aflac's recognition of NXT's expertise as an asset manager, our proven, broad-based direct origination capability and rigorous underwriting process for proprietary middle market loans."

About Aflac 

When a policyholder gets sick or hurt, Aflac pays cash benefits fast. For six decades, Aflac insurance policies have given policyholders the opportunity to focus on recovery, not financial stress. In the United States, Aflac is the leading provider of voluntary insurance at the worksite. Through its trailblazing One Day PaySM initiative, Aflac U.S. can receive, process, approve and disburse payment for eligible claims in one business day. In Japan, Aflac is the leading provider of medical and cancer insurance and insures 1 in 4 households. Aflac individual and group insurance products help provide protection to more than 50 million people worldwide. For 11 consecutive years, Aflac has been recognized by Ethisphere as one of the World's Most Ethical Companies. In 2017, Fortune magazine recognized Aflac as one of the 100 Best Companies to Work For in America for the 19th consecutive year and included Aflac on its list of Most Admired Companies for the 16th time. In 2015, Aflac's contact centers were recognized by J.D. Power by providing "An Outstanding Customer Service Experience" for the Live Phone Channel. Aflac Incorporated is a Fortune 500 company listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol AFL. To find out more about Aflac and One Day PaySM, visit aflac.com or espanol.aflac.com.

About Aflac Global Investments 

Aflac Global Investments is the asset management division of Aflac Incorporated, with offices in New York and Tokyo and more than 100 professionals managing in excess of $110 billion on behalf of the general account of Aflac Japan and Aflac U.S.

About NXT Capital

NXT Capital is a leading provider of structured financing to the U.S. middle market. Since its formation in 2010, the company has originated over $15 billion in total financing volume spread over 500+ transactions. With $8.8 billion of capital at its disposal, NXT provides a full range of structured financing solutions on a direct basis through its Corporate Finance and Real Estate Finance Groups.  NXT Capital manages capital for third parties through its  asset management platform and offers investors proprietary access to primarily first lien senior secured loans that are not broadly traded or otherwise generally available without a loan origination platform. Investment offerings include levered and unlevered funds, separately managed accounts and CLOs.  NXT's investor base includes public and private pension plans, insurance companies, endowments, foundations and other institutional investors. NXT Capital Investment Advisers, LLC, a subsidiary of NXT Capital LLC, is an SEC Registered Investment Adviser.

Analyst and investor contact – Robin Y. Wilkey, 706.596.3264 or 800.235.2667, FAX: 706.324.6330, or rwilkey@aflac.com

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/aflac-announces-investment-partnership-with-nxt-capital-300431003.html|||

COLUMBUS, Ga., March 31, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Aflac Announces Investment Partnership with NXT Capital. NXT to Manage Initial $500 million Portfolio Related...