Simon allows you to very quickly point domains to specific hosts and ports by defining directives in Redis. Largely inspired by hipache, a standalone proxy that does the same thing.

For every request(!), Simon looks up the Redis Set to find one or more destinations. To define a route, add a destination ( or or even ) to a Redis set :

Wait, for every request? Isn't that slow? Not at all, we're talking Nginx and Redis here.

Distribute requests for to ports 5566 and 5577:

If Simon finds multiple destinations, new visitors will be randomly directed to one of them as a rough form of load balancing. If a session ID is present Simon will direct all further visits to the same destination. The session ID is read from the cookie "cookie_connect.sid" by default, see options below for how to change this.

These instructions are specific to the OpenResty distribution on Ubuntu:

The above config first initializes Nginx variables and (to make them available in the Lua scope) then runs Simon, then uses those (now defined) variables to set up the directive.

You can use an asterisk "*" to define a catch-all / fallback for a single level of subdomain. For example, "*.example.dev" will match "hello.example.dev" but not "api.staging.example.dev":

Wildcard domains are only used if an exact match is not found.

Some proxied-to servers require a specific hostname to understand the request (maybe you're proxying to a S3 bucket, Wordpress instance, or another Simon instance). By default Simon copies the hostname of the original request (so if the request is to , that will be carried along in the proxied request). To send a specific hostname, you can define a " " key:

Set up "Static website hosting" on your S3 bucket to get public access and loading index.html for / requests.

To remove a destination, remove it from the Redis set with :

To delete an entire route (all destinations) use the Redis command:

Instead of using the Redis CLI directly, you can use the provided bash script for a slightly nicer experience, such as|||

simon - Dynamic routing/vhosts with nginx + Lua + Redis