One of the most beneficial business environments for entrepreneurs these days are co-working spaces. Are you going to organize your own co-working space? To help, we’ve gathered together a useful tips for organizing a perfect space.

However, let us clarify one important thing - not everybody’s definition of "perfect" is the same, but when creating a co-working space, follow these advice, to organize and manage everything in a proper manner.

In general,  what is co-working space? For just organizing a simple one, you need only a  group of people with a shared interests. However, if your aim is to create a proper business space, you have to think carefully on every detail. The process can be complicated and difficult. Here are few tips to think about, when trying to organize an effective and awesome co-working space. Let's start with definition.

A co-working place is a shared working space, the mission of which is to boost networking. Here people meet and work together, simply, network. These spaces  typically unite together entrepreneurs, freelancers, startupers and simply, professionals from different fields. Co-working spaces are great for freelancers or people, who are not a constant office workers or like to travel frequently.

First of all, organizing a co-working space is somehow starting a startup. So it is important to understand the demands of the community your co-working space is created for.

If you think “once I built it, they will come”, you're wrong. First of all, the concept of co-working space is new, many people don't even know, what is it. So you have to do some work in explaining the targeted community, what is co- working space, how can they be involved and etc.. It's a good idea to host a few events for creating an interest towards your space. Be active in social media, create meetups or Facebook group to invite followers and friends to join. Learn an art of small paces.  First,  find a convenient place to organize meeting. Then, develop the concept step by step.

What do you imagine, when thinking about co-working spaces? Some trendy contemporary, stylish or even urban designed place, where all sort of creative and unusual falk is gathered, right? To be honest, this costs a pretty penny, so when spent money to create such place, you have to understand what to charge for participation.

Being able to understand the investment size, will help you to define the rightest budget. Think also about a mere thing, which is crucial, when designing your co-working space. Is this a profit center or an inspiration center? Co-working space must be an inspiration center.

When choosing a space surely you’re looking for a convenient, safe and easy place. Many people think,co-working is ideal to organize in an old, underutilized buildings or factories. After going throught design process, it becomes a proper one for your co-working space.

After choosing a location and the building, you have to choose an interior style. The first thing that users notice when entering your co-working space is your furnishings. Don't overview the power of the first impression. The first few seconds will be crucial for a person to decide, whether he/she wants to work here, or not.   Hire professional designer. Your interior must reflect the space’s core values and target communities principles.

Interior design is a powerful tool to produce a desirous mood and environment, to boost conversation and collaboration.

It is a good way to divide your space into several sections. It’s perfect to have open space working desks, brainstorming rooms, private team spaces, and quiet spaces, where people will spend time on strategic thinking. Don't forget also about conference room, for people who meet clients often.

When it comes to interior design be free, creative and sharp, you’re only limited by your and maybe your interior designer’s imagination. Have fun with it, but never forget the people for whom it is built.

Co-working isn’t only about the space. Be attentive to details, such as your space name, logo, marketing materials. These are details that identify your community and space. Think about name of your space, which will affect the logo design, for sure. Pay attention also to social media marketing. Your presence in social net must be remarcable. Don't forget about a high quality site, as all of these ingredients reflect your brand. Post high quaility photos of your space, people inside, as an images of an empty space are not attractive. On social media don’t just post,  engage!

Besides being a working space for different people, co-working space is also a place, where people interact, have fun, learn something new. Events best work for your space marketing. It helps to engage a future members.

For example, if your co-working space focuses on design, you can organize a meeting concerning the latest trends of UX design. This will help you to solidify your reputation.

Let members attend these events for free and encourage them to organize their own events. When organizing an event, set 30-60 minute breaks after each session. The candid conversation do a real magic.

Organize a library, by adding digital and printed books on various fields. This will help your space to become an all-purpose hub.

Co-working is about flexibility and affordability.

Guess you have designed and built a perfect co-working space and set the price for participation. People enjoy your beautiful interior design and community. However, if your prices are too high, hardly it will keep them with you. Co-working spaces are designed for small businesses, which can't rent long-term real estates. Create a various packages to fit your community pocket.

We hope these simple, but important advice were helpful to understand how to organize a co-working space which will be attractive to targeted community and will create an outstanding environment, aiming to be a powerful tool among a new class workers, who prefer organizing their work life, focusing on  interactions with fellow thinkers, beneficial relationships and personal growth.|||

Co-working spaces are a new trend for new class  workers, who prefer organizing their work life, focusing on  interactions with fellow thinkers, beneficial relationships and personal growth. Read our article on how to organize a perfect co-working space. | en |