Let's face it, this is not the best looking website you have ever come across. In fact, I strongly dislike it. Here's the thing ... I used to follow a mantra that unless something looked perfect, it wasn't worth shipping. As time has gone by, I have realized how untrue that is. Don't get me wrong. I'm not attempting to degrade the importance of presentation. The point I'm trying to make is if presentation trumps the ability to deliver, then something has gone terribly ary.

One of my favorite quotes is from Reid Hoffman, the founder of LinkedIn, when he stated, "If you are not embarrassed by the first version of your product, you’ve launched too late." Reid follows the movement which is "Iterate Fast and Release Often". This has been a rising trend over the last several years and it is valid. The reason that is the case is that when it comes to presentation, the only way to verify if it is effective, is by testing it. The only way to test it, is to get it in front of users. Therefore the faster you can get it in front of users, the quicker you can create a tried product that's presentation is based off facts rather then a designer's opinion.

After being in this industry for over a decade, one of the main struggles I have seen time and time again is that we are our own worst critics. Ever since the beginning we were taught to be critical of our work. While I think this is an important talent to have, I think that it is one thing that gets in the way of us deciding whether to ship something or not.

This is something that I myself have struggled with. For years I have had ideas rolling around in my head, that I started to work on, only to never ship them because they never met my standards. They never were good enough to me. The key issue here is that they were stuck in my head. I never took the risk of opening them up to the world to see if they were good enough for others. If it solved other's problems. The truth is they might not have, but in the same breath I can say they may have. The sad thing is, I will never know.

With that said, I am putting a challenge out. A challenge to take risks. A challenge to move as fast as you can to get your products at a place where other's can begin to give you feedback. A challenge to ship. Until you do, you never will know if your idea has merrit or not.

If this resonates with you, I would love to point you to a podcast that has gotten me excited. Please note that I have no affiliation with this podcast, and the podcast itself ended back in 2015. With that said, if you are looking for some more inspiration go and check out Build and Launch by Justin Jackson. It will be well worth your time.|||

