Drupal is integrated with phpmyadmin and webmin with file transfer.

Drupal has the complete requirement of softwares to run your application smoothly.

Intuz Drupal Stack has apache, mysql, php, phpmyadmin, webmin, Drupal and other scripts which make it easy for you to use the AMI. We have integrated SSL (Self Signed Certificate), phpmyadmin, webmin with file transfer and scripts for password, backup and update management.

Annual software subscription requires one time up front payment with no ongoing charges, and covers all software fees for the selected instance type. Hourly AWS infrastructure usage fees still apply. Learn more about annual subscriptions

Once the instance is running, enter the public IP provided by Amazon into your browser. Wait for the instance health checks to pass. You will then see the Drupal page, enter 'admin' as username and 'instance-id' as password. You can access '/phpmyadmin' page and use 'root' as username and 'instance-id' as password. You can access 'webmin' page at port 8000, so URL will be 'http://instance-public-ip:8000' and use 'admin' as username and 'instance-id' as password. You can also access your instance via SSH using the username 'ubuntu' and your Amazon private key. For additional setup instructions please visit https://cloud.intuz.com/applications/drupal-stack/aws/how-to-use

Once the instance is running, enter the public IP provided by Amazon into your browser. Wait for the instance health checks to pass. You will then see the Drupal page, enter 'admin' as username and 'instance-id' as password. You can access '/phpmyadmin' page and use 'root' as username and 'instance-id' as password. You can access 'webmin' page at port 8000, so URL will be 'http://instance-public-ip:8000' and use 'admin' as username and 'instance-id' as password. You can also access your instance via SSH using the username 'ubuntu' and your Amazon private key. For additional setup instructions please visit https://cloud.intuz.com/applications/drupal-stack/aws/how-to-use

AWS Support is a one-on-one, fast-response support channel that is staffed 24x7x365 with experienced and technical support engineers. The service helps customers of all sizes and technical abilities to successfully utilize the products and features provided by Amazon Web Services. Learn more

Intuz will not refund money in any case; however, you can cancel your subscription at any time.

Annual subscription cancellations or downgrades are not supported. If you need help with or want to upgrade your subscriptions, please click here

By subscribing to this product you agree to terms and conditions outlined in the product End User License Agreement (EULA).|||

