Interview with Sean Ellis, creator of growth hacking, and Morgan Brown, co-author of “Hacking Growth”

I know, I know. You’ve heard all about “growth hacking”. And you’re not into short-term thinking or get-rich-quick schemes.

I thought exactly the same way until a few weeks ago, when I interviewed Sean Ellis (who created growth hacking) and Morgan Brown (a co-pioneer).

Why did I change my mind? I realised that I was wrongly conflating growth quacks with growth hacks.

That’s partly because Sean and Morgan have been mostly silent (compared to everybody else) about this concept. I guess they’ve been busy, you know, growing companies.

In fact, when I entered “What is growth hacking?” into Google, I found nothing by Sean and Morgan on page 1. There are references to them… but nothing they’ve actually authored. Here’s what I did find:

I now realise that these are all critically incomplete and inaccurate definitions of growth hacking… even though they are the definitions by which I too judged the concept.

For one, they all overlook one factor both Sean and Morgan say is critical for true growth hacking—a good user experience.

This tendency to leave users out of the equation—or as Neil Patel says, “ignore almost everything…” to achieve one goal—is, in my opinion, why growth hacking is so misunderstood.

I use these marketers as examples not to malign them (I’m sure they were only trying to share their interest in the concept), but to enhance the clarity of my point.

More fundamentally, their definitions all make the common mistake of suggesting growth hacking is an unbalanced fixation on one outcome (usually money).

In fact, growth hacking is a way of thinking, manifested as a pattern of behaviour—the outcome of which is, more often than not, commercial growth.

The difference is subtle but the effect is exponential.

And when I say “cost”, I mean it in both human and financial terms.

So, what does growth hacking actually mean? How does it actually work? And why is it the perfect methodology for unleashing the combined powers of product, marketing and user experience?

Sean and Morgan explain all this and more in their first ever book on the subject, “Hacking Growth”.

They were also kind enough to share some of their insights with me, during a 40-minute interview. In this article, I share those same insights with you.

You can probably tell that the creator of growth hacking has a more holistic view of his methodology than the gurus who peddle one-dimensional versions of it.

But what makes growth hacking different from any other marketing school of thought? What gives it merit?

Growth hacking was created, while Sean worked at Dropbox, to empower a new kind of business for a new kind of challenge.

As Sean explained, it would’ve been suicide for Dropbox (in its early days) to try and play the “brand awareness” game through mass media advertising… against much bigger and well-established competition:

“I used to have a lot of founders and CEOs who would grab me and say, ‘Hey, can you come and help us build awareness?’ and I’d say, ‘You have a budget that’s you know, maybe $50,000 for the next year. The average person sees 3,000 advertisements a day. There’s no way we’re gonna go out and just build awareness.’”

These new companies (software companies typically) were trying to win a game designed for old companies, and do so from a position of great disadvantage. This made no sense to Sean… and rightly so, in my opinion.

He decided to turn Dropbox’s “disadvantages” (being young, small and intangible) into strengths.

At the time, most companies were pouring their marketing resources into tactics and methods: Whose direct impact on revenue was difficult to isolate and measure Which were difficult to modify and improve in real time, as soon as you learned from sub-optimal decisions Which required lots of time, money and bureaucracy to launch and validate

For example, before the mainstream adoption of software and the Internet, Coca Cola sold physical products through the power of a brand which was built on mass media advertising.

Did Dropbox and other small software companies have to use the same model? Did it make sense for them to do so? Sean thought not.

As an antithesis to the traditional approach to marketing, Sean built something for his employers which was based on 3 principles: And thus, growth hacking was born. If you’re not doing number 1, you’re a swindler. If you’re not doing number 2, you’re a gambler. If you’re not doing number 3, you’re a cadaver. Sean and Morgan consider all 3 parts of the equation essential. The problem is that almost everybody else focusses on only one part. “I would like to say that growth is really just #marketing with a scoreboard,” says @morganb #HackingGrowth Tweet this! Growth hacking also leads to marketing that is less cost-exclusionary (unlike most traditional marketing strategies and tactics ), and inherently designed to prioritise effectiveness. This probably explains why it’s so attractive to businesses of all sizes. Halfway through my conversation with Sean and Morgan, I realised that even we at WhatUsersDo have been applying all of the principles he uses to define growth hacking—it’s just we’ve never called ourselves growth hackers. Growth hacking is the natural, optimal synthesis of product, UX and marketing If you work in the fields of product management or user experience, you’ve probably noticed some parallels between growth hacking and your job. I’m mostly talking about the necessity for customer (or user) research and the focus on rapid experimentation (or iteration). So, what’s different about growth hacking? Perspective. It’s like looking at different sides of the same Rubik’s Cube. The objective is the same. The method is the same. You just see a different side of the same challenge. Within growth hacking: Product managers see things from an angle of product adoption User experience professionals see things from an angle of user satisfaction Marketers see things from an angle of business growth It doesn’t take a genius to see that all of these depend on each other… yet, the challenges faced in achieving them can have subtle differences. Hence, they’ve been split into different disciplines. Growth hacking believes they all become stronger when we bring them back together, to learn from and enhance each other. “The compatibility of #GrowthHacking with product & usability is how it should be,” says @SeanEllis #HackingGrowth Tweet this! Imagine a marketer who knows as much as the product manager about who uses an app and how. Or a product manager who knows as much as the marketer about what makes people buy (and keep buying) or not. Or a user experience professional who knows as much as both about where the sweet spot lies between what users want and what the business needs. Those are the makings of an unstoppable company. And, at its core, that’s what growth hacking is—making a company greater than the sum of its parts. It’s not about brute-force marketing. It’s not about being sly and underhanded. It’s not about turning off your brain and just doing what Internet gurus tell you to do. #GrowthHacking is the beautiful lovechild of #product, #UX and #marketing genius. Tweet this! Try it for yourself – get a free trial showing 3 real people using your website or app, as they speak their thoughts More like this: [Marketing] Beginner’s guide to user experience (UX) testing How to run user experience (UX) tests on marketing When to start user experience (UX) testing for marketing Balancing intuition & convention to create exceptional experiences With Jay Acunzo, Unthinkable.fm founder and former Googler|||

Sean Ellis and Morgan Brown, authors of "Hacking Growth", discuss their new book and the pivotal role good UX plays in growth hacking