In this article, I list out 10 WordPress plugins to improve image performance for your WordPress website. When your images loads fast, it improves the performance of your WordPress website. Why WordPress remains the best CMS or blogging tool, it’s nothing but the enormous amount of plugins. A person with zero knowledge about technology can start a website. You have got a bunch of plugins to optimise your images.  Because faster load time is one of the key factors for search engine ranking. It is necessary to optimise an image rich page or post.

Lazy load plugin uses jQuery.Sonar to only load an image when visible to the viewport. It is one of the easiest plugins to deal with just need to install and activate, as it has zero configurations. It saves your server’s bandwidth in good amount.

This plugin will boost loading time of your blog.  How does the plugin works is it will virtualize the connections through defined subdomains as you like. So when a page loads browser will have access to different subdomains to download the image. In this way, the image content downloads parallelly to the browser from different subdomains.

The CW Image Optimizer plugin will automatically and losslessly optimise your images as you upload them to your blog. It can also optimise the images that you have already uploaded in the past. The plugin itself recommends having dedicated hosting environment. Because  CW Image Optimizer plugin is based on the WP Smush.it plugin. Unlike Smush.it images will not deal with third party tools, but files are optimised using the Linux littleutils image optimisation tools.

The EWWW Image Optimizer is a WordPress plugin that will automatically optimise your images as you upload them to your blog.By default, EWWW Image Optimizer uses lossless optimisation techniques, so image quality will remain the same before and after optimisation.

The tools used for optimisation are jpegtran, TinyJPG, JPEGmini, optipng, pngout, pngquant, TinyPNG, and gifsicle. The plugin will work in the shared hosting also as most of these tools are available in shared hosting servers.

It’s a good plugin to resize an uploaded image is larger than configured size. The plugin is configurable with a max width, height and quality. When an admin uploads an image and that is larger than the configured size, Imsanity will automatically scale it down to the

 configured size and replace the original image.

It works as you upload the image to the website also have a  bulk resize option to handle already uploaded images.

Hammy resizes content images (only within posts and pages, not custom post types) and regenerates a number of smaller sized images. And it serves the most appropriate sized image when a user visits the page.

This helps to load your website faster especially on mobile devices. This plugin is easy to setup,  has only 3 options to set.

PB-responsive resizes the images to fit the user’s screen size, the plugin will do this process automatically. Also, it will automatically insert the responsive syntax to the page. This is a great help for your website visitors to use their tablets or mobile devices.

The Media File Renamer is a WordPress plugin that physically renames media files nicely for a cleaner system and for a better SEO. Also, it allows you to rename the title to perform better in SEO. Search engines give importance to image titles to understand the image as they cannot read image content.

Wp Smush.it plugin uses Yahoo’s Smush.it service to optimise the images and reduce its size. You can set a max width and height and large images will scale down as they are being compressed. Just needs to install and activate it, you are ready.

BJ Lazy Load, a great plugin allows you to lazy load selected images(including post images and thumbnails), Gravatar images and replace content with a placeholder. And loads the content as it gets close to enter the browser window when the visitor scrolls the page. Since it works with iframes, it also covers embedded video’s from YouTube, Vimeo etc . Unlike Lazy Load, there are some simple settings that allow you to customize how the plugin works, such as choosing a placeholder and skipping images with classes.|||

