At least 11 people have been killed and dozens more injured after a bomb filled with shrapnel exploded on the metro system in the Russian city of St Petersburg.

Horrific images from the scene show bloodied commuters lay on a platform after the blast between the stations of the Institute of Technology and Sennaya Ploshchad.

Eyewitnesses say an explosion happened in between two stations - leaving commuters covered in blood - but the train was able to continue on to the next platform.

It is thought the explosion was caused by a bomb filled with shrapnel - possibly 'ball bearings' allegedly spotted in a second device which was deactivated nearby.

An eyewitness claims to have seen a man leaving a briefcase on a carriage shortly before the blast.

Russian media outlets have issued a photograph of a bearded man who is wanted in connection with the explosion.

Meanwhile new video has emerged showing the moment the train pulled into a platform and people began jumping out of windows.

Shot by someone travelling in the carriage behind the one where the explosion was located, it reveals the ensuing confusion as people struggled to grasp with what happened in the seconds after the ‘briefcase’ exploded.

People can be heard screaming in the background as bodies are dragged from the carriage, people stumble around, some bleeding - other bodies can be seen lying still with their feet sticking out of a train door.

Russian President Vladimir Putin was in the city holding a meeting with the President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko.

He has said Russian officials are investigating whether terrorists are behind the explosion.

The blast happened at 2.30pm local time on the blue line of the underground system.

Speaking to Russian news site Paper, one eyewitness called Pauline said: "The explosion occurred between the stations Sennaya and Institute of Technology.

"There was a deafening bang, then the sharp smell of smoke. We immediately went to the end of the car, formed a crush."

Speaking to Life News, one witness said: "People were bleeding, their hair burned.

"We were told to move to the exit. People just fled.

"My girlfriend was in the next car that exploded. When she came out, she saw that people were mutilated."

"One eyewitness wrote on Twitter: "I was riding down the escalator and suddenly an explosive wave from below, echoing from the tunnel. The station is evacuated. "

Putin said the government was considering all possible causes for the blast.

"I have already spoken to the head of our special services, they are working to ascertain the cause (of the blasts)," Putin said.

"The causes are not clear, it's too early. We will look at all possible causes, terrorism as well as common crime," he added.

Maxim Liksutov, Moscow's deputy mayor, told Interfax that authorities were tightening security on the subway in the Russian capital.

The agency that runs the subway said several stations in the northern Russian city were closed and that an evacuation was under way.

Social media users posted photographs and video from a subway station in the city centre, showing people lying on the floor outside a train with a mangled door.

Frantic commuters reached into doors and windows, trying to see if anyone was there and shouting: "Call an ambulance!"|||

Horrific images from the bomb scene at Sennaya Ploshchad station show bloodied commuters lay on a platform after explosion