Another release today, this time with a lot of bugfixes and small features driven by some real-world ProseMirror work I've been doing, along with a handful of minor breaking changes that clean up some bad decisions from the past.

The most meaningful change in this release (which was already foreshadowed in 0.19.0) is that selections are represented in a more generic way, and get more control over how they behave when they are deleted or replaced. If your code still assumes a selection is either a text selection or a node selection, you should write it in a different way.

Newlines in the text are now normalized to spaces when parsing except when you set to in your options or in a parse rule.

Fragments now have and methods, providing the same functionality as the methods by the same name on nodes.

Resolved positions now have and methods to easily find a maximum or minimum position.

Fixes issue where replacing would sometimes unexpectedly split nodes.

may now return a node selection when the document does not contain a valid cursor position.

objects now implement a method that returns their content. This is used to determine what ends up on the clipboard when the selection is copied or dragged.

Selections may now specify multiple ranges that they cover, to generalize to more types of selections. The superclass constructor takes an array of ranges as optional third argument.

Selections gained new methods and to provide subclasses more control over how selections of that type respond to being deleted or overwritten.

Selections have a new method that custom selection classes can implement to allow the undo history to accurately store and restore them.

The new selection class can be used to select the entire document.

The and options to inline decorations were renamed to and so that they also make sense in right-to-left text. The old names work with a warning until the next release.

The default styling for lists and blockquotes was removed from . (They were moved to the module.)

Fixes reading of selection in Chrome in a shadow DOM.

Registering DOM event handlers that the editor doesn't listen to by default with the prop should work again.

Backspacing after turning off a mark now works again in Firefox.

The new props and can be used to override drop and paste behavior.

The input rules plugin no longer implicitly binds backspace to undo the last applied rule.

This module now exposes a command , which will revert an input rule when run directly after one was applied.

The new command, bound to Mod-a in the base keymap, sets the selection to an .

The command can now lift items out of a list entirely, when the parent node isn't another list.|||

Another release today, this time with a lot of bugfixes and small features driven by some real-world ProseMirror work I&#39;ve been doing, along with a handful of minor breaking changes that clean up some bad decisions from &hellip;