Second, it’s also possible that remote workers have lower levels of team empathy . Since the advent of email and texting, we’ve been slowly but surely cutting ourselves off from face-to-face communication. And now we’ve all embraced text-only work communication, mainly through email and apps like Slack.

First, great ideas are rarely eureka moments — one person alone having an astonishing revelation. Most groundbreaking ideas come from working in a team; shooting the breeze about new ideas, sparking off the people sitting next to you . That’s much easier to do when teams are co-located; when there are more opportunities for the free exchange of ideas, and so-called ‘water cooler’ moments.

In fact, remote working may actually harm team productivity , and there are a number of reasons we should take this possibility seriously.

But text-only communication channels can be dangerous. They make you forget that there’s a person on the other end of that string of text; a real human being with thoughts, opinions and feelings. They’re not just a 2D persona. This can make it easy to say things that you would never say to people face to face; dismiss their ideas in an offhand way; not engage with people and their ideas properly.

The end result is that team members could end up feeling less empathy for each other, and also feeling less comfortable sharing ideas for fear of ridicule and dismissal. This may have important ramifications for team productivity because team performance is often said to be tied to so-called ‘psychological safety’, or the level of comfort you have in sharing new ideas with team members.

Remote working is not dead yet — and it never will be. Many companies simply cannot call their staff back to the office, like IBM. They just don’t have the space to accommodate their full workforce, and many talented employees would rather move company than move home.

Plus, as every modern-day employer knows, many outstanding individuals just don’t work best in the office — they do need their freedom and if we don’t give it to them they take their ideas and knowledge elsewhere. But we can try to compensate for some stresses that remote working puts on team productivity; and try to create the environment that breeds great ideas.

Alongside actively encouraging ad-hoc phone and Skype discussions, we can also add features to our team tools that foster close team working and remind team members that they’re talking to other real people.

For example, ViewsHub has a feature that allows teams to place individuals on a psychological map, showing their different personality traits, strengths, and potential weaknesses. This enables team members to better understand their colleagues, build a deeper and richer picture of each other, and help people understand how different members of the team can fit together effectively.

Managers are now turning their sights to team productivity. With it now at the top of the agenda, the kind of exponential growth in remote working that we’ve seen over the last few years may slow down, or even go into reverse. But it’s clear that the clock can’t be turned back now.

Instead, managers have to face the challenge head on and question how to create a genuine team atmosphere among remote team members.|||

IBM has made a controversial decision. Remote working is out. Office-based co-location is in. Last week, the company’s Chief Marketing Officer announced that its 2,600-strong US marketing workforce…