Host your code online in as many public and private repositories as you want. Free for 5 users.

Are you a student or teacher? Store your classwork, distribute assignments, and collaborate on your code. Bitbucket Cloud offers free unlimited collaborators and free unlimited private repositories for all students and teachers. Already a student using Bitbucket? Join our Student Ambassador Program here.

There are many things a student developer needs to worry about during their college life, but knowing where to store their labs, projects and assignments shouldn’t be one of them. Bitbucket Cloud has offered free unlimited repositories and unlimited  for , and streamlined the process of an academic account. It’s easier than ever for both students and teachers to get started and store, collaborate on, and distribute their classwork using Bitbucket Cloud.

Get up and running with Git, all in the cloud

No more USB drives, emails, or FTP’ing to college servers for your classwork. You can easily set up repositories for each of your labs or classes with Bitbucket. Better still, your code is hosted in the cloud so you can access your classwork on any machine, anywhere you are. Want to keep your work private, away from prying eyes? We’ve got you covered. With unlimited private repositories you can control who can view your work and only give access to those who need it.

And by using Git you’re getting a head start on your career by learning to use the industry standard for version control. What’s there not to like?

Perhaps you need to collaborate on a group project with your team, or give repository access to your professor or TA for grading Academic accounts on Bitbucket include unlimited collaborators making it easy to do all that and more. Our aim is to make the process of working with your teachers and peers as easy as possible.

Free Academic accounts for all students and teachers

Best of all, Academic accounts on Bitbucket are free. That’s right, free as … without the age requirement of course! To get free unlimited repositories and collaborators, all you need to do is sign up for a Bitbucket account with your academic email address (e.g. ). We’ve automated the process so when you sign up you’ll instantly be given an Academic account. And don’t worry if it’s not automatic – simply fill out this form and our team will get you up and running in no time. We’re always adding  so over time we hope to have this process automated for as many institutions as possible.

We’re excited to help student developers all over the world learn, collaborate and share their code with Bitbucket Cloud, and we want you to help spread the word. Share our with your friends on Twitter and Facebook and be in the running to win some sweet swag. Don’t forget to use the hashtag #bitbucketedu so we can keep track!

As we expand our student initiatives we’re proud to announce our upcoming student ambassador program. If you’re interested in learning more about Git, love attending and exploring opportunities for your peers and universities, then we’d love to hear from you. Register your interest here and we’ll be in touch!|||

