While abortion may technically be legal in South Africa, accessing one can be quite challenging.

According to Leading Safe Choices, over 40% of designated abortion care sites in 2011 weren’t actually providing the service. Conscientious objection, or the right for medical professionals to refuse to perform abortion on religious or moral grounds, is used extensively. Marion Stevens, who coordinates Women in Sexual and Reproductive Rights and Health (WISH) Associates. says that healthcare professionals who refuse to perform abortions are legally obliged to refer the patient to someone who will, but not all professionals do. This is often because they believe performing abortion is against their religion.

Anti-abortion groups like Doctors for Life work on upholding and broadening the right to conscientious objection. The lack of providers also leads to long waiting lists, which means that many people are pushed over the 12-week limit. Because of this, many people turn to illegal clinics.

Rebecca*, a 31-year-old woman living in Cape Town, has had two abortions, one legally conducted by a government hospital, and another done at an illegal clinic. (Because of the stigma attached to abortion, she’s requested we use a pseudonym for this article.) Her first abortion took place after she was sexually assaulted, while the second one took place after her contraceptive methods failed and was financially unable to care for a child. Perhaps ironically, she preferred her experience at the illegal clinic.

“Because I had an abortion before, and because I was able to research what to look out for, I knew that the abortion was legitimate,” she said. “The clinic was clean and [the abortion] was over in four hours. When I went to the hospital, my experience was worse. [The hospital workers] were rude and judgmental, I had to dig around to get information, and I had to return to the hospital twice after the abortion.”

While the hospital abortion was free, Rebecca’s second abortion cost her R1400 — roughly $100. According to her, it was “worth every cent” because it was a more pleasant and accessible experience.

While phone numbers for private abortion clinics are plastered all over lampposts, the National Department of Health’s website lists no information on abortion at all.

When I contacted the clinics advertised on lampposts in Johannesburg, Cape Town, Grahamstown, Pietermaritzburg and Port Elizabeth, someone answered almost immediately. In some cases, I could speak to the clinic workers via Whatsapp. A few clinics offered to schedule an appointment for me on the same day I called.

When I phoned government clinics, on the other hand, I struggled to get through on the first try. In two cases, when I asked about abortion, the person on the other end hung up. For clinics in Cape Town and Johannesburg, the people I spoke to told me that they don’t conduct abortions. One doctor confessed to me that, although her degree was legitimate, her clinic was not registered with the Department of Health and was thus illegal.|||

A faded poster with the word ‘ABORTION’ in purple capital letters is plastered on a lamppost near my house in Grahamstown, South Africa. At the bottom of the poster, a phone number is printed in…