It’s unfortunate that recent events are showing a need for increased security initiatives.  In the business world, security initiatives take resources away from handling business that will drive to company profits. Enacting additional security measures becomes more of a nuisance than a help. These security measures commonly result in an organization having to change the natural flow of operations. I do support security initiatives when they are effective while not inferring with daily operations. So, here are five reasons why I believe a USB panic button system is always the best option:

Traditional panic buttons offered through alarm companies require hard wiring into your phone line.  So changing your office around would cause an alarm company representative to move the buttons at your cost.  I can’t speak for other  , but I can explain how the systems offered through CRS operate.  The CRS USB Panic Button System is shipped to clients pre-programmed and ready to use. Plug the device into any workstation running CRS Notify, and it automatically works. You can change the USB panic button system to any other computer running CRS Notify at any time, and it will work. Simply unplug the wireless panic button from the primary workstation and plug it into the workstation of your choice. As long as the CRS Notify program is installed on the workstation, your wireless panic button is fully operational.

Unlike traditional panic buttons, the USB panic button system works with a software program installed on the computer and uses the power of the internet. I advise clients that use traditional panic buttons to have an incident response plan to account for seven minutes between the onset of an incident until responders arrive. Most of that seven minutes are because most traditional panic buttons take over two minutes to alert just one type of responder. In contrast, a USB panic button system using the power of the internet result in instantaneous alerts sent to both internal and external responders. That is a significant amount of time during an active crisis where every second counts. Rapid notification to multiple responders ensures that the alert is received promptly. The quicker responders are notified, the faster the crisis can be resolved with a more favorable outcome.

USB panic button systems have multiple ways to alert several responders at once. However, traditional panic buttons only alert one responder of an emergency. Well, how do we inform everyone else in the event of a crisis, you ask? A USB panic button system can simultaneously alert multiple responders and staff using various methods. These methods include automated voice calls, text messages, phone apps, emails, and computer-based panic buttons. USB panic button programs merge all your alerting needs into one button for a prepared response. These mass notification methods confirm that the message was received by all parties. The computer-based alert room acts as a two-way communication device that is perfect for relaying information during a lock down or active shooter situation. With this real-time communication channel, everyone involved can stay in the know about the emergency situation.

Police officers respond to initiated traditional panic button alerts with no hesitation. However, officers only receive the information that a panic button was activated and the address. Officers do not know who initiated the panic button, the potential victim’s particular location, or how long ago they triggered the device. Moreover, the lack of information negatively impacts a substantial response and resolution of the situation. I cannot speak for other organizations offering a wireless panic button system. However, the CRS USB panic button system allows customizable messages for both alert levels and each individual end-user. The messages can relay a particular communication in several different ways. Information is sent via computer application, text message, email, and an automated voice call displaying the exact location and the party who initiated the alert. The details allow responders the ability to pinpoint the duress location and efficiently respond to the situation.

Again, I cannot speak for other USB button system companies. However, the USB panic buttons offered through CRS can initiate both a high or low-level alert in addition to using a computer mouse. Using the CRS USB panic button system, a client can determine company responses for each button. Meanwhile, traditional panic buttons only have one alert method to one responder and are no longer competitive with technology today.

With CRS, clients can use the low-level alert to help mitigate a problem before it escalates, only notifying a few select responder without alerting everyone. Furthermore, the low-level alert is ideal for suspicious activity. Also, business managers can handle the situation without causing any further or unneeded panic to all staff members. The high-level alert lets responders know that the situation has escalated into an emergency where employees need to be aware. Staff members and responders are then set in motion to react to the crisis in a prepared manner.

I did not write this blog to push a product.  There are many other reasons why USB panic button systems triumph over traditional panic buttons.  Furthermore, whether you look at CRS or another company, I ask you to refrain from traditional panic buttons.  Please feel free to contact me at info@communityresponsesystems.com if you have any questions.|||

A USB panic button system is always the best option. Learn reasons why a USB panic button system triumphs over traditional panic buttons.