Overhauled to now include 120 challenges and solutions and added Anki flashcards.

Also included are unit tested reference implementations of various data structures and algorithms.

Challenges focus on algorithms and data structures found in coding interviews.

Each challenge has one or more reference solutions that are:

Challenges will soon provide on-demand incremental hints to help you arrive at the optimal solution.

The provided Anki flashcard deck uses spaced repetition to help you retain key concepts.

Great for use while on-the-go.

Looking for resources to help you prep for the System Design and Object-Oriented Design interviews?

Check out the sister repo The System Design Primer, which contains additional Anki decks:

Each challenge has two notebooks, a challenge notebook with unit tests for you to solve and a solution notebook for reference.

Unit tested, fully functional implementations of the following data structures:

Unit tested, fully functional implementations of the following algorithms:

*The notebooks (.pynb) read/write the associated unit test (.py) file.

If you already have Python installed and are familiar with installing packages, you can get IPython Notebook with pip:

If you run into an issue about pyzmq, refer to the following Stack Overflow post and run:

As an alternative, you can also use the provided file:

For detailed instructions, scripts, and tools to more optimally set up your development environment, check out the dev-setup repo.

For more details on notebook installation, follow the directions here.

More information on IPython/Jupyter Notebooks can be found here.

More information on Nose can be found here.

Challenges are provided in the form of IPython/Jupyter Notebooks and have been tested with Python 2.7 and Python 3.x.

If you need to install IPython/Jupyter Notebook, see the Notebook Installation section.

This will launch your web browser with the list of challenge categories:

To debug your solution with pdb, refer to the following ticket.

Note: If your solution is different from those listed in the Solution Notebook, consider submitting a pull request so others can benefit from your work. Review the Contributing Guidelines for details.

Challenges, solutions, and unit tests are presented in the form of IPython/Jupyter Notebooks.

Review the Contributing Guidelines for details on how to:

Feel free to contact me to discuss any issues, questions, or comments.

My contact info can be found on my GitHub page.

I am providing code and resources in this repository to you under an open source license. Because this is my personal repository, the license you receive to my code and resources is from me and not my employer (Facebook).|||

interactive-coding-challenges - Huge update!  Interactive Python coding interview challenges (algorithms and data structures).  Includes Anki flashcards.