When Financial Times Tokyo reporter Kana Inagaki mentioned today that the Renault-Nissan Alliance is planning to divest itself from its in-house battery production, Renault/Nissan/Mitsubishi triple-CEO Carlos Ghosn did not deny it. Instead, he explained that Nissan is “going to rely more and more on batteries by existing suppliers,” and why these days, in-house battery production is a very stupid idea for a carmaker, a waste of money that can be put to much smarter use elsewhere. A few months ago, reports of a spin-off of Nissan's battery venture were called "speculation." Today, they kicked off a free seminar on capital management in the auto industry.

“When we started making EVs in 2008,” Ghosn said today at an interview in Yokohama, “there was no battery capable of supporting an electric car. So we decided to do it ourselves. The situation today in 2016 is completely different. “

Back then, Nissan started a joint-venture with Japan’s NEC called Automotive Energy Supply Corporation (AESC). In 2014, the company was the world’s second-largest EV battery maker after Panasonic. Size alone does not guarantee cost leadership, especially not when production is in-house, and is operating without healthy competition, and without Purchasing putting the thumbscrews on an outside supplier. As it became evident in 2014, when first reports surfaced that Nissan’s batteries could be bought for less money at outside supplier LG Chem.

People who value a company like Tesla for its Gigafactory, should take careful note of what one of the best brains in the industry said today about vertical integration. Said Ghosn:

“As carmakers, we need to develop the technology nobody has, but when the technology is available outside, we should externalize. A core question for a carmaker is what are the priorities of investment. If you invest everywhere, you are going to need huge amounts of money. One of the reasons for why we have suppliers is that one cannot invest in everything. You need to select where you want to invest, where is your core business, and this is an ever-changing task.”

It definitely would be silly and naïve today to emulate Ford’s River Rouge plant of the 1920’s, where iron ore went in on one side and cars exited on the other. Groundbreaking as it was hundred years ago, to insist these days on making something on your own that can be bought better and cheaper elsewhere is silly at best, and suicidal eventually. Eventually, Tesla will learn, probably the hard and painful way, that in modern times, a high degree of vertical integration is a warning sign, and not a good thing at all.

Follow @bertelschmitt, the "lone voice telling the real story behind the ridiculous," according to @LynnCSchreiber, the "lobbyist of the Old World," according to @Dusssssss3.|||

Why build if you can buy?