TTA-based Co-Design Environment (TCE) is a toolset for designing and programming customized processors based on the Transport Triggered Architecture (TTA). The toolset provides a complete retargetable co-design flow from high-level language programs down to synthesizable processor RTL (VHDL and Verilog backends supported) and parallel program binaries. Processor customization points include the register files, function units, supported operations, and the interconnection network.

TCE development is directed by the Customized Parallel Computing (CPC) group at the Department of Pervasive Computing of Tampere University of Technology (TUT), Finland.

It's been too long time since a new publication page update. The following new publications are now found in proceedings and published journal issues: Tomi Äijö, Pekka Jääskeläinen, Tapio Elomaa, Jarmo Takala:

 ,

 in ACM Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization, January 2016, vol. 12, issue 4 (download). Heikki Kultala, Joonas Multanen, Pekka Jääskeläinen, Timo Viitanen, and Jarmo Takala:

 "Impact of Operand Sharing to the Processor Energy Efficiency" ,

 in CADS: 18Th CSI International Symposium on Computer Architecture & Digital Systems (Tehran, Iran, October 2015) (download). Joonas Multanen, Timo Viitanen, Henry Linjamäki, Heikki Kultala, Pekka Jääskeläinen, Jarmo Takala, Lauri Koskinen, Jesse Simonsson, Heikki Berg, Kalle Raiskila and Tommi Zetterman:

 ,

 in SAMOS XV: Embedded Computer Systems: Architectures, MOdeling, and Simulation (Samos, Greece, July 2015) (download).

As part of the project we are developing a codesign toolset using TTA as the architecture template. The toolset is called TTA-based Co-Design Environment (TCE).

TCE is a toolset for designing application-specific processors (ASP) based on the Transport Triggered Architecture (TTA). The toolset provides a complete co-design flow from C programs down to synthesizable VHDL and parallel program binaries. Processor customization points include the register files, function units, supported operations, and the interconnection network.

TCE has been developed in the Tampere University of Technology since the early 2003.|||

TCE - TTA-Based Co-Design Environment - An open source toolset for designing application-specific processors based on the Transport Triggered Architecture paradigm.