You can treat pretty much like you would or .

You can change the colors uses via or the environment variable .

If your terminal doesn't support true color (16 million colors) then run with or set environment variable .

If you like really long lines that wrap at terminal edge then use or set .

A current at-time-of-writing list of pygment styles is the following:

uses by default but is also very nice.

iTerm2 under OSX is great and nicely supports true color. Urxvt under Linux only pretends to be true color and doesn't do it very well.

If you have strange color issues then running with should be the first thing you try. If that fixes your problem then make sure to add to your .

See this gist for more info.

For some reason Apple has disabled italics in the their files so you have to do a little patching to enable them. This is irrespective of which terminal program you use but may depend on what is set to.

Anyhow, based on this excellent post here's the on enabling italics in OSX.

Note, the line above may not work quite right so edit and manually append to the end of the file.

Regardless, restart your terminal program of choice and italics should work. Test with:

Because pygments highlights the markdown but doesn't strip out the control characters. Also, ConsoleMD uses CommonMark to parse the markdown instead of the lousy one in pygments (I'm allowed to say that since I'm the guy that wrote it).

Also, ConsoleMD uses some parts of pygments internally, and uses pygments to highlight code blocks.

Over the last few years there's been work on standardizing markdown with an official spec, that work happens at CommonMark.org.

The python implementation of the specification that I used is called CommonMark-py.

Github has recently (March 2017) converted all internal markdown to use a CommonMark parser, an interesting article can be found here.

Probably. There are lots of corner cases and it's not always clear what the proper output should even be. For instance, an executive decision was made to show url links as a list at the end of the document.

Unfortunately isn't very easy to use as a library so if any node types got missed then chaos may ensue. Please open a bug (or even better a pull request) so that can get patched up.|||

consolemd - render markdown to the console (not just highlight it)