She’s one of the world’s highest-paid models, Swarovski brand ambassador, YouTube star, and BFF of Taylor Swift, but Karlie Kloss has managed to find time to learn to code--and to help other young women do the same.

In 2015, she started Kode with Klossy, a summer camp and scholarship program that teaches girls ages 13 to 18 to code. This year, the program is expanding to 10 cities— including New York, Los Angeles, St. Louis, Oakland, Chicago, Austin, Detroit, Miami, Atlanta and New Orleans—and offering about 300 scholarships.

Through the program, supported by Ford’s STEAM Experience initiative, students will learn the fundamentals of Ruby on Rails and explore concepts in front-end and back-end software engineering, building a web-app by the end of the two weeks. Some of the camps will offer a most advanced course for returning students. Applications for the program opened today.

Before she walked her first runway at the age of 15, Kloss says she expected she’d have a career in math or science. “Fashion has been an incredible adventure and I wouldn’t change my career for the world, but that interest and curiosity about science and tech stayed with me,” she says. “I took my first coding class three years ago and loved it.”

Kloss wants young women to know that learning code opens doors in industries from music and fashion to social impact and beyond, and that it is more creative and attainable than they might think. “Before I tried coding, it was mysterious and intimidating, but even after the first week of learning basic coding skills, it all became a lot less abstract,” she says. ““With the right teacher, coding really comes to life and gives you the skills you need to build a cool idea into an app or business or to solve serious challenges through technology—that’s what’s so exciting.”

Students develop projects based on their own interests, with last year’s projects including apps in weather detection, fashion, and civic engagement. “This creativity and ingenuity is what inspires me,” says Kloss. “For me personally, it’s been exciting to watch technology change the fashion industry and my career as a model.”

While there are several similar programs, Kloss’ popularity and glamour might reach girls who hadn’t seriously considered coding before, especially as she is doing the same. Kloss says she is now learning Swift with her coding teacher. “It takes time and patience, but I keep sticking with it,” she says.

Watching the videos students submit with their applications is one of her favorite parts of the process. “The diversity in the backgrounds and experiences of the students are powerful and make me want to work even harder,” she says. “Last year we had a first-generation American student living in rural California share her story of growing up without access to computer science classes, and her dream was to launch a coding club at her own school.” Those videos, Kloss says, have shown her that there is demand and excitement among young women for computer science.|||

The coding camp the supermodel started after she took classes herself is expanding to 10 cities and offering hundreds of scholarships to introduce more girls and young women to coding.