The e-commerce market is growing up with a rapid speed along with the technology. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the sales figure of e-commerce web portals has reached 80.3 Billion, which indicates that it will soon rule the roost. Today, every business want to make its online presence too, as it is the fastest way to get connected with a lot of consumers.

It may seem easy to build an e-commerce website today, as there are many options available in the market. But, things get a bit complicated, when it comes to choosing one of them. So, here we present you a list of some most popular platforms for every eCommerce business.

WooCommerce is basically a free WordPress plugin, which allows the user to get every benefit related to developing a WordPress website. This platform is being used by over 13 million users across the world, by which it has been ranked in the top development platform lists.

The users, who use WordPress do not need to change to any other platform to use Woocommerce. If you are going to develop a content-based website, or if you are going to blog more regarding your goods and discounts, it the best platform compared to Shopify or Magento.

Shopify has been voted as the best e-commerce platform till now because of its easy setup, faster loading speed, and secure payment gateways. It provides instant solutions for e-commerce aspirants to launch their website in very less time. Shopify delivers everything that’s needed to launch a website straight from domain name choosing to ship integration.

Along with Shopify, basic tasks like Adding products, design customization, domain name set up, shopping and tax rates and payment settings can be done in very less time. Moreover, you will not need any development team, and only a support team will be enough to get your work done.

Zencart is an online eCommerce platform, which makes use of MySQL database and has been designed especially for online merchants. It is an open source platform that is being used by over 100,000 stores across the globe. It avails 100s of pre-built add-ons, which can be downloaded and customized as per your use.

The user can also set preferred currency settings, time zone, taxes and language as per the requirement. Moreover, you can also track down the performance of your products as well. It also features products with multi-language functionality as well as secure payment processing gateways based on PayPal and FirstData.

Magento is undoubtedly the market leader in e-commerce development platforms. The framework made its debut as Magento go and later introduced an upgraded version Magento 2.0. It holds more than 29% of market share and still is growing rapidly.

It is an open source technology based e-commerce platform that provides online business a flexible and scalable online store along with a complete control over the content, functionality, and looks of the web portal.

osCommerce may not be a powerful contender in the list, but it does have certain qualities, which makes it a preferable option for many users. The first quality among them is its price, it is comparatively cheap and can be downloaded easily.

The second quality of the following framework is that it doesn’t need an expert coding team for design and customization. Most of the updates for OsCommerce-built stores are also available at free of cost.

Joomla is basically a free and open source content management system (CMS), which has been developed to make the development of e-commerce platforms easier and faster.

It has been downloaded over 78 million times across the globe till November 2016, which means it is getting used by a lot of developers. Moreover, it also features page caching, RSS feeds, printable version of pages, news flashes, blogs, search and a support for language internationalization.

Prestashop is also an open source e-commerce development platform, which can be easily downloaded and utilised to build your own e-commerce website. If your site is getting build by using this platform, it will gain additional visibility in search engines, because of its SEO friendly nature.

This platform is getting used by over 125,000 online stores, which means if you are thinking to go with this framework, you have a big panel of developers to help you out in coding. It supports 40 languages and you are also allowed to purchase the paid version of it via Prestashop store.

OpenCart, as its name resembles, is an open source digital platform, which is dedicated making the development of e-commerce websites easier. It offers a good set of features, which offers organized manner for order processing and a robust catalog functionality.

It is free to use the platform, but additional paid extensions are also available to use in it that suits your business. It is blessed with user-friendly interface and also packs its own ‘How to use’ guide to ensure working more easier on it.

BigCommerce has its own importance in development platform market. Its latest version BigCommerce Next (BCN) has made its position more stable in the e-commerce shopping cart development platform.

Additional features of the BigCommerce Next include an exclusive framework for blogging, a variety of responsive theme on offer unlike its competitors, integration with Google Trusted Stores, updates in BigCommerce app store and traffic system that simplifies multiple marketing tasks.

It is a powerful open source content management system (CMS), which is blessed with the facility to build powerful online stores with easy installation and support. It is blessed with an easy to use user interface along with an instructional guide to making your work more easier.

It comes with an easy-to-use administration system and is capable of handling some of the more complex payment models, like those that are subscription-based.|||

Here are the 10 Most Popular eCommerce Platforms to kick start your career. MEAN is emerging as one of the industry's Most In-Demand online shopping platforms.