This may feel like the hardest thing you have to decide. You probably have a several avenues that you can go, but you are having a hard time deciding which path to take.

I recommended to my friend to read The One Thing by Gary Keller and Jay Papasan.

Don’t feel like buying the book — no problem. I’m going to tell you exactly what you need to take away from this book.

Basically, you need to pick one thing and stick to it. Literally, the cover can’t be more blatant on what you need to do. This book isn’t going to tell you how to choose. There is no wrong answer. Just choose.

The reason you aren’t moving forward is because you haven’t made a decision. You’re uncertain that you can commit to doing one thing for the rest of your life.

If there is more than one thing that you want to be doing with your life, there are ways to accommodate that. You want to be a professional dancer, but you also want to teach, you want to write a book, you want to make music videos, and give back to charity.

That’s a lot to bite off and chew. It’s not impossible, but you can’t do it all at one time. You have to choose one thing, get really good at it, and then integrate your other aspirations into that One Thing. Essentially, you are going to let all of your other aspirations sit on the back burner until you can integrate them in a way that supports your One Thing.

Look at Tina Fey, former of SNL writer, screenwriter, film director, actress, and author of Bossypants. All of her accomplishments were all aspirations at one point. She didn’t do everything overnight. She started out as a writer and an improv actress. Overtime, she built her business around a central theme, her comedy.

This is how we all should be thinking about our goals. Choosing One Thing will not keep you from doing everything you’ve want to do in your lifetime. Instead, it will simply inform how to integrate these other aspirations into your life in a way that supports one central goal.

If you are interested in reading The One Thing, here’s an overview:

You can find a helpful affiliate link here: The One Thing.

If you enjoyed this article, let me know with a like and a follow.

So, I’m going to ask you a vital question to your career. What is your One Thing? Start here and let me know in the comments.|||

This may feel like the hardest thing you have to decide. You probably have a several avenues that you can go, but you are having a hard time deciding which path to take. Don’t feel like buying the…