Using gulp-template we increase speed in development, this is simply by creating templates of the components and containers. This is basically reusing the same code blocks with a single command.

This tutorial will walk you through how you use gulp-template to avoid creating empty files for every new container and component, this tutorial is specific to react-native, however this technique can be used with any framework of choice.

Furthermore, this technique is very useful if applied to legacy code base with variety of code blocks that have formed patterns.

Install the other libraries for the gulp command

To compose templates, gulp-template makes use of interpolation delimiters.

There has to be a directory where all the template files are stored. So create a folder in the root directory named templates.

Basically our containers handle the heavy load for the components, things like requesting data or getting offline stored images is handle by the container.

Since our container will be connected to an external resource, it’s important to add an activity indicator to the container for good UX.

Depending on the design of the app our component view could be a simple list or list of cards. The interesting thing is, if we have to implement this list else where we get to use the gulp command to create it.

Create a Gulpfile.js. In it we would define the path for the templates and the destination directories for the compiled files.

Furthermore, with the yargs library we can get the arguments passed to the gulp task.

Finally will use the gulp-template library to create the compiled version of the template files and move them to their respective directories.

Once the gulp task is created we can run the create command to create new containers and components.

This would create a new component named home in the components directory. Also we can specify the type to container.​

This would create a container in the container directory.

This tutorial is a walkthrough on using gulp-template to reuse code blocks for react-native projects. The most important part is the gulp task which makes use of gulp-template, yargs and rename libraries to create compiled templates.|||

Using gulp-template we increase speed in development, this is simply by creating templates of the components and containers. This is basically reusing the same code blocks with a single command. This…