First They Came . . .

Many years ago, I had the pleasure of being a close friend of Sibylle Niemöller-von Sell, the second wife of Pastor Martin Niemöller, who shared his life in his final years and who continued his work after his death in 1984. Sibylle mentioned that her husband’s most famous pronouncement — “First they came for the Communists, and I said nothing because I was not a Communist. . . .” — was frequently misquoted and mischaracterized. And indeed, the quotation can be found in many different forms.

I thought about Sibylle’s comment when I saw it mentioned in Peter Fritzsche’s review of “The Gestapo,” by Frank McDonough (March 12). To begin with, the proper declension of the passage is “Communists, Social Democrats, trade unionists, Jews.” (Catholics are sometimes included, which is not only a misquotation but historically inaccurate; the Nazis never “came for” German Catholics in anything like the sense that they did for these other groups.) Niemöller was referring specifically to the events of the year 1933, when Hitler — aided and abetted by the Reichstag fire — concentrated on eliminating all organized political opposition to his regime before he got down to the work of so-called “racial purification.”

Also, the quotation is not originally from a sermon (as many people believe) or, as the review has it, a poem (although these days it is often presented as a poem). It was tossed off almost casually one evening in Niemöller’s living room, as he led an informal discussion group of divinity students on the theme of what it means to be a practical Christian in modern times.

Niemöller cast the statement in the first person, at least in part, out of a sense of guilt. As a former U-boat commander in World War I, Niemöller’s pre-Nazi politics tended strongly toward the nationalistic and the conservative, and he was a critic of the Weimar regime. As Sibylle said ruefully: “My parents saw the evil of National Socialism right from the start. My husband did not; he had to learn the hard way.”

I eagerly anticipated Kay Redfield Jamison’s new book on Robert Lowell, including its exploration of the relationship between mania and creativity. However, I was disheartened to see that your review of “Robert Lowell, Setting the River on Fire” (March 5) used antiquated terms like “stark raving mad,” “going mad” and, worst of all, “crazy” outside of the historical quotations from the book. Those terms unnecessarily perpetuate stigma against mental illness that affects millions of Americans.

I appreciated Ruth Whippman’s thoughtful review of Damion Searls’s “The Inkblots” (March 19). But she, and Searls as well, may have failed to note that it takes an especially gifted and sensitive clinical psychologist to interpret the results of a Rorschach test. In my experience over the past decades when the Rorschach was in vogue, there were only a handful of clinicians who were right on target in their diagnostic assessment of a Rorschach protocol. Others — the more pedestrian, average clinicians — were guided less by their own clinical acumen and sensitivity than by their reliance on a cumbersome system of “objective scoring” (as dictated by the prevailing positivist science that has dominated our field and, in this instance at least, failed miserably).

The writer is a professor emeritus of psychology at New York University.

The review of Lauren Elkin’s “Flâneuse” (March 5) brought back wonderful memories of the many times I found myself in Paris over a weekend after the week’s business was done. Sometime in the late ’90s, I saw posters for a book fair and read in Time Out Paris about how the French admire American writers, some of whom would be reading at the event. I found my way to the large venue and into the back of the room where Allen Ginsberg was reading “Howl,” accompanied by Philip Glass, his longtime friend and collaborator. Yes, walking cities is not only energizing and inspiring, but the things one stumbles on can be life-changing.

Getting It Right

The Bookends column (March 19) asks which novel got it right, “1984” or “Brave New World.” Who got it right? Kurt Vonnegut in “Player Piano.” He wrote it in 1952, and it’s spot-on, even though his computers had vacuum tubes.

In his Bookends entry, Siddhartha Deb names several great books and authors. I’ve not seen anyone mention Kurt Vonnegut’s classic “Player Piano.” It has all the proper dystopian elements as well as very dark humor. We need some humor now, even dark humor.

Could a reader’s opinion of the two novels discussed in Bookends be influenced by his or her background? It seems possible that an African-American, thinking of mass incarceration, poverty and the denial of the history of slavery, would find Orwell’s nightmare quite compelling. A middle-class white who has experienced manipulation but no outright oppression might find “Brave New World” more convincing. Has anybody tested this on readers?

The Book Review wants to hear from readers. Letters for publication should include the writer’s name, address and telephone number. Please address them to books@nytimes or to The Editor, The New York Times Book Review, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. Comments may also be posted on the Book Review’s Facebook page.

Letters may be edited for length and clarity. We regret that we are unable to acknowledge letters.

Information about subscriptions and submitting books for review may be found here.|||

