As Snapchat launches its ad presence in New Zealand, Air New Zealand becomes the first brand to advertise on Snapchat. Air New Zealand Snapchat ads including geofilters, sponsored lenses and video ads became available as a result of the sales partnership lead out of Sydney by Kathryn Carter, General Manager, Sales – Australia at Snapchat Inc.

Air New Zealand GM global brand and content marketing Jodi Williams commented on the launch saying that “Snapchat is one of the fastest-growing social networks in the world and Kiwis are embracing it in various and innovative ways”.

Air New Zealand Snapchat filter (as demonstrated above) is available not only to the lucky travelers boarding the airplane, but to anyone around the world who is dreaming of visiting southern hemisphere. To unlock the secret filter for one hour, one has to scan the Snapcode below with their Snapchat app.

Once you scan the Snapcode in your Snapchat app, you will see a pop-up message from where you can unlock the secret filter for an hour.

Once the filter is unlocked, take a picture or a video and swipe right till you see Air New Zealand secret Snapchat filter making your way to your Snap.

While partnership with Air New Zealand marks the first time Snapchat launched the ads in New Zealand, it’s not the first time Snapchat made headlines in the country. In August 2016 a leaked Snapchat video showed Air New Zealand flight crew mocking travellers and posing with inappropriate props in the cockpit. The caption on the video (pictured in a screenshot below) said”Wish I could spit on passengers like this”.

Following the leaked video, Air New Zealand spokesperson said that the airline was “shocked and appalled” by the crew behavior and prompted an internal investigation. It appeared that the video was created more than four years ago and one of the crew members in question were removed from their duties and two employees were suspended as the investigation commenced.

To follow Air New Zealand on Snapchat, open the Snapchat app, point to the Snapcode below and press and hold till you see an option to add Air New Zealand as a friend on Snapchat.|||

As Snapchat launches its ad presence in New Zealand, Air New Zealand Snapchat ads including geofilters, sponsored lenses & video ads hit the screens