Amazon has sent an email with reasons for termination as follow:

I have replied this email as follow:

Thank you for your feedback although it was too late. For a healthy associate relationship you need to explain what is wrong and even warn before you close an account which I think is not hard to do.

I will go though all your reasoning:

-The information in your application, such as your email address, mailing address, and/or the list of Sites you are using to drive traffic to Amazon is not accurate or up-to-date.

I have had two store ids one of them was inactive and site was not online for ages. When I call to Amazon the employee from Amazon said me he can only see productionscheduling.com which was my inactive old site he could not even find www.jeviz.com why? I can see in my account there exist 2 store ids? You even can not find my site which I can see that time easily from your own associates site. Is this really your profession level? The guy I talked suggested me to re-apply an affiliate account. Then I re-applied and delete the my old site from the list to leave only jeviz.com listed. By the way an inactive non-online site just in the list can’t be a reason for account termination, it is not a valid reason. Your reasoning must make a sense. An attitude I can do whatever I can is not a healthy way of relationship.

-You are using a linking to Amazon in a manner that makes it unclear that you are linking to an Amazon Site.

Your Operating Agreement really sucks. You conflict your own Operating Agreement. Here is why:

Your own Link To Search Results tool creates just a link without any hint that directs to Amazon a user must click and see to what is going to happen. Anything you made about my site must not conflict your own affiliate tools that you encourage us to use and I think it is a reasonable basic logic. Here below you can see “python books” link which does not state about what will happen.|||

My side project Jeviz.com is basically Amazon search on steroids! which provides advanced Amazon search capabilities. I have announced my project on hackernews last year and it was generating revenue…