Whenever I go to Amsterdam, every once in a while I meet up with Boris. Now our meetings are always inspiring (I guess for the both of us ), full of ideas, about stuff we can do and a couple of months ago Boris came up with the following (he also blogged about this)

At this moment I can see 8 different signals. Some are closed networks but most are open and available. I can only connect to one at a time so I tend to just pick the one with the best signal. But what if I could connect to all the networks at the same time and combine their bandwith?

Yeah, that is what I need!

A big, fat access point with a large antenna and a bunch of Wi-Fi cards that automatically connect to the strongest signals it can pick up. Then it would combine all these signals into one FreeLoading Broadband Canal for me to use.

So, in the end, I guess I was the one up for the challenge and now, two days ahead of The Next Web Conference its time to show the world what weve got!

What is it?

Well, I (re)searched a whole lot of available hardware before I decided this is what this magic box should be:

Its a nice black box of course, but whats inside?

The inside consists of a Routerboard 532A motherboard with 564 daughterboard.

That on its own gives the following specs:

CPU MIPS 32 4Kc based 266MHz (BIOS adjustable from 200 to 400MHz) embedded processor

 Memory 64MB DDR onboard memory chip

 Root loader RouterBOOT, 1Mbit Flash chip

 Data storage 128MB onboard NAND memory chip

 CompactFlash type I/II slot (also supports IBM/Hitachi Microdrive)

 Ethernet ports One IDT Korina 10/100 Mbit/s Fast Ethernet port supporting Auto-MDI/X, eight VIA VT6105 10/100 Mbit/s Fast Ethernet ports supporting Auto-MDI/X

 MiniPCI slot Six MiniPCI Type IIIA/IIIB slots

 Serial ports One DB9 RS232C asynchronous serial port

Now that is already a nice piece of equipment, but doesnt bring us any nearer to a solution of Boris problem here, so I added six mini-PCI cards (and a quite famous 4GB Compact Flash card ), three of which are visible in this picture:

The cards I ended up using are Senao/Engenius SL(NL/EL?) 5354MP cards with Atheros AR5213 chipset, for which drivers exist by the means of the MadWifi project.

So, a small box, a MIPS-CPU, six wireless network interfaces, now what?

Well, the idea is to bundle all the traffic from these six wireless networkinterfaces (and maybe a wired interface too) into one big connection which, if you keep the wireless interfaces down to five, otherwise you need to hook up to it by wire, could be retransmitted into one powerfull new connection!

The box at this moment happily boots Debian and the bonding of all the network traffic is done in a load-balancing way, but the other way around. Instead of balancing the load of one connection over multiple servers, we balance multiple connections into one device.

Now of course, even though I need some more time to finetune this setup, this is Amsterdam and this is Boris specific solution for his problem. In Amsterdam, believe it or not, you can find a lot of unencrypted networks but even making use of unencrypted networks which are not your own is quite controversial, let alone, if we would add features which would enable the use of lightly encrypted networks(WEP 64/128 bit). Theres lots and lots of material out there and even though it could take the machine a while, technically this machine is able to crack lightly encrypted networks. But the question arises, will we do that and can we (from a legal point of view) do that?

So, to answer that, were gonna ask you!

Which features, according to you, should the Slurpr have?

Which features should the Slurpr have?

 Put everything in it that's technologically feasible, make this box the meanest WEP-cracking wireless-bundling box ever!

 I don't care what you make, just get me one! (you can pre-order below)

 Bundling of network traffic is fine, but only connect to open/unencrpyted networks.

 Bundling of network traffic is fine, but do not connect to any private network.

 Forget it, I'll build my own, thank you very much.

 

View Results 

 



Somehow, Boris and I both think we could be up for some legal consequences if we would market/sell this box in a way we both would like, so to add to the earlier question,

How about the legal consequences of the Slurpr?

How about the legal consequences of the Slurpr?

I would be willing to sign a waiver, especially if that enables all kinds of features. You guys sort the consequences out, I'm not signing anything! Total Votes: 22008

 

 



But, even though were very curious about what you think of our Slurpr, no matter what were gonna sell it anyway!

The box will cost 999 euro, ex taxes and ex shipping. Now that may seem very steep, but click around the web, configure it with these specs and on the material alone youll come very close.

This box is being sold pre-assembled, pre-configured (remember youve got a vote in that!) and ready to slurp!

So, if you would like to have this controversial box as one of the first around, make sure you pre-order your Slurpr today! Click the add to cart below and your pre-ordering through PayPal starts.

we used paylogic here before, but as it seems, paypal is preferrable. If you already ordered through paylogic, no sweat, your order is safe!

If youd like to be updated about the Slurpr, you can fill in your mail-address here:

Next to the pre-assembled boxes, everyone can build their own of course. Maybe with a couple of wireless interfaces less than this one, that doesnt matter. We can host the images which can be flashed directly to the Compact Flash cards. If people are willing to contribute to this project, wed like to hear about it of course!

Lets Slurp and truly liberate some Wifi!

Terms and Conditions of Use 

 I would like to point out that everything on this website is licensed through a Creative Commons License. Its free for any non-commercial use, so anybody trying this out for themselves is something Id like to encourage. Just dont be evil

you can find all of my projects overhere|||

