Summary: have the basics right, be sexy, investigate & be pro-active

It was a weekend night, and I was a little tipsy. My girlfriend and I were walking back to the The Hague train station after a good Chinese meal. My phone rang, and without fully realizing I was speaking to Rutger, the program director of Rockstart Accelerator Web & Mobile, I muttered “hmmyeah Vincent here”.

“Sorry for calling so late! I have some good news for you. You’ve been accepted by the Rockstart Accelerator!”

I had stopped walking, and my blood had stopped flowing. After that I can only remember stuttering a few thank-yous and hanging up. A hug and a shout later, we decided to walk back into the Hague for many more drinks and a good night out.

I am the founder of BotBoys, a small but fast-growing chatbot company. My goal is getting us to enormous scale. In the last few months, I’ve decided Rockstart is our best match and (apparently) took the right steps to get selected for the program. I’ve chosen to write this down in order to help others like me.

Rockstart is the premier startup network in the Netherlands. Their mission is to help fast-growing companies that just started out get from “we are an ambitious team with a good idea and some momentum but we’re a chaotic mess” to “why yes we’re a legitimate business and scaling up like crazy”

Getting into the Rockstart program is the goal for many entrepreneurs who want a scalable business. It is the home of successful companies like 3D Hubs, Wercker, Peerby and Owlin. It’s not as huge as Y-Combinator (Airbnb, Dropbox) in the US, but if you plan on focusing on Europe, Rockstart might be your best bet at success.

I’ve been closely following the startup ‘world’ for a while.. There’s other accelerators in the Netherlands and in Western Europe, but Rockstart is for me the most relevant one (how Rockstart compares to others, like Startupbootcamp or Yes!Delft for example, is for a later blog post).

I’m in the business of making chatbots. My company, BotBoys, has spent the last year making chatbots for big Dutch corporates (NOS, the national broadcasting service, a big theme park, a big logistics company, the National Lottery, etc), smaller firms (e-commerce, law firms) and startups.

It’s our goal to build a scalable and unique business built on what we’ve achieved so far.

Rockstart is without a doubt the best local network of people who’ve built scalable businesses – it’s the best way to meet founders who’ve been there and done it all, early employees at Uber and Facebook and investors with a track record. Being part of this program means easy access to all these groups and more.

On the other hand, participation isn’t free. You pay with a percentage of your company. If ever you’re unsatisfied, no way to undo. You will have this group of people as a partial owner of what you created.

Late last year, I presented at Rockstart Answers – an event where startups can receive feedback and connect to relevant people. This was my first personal encounter with the Rockstart team. The combination of their high-level thinking about start-ups and their generous attitude left me with a positive impression.

After that, I investigated: I interviewed anyone I could find who was working for or with Rockstart. Staff, mentors, investors, friends, etc. I mainly wanted to know two things:

The most important lesson regarding 2) is something a mentor in the program shared with me. I’d asked him a question that I came to ask several people I’ve interviewed: “What if I work very hard, and try to get the same connections independently of the program? How much effort would it take?”

“You will never get the same treatment as if you’re in the program. When I ask my fellow mentors in Rockstart for advice, sure, they will give me a friendly pointer, but if it’s a startup in the program they will actually spend hours helping you out personally.”

After hearing similar stories about the effects this program can have on our hiring, fundraising, scaling up, team, architecture, etc., and I wasn’t able to find any ‘red flag’ (any potential disqualifying moral or practical fact concerning the organisation or its leadership), I was convinced: we were going to be part of this Accelerator.

First general pitch for the mentors at the start of Selection Days

The official selection procedure consists first of an online application form, followed by several skype conversations with different Rockstart mentors. Out of 300 or so applicants, the top 20 gets invited to Amsterdam for ‘Selection Days’, where you pitch on stage, meet many mentors in short and structured talks and get a psychological profile of your team. Finally, this top 20 gets to present to and talk with the investment committee – the gathering of people who are most going to influence the decision.

Facing the investment committee was challenging. They would give us very direct questions that showed not just that they thoroughly understood what we were trying to do, but that they were already looking beyond that. We realized this on the moment we finished our presentation and got the first question, boiling down to a “Why do you assume this is scalable”. This is the question that my team and me have been thinking about and working on fulltime for almost a year – initially, without realizing it – and here, this committee, upon meeting us, directly gets to the heart of the matter. But how to convince them?

We had a long discussion, and in the end they still seemed a bit unsatisfied with the answer we had offered. I was shaking. Had we in fact not prepared at all? Or was even showing up here a mistake? But they asked us to think again about our strategy, write it down clearly, and get back to them the next day “by noon”.

My co-founder had to quickly get back to our office to continue work, and I stayed at the Rockstart canteen working on our ‘homework assignment’ until after office hours and everything had gone quiet. I can still remember program director Rutger stopping on his way out when he saw me. “I was hoping you’d still be here” – he said, offering his support.

Next time I would talk to him was on the phone, that evening in The Hague, to hear we had gotten accepted.

First of all, the only reason we were considered at all is because we got (most of) the basics right. Having a general idea about what you’re doing regarding team and product and being able to clearly communicate your vision regarding these is essential. I see this without fail in the other founders who are now my batch-mates as well (more on them in a later blog post). They all have been exposed to lots of feedback in the past, learned to listen, make up their own minds, iterate, and execute on it.

However, there are plenty of applicants with a clear vision and a good pitch who didn’t get selected. Most of them could have easily been in my place. The level is quite high. And I suspect this must be the most frustrating part about selecting startups: the ones you didn’t select are as likely to have become successful as the ones you did.

So how to be part of the final 10? I think the biggest contributor in our case was we seem to have picked something to work on that attracts people. We work in a field that’s sexy right now, and even though that’s also a weakness (more on that in a later blog post), the nice side-effect is that people will be talking about you. If I have to choose one biggest contributor to us being selected, I think this simple fact would be it.

Next to that, I noticed that all the investigative work I did beforehand, and my critical attitude on the program itself had left a good impression on people involved in the selection process. So that didn’t hurt either. Participating in Rockstart Answers, and my pro-actively talking to a lot of people around Rockstart beforehand and gathering feedback made all the difference. It sharpened all our answers beforehand, and some mentors were already informed of what we were doing and why, and we could quickly get to the meat of things during the selection process.

Hold on, you think, but isn’t that unfair? 1) Not everyone can be working on something sexy, and 2) not everyone has the possibility of interviewing a whole range of people in a network! What I want to impress on you is that yes, they can and they should.

All in all, I can’t stress enough that startup founders should focus their worries on the basics; are they making something that people want, and are they (becoming) a good team? All other questions and activities that do not follow from the basics should not take up more than a fraction of your time and cognitive energy. Every once in a while, I read stuff like Sam Altman’s Startup Playbook as a way to remind myself.

Thanks to Qing Wang, Rutger van Waveren and Roxy van Beek for their input on drafts of this article.|||

