I've begun doing research for forming an LLC in the US and I have yet to find any decent guide. While this is not a complete guide, hopefully it will compile a lot of information in once place.

From what I have been reading thus far, the best state to incorporate are Wyoming, Nevada, and Delaware. All of these states are known as "incorporate friendly" states due to their relaxed tax laws and small business friendly court system.

As a general overview, here is a comparison of the three states.

Delaware is good for larger scaled corporations or is you are getting funding from VC. Wyoming and Nevada are better for small starting business, especially if you don't plan on becoming a Fortune 500 anytime soon.

More info on Wyoming. Note, this is a service website, so they are trying to get you to use their services for registering in Wyoming, but the info does seem credible.

What other states have good options?

Kentucky may be worth looking into. Where most states costs a filing fee of anywhere from $100 - $400 per year (some are a single fee like Texas). Kentucky's filing fee is only $55 and then $15 per year. While they do tax you, for a startup on a budget, this may be a viable option. Learn more: here.

Anyone can incorporate in any state, as long as they have a legal address in that location. You can pay an agent a yearly fee who will give you this service. They can legally receive mail on your behalf, which should be noted in the event a client wants to file suit. While I have not yet looked into it, I have read good things about this site for finding one of these agents.

If you are living in America and working out of a home office, I recommend looking into this how to; how to get qualified for a tax deduction with a home office.

An operating agreement is one of the most important documents used by LLCs because it structures the business' financial and functional decisions. The purpose of the document is to govern the internal operations of the business in a way that suits the specific needs of the business owners. Once the document is signed by the members, it acts as an official contract binding them to its terms.

The U.S Small Business Administration has a good writeup on this on their website. Most states do not require an Operating Agreement, but it is highly recommended. www.sba.gov

Nolo.com offers guides for individual states. If you'd like a file an LLC, I suggest using this website as a checklist when getting ready to file.

Click here to view a guide on different states.

More Information from Nolo on forming an LLC

I haven't done much research on this, but here is a guide for Puerto Rico.|||

I've begun doing research for forming an LLC in the US and I have yet to find any decent guide. While this is not a complete guide, hopefully it...