Oh boy, it’s a big day for ATLUS today. It took us a while (pause for Winter 2014 joke), but Persona 5 is finally out in the West! Seriously, we poured countless hours into making the game as perfect as it can be, and words can’t explain how excited we are for you all to finally be playing it. Some of you might be saying “this is totally just PR speak,” but I’m telling you it’s not. All of us at ATLUS in Japan and America worked our freaking butts off to make sure Persona 5 is worthy of having the Persona name.

We know this game means a lot to our fans, and we’re literally SO, SO HAPPY that you can now suit up with the Phantom Thieves and cause some havoc in Tokyo. Word of advice to newcomers of the game: *deep breath* MAKE SURE TO CHECK YOUR CALENDAR AND NOT WAIT UNTIL THE VERY LAST DAY TO STEAL SOMEONE’S TREASURE. REMEMBER TO SEND OUT A CALLING CARD BEFOREHAND OR ELSE ONLY PROFOUND SADNESS AWAITS. Oh, and save often.

Ok, now let’s talk Persona 5 streaming and videos. Simply put, we don’t want the experience to be spoiled for people who haven’t played the game. Our fans have waited years for the game to come out and we really want to make sure they can experience it fully as a totally new adventure. Please read our video/streaming guidelines below:

Please, PLEASE do not post any specific plot points or story spoilers, and only talk about the game in broad strokes. (Good example: “The game deals with dark themes right off the bat, with a lecherous teacher and other corrupted individuals.” Bad example: “Players immediately run into trouble with the pervy teacher *spoiler*, whose actions go so far as to cause *spoiler*.”)

You’re more than welcome to talk/show Confidants, the new combat, the Velvet Room, the dungeons, etc. Just please keep in mind that as a singular story playthrough, viewers are *highly* wary of spoilers!

In-game Content Limit: Please limit video content through the in-game date of 7/7.

This being a Japanese title with a single-playthrough story means our masters in Japan are very wary about it. Sharing is currently blocked through the native PS4 UI. However, if you do plan on streaming, video guidelines above apply except length. If you decide to stream past 7/7 (I HIGHLY RECOMMEND NOT DOING THIS, YOU HAVE BEEN WARNED), you do so at the risk of being issued a content ID claim or worse, a channel strike/account suspension.

That being said, Persona 5 is a super special case for us and we’re in ongoing discussion about how our policies may evolve in the future. Thanks for reading and good luck in the Metaverse.|||

