In July 2012, I had the opportunity to attend OSCON in Portland. One of my favorite sessions was The Art of Organizational Manipulation by Brian Fitzpatrick and Ben Collins-Sussman. With a title like that, I needed to be in the front row! The session was the launch for their book Team Geek (now called Debugging Teams) and all attendees received a free copy (thanks!). I have now read the book 5 times and can honestly say that it has changed they way I lead teams.

Fitzpatrick and Collins-Sussman assert that the foundation of an awesome team culture is a team mission statement. The mission statement clearly defines the team’s core values and keeps goals in sync.

As MindTouch Engineering was growing rapidly from a small group of about 10 to a team of over 30, we realized that the core values of our team had to be defined. It was no longer an option to scale our team culture without a mission statement. Companies talk about only hiring candidates that share the team's core values. It's impossible to do that until your team has identified and documented what values they stand for.

Our team was already working really well using many of the collaboration techniques described in Team Geek. I proposed reading Team Geek as a book club for the engineering leads and original team members. We committed to finish reading the book over a couple of weeks. During a few off site meetings, the team discuss what we learned. We reviewed each chapter and identified the values and anti-patterns that resonated with us personally. From each chapter we captured on a whiteboard the collective values.

Now the real work could begin: defining our mission statement! The process was not easy. We constructed different mission statements from the identified common values. Each statement was analyzed, every word and phrase was debated and carefully selected. In the end, we came up with a statement that truly defines our core values.

Our mission statement is central to everything we do as a team: Interviewing, Hiring, Career Sprints, Development and Maintenance Months. It is regularly referenced by team members in conversation. Every day when entering and leaving the office we see the mission statement prominently displayed on our wall.

If your team hasn’t defined their mission statement yet, what’s holding them back from doing so?|||

