While surfing the web, you likely will stumble upon many unsecured websites. These sites pose a serious risk of data theft or privacy violation. When you are using an unsecured website, all data that is exchanged between the website-server and you, the internet user, is up for grabs. This means anyone is able to see your internet activity and steal your sensitive information such as passwords or private messages.

Keeping your data secure is important for many reasons, but one of the biggest risks of using an unsecured website is identity theft. With your personal information, someone can pretend to be you. With your login info, someone can send emails from your account, order things while paying from your bank account, or steal your money. Hackers can also spoof websites, so you might think you are on your banking website, but you might actually on the hackers fake website. This is why it’s so important to make sure your web surfing is secure. [Tips][Hide tips]

1: https://

 Always check that the website you are using is secured. You can recognize an unsecured website by the web address: when it starts with HTTP (without an “s” at the end) and it shows no lock or an open lock in front of the web address you have to be careful, as this means it has not been secured. If you are on an unsecured website, make absolutely sure that you are not leaving any information behind that you want to keep private, such as passwords or credit card information. Online banking especially is very risky. Secured websites, on the other hand, start with HTTPS and/or show a closed lock. These websites are safe because they bought an SSL Certificate which means that all data that is exchanged between the website server and the internet user is encrypted. The data is encoded in such a way that only authorized parties can read it. 2: HTTPS Everywhere

 Install the browser add-on HTTPS Everywhere. It is a Firefox, Chrome, and Opera extension that enforces websites which offer both HTTPS and HTTP to always serve you the HTTPS version of their website. It cannot make your connection secure if they do not have an SSL certificate at all, but overall it makes your browsing more secure. 3: Tor

 Use the Tor browser instead of the regular internet browser you normally use. Tor is a browser that can be downloaded for free. When you’re browsing with the Tor browser no one will be able to see what you are doing over the network, what computer you are using or where you are located. All your data is secure.|||

