One of my main research directions in the last decade is  quantum information theory and quantum computers. (See this post and this one.) It is therefore a pleasure to report and give many links on the massive efforts carried out these days in these directions and the great enthusiasm and hope these efforts carry.

A general article about quantum technologies and computing  in the Economist.

“Nature” article  Quantum computers ready to leap out of the lab in 2017.  It is mainly on Google, Microsoft, and Monroe’s lab mentioning also IBM, Rigetti and Quantum Circuits (a new startup by the Yale group). A little debate between John Martinis and Robert Schoelkopf about the target of “quantum supremacy.”  Regarding topological quantum computing Leo Kouwenhoven declares that “2017 is the year of braiding,”

How to say “Quantum computers” in other languages? Hebrew: מחשבים קוונטים pronounced: maghshevim kvantim; Spanish: Computadoras cuánticas (google translate).

Please contribute! For earlier efforts in this spirit see “more or less in various languages” and “When it rains it pours” in various languages. Of course, ordinary comments are welcome as well.

The Race to Sell True Quantum Computers Begins Before They Really Exist, (Wired)  Mainly on Google and IBM. IBM Inches Ahead of Google in Race for Quantum Computing Power, MIT Technology Review.  Commercialize quantum technologies in five years (Nature)

IBM: IBM’s quantum cloud computer goes commercial (Nature) IBM moves from a 5-qubit quantum computer to 50-qubit commercial quantum computer in the near future. Also IBM’s first commercial quantum computer paves way to overhaul of molecular simulations (chemistry world);  IBM Building First Universal Quantum Computers for Business and Science (IBM Press Release); and a PC World article.

Google: Researchers Report Milestone in Developing Quantum Computer (NYT);  Quantum computing is poised to transform our lives. Meet the man leading Google’s charge (Wired, and interview with John Martinis)

Microsoft: Microsoft Makes Bet Quantum Computing Is Next Breakthrough (NYT) ; Inside Microsoft’s quest for a topological quantum computer (Nature) Microsoft doubles down on quantum computing bet. Microsoft approach is based on topological quantum computing.

Others: Scientists are close to building a quantum computer that can beat a conventional one, Science, Chris Monroe and the Startup ionQ, and various other groups and methods. Quantum Computing on Cusp, EE Times, Yale’s group and Quantum Circuits.  Quantum hanky-panky (Seth Lloyd, Edge); Its much bigger than it looks (David Deutsch, Edge);

NIST:  National Institute of Standards and Technology, quantum divisions.  Super quantum simulator ‘entangles’ hundreds of ions (Science daily)  Quantum computers may have higher ‘speed limits’ than thought (Phys.org.) A thought experiment by Stephen Jordan.

D-wave. D-wave is building large scale quantum computers with (rather noisy) superconducting qubits, and implement specific optimization algorithms. D-Wave quantum computers: The smart person’s guide .  Quantum computer learns to ‘see’ trees Science Magazine. An article in Quanta Magazine.

List of companies involved in quantum computers. A few webpages:  1Qbit ; D-wave ; Quantum circuits (Yale group) ; Rigetti ; Monroe’s blog; Station Q (Microsoft); Google; IBM-Q;

The key for large scale universal quantum computers is quantum error-correcting codes.

IBM to develop hardware to wipe out errors in quantum computing (New Scientists)

Physicists show that real-time error correction in quantum … (Phys.Org, reporting on research in South Africa)

New Yale-developed device lengthens the life of quantum information (Yale news)

A convincing demonstration of computational complexity supremacy is expected by researchers in the near future. Main approaches are using quantum circuits with around 50 qubits or via demonstration of BosonSampling with 20-30 bosons.

Revealed: Google’s plan for quantum computer supremacy (New Scientist);  How Widely Should We Draw The Circle? (Scott Aaronson on imminent demonstration of quantum supremacy); News release from Bristol U. ; Proto quantum computer inspired by Victorians gets a speed boost About BosonSampling. (New Scientist.);  Massive Disruption Is Coming With Quantum Computing, Singularity Hub

Forging a Qubit to Rule Them All (Quanta Magazine);  Inside the Knotty World of ‘Anyon’ Particles (Quanta Magazine);  Why Insights of Nobel Physicists Could Revolutionize 21st-Century (Scientific Computing): Via Majorana fermions: Physicists In China Detect The Majorana Fermion (Asian Scientist Magazine); The discovery of Majorana fermion (EurekAlert);

Quantum computer makes first high-energy physics simulation, Nature, about the Innsbruck group.

A general article: The trouble with quantum computing by Ben Skuse, Engineering and Technology. The author expresses overall an optimistic bottom line, but explains the difficulties and also brings my point of view.

Here is the ending paragraph:

Much like outcomes in the quantum world itself, the future of quantum computing involves a number of unknowns, none of which we can predict. When and whether quantum supremacy and universal quantum computers can be achieved is currently up in the air, but the work of Chow, Lucas, Montanaro and even Kalai is contributing to tilting the odds in its favour. And each ‘step closer’ is only that. The road to quantum computing stretches off into the distance and may have no end.

Quantum computers will allow breaking most of current cryptosystems. This leads to much effort for “post-quantum cryptography,” namely developing cryptographic methods immune to quantum attacks.

HACKING, CRYPTOGRAPHY, AND THE COUNTDOWN TO QUANTUM COMPUTING (New Yorker)

Post-Quantum Cryptography: NIST’s Plan for the Future (U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)) NIST requests ideas for crypto that can survive quantum computers (The Register)

An article regarding RSA conference. (bank info security.); An article in Quanta Magazine

EXCLUSIVE – Mathematically provable communication security and other applications of Quantum Key Distribution (OpenGovAsia); Developing a quantum key system to make mobile transactions safer (New Atlas); China’s 2000-km Quantum Link Is Almost Complete (IEEE Spectrum); SK Telecom, Nokia team on quantum cryptography (Telecom Asia); Chinese Physicists Achieve Record-Breaking Quantum Cryptography Breakthrough (Hecked).

Atomic  clocks:  Physicists Find That as Clocks Get More Precise, Time Gets More, ScienceAlert;  JILA atomic clock mimics long-sought synthetic magnetic state; Time crystals:  Time Crystals Are Real, But That Doesn’t Mean Time Is Crystallized (Forbes); Entanglement and theoretical physics: The quantum source of space-time (Nature); The equation that could transform physics: Researchers say ER=EPR … (Daily mail). Quantum biology:  Can Quantum Physics Explain Consciousness? (The Atlantic)  Are we ready for quantum biology?, New Scientist;  A New Spin on the Quantum Brain, Quanta Magazine; quantum effects in biological systems (a conference at IIAS).

U.K. The future is quantum: solution to the world’s critical problems; Quantum computers will solve problems that conventional computers never could. (Financial times)

China: Chinese satellite is one giant step for the quantum internet  (Nature); 5 reasons why China will rule tech, 2017 edition (computerworld. quantum computers is one of the items).  China’s push to become a tech superpower triggers alarms abroad (Financial times, quantum computing emphasized );   China can help drive global progress in quantum computing (ZD net)

Australia: Sydney University’s David Reilly part of Microsoft’s billion-dollar push, The Sydney Morning Heral; Quantum computing is the next space race says Telstras Hugh Bradlow  (Financial Review, Australia).

Canada: Canada leads in the race to create Quantum Valley, The Globe and Mail; Canada’s PM on quantum computing.

Israel: The future is here: the quantum computer revolution (in Hebrew); Calcalist article (Hebrew); Israeli scientists discovery towards QC (in Hebrew Haaretz) ; Quantum computing breakthrough: Israeli scientists invent cannon for entangled photon clusters (International Business Times).|||

One of my main research directions in the last decade is  quantum information theory and quantum computers. (See this post and this one.) It is therefore a pleasure to report and give many links on the massive efforts carried out these days in these directions and the great enthusiasm and hope these efforts carry. Europe quantum…