Västerås, Sweden, 14th March 2017 *** Percepio AB, the leading specialist in software tracing tools for real-time operating systems, has been working closely with ARM to develop Tracealyzer for ARM® Keil® RTX5, the new RTOS in Keil MDK and ARM mbed™ OS.

Tracealyzer for RTX5 is based on Percepio’s latest Tracealyzer v3.1 platform and builds on ARM’s new Event Recorder technology in Keil MDK. This allows for continuous streaming of event data to the host PC over JTAG or SWD, using common debug probes such as the Keil ULINK series. Percepio is the first ARM partner to leverage the Event Recorder technology.

Tracealyzer offers 25+ graphical views of the real-time behavior, including a timeline of tasks and ISRs, also showing calls to MDK APIs as well as custom “user events.” Other views include CPU Load, operations on specific kernel objects, and plots of application data from user events.

Tracealyzer for Keil RTX5 will be available during Q2 2017, with all 25+ graphical runtime views that have made Tracealyzer the world-leading RTOS visualization tool. All Tracealyzer versions offer an evaluation period with full functionality, and include demo traces for exploring the features of Tracealyzer without writing a single line of code.

Reinhard Keil, Director of MCU Tools at ARM said: “IoT developers require tools to avoid bottlenecks during development and to speed time-to-market for complex connected products. Percepio Tracealyzer enables unparalleled insight into the execution, timing and interactions of the RTX5 real-time operating system, the MDK middleware components and the user application. Percepio is the first ARM partner to utilize our new Event Recorder technology, which provides time deterministic high-speed access to a running target system.”

“Tracealyzer for RTX5 is a major milestone in our ambition to offer premium trace visualization for all leading RTOS platforms, greatly facilitated by ARM’s initiative to develop the Event Recorder,” said Johan Kraft, CEO and Founder of Percepio. “This is a critical step in supporting IoT developers with the tools needed for efficient development of advanced, cutting-edge products.”

Founded in 2009 and based in Västerås, Sweden, Percepio is a developer of highly visual runtime diagnostics tools for embedded and Linux-based software. Percepio’s tool family Tracealyzer provides an unprecedented level of insight into the runtime world of embedded software, which facilitates understanding, troubleshooting and optimization. Tracealyzer gives embedded software developers better means to create more robust and efficient software, on time and within budget. Percepio collaborates with several leading vendors of operating systems for embedded software.|||

