Newsletters are one of the most valuable means of communication a company has with its most loyal customers. Not only is it incredibly low cost, but newsletters allow you to understand your customer base, build relationships and take advantage of email as a marketing tool.

Blogs can benefit massively from effecting newsletter marketing, since your subscribers allow you to notify them whenever you publish new content and in turn, this drives traffic to your site! To take full advantage of this tool, apply the following tips to your current strategy to boost your subscription rate almost instantly.



 10 Effective Ways to Get More Email List Subscribers

While it may seem like an obvious piece of advice, incentivizing your readers with gifts is a quick and easy way to grow your subscriber list. Different industries utilize different tools, discount codes are incredibly common on e-commerce sites, while online casinos give out exclusive bonus codes and gift cards can be found across every business sector. While prizes are great, without presenting the added value of the core of your offer, the newsletter itself, you will miss out on even more growth!

From a site owner’s perspective, a newsletter is a way to push your articles or products to your readers, but to subscribers it is an additional medium that should offer unique and additional value beyond reminders of your site’s offerings.

Therefore, successful online marketing blogs often offer webinars, eBooks and checklists that are not featured anywhere on the site. This makes the newsletter’s added value more tangible, since only subscribers can benefit from these offerings. Other industries play with this concept to suit their offerings. Fitness blogs for example often offer macro calculators or personalized nutrition guides (after customers complete a form) to elicit higher subscription rates.



 29 Proven Ways to Use Social Proof to Increase Your Conversions (Updated)

If other people have subscribed to your newsletter and enjoyed the exclusive content it offers, you can use these facts to draw in new subscribers. Social proof is a powerful persuasion and marketing tool that can have a positive impact on visitors who are deciding whether they should subscribe to your newsletter. Whether you boast about your current list of subscribers, monthly readers, or the number of promotions given out via email, you can use these figures as proof of popularity which will in turn make your newsletters even more popular!|||

Newsletters are one of the most valuable means of communication a company has with its most loyal customers. Not only is it incredibly low cost, but newsle