At Mozilla we have been working on a feature called containers, which gives users the ability to separate their lives online to prevent being tracked.

Since launching containers in Nightly and now in Test Pilot, the most requested feature for containers was the ability to assign a website to a container. When a user assigns a website to a container the browser will then load that website in said container whenever the website is requested.

To get the features mentioned in this article download Containers in Test Pilot

Launching today you will be able to assign websites to your containers using the following flow:

Assign the container to the link by picking “Always Open in This Container”:

When you click a link to bbc.com you will see this prompt asking you to confirm opening in the container you asked for:

When you want to remove the assignment use the same context menu:

Using the example we can see how a user will be able to prevent their browsing history being shared from advertisers, news and shopping sites whilst only adding minimal effort to their browsing flow.

For a long time we put off implementing this feature due to it’s user interface complexity and we likely will still have to tweak it after we launch. The feature itself wasn’t very complex, with the code being only ~300 lines of code.

I was initially hesitant to implement this feature due to the following three issues:

Websites often have paths or pages that supply capabilities that other pages can call. These capabilities could be paying someone or resetting a password. A Cross Site Request Forgery is an attack when a user unknowingly visits one of these paths without intending to. CSRF exploits usually require that a user is already authenticated to a website and then unknowingly gets sent to one of these capability URLs that performs a privileged action on the authenticated users behalf.

There are lots of ways a website can protect users from these forms of attacks, however in reality they still exist on the web today.

Containers actually fix this issue so long as you log into services within a new container, lets take another look at that example:

Now if we had assigned the bank to go into the Finance container we would be not protected either.

Furthermore single use capability URLs can actually leak in the referrer header too.

Users won’t get the advantage of having multiple mail clients in different containers (Work and Personal mail)

My other issue with container assignment would be that a user wouldn’t see the immediate advantage of using containers if they always get teleported into a certain container.

Users might suffer from their search engine and mail provider all being lumped into the same container. This would mean the website could still track across all these properties. One of the design goals of containers was to limit the amount of tracking users had whilst browsing the internet and helping users shatter their filter bubble.

If a website can force a user into a container for another site they potentially can continue to track the user.

Lets take a look at an example of a staff member leaking his information across the web:

Whenever you assign an origin into a container you risk leaking your browsing history like this unsuspecting person did. This might seem extreme but there is however evidence to suggest medical information often leaks from one website to another.

We had a hard balance between separating HTTP vs HTTPS assignment of a website.

Despite the risk of HTTP over insecure networks we decided that there was enough websites this would break right now and the usability disadvantages were pretty bad. The containers project as a whole has been a hard balance of usability and stricter security settings. There are already places where containers are imperfect for preventing tracking such as:

Containers isn’t considered the most robust security and privacy measure we have within the browser, it’s a compromise of usability and robust security. At risk users should consider the patches Mozilla is working on as part of the Tor uplift project namely “first party isolation” and the anti fingerprinting techniques Tor browser uses.

One of the advantages of us running the test pilot experiment is it allows us to measure the usage of containers to gauge how people are using it, we often struggle to do wild experiments within Firefox like this because we can’t gather as much information as we likely would want.

Feedback is always welcome at containers@mozilla.com where all the other developers involved in the experiment and the underlying platform changes will be notified.

Feel free to reach out on twitter @KingstonTime

I want to highlight, despite this being a feature I worked on many others have been involved with the experiment.

The team responsible for getting the Test pilot live:

Existing platform team responsible for working on getting containers and origin attributes into Nightly.

Carolyn Jaeger who created the stunning gif in this article.

I’m sure many others have been missed too!|||

At Mozilla we have been working on a feature called containers, which gives users the ability to separate their lives online to prevent being tracked.