Network marketing has been one of the popular business worldwide today. It is a flexible kind of business wherein it can be a part-time or a full-time job. If you are new with this (or simply how other people calls it “marketing” or “networking”), you might find it hard to understand. There are lots of network marketing businesses globally, some are successful, some are not, but that doesn’t mean it’s the dead-end for everyone who wants to start their own business. The secret to success not just relies on how you are doing it, but also on what you are doing.

Our featured author is one of the great speakers teaching people about building a business. Together with Richard Fenton, our featured author founded Courage Crafters Inc. and with Ray Higdon, they wrote Go for No! for Network Marketing. Go for No! for Network Marketing is one of the best-selling multilevel marketing and small business and entrepreneurship book.

We don’t want you to wait, so we are introducing Ms. Andrea Waltz, our featured author who coauthored Go for No! for Network Marketing. Ms. Andrea Waltz together with Mr. Richard Fenton has written and published many books, but Go for No! for Network Marketing is the most popular book they’ve written and has been always on the best-selling list for several years, meaning, it’s really a helpful and useful book.

Ms. Andrea is a very nice person. We’ve got a “yes” right away when we asked her for an interview. A great author, respected speaker, and a humble person, may we say. Ms. Andrea, we know you are going to read this, we here at MoneyLang thanks you for the kindness you showed us. We know you are a busy person, but dedicated some of your time for us and because of that, thank you so much and we appreciate it!

To our dear readers, we won’t make this long. Enjoy reading our second female featured author and please don’t forget to share this with your friends and family!

Title: Go for No! for Network Marketing

Background: entrepreneur at the age of 24. Owns speaking, training, book publishing co.

1. What inspired you to write your book/s?

My husband and writing/business partner and I love telling stories. That is why most of our business books are parables. We also knew that as professional speakers and trainers, having a book would be the best way to get hired. If they like what is in the book they would like us to share it at a meeting. But truly, we love creating and luckily we have operated in a world where we could be our own publisher.

2. If I am an aspiring author, what advice can you give?

The best advice is to write. And second piece of advice is get your work out into the world. For example, if you can’t get a publisher, publish yourself. Don’t wait for someone else to pick you.

3. If there’s one chapter in your book people should have read, which one should it be, and why?

For Go for No! the best chapter (and they are small) would be to start on page 29 with the Failure / Success Model. In that chapter, we share two ways people look at success. One is, they think success is on one side of them and failure is on the other. Like it is a choice. You choose failure. Or, you choose success. However, that model is what we call, the old way of thinking. The new model is, failure is in the middle, and success is actually on the other side of failure. In others words, if you want success you have no choice but to move through and go through failure. That mental model helps people understand that in order to get more yeses, they are also going to need to hear no, Hence, Go for No!

4. If you could give one piece of financial advice to our readers, what would it be?

Well, I’m not one to give financial advice, but in my own life I make sure that I am putting some money off to the side – often said as “pay yourself first.” As an entrepreneur I am responsible for saving money, I have no company pension per se. The other thing I would suggest is, even though it costs money, never stop investing in yourself through education, books, courses or events. I have done that my business life and believe it is a great part of my success.

5. As an author, which book made the most impact on you?

The book that had the biggest impact on my life was The Aladdin Factor by Mark Victor Hansen and Jack Canfield. The entire book is about the art and science of asking for what you want. It also was the perfect thing for me to read as the person who now shares “Go for No!” which is all about hearing the word no and not being afraid to fail in your pursuit of a yes. I sat down and interviewed Jack Canfield for a project we were doing and was able to tell him how much his book meant to me which was amazing.

6. What would you like to ask the next author being interviewed?

I would ask what is the most challenging part about writing a book? As an author, I am always curious about that!

BONUS Question from Mr. Dick Carpenter: “What does your typical writing process look like?”

Because Richard and I write everything together, it is a little different than some authors. We have learned that someone has to take the lead. So, it’s not like we sit at the computer together and try to come up with sentences. Also, writing a parable has a big creative element to it. Sometimes, the story changes once you get into it.

We have several strategy sessions where we talk about the story, the plot and the things we want to teach – the concepts as we call them. Richard will write the first draft entirely. I then go through and do a massive edit – adding, changing, etc. We go through that process 2-3 times. Then finally we send our book off to a copy editor who fixes all of our errors. One thing we never do is let a book drag on. When we start the planning and writing process, we dig in and stay with it. Go for No! took less than a month to write (I think Richard actually wrote the entire first draft in 17 days.) Letting a book drag on and on I think is a challenge for some writers so it is important that you schedule time every day and do the work.

There we have it! We would love to hear from all of you! Leaving a comment or suggestion will make us very happy. Be the first to be updated when we publish a new interview by liking our Facebook page and following us on Twitter!|||

