Today we’re unveiling an exciting new experience on Twitch, one that gets great games into your hands faster, rewards you with goodies, AND lets you support your favorite streamers. Now, when streamers are playing a game available on Twitch, you’ll be able to purchase it directly from their channel page.

Games or in-game items that cost $4.99 or more will earn you a shiny Twitch Crate, which includes randomly generated rewards like emotes, badges, and Bits for Cheering. Go ahead. Hum the Zelda treasure tune as you open them. We won’t judge you.

Twitch Crates Gear Giveaway: Get a crate, and the chance to win prizes!

To celebrate the launch of Twitch Crates, we’re giving you a chance to win prizes that enhance your gaming experience.

From now through the end of early May, each time you make a purchase that qualifies for a Twitch Crate, you earn an invitation for a chance to win some sweet gaming and streaming gear. There are four weekly drawings, plus a grand prize that includes over $500 of professional streaming equipment. You can also enter without making a purchase. For more on the Twitch Crates Gear Giveaway, including details on what exactly you can win and how to enter, check out this blog post.

We’re starting with about 50 titles, and we’ll keep on adding new games. You can buy either the full game or in-game content directly through Twitch.

Need to smash some faces or take down a drug cartel? Ubisoft’s For Honor and Tom Clancy’s Ghost Recon: Wildlands have you covered. Craving a great story? Telltale Games is here for you with The Walking Dead or Minecraft: Story Mode. Adventure fans can explore the Wyoming wilderness in Campo Santo’s Firewatch, and shooter fans can satisfy their loot lust with Digital Extremes’ Warframe. There’s something for everyone with more to come soon, so check out the full list here.

One of the best reasons to buy on Twitch is that your purchases can support a broadcaster. Twitch will share 5% of the purchase price with Partnered streamers that have opted into our commerce program when you buy from their channel page. As our game catalog grows and we add more cool items into Twitch Crates, we hope you’ll have even more reasons to come to Twitch, watch and Cheer your favorite streamers, chat with friends, find new game content, and now, get it right away from your favorite streamers.

I’m dying to read the fine print details on that Twitch Crates Gear Giveaway you mentioned!

A: Okay, here it is: NO PURCHASE NECESSARY TO ENTER OR WIN. Must be 18+ and a legal resident of the 50 US or DC. Other restrictions apply. Sweepstakes consists of multiple entry periods beginning 4/4/17 through 5/5/17 at 11:59 pm PT. Void where prohibited. For a list of Entry Periods, available Prizes and full details see Official Rules. Limit 1 Entry per qualifying purchase. Purchase Window ends 11:59 pm PT 5/1/17. Details for free entry CLICK HERE. Sponsor: Twitch Interactive, Inc.). And click here to read the blog post that covers what you can win and how to enter.

How much money do streamers get when I buy a game or in-game content?

A: The standard agreement with partnered streamers that opt in to this program provides them with 5% of the purchase price (less items such as, taxes or discounts) from the sale of games and in-game items that are purchased from their channel page. You will know that a partnered streamer is opted in to earn revenue when you see the words “Purchase revenue is shared with <streamer’s Twitch name>” to the right of the purchase button on the channel page.

Additionally, if you visit the game details page via the “Game Details” link displayed on the streamer’s channel page and then you make a purchase from the game details page for the game you are watching, the streamer will receive the 5% of the purchase price, as long as you do not navigate to any other page before completing the purchase.

I’m a partnered streamer. How do I opt in to receive revenue from this program?

A: You can find instructions in this help article.

From what regions can I purchase a game or in-game item?

A: Purchases are available worldwide and payments are made using an Amazon account. At launch, all pricing is in US dollars. We’ll add support for more currencies in the coming months.

How do I download games I purchase on Twitch?

A: Games purchased on Twitch can either be downloaded and played via the Twitch App, or through existing services like Uplay. For more details, see this help article.

If I’m not a partnered streamer, can viewers buy games from my channel page?

A: An offer to buy a game or in game content will appear on all streamer channel pages when a game is being played that is offered for sale by Twitch. Only partnered streamers will be eligible to earn revenue through this program.|||

Today we’re unveiling an exciting new experience on Twitch, one that gets great games into your hands faster, rewards you with goodies, AND lets you support your favorite streamers. Now, when…