People say That “advertising on Google” intend, in technical jargon a “Search Network only — All features” Campaign. That is to display the ads on the results page -called SERP- when you search for a keyword on Google.

For a person working with Google for years, the statement “advertising on Google” is not very clear. Google has many advertising products that can be used.

Note for those who already know AdWords: This guide is designed for those unfamiliar with AdWords, so I’m not always using technically correct terms to describe all the concepts. This way of writing in done intentionally to make the guide understandable by anyone. Things are slightly more complicated as explained here.

This guide is for those who have never used advertising on Google and aims to clearly explain how Google can increase sales of a company that sells products or services on the Internet or in a physical store.

It is a pretty complicated tool to use and is easy to make mistakes that result in considerable loss of money. Below you can find a Google Adwords screen.

Google Adwords is the principal tool by which advertisers who want to advertise on advertising channels offered by Google are setting up their campaigns.

In the above example, the user used “manicure” as the keyword. In the upper part (highlighted in pink) the ads are placed. The word “Ad” precedes the advertisement results. The area without commercials is called Organic, and it’s below the ads area.

Before you start you need to understand the structure of an Adwords campaign.

Below I will explain how to set the Adwords campaign step by step.

I created a Google Sheet (a kind of Online Excel Spreadsheet) that contains all the essential data required to set your Campaign. As you read this guide, you can fill it out and then transfer all of AdWords later. Link to the sheet:

However here is a list (not exhaustive) of the kind of advertisements that you can buy through Google Adwords:

However here is a list (not exhaustive) of the advertising channels that you can buy through Google Adwords:

This guide focuses on the explanation of advertising campaigns on “Search Network only,” simplifying, the Google results page, also called SERP.

To be able to advertise on Google you need to know how Google Adwords works. There is a simplified version of Google Adwords called Adwords Express but does not include many of the features available on Google Adwords.

To set up an Adwords campaign, you must know first of all the components.

Below are the main elements of an Adwords campaign:

The first step is to create a clear list of services or goods that you want to advertise. Having a clear and comprehensive list is important. Whether you have ten products/services, or if you have 10.000.

Use a Google Sheet to do it. The one I have prepared it’s perfect.

Se you have many, Google provides a methodology to create ads in an automated way.

For each Text Ad you should write the following things (see image):

Image: Structure of an AdWords Text Ad. Link to high-resolution image.

The question that comes to mind is: what do I write? The answer is simple: you do not need to know right away what to write. Write at least three Ads for each product/service. Google will test them all automatically and will pick to display only the Ads that get you more results. Obviously, if you already know what value or what message attracts your customers, you will be more advantaged. However, always test different ads to see which is most appreciated by your target.

To write different Ads, tests changes in the following elements, in order of importance:

Keywords are the phrases that you write in the Google search bar. For example in the image below, the keyword is “new york.”

For each ad choose at least three keywords that you would use if you searched on Google that product/service. It will then be Google Adwords to suggest further keywords.

Important: the keyword suggestion tool by Google Adwords is a very powerful tool that should be used with caution. Read through each keyword before you add it and ask yourself the following three questions before adding it:

Image: The Keyword suggestion tool by Google Adwords. Link to high-resolution image.

The Ad Extensions expand the information provided by your Ad. It’s important to use all those are relevant to your Ads and business.

I will not explain here how to add each extension, as each extension is different from each other to set up. But I will show how the graphically look.

It is important to note that the extensions can be set at the Campaign Level (i.e., that appear for all ads in the campaign) or at the Group Level (i.e., only appear for ads in that group).

Sitelinks Extensions: They are the links that appear below the ad. When and how to use it: if you think the customer can be highly interested in information related to those included in the announcement. Example: the contact page.

Call Extensions: If you like the user to called you directly, you can enter your phone number directly into the ad. If the ad is displayed on a computer, Adwords shows the number. If the ad is displayed on a mobile phone, Adwords shows a “Call” button.

Price Extensions: if you want to showcase the prices of your products and services directly into your ad, you can use this extension.

Here are other extensions available:

Google continuously creates new types of extensions because it realized that it substantially increases the performance of ad campaigns. And if advertisers are happy, they spend more, and Google earns more.

Set up as many extensions as possible. Do not worry; Google continues to test extensions to see which increase clicks and which are not, automatically hiding those with no increase clicks. However, do not abuse extensions: use them only in the manner for which they were born.

Good news: you have finished setting up your Google campaign.

Bad news: this is just the beginning.

Allocate at least 2 hours per week to improve your campaign. All elements of the campaign will receive statistics on their performance. Keywords, ads, extensions receive a deluge of statistics you can analyze. My personal recommendation: start with the worst statistics. Try to figure out what was wrong, fix it and move on to something “less worse.”

The purpose of this guide is not to teach you how to optimize your Adwords campaign. The truth is that in addition to some fundamental techniques, optimization of an AdWords campaign requires two things:

The second point is of particular importance. Do not think that an Adwords specialist is enough to work miracles. Example: the expert realizes that the group containing advertisements for the sale of ice cream performs below average. However, the specialist does not know that winter will not sell ice cream. Obviously, this is a “stupid” example, but this is to explain that every business has its peculiarities, and should always be kept in mind.

I hope to have been clear enough. Google Adwords is my daily bread, so I may have omitted details that a person who has never used AdWords might have considered necessary.|||

Guide for those who have never used advertising on Google and want to know how Google can increase sales of a business that sells products or services.