So you have heard about the dangers of ultraviolet light right? That excess exposure to ultraviolet light can lead to skin cancers such as melanoma. And that devices such as sun beads are the leading cause of excess ultraviolet light exposure, as well as our trusty sun. Especially as the ozone hole is still around, exposing our poor Australian and New Zealand cousins with high amounts of ultraviolet .

We will go through some facts about light. How it can cause cancer such as melanoma. And what exactly is ultraviolet light. What makes it so dangerous over normal light.

We will also go through the different types of skin cancers that it can cause. You have probably already heard about melanoma, but there are others too.

Everyone seems to be chasing that beach brown tanned look,  but it could be coming at a cost. Causing more skin cancer than is necessary. We will tell you how you can have your tan and protect yourself from skin cancer. Have your cake and eat it too! Let’s go!

Why does ultraviolet light cause skin cancer? And what exactly is ultraviolet light. You should be looking for answers to these questions. Skin cancer is one of the easiest cancers you can protect yourself from.

Should you bother protect yourself from skin cancer? Of course yes. You should not take skin cancer lightly. Forms of skin cancer can be super aggressive and can lead to a shortened life.

First of, to understand how ultraviolet light causes skin cancer you need to understand what Ultra violet light is. It is by all means light, but you can’t see it like regular light. It’s the same as infra red, you can’t see that either. Infrared and ultraviolet are light on either side of our visible spectrum.

By the way infra red is used in a lot of everyday objects, like your tv remote.

ultraviolet light has a lot of energy. This is what makes it dangerous. In order of energy the light spectrum goes like this, Infra red with the lost energy, then comes Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Violet, and finally the most energetic, ultraviolet.

But remember that infrared and ultraviolet aren’t really in our visible spectrum- they lie just on the outside of the colours we can see.

So you can see that ultraviolet has the highest amount of energy. This is an important fact you need to remember.

So Ultraviolet has the most energy in the visible spectrum. This means it also has the highest frequency of the coloured light mentioned above. This gives it some unique properties.

Ultraviolet light has just enough energy to ionise things. That is when it interacts with stuff it can rip electrons of it. Whereas the other light can’t do this.  This ionisation of stuff can cause damage to your cells- which lead to cancer.

Ultraviolet can ionize stuff, but its energy is not as much as x-rays and gamma rays. So it can only travel very shallow distances. This is why it causes skin cancer. It can’t get deeper than the layer of skin as it doesn’t have enough energy to go any further.

When atoms inside your cells are ionised the cause free radicals. These free radicals cause damage to you DNA molecules. Breaking them and forcing the cell to try and repair itself. If it can repair itself correctly then there is no issue.

If it can’t repair itself, the cell may die. And in rear situation the DNA molecule is damaged and repaired, but repaired incorrectly. This is what can lead to skin cancer. When the cell has been repaired incorrectly the cell can start to have a mind of its own.

When a DNA repair hasn’t been performed correctly, but the cell survives, the cell doesn’t remember what its job is anymore. The cell becomes useless. And the only thing it knows to do is to reproduce. The cell will start to reproduce for ever.

This re-population of a cell that has no job to do causes a tumor. A bunch of useless cells that just grow and grow.

Not all these incorrectly repaired cells go on to do this. The human body can recognize a cell that has become useless and will kill it off. But the body isn’t perfect and sometimes it will miss one, which will go on to grow a tumor. 

  

 

 

 

 



There are several types of skin cancers out there. Here is what you need to know about them. The most common include.

This is not actually cancer, rather it is a precancerous. But left to its own devices can mutate into a cancer. These occur in areas where there has been a lot of sun exposure, such as noses and cheeks.  They are normally scaly rough spots on the skin. Keratosis are not too bad. They are easily treated with chemotherapy creams applied directly to the skin.

Although moles aren’t caused by the sun. They can lead to cancer. Most moles are actually benign type of melanoma. Benign means dormant, or inactive. They can awake from their sleep thought. So you need to keep an eye out for any moles that change their color, shape, borders, or are growing fast. They can lead to full blown cancer if left unchecked.

If noticed early, they are easily removed and the threat is gone. So be proactive and have any suspicious moles removed. Better yet. Get a mole map of your body done. This will give you a record of where your moles are and if any new ones appear.

SCC stands for Squamous Cell Carcinoma. They are cell layer in the skin. They are problematic as they have the potential to invade deeper and have a higher chance of metastasising- spreading throughout the body. Squamous cell carcinoma the lip, or within old scars are at a higher risk of spreading. Actinic Keratosis, as mentioned above, can eventually turn into squamous cell carcinoma if left untreated.

Squamous cell carcinoma often shows up as a non healing sores, or a scaly plaque, or sometimes just bumps.

BCC stands for basal cell carcinoma. It is another layer in the skin where basal cells are present. They are less aggressive than squamous cell carcinoma. Most basal cell carcinoma cancers never metastasize or spread.

Basal cell carcinoma are usually described as pearly because they usually have a shiny surface with dilated blood vessels on top.

Melanoma are cancer of the melanocytes. Melanocytes are the cells in your skin responsible for the skin color, they are also what cause the colour in moles. These cells can become cancerous after too much ultraviolet light exposure over a long period of time.

Melanoma is very aggressive type of cancer. Much more aggressive than both squamous cell cancer and basal cell cancer.

Melanomas can start of from a change within an existing mole. Moles can become dysplastic, which just means that they have changed appearance when you view them under a microscope.

Most skin cancer are curable thought. There are different treatment options depending on the cancer and where it is located.

Actinic Keratosis and moles are easily removed with surgery. Just cut them out. Actinic keratosis can also be treated using a chemotherapy cream applied directly onto the skin affected.

Squamous cell and Basal cell cancers can also be treated using surgery. Or in other cases they are treated with radiotherapy. The benefit of radiotherapy over surgery is that you won’t get a scar when treated with radiotherapy. Both treatment options have great success rated.

The one to worry about is melanoma if not treated early. Once melanoma has metastasized or spread it is very aggressive and requires aggressive treatment such as intravenous chemotherapy. Chemotherapy which is injected into the veins.

Once a melanoma has spread and is not localized anymore it is nearly almost fatal.

Minimizing ultraviolet light exposure is one of the easiest and most efficient ways in preventing skin cancer. Sunscreen and hats are a great option to minimise the exposure to the skin. This will reduce the chance of developing a skin cancer later in life.

Avoiding tanning beds is also an excellent way of protecting yourself. These tanning beds produce large quantities of ultraviolet light to speed up the tanning process.

If you really want to get a tan, just use sunscreen. You can still get that tan even with wearing sunscreen. People often believe that you  can’t tan when you have sunscreen on, but this is just not true.

So that is how ultraviolet light can cause skin cancer in the long run. Ultraviolet light has the least amount of energy required to ionize cells inside your body. But you don’t need to worry. Protecting your sell from ultraviolet light is easy. Just use sunscreen.

There are several types of skin cancers that can form from excess ultraviolet light exposure. However, most are easily curable. Yes that is right. We have a cure to skin cancer in most cases. The one to worry about is melanoma. Once it has become advances it will most likely kill you.

In my opinion, a suntan is not worth getting skin cancer over.|||

What is it about Ultraviolet light that is dangerous? How does it lead to the possibility of skin cancer? and what types of skin cancer are there?