Have you build your chatbot and ready to roll out for customers? But Wait! Before releasing the bot to your targeted audience , you need to test your bot. You have to check user conversational flow, you need to test user experience and you need to understand your bot engagement easiness. After Developing any product or module testing play a key role before publishing that product in market. These tools will help you to evaluate your chatbot.

Bot testing is designed to help you with your bot through conversation, usability, user experience, user metrics.

Conversational Flow: Enhance your conversational flow with the outputs of your examined data.

User Engagement: Find out the analyzed interactions and engagement between your bot and user.

Usability & UX: Explore your bot’s bottlenecks in usability and user experience perspective

Developed by Botanalytics team, Bot Testing provides full analysis report about your chatbot.

The best chatbots understand their users: Users chat in their own preferred way. For example, they may use informal language and short forms. The best chatbots are able to understand what users say without forcing them to use a certain format. On the other hand, users will get frustrated and stop engaging with chatbots that repeatedly fail to understand them. This leaves a negative impression and hurts your brand.

The key solution: For your chatbot to understand your users, it needs to be trained on many messages variants that express similar meaning. However, it is difficult and time-consuming to come up with many message variants on your own because people are so diverse in how they chat with others. It varies across genders, social groups, and countries. This is where Botflair can help! At BotFlair, conduct extensive research so as to generate different message variants that are relevant to your bot’s specific domain.

Dimon enables bot and chatbot owners to identify and fix issues in their bot conversations

Automate Testing: Decrease testing time from hours to several minutes

Generate Scenarios: Like thousands of people that interact with your bot to achieve full coverage of your bot functionality

Monitoring: Get a real-time notification when something goes wrong with your bot

Now ready to launch your chatbot? Use these distribution channels to promote your chatbot and to reach the larger audience.|||

Have you build your chatbot and ready to roll out for customers? But Wait! Before releasing the bot to your targeted audience , you need to test your bot. You have to check user conversational flow…