

 AnyChart is a flexible JavaScript (HTML5) based solution that allows developers to embed interactive and great looking charts and dashboards into any web, standalone or mobile project. AnyChart products include massive out-of-the-box capabilities, combined with the flexibility and the simplicity. Qlik Sense is a self-service data visualization and discovery application designed for all business users whether, individuals, groups, or organizations. With Qlik Sense you can analyze data and make data discoveries on your own. You can share knowledge and analyze data in groups and across organizations. Qlik Sense lets you ask and answer your own questions and follow your own paths to insight, as well as enabling you and your colleagues to reach decisions collaboratively.



 Locate .zip file with extension and unzip it. Open the unzipped folder to find another folder inside. Copy that folder and navigate to documents/qlik/sense/extensions and paste the folder there. Go to your QMC and, in the navigation menu on the left, under “Manage Resources”, click “Extensions”. Then, in the action bar at the bottom of the screen, click “Import” Click “Choose File” in the popup and navigate to the folder that was downloaded, select it, then click “Import”.



 All chart types except Pie can have more than one series. The number of series depends on the number of measures. One measure corresponds to one series. The order of series is the same order measures have. To reorder series just reorder measures. Each series can be configured individually. You can set series name, markers and labels display and labels text format. For every series you can choose series type different than chart's default series type.



 You can change the color scheme of a chart by using Palette dropdown. AnyChart extension allows to configuring the legend: enable/disable, set layout, position, align, and title. AnyChart Extension allows to configuring axes: orientation, titles and labels and so on.|||

AnyChart JavaScript Visualization Library extension for Qlik Sense.