4 years ago I began to suffer from depression, at the time I had worked in an agency environment for around 10 years, having progressed from a junior to a department head. The years I had spent learning and understanding how to meet client expectations and align those with the delivery of good software were invaluable.

But something began to feel wrong, seriously wrong. I was an engineer without a problem to solve. Projects no longer excited me, I wasn’t driven to the point of obsession, as a professed workaholic I no longer felt driven, I didn’t have a purpose.

Waking up every day became hard, the smallest of problems became justifiable excuses to not bother.

My work didn’t suffer, but I no longer felt joy in doing it, “what’s the point” became a personal mantra. I had to do something to get back on track.

Through a series of cognitive behaviour therapy sessions I began to realise this was in my control, I could change my life and my career with it.

The hardest decision I made was the realisation that my work environment and the work I was doing was no longer fulfilling, agency work after so long wasn’t where my heart lied. I had to see a product evolve, solve problems that required time, careful consideration and I’d have to develop new skills. I needed a fresh start.

At the time I was fighting personal feelings of doubt, disbelief anyone would value what I had to give. So pushing myself into the job market was daunting, having reflected on it now, I’m certain I could of made my mental state worse, subjecting myself to rejection, lowering my self-worth, it was stupid, but it made me stronger having done it.

My CBT sessions became professional coaching, discussing my insecurities, learning to present myself again to would be employers. My proudest moment was securing an offer from Google, I later declined due to circumstances at the time.

I’m now a Software Engineering Manager at the LADbible Group, it’s been a fantastic experience, over the last 2 years I’ve grown so much, in part, thanks to my past self pushing me into the world, out of the dark places I was in and towards the incredible team and people who work there, the passion and fast paced environment threw me into a new life.|||

4 years ago I began to suffer from depression, at the time I had worked in an agency environment for around 10 years, having progressed from a junior to a department head. The years I had spent…