After showcasing its P10 and P10 Plus smartphones now, Huawei is all set to release its new tablet called Mediapad T3. Recently, the Huawei Mediapad T3 got a Wi-Fi approval from the FCC. We all are now quite familiar with some of the specs details about the tablet, which have been revealed already.

And now, we have some latest leaks from the renowned leakster Roland Quandt, about the Mediapad T3 and M3 Lite; interestingly, this is the first time we have heard it that way.

For the starters, the Huawei’s Android tab, MediaPad T3 will be arriving in three different budget-friendly variants, with a choice of screen sizes. A fresh report hints that the latest Huawei MediaPad T3 has a 7-inch screen that comes in a Wi-Fi only setup, with 8GB of internal storage space. Among the four rumored Huawei tablets, this will be the cheapest one, expected to be priced at 129 Euros ($137). Well apparently, this one will not feature an LTE variant.

Likewise, there will also be an 8-inch and 10-inch versions of the MediaPad T3 available, and they both will come with Wi-Fi and LTE support. While, these two vary in the screen sizes, they both will probably be accompanied by a 16GB of storage space, fairly dealing with 2GB of RAM.

Coming on to the prices: The 8-inch version will be priced €219 for the Wi-Fi only version, and for the LTE one, it will be €239. The 10-inch version will be priced slightly more than the 8-inch for the Wi-Fi only option, as it will cost €229, and the LTE form will cost €279.

Moreover, talking about the MediaPad M3 Lite 10; it will be the most expensive tablet among its siblings. It will arrive with a 10-inch display with 3GB of RAM along with 32 GB of native storage.

Here, the customers can expect the price of the Wi-Fi only version at €329, while the LTE version would come at the cost of €379 ($404). All these variants are hopefully powered by MediaTek processor. Anyhow, the U.S pricing details of these variants are not available yet.

These tablets are expected be launched in Europe very soon, by when their exact pricing details may also be revealed. However, a definite time-frame for the official release of these tablets, is still unknown in both U.S as well as Europe.|||

Huawei's upcoming tablets MediaPad T3 and M3 Lite specs and pricing details leaked with Wi-Fi and LTE Versions. It will come with 7-inch,8-inch and 10-inch