Hi, Mommies! Congratulations on your newly born babies.  Advice from your doctors can be more focused on healthy veggies and fruits, even in treats- you also have to eat healthily and in moderate amount. Remember though that they not set in stone. You can choose whatever food you like, as long as they are not harmful, and you can consume the necessary nutrients for pregnancy. Pregnant women have cravings and dislike for certain foods that also fluctuates or change from time to time.

That is why you should try to be flexible in choosing your meals. You don’t need to stress yourself and buy everything that you think is healthy. But, you should at least eat those that are fundamentally necessary. A healthy mother is one of the main factors for having a healthy baby. Your baby’s life is in your hands. Avoid anything that is raw or uncooked meats.

They may contain bacteria or just simply unclean. Make sure you don’t eat too much to prevent an overweight baby. There is some belief out there that a bigger baby means a healthier baby, which is not true according to studies. It may also help if you would just listen to your instincts. If you feel like the baby is asking for something, well, give it. Okay, maybe not every time. As a mother, you always know what is best for your baby.

Your little infant demand long hours of sleep. It is important to let them sleep to support their progress and developments occurring in their body which are vital for them to become healthy and strong. You have learned that babies sleep sixteen (16) to seventeen (17) hours with intervals on the previous chapter. You should breastfeed your baby and stop when your baby gains enough weight and stops sucking at your breast. It is normal if your baby cries a lot he is trying to express himself or herself. Check if your baby is tired, sleepy, hungry, or in need for diaper changing.

2. Handle your baby with genuine care. One important reminder is never to shake your baby’s head. It causes baby’s tiny blood vessels found in his or head to tear and bleed and may lead to blindness, hearing deficiency, slow learning, other results caused by brain damage and may even cause death. As aforementioned, your baby cries to express himself or herself since he or she cannot speak words yet, it is discerning to know how to adjust when your baby cries much and be knowledgeable of serious effects, shaking can cause to your baby. Take this advice, handle your baby with care and never shake your baby.

Prevention is better than cure. Though some parents are afraid to immunize their babies, it is important to know that vaccines do more good than harm to your baby. It promotes health and prevents the baby against common and viral diseases such as polio, hepatitis, measles, autism and so forth. Be sure that when you bring your baby for immunization, he or she does not have any coughs or colds or relatively just got better from the fever. It is advisable to bring your baby with no sort of sickness he or she is carrying. Concerned parents should not miss any immunization process. You will be given a card and make sure every vaccine checked. Babies should be given attention and importance when they immunized against common diseases.

Your baby’s teeth usually come at four (4) to seven (7) months some even earlier at three (3) months but this a rare phenomenon. Signs that your baby starts teething is when he or she put something in his or her mouth anything he or she is having at hand; it could be a toy or a blanket. Usually, your baby starts to play with their ears and spits excess from drooling.

The lower front teeth come first, then the top front teeth and then molars teeth grow and then their canine teeth. Remember that your baby’s teeth will not grow in one month, it continues to grow in number as time goes. Teething in babies usually ends at their two years of the toddler stage. When your baby is now one year old, you can bring him or her to the dentist. Usually, at ten months, there have to be teeth visible in your baby’s mouth, if not, the dentist will do some screening test regarding your baby’s teething condition.

When a certain tooth is coming out from the red gums of your baby, you may find sources that are capable of brushing like a toothbrush or clean wipe to brush the surface where the tooth is coming in. By doing this, it will make the tooth come in a little faster or quicker. You could use teething ring as well that is readily available to purchase at pharmacies, but make sure that the teething ring is not frozen into solid since it may cause fractures to the tooth or teeth of your baby.

Parents use taping gels to apply on their baby’s gums to numb it and to ease the pain mixed with itchiness felt by their baby, and if it gets worse, they use homeopathic teething tablets as an alternative.

However, take serious cautious when using gum numbing gels since when you overdo the balance amount of application on your baby’s gums, it may lead to a toxic level of implementation and may cause tooth decay. It is necessary to read the gel’s description or label’s use to avoid these sort of overdose results. When your baby’s teeth appear, it is important that you keep them clean by wiping them with clean, soft towels and when your baby’s teeth increase in the number you can now brush them using a non-fluoridated toothpaste.

The reason for using the toothpaste as mentioned earlier, is relative that your baby cannot spit out the toothpaste and most likely he or she swallows it- and it causes white spots on the adult teeth when they come in, that is why non-fluoridated toothpaste highly recommended. When your baby cries much and wakes at night, you may wish to contact your pediatrician about offering a dose of infant Tylenol for a day or two. You may go to the doctor as well if your baby has a fever and cold, these may be the results of his or her ear hurting. Your baby’s toothing pace requires and seeks attention; it is vital to take good care of them when their teeth come out from their gums.

You may go to the doctor as well if your baby has a fever and cold, these may be the results of his or her ear hurting. Your baby’s toothing pace requires and seeks attention; it is vital to take good care of them when their teeth come out from their gums.

Just as how you want your house clean, dirtless, shiny and neat, you have to do more for your baby. Your baby needs all his or her eating utensils boiled under hot water for ten minutes to kill the possible dirt and bacteria clinging to it. Everything your baby uses and touches must be clean and sanitized. Most pediatricians highly recommend newborns to take a bath of two to three times per week. You may increase the number of frequency of baths as your baby gains age.

Though your newly born baby is recommended not to take a bath every day, it is important to keep their diapers clean and changed when dirty. There are various types of diapers one that is cooling and soothing, totally made out of cotton and some other brands are heavy and may cause your baby some discomforts. In choosing the type of diaper to use make sure that your baby is comfortable and confident.

Be careful on using sanitizers, make sure your baby has no way of getting it- he or she might drink it, sanitizers applied with the proper amount of alcohol on the entire surface on your hands will be a good alternative if sinks are not available. However, a thoroughly good washed hand, drenched with water and cleaned with soap is the best way to wash off the bacteria.

Do not believe in the five-second rule. Everyone knows about this certain food rule that when the food falls on the floor, no longer than five seconds, is still safe to eat or edible. Do not think that it is safe, even if your floor looks shiny, do not let it fool you. Research shows that the food is contaminated with germs as soon as it hits the floor. Concerned parents should say no to the food five-minute rule; it is not true.

It can be a bit challenging at first, but don’t worry mommies you’ll eventually develop a caring routine for you newly born baby, and you’ll get used to it. Just relax and enjoy your journey while taking care of your little angels, they’ll grow up soon and will amaze you with their bubbliness. We are looking forward to hearing your experience, let us know in the comment section below. Take care mommies!|||

Congratulations on your newly born babies. Newborn Baby care tips for First Time Parents Advice from your doctors can be more focused on healthy veggies