What is your stance on AI research given Canada's privileged position in the field? originally appeared on Quora - the place to gain and share knowledge, empowering people to learn from others and better understand the world.

Answer by Justin Trudeau, 23rd Prime Minister of Canada, on Quora:

I’ve been personally fascinated by AI ever since high school when I read books like Roger Penrose’s Emperor’s New Mind and Douglas Hofstadter’s The Mind’s I. So it’s really exciting for me to be able to encourage Canadian leadership in the field today.

You see, strong public support for research programs and world class expertise at Canadian universities has helped propel Canada to a position as leader in artificial intelligence and deep learning research and use. Canadian talent and ideas are in high demand around the world—but activity needs to remain in Canada to harness the benefits from artificial intelligence.

So to retain and attract top academic talent, and to increase the number of post-graduate trainees and researchers studying artificial intelligence and deep learning, Our latest budget proposes to provide $125 million to launch a Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy for research and talent. The Strategy will promote collaboration between Canada’s main centres of expertise in Montréal, Toronto-Waterloo and Edmonton and position Canada as a world-leading destination for companies seeking to invest in artificial intelligence and innovation. A leader in the area of artificial intelligence, the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research will be responsible for administering the funding for the new Strategy.

This question originally appeared on Quora - the place to gain and share knowledge, empowering people to learn from others and better understand the world. You can follow Quora on Twitter, Facebook, and Google+. More questions:|||

What is your stance on AI research given Canada's privileged position in the field? This question was originally answered on Quora by Justin Trudeau.