A big part of a developer’s job, apart from writing code, is reading code. Some people claim that most programmers read more code than they write. Which means that a good reading experience is important. So choosing a monospaced typeface that is easy to read can help a lot.

That’s why I put together a list of coding fonts that various developers use in their editor of choice.

Iosevka is a slender monospace sans-serif and slab-serif typeface inspired by Pragmata Pro, M+ and PF DIN Mono, designed to be the ideal font for programming. Download

Inconsolata is a monospace font, designed for printed code listings and the like. Download

Source Code Pro is a set of OpenType fonts that have been designed to work well in user interface (UI) environments. Download

Cousine offers improved on-screen readability characteristics and the pan-European WGL character set and solves the needs of developers looking for width-compatible fonts to address document portability across platforms. Download

Anonymous Pro (2009) is a family of four fixed-width fonts designed with coding in mind. Download

Input is a flexible system of fonts designed specifically for code by David Jonathan Ross. Download

Designed to integrate with the character of the FirefoxOS, the Fira typefaces also aim to cover the legibility needs for a large range of handsets varying in screen quality and rendering. Download

Oxygen Mono is the monospace companion family to Oxygen, the KDE project UI and brand type. Download

Lekton has been designed at ISIA Urbino, Italy, and is inspired by some of the typefaces used on the Olivetti typewriters. Download

The design of Cutive, and this monospace sister family Cutive Mono, is based on a number of classic typewriter typefaces, in particular the faces of IBM’s ‘Executive,’ and the older ‘Smith-Premier’. Download

PT Mono was developed for specific uses in forms, tables, worksheets and other contexts. Equal character widths are very helpful in setting complex documents, as with such a font you may easily calculate size of entry fields, column widths in tables and so on. Download

Hack is designed to be a workhorse typeface for code. Download

Roboto Mono is a monospaced addition to the Roboto type family. Like the other members of the Roboto family, the fonts are optimized for readability on screens across a wide variety of devices and reading environments. Download

Ubuntu Mono is part of the Ubuntu Font Family which is a set of matching new libre/open fonts in development during 2010-2011. Download

Space Mono is an original fixed-width type family designed by Colophon Foundry for Google Design. It supports a Latin Extended glyph set, enabling typesetting for English and other Western European languages. Download

Liberation Mono is part of the Liberation(tm) Fonts which is a type family that aims at metric compatibility with Arial, Times New Roman, and Courier New. Download

Fira Code is an extension of the Fira Mono font containing a set of ligatures for common programming multi-character combinations. Download

Office Code Pro is a customized version of Source Code Pro, the monospaced sans serif originally created by Paul D. Hunt for Adobe Systems Incorporated. Download

Monaco is a monospaced sans-serif typeface designed by Susan Kare and Kris Holmes. It ships with OS X and was already present with all previous versions of the Mac operating system. Download

Andale Mono is a monospaced sans-serif typeface designed by Steve Matteson for terminal emulation and software development environments, originally for the Taligent project by Apple Inc. and IBM. Download

Consolas is a monospaced (non-proportional) typeface, designed by Luc(as) de Groot. It is a part of a suite of fonts that take advantage of Microsoft’s ClearType font rendering technology. It is included with Windows since Windows Vista, Microsoft Office 2007 and Microsoft Visual Studio 2010, and is available for download from Microsoft. Download

Courier is a monospaced typeface for use in tabular material, technical documentation, and word processing. It was designed in the mid-1900s by Howard Kettler of IBM as a typewriter face, and was later redrawn by Adrian Frutiger for the IBM Selectric series. Download

A typeface rooted in the traditions of typewriting, Operator is designed to offer a new voice for designers, and a new tool for developers. Download

PragmataPro™ is a condensed monospaced font optimized for screen, designed to be the ideal font for coding, math and engineering. Download

Pairing the efficiency of a monospaced font with warmth and character, Cartograph CF is a handsome font family featuring both fixed-pitch and proportional sans versions. Download|||

A big part of a developer's job, apart from writing code, is reading code. Some people claim that most programmers read more code than they write.