I subscribe to about 50 different blogs in Feedly, organized as shown in the diagram below. While it may look like a lot, the majority of my blogs post less than monthly, which amounts to about thirty minutes to an hour of news reading per day.

Since I’m in the tech industry, I follow one major tech blog, The Verge, which give me a good dose of today’s tech news, in addition to some others (shout out to Hacker Noon). I also follow some VC blogs such as A16Z.

I follow Lifehacker, 99U, and Wait But Why.

I have certain specific interests and follow blogs based on these interests — for example, I follow the subreddit for /r/bodyhacking since I’m a wannabe cyborg. Check out my nootropics Medium article if you’re interested in learning more.

Whenever I find a company I’m interested in or that I think is interesting, I follow it on a specific “company blogs” feed. This is really useful for staying up to date on particular company news, especially if you’re ever considering interviewing there in the future. I follow Google’s blog, Trello’s blog, and the Wealthfront blog, among others.

I have a separate feed of all the blogs that my friends write on — this way, I can always know immediately when someone updates their blog — you can even do this for Medium writers!

I subscribe to Eater SF, a custom-made Thrillist SF feed (yes, you can make your own RSS feeds for any website!), and some local San Francisco Events websites. Whenever I see a cool restaurant opening or an interesting event, I’ll message some friends about it and see who’s down. This feed is a great way to always have fun and interesting hangout ideas.

I subscribe to Vulture’s blog about Movies/TV/Pop Culture, Alan Sepinwall’s blog on Television, and some musical artist blogs on Pitchfork. This feed is for my personal enjoyment, since I’m a big TV/Film nerd.

Every morning, I’ll scan news.google.com, and Google the word “Trump” to see what’s latest in political news. Google has a good smattering of left and right wing blogs in its search results.

In general, I dislike political news, and I feel like I already get enough political news on Facebook. One exception is The Economist: I read The Economist’s Editor Picks each week on The Economist mobile app (iOS, Android), for free each week.

On desktop, I block my news feed using the News Feed Eradicator Chrome Extension. On mobile, I log in to facebook.com on my mobile browser (I don’t get the app, since I don’t want to be logging in *too* much). I usually get a healthy amount of political news from within my echo-chamber, and catch up with friends’ news. I subscribe (by selecting “Close Friends”) to most of my friend’s Facebook profiles.

I typically stay away from email newsletters aside from Product Hunt, and I aggressively filter newsletter-type emails into Inbox Bundles that I’ve set to only appear on a weekly basis.

I read news on my Feedly app while I’m on the go — it’s a great way to fill time between moments, and feels more productive/enriching than going through an endless Facebook feed. If I see something worth a second look, I’ll save the article, and I go through my “Read Later” section when I’m on my desktop computer. When I’m done reading, I try to look around and be present, read a book, or listen to some music and relax.

When I find an article I really like, or if it’s particularly relevant to a friend, I’ll share the news article with a brief message.

I’m never getting news from blogs outside of the one’s I’ve subscribed to. While this is great for getting targeted news, sometimes it’s healthy to see different perspectives or expand beyond the echo chamber. This is where Google News is really helpful at balancing out my news.

I’ve gotten quite used to scanning tons of headlines a day, and being quick to pick which headlines interest me and skipping the ones of low interest.

At first, I signed up for WAY too many blogs. I quickly realized I would never be able to actually finish all the news I was signed up for. It’s important to subscribe to only blogs you know you’ll read. I also use the Sortly Chrome Extension, which helps the most trending articles appear at the top of my feed.

Not all blogs stay the same, and there are always interesting new blogs that come up. I make an effort to, every three months, review my news consumption and delete blogs I’m not really ever clicking on. I’ll also scan some of the blogs I follow to see if any affiliated blogs are of interest to me.

There are a lot of interesting opinions about how to consume news, some of which would argue that reading headlines too often is also a waste of mental energy. I think finite feeds are a step in the right direction, but am excited to continue to prune my news system. For now, I’m okay with reading more headlines because I enjoy the snippets of news, the total volume isn’t that high, and it’s a great way to keep in touch with friends by sending them fun/relevant articles.|||

This post is part of a larger attempt to share my personal “systems” that help me organize my life. I’m no expert, but by sharing my system, I hope to get feedback and inspire others to share as well…