Visual feedback tools are also often referred to as usability feedback tools. These types of tools are used by marketeers and other user experience specialists to improve page usability by capturing input from their users as it comes in. Using these tools, you are able point to specific page elements (including forms, images, buttons or paragraphs) and provide feedback on those page elements. Once an element is selected, the tool saves the screenshot with the user’s feedback. These tools are great for new websites and apps where the bugs or any unclear content needs to be identified quickly.

 

 Here is a selection of some of the best Visual Feedback tools (each with their own pros and cons) to help you decide which is best for your business.

 

 Note:

 We have added licence costs of the tools in the overview (where possible). However, the price tends to vary quite a bit, and business models change over time. Therefore the price figures for each of these tools will not be updated regularly. They were confirmed the date of this blog post’s publication.



 

 Bugherd is a web-based issue tracking and project management software system for developers and designers. Like all of the other tools, it also has an in-page feedback option, allowing customers to report issues directly from the website. This enables you to see exactly which parts have been reported. Additionally, it includes project management tools, based on scrum. The software helps you convert customer feedback data into actionable tasks. The tool costs anywhere between $29 and $180 a month.

 

 Website: www.bugherd.com



 

 Notable is web-based tool that allows users to take an interface screenshot, sketch or wireframe and share notes on this feedback with their design team. Users can also export custom PDFs as well as comment on source code and there is no limit to the number of team members. Depending on the package you choose, tool can cost anywhere between $19/month (basic) to $99/month (premium).

 

 Website: www.notableapp.com



 

 This tool is great for designers who want to review the usability of their website before it goes live. It offers features such as the Five Second Test, Click Test, Question Test, Navigation Test and Preference Test that give designers a good indication of how users experience different aspects of their website. For individual users, pricing can range from free to $199/month. There is also a team package that costs $396/month.

 

 Website: www.usabilityhub.com



 

 Mopin.io offers a free visual feedback tool that is great for user testing on new landing pages and web designs. Mopin.io does not require any installations on the web page or in the browser. It’s completely hassle free. All feedback is collected with a generated shortened url of the web page you want to collect feedback on. Feedback is emailed directly to your inbox. For premium users, the visual feedback plugin can also be integrated into the Mopinion Suite (paid software). NOTE: mopin.io is developed by feedback software specialist Mopinion.

 

 Website: www.mopin.io



 

 With User Testing, you can select users based on your target demographics and observe their behaviour on your website. You can do this by either monitoring their screen activity or listening to the recording they have made whilst using your website. Just an hour after being submitted you will receive the usability test video as well as answers to the questions you’ve asked them. It can also be using in the prototyping phase. Pricing for your first 10 videos is $49/video. There is also an enterprise version for this tool.

 

 Website: www.usertesting.com



 

 Criticue enables you to have your website or even website concept to be reviewed by a community of entrepreneurs, usability experts and web designers. The tool is based on a ‘one-for-one exchange’ meaning for every site you provide a review for, you a receive one for your website. Reviews are focused on design and first-time impressions. Criticue is free to use.

 

 Website: www.criticue.com



 

 BugMuncher is a web application that allows users to highlight problems on a website. It works similar to Usersnap. The difference is that the notes you take are mainly based on selecting (highlighting) elements on the page and not so much aimed at making drawings and drawing arrows. This tool also saves the notes as a screenshot and sends it to you by email. Depending on the package you choose pricing can range from $29 – $199/month.

 

 Website: www.bugmuncher.com



 

 TrackDuck is a visual feedback tool especially aimed at web designers and developers. This tool can be used to highlight elements of the page and to give comments on it. The feedback arrives real-time through email and in the dashboard. In the protected environment it is possible to chat with other users, assign tasks and check the progress of certain issues. Pricing ranges between $9 and $49 a month.

 

 Website: www.trackduck.com



 

 Silverback is guerilla usability testing software that enables users to capture screen activity, record the tester’s voice and video their face. With this tool, you can create tasks and mark important events within each session. Silverback is for Mac users only but requires no setup. The free trial version is fully functional but adds a watermark to all video exports. To remove this watermark, users must pay $39.

 

 Website: www.silverbackapp.com



 

 With Verify you can collect and analyse visitor feedback from screens or test versions (mockups). You collect feedback, see what people remember about your design and what they think of it. Verify is a nice app for testing ideas before they are implemented. You can get a basic count for $19 a month.

 

 Website: www.verifyapp.com



 

 To create a test for your users in Try My UI, you must present a scenario with a set of tasks for your users. The tool then enables to you watch narrated videos of your users navigating your website. In the video (in addition to their voice), you will see things such as their own screen, mouse movements and any keystrokes. You can also receive written answers to four questions you provide at the beginning of the test. You can select users based on specific criteria. Test credits start from $35/test, however there are also packages for teams ($299/month) and agencies.

 

 Website: www.trymyui.com



 

 Userlytics enables you to test prototypes throughout the design process. You can observe real people experiencing your prototype or website in real time. The tool allows you to watch and listen to participants carry out tasks, answer questions and interact on your website. Userlytics provides participants for you or alternatively, you can choose your own. Results for the tests are delivered within a few hours, afterwhich these can be shared with team members or your clients. Userlytics offers a flexible pricing plan, ranging from $49/participant to $89/participant.

 

 Website: www.userlytics.com



 

 UserSnap makes its easier to check for bugs and other issues. It also contributes to fast communication between designers, customers and employees. At the click of a button, visitors and designers can submit a bug report from the website. You can also create in-browser screenshots with this tool, so you can see exactly what your visitor sees without needing a plug-in. Pricing for Small to Medium businesses (SMB) range anywhere between €69 to €329 a month and there is custom pricing for enterprises.

 

 Website: www.usersnap.com



 

 Marker is a visual feedback and bug reporting tool for web professionals. With this tool you can convert screenshots from any website into a powerful bug report directly into your existing tools. What is unique about this tool is that the feedback is captured via a browser plug-in, rather than on the page itself so it must first be installed in Chrome before it can be used. Some key features are screenshot annotation tools, shareable links and workflow integration. Marker can be integrated with various scrum and project management tools such as Jira, Slack, Trello and Github. A premium account costs anywhere from $19 to $119 a month.

 

 Website: www.marker.io



 

 Feedback.js is an open source project created in JavaScript. This framework enables you to create feedback forms that include a screenshot. This is, for instance, known for a number of applications of Google in which it is used. If you’re mainly looking for the collection of visual feedback, this is an inexpensive alternative to other tools. Feedback.js is free to use but some coding skills in JavaScript are required.



 

 Hotjar is a tool that combines applications of several usability tools. In terms of visual feedback, however, it offers features such as creating heatmaps and user recordings (the tracking of sessions on the page). These recordings can be tagged, shared and filtered in the Hotjar dashboard. Depending on the number of pageviews per day you want to collect, pricing can range from €89 to €589/month.

 

 Website: www.hotjar.com



 

 DebugMe is a visual website feedback tool with a built-in issue tracking & project management solution. It comes with native integrations to software development and task management tools such as Jira, Trello, Pivotal Tracker or Visual Studio. Pricing starts from $8 per month after a free trial period.

 

 Website: www.debugme.eu



 

 Mostly used by digital agencies, marketing companies and corporate web teams, PageProofer is visual bug tracking and feedback system. It enables users to leave a virtual sticky note on the website when something needs to be brought to attention. These notes can be assigned to team members and can include file attachments, comments and browser info. Depending on the number of users, pricing ranges between $20 to $125/month.

 

 Website: www.pageproofer.com



 

 RedPen is web-based app that lets you upload a file and share it with clients and team members for feedback. This tool saves users from having to email files back and forth. Once you receive a file from a team member, you just have to click on the design and leave a comment. Running around 5 projects on your website? The price will be around $20/month. Are you need of a bigger package? These range all the way up to 40 projects at $90/month.

 

 Website: www.redpen.io



 

 Userback enables you to collect real-time feedback with screenshots and instant notifications. Users can articulate which content needs to be altered by drawing and writing on your webpage. This tool can be integrated with various bug tracking and project management tools such as HipChat, Jira, Trello, WordPress and Campaign Monitor. There is a free version but if you want to upgrade with more users and projects, pricing can range anywhere between $16 to $59/month.

 

 Website: www.userback.io



 

 Juntoo, similar to PageProofer, allows users to place sticky notes with comments directly on HTML elements (text, image or graphic), which can in turn be sent to team members for review. This tool is free to use.

 

 Website: www.juntoo.co

There is clearly a lot to choose from. However, making the right choice all comes down to what you want to achieve and how far along your team or company is in terms of maturity.

 

 It’s important to remember that you should first have some goals in mind in terms of what you want to achieve with the tool. Only then should you move on to things such as your budget. There are several tools that cater their services more towards enterprise businesses, but there are also more cost-efficient options for smaller companies. And lastly, it is important to consider any potential technical limitations. This includes factors such as IT restrictions when it comes to privacy or security (e.g. how and where data is stored).

 

 We hope this overview provides you with some inspiration in finding the right visual feedback tools tools. If you found this article interesting you might also want to check out other comparison blogs of ours including The Best User Experience (UX) tools and 31 Website Feedback Tools.

 

 Please feel free to add any suggestions or comments below!|||

Searching for the right visual feedback tools for your business? Here is an overview of the top tools on the market. Find out which one fits your needs best