Explainer video toolkit has over 400 scenes to build any kind of explainer animation videos. It features character animations, environment scenes, infographics, various icons, kinetic typography and more. Template also includes ready-made presets to make your video production process even faster. This template is the best option for startups and small businesses to promote their brand and gain virality. Learn more

Neon Power Logo reveal is an ideal solution for creating the most impressive intro video for any product or service. Template features a cool neon atmosphere and high contrast look, to perfectly suit for presentations, online channels, introductions, YouTube channels and more. You simply upload your logo and we turn it into a beautiful intro video, which has the most professional look and realistic 3D feel. Learn more

Whiteboard Animation Pack has over 400 animated scenes. It is an ideal solution for any presentations and animated whiteboard videos. It has character animations, dozens of icons, photo and video holders, kinetic typography and more. It also features already-made presets for making your video production process even faster. If you are looking for a clean, minimalistic look, this template is the best fit. Learn more

Sci-Fi Space is the most Cosmic Project available on Renderforest. It features realistic 3D scenes including universe, astronaut and rocket scenes for making gaming intros, scientific videos, movie trailers or teasers, 3D kinetic Typography videos and more. It includes already-made presets to make your video production easier. Template has over 30 animated 3D scenes. Learn more

Mobile application promotion toolkit is an enhanced project, which has over 100 animated 3D scenes of iPhone, iPad, notebooks and android smartphone. It can be a powerful tool for creating mobile application promotional or tutorial videos. You can upload screenshots or even screencast videos to give them professional look. Learn more

Parallax Slideshow helps to unveil the new beauty of your images by turning them into 3D animated photos. Template supports both videos and photos and can last up to 60 minutes. This slideshow gives 3D look and parallax effect with smooth transitions to your photos. It can be used for creating family, travel or corporate slideshow videos or even openers for promotional videos and interviews. Learn more

For ones who are looking for the most minimalistic and clean look, this template may be the best fit. It features soft light animations and a clean, modern look. This can be a great intro or outro for your videos so they have the most professional look to quickly increase your website traffic and engage your customers. You can use it for presentations, online channels, company introductions and more. Learn more

Do you need a general video to introduce your company or open a presentation? Look no further than the Company Story Promotion Template. Featuring fluid transitions and simplistic style, this template aims to keep your audience’s attention on the company. Pick your own music, upload your images, and render your company's story, which can be the best presentation for your company. Learn more

Happy birthday video card is a template from our special event category, where you can find dozens of videos for weddings, parties, event invitations or special event promotions. Such templates help to congratulate or invite your friends or family in the most impressing ways. Happy birthday video card can be a nice present to congratulate your friends, family or loved ones. Learn more|||

Renderforest is free online video maker and video editor. Make videos with music, animations, slideshows and more with our online video making app.Renderforest is free online video maker and video editor. Make videos with music, animations, slideshows and more with our online video making app. | en