Among other things, modern society is built upon humanities ability to cooperate; the ability to work (and compromise) with each other in order to achieve a shared goal. For sustained cooperation (i.e. the continuous fulfillment of a multitude of goals in order to achieve the broader objective of a raised standard of living) to be possible, human beings must implement social structures which (to exist for any impactful period of time) facilitate amiable interpersonal interactions (at minimum).

These structures are held together by the glue of commonly held beliefs (i.e. shared values) which encourage cooperation. As a society grows to cooperate in more effective and efficient ways, it is consequently able to sustain a larger population and accelerate the pace at which it makes progress. Governments are a meta type of social structure (emerging as a society’s populous reaches sufficient size) which include the function of orchestrating other high level social structures in a way agreeable to the broader populous. The goal of government is to affect these structures in a way that drives societal progress in their proposed direction (as a result of a large enough segment of the nation being in agreement). The way in which a government affects these structures is highly dependent on its ideology and the more general electoral system of which it is a part (this piece is primarily concerned with modern democratic societies).

The problem with shared values in modern society is that (for most) language is a clumsy tool of self expression. Since the notion of public relations came into vogue, a new threat to traditional democracies emerged. The idea that language can be crafted in such a way that it is able to manipulate a collective into believing in something because of the way it is presented instead of its meaning manifested itself. Resultantly, as. a nation grows less literate, it becomes increasingly easier to manipulate large swaths of people into voting for values largely against their true beliefs and morals. The language of politics takes the form that it does in most societies because the terminology used is broad enough that, once filtered through an individuals belief systems, it can be used to indoctrinate opinions into individuals via the trojan horse of ideology.

It is the tendency for governments to act in a self serving (i.e. corrupt) manner simply because it is a possibility; over the lifetime of the governmental system in question, corruption will eventually manifest itself. As a basic preventative measure, most modern democracies rarely see a single leader (or party) in power for more than a few consecutive electoral cycles. Over longer timescales corruption in inevitably simply because it will be instigated by external agents. Those who wish to disproportionately influence certain areas of government use abstract and increasingly convoluted mechanisms to do this regardless of the party in power.

This holds especially true in todays world where the majority of political influence is dominated by financial contributions. Donors and lobbyists are able to push self-serving legislation simply because they have the cash reserves to do so. Those who hold the most influence over modern nations are those who have historically invested the most capital into acquiring the influence in the first place. As the corruption within a government grows increasingly blatant (and the consequences of the corruption less abstract) enough shared societal values are transgressed until the system itself is called into question.|||

Among other things, modern society is built upon humanities ability to cooperate; the ability to work (and compromise) with each other in order to achieve a shared goal. For sustained cooperation (i…