Insight is expanding to Seattle this summer. The first session of the Insight Data Science Fellows Program in Seattle will begin this July, with mentorship from data teams at Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft, the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, and many more top data scientists. This Insight Fellowship, like all Insight programs, is tuition-free.

Since 2012, Insight has helped over 900 Insight Fellows start their careers as data scientists and data engineers at over 250 companies across the US. Seattle is one of the world’s most exciting tech hubs, and we have seen the demand for data science talent in the area continue to grow. Fellows from Insight’s Remote program, which focuses on cities all across the US, have been choosing Seattle as a place to live and work more and more frequently.

As a result, we already have a vibrant community of over 25 Insight alums working in Seattle at top companies including Facebook, Amazon, Microsoft, Expedia, Capital One, Coupang, the Allen Institute for Brain Science, and startups like Zymergen, iSpot.tv, RichRelevance, and Placed. These Insight Fellows plus a group of top data science team leads in the Seattle area will serve as our Insight community mentor network for our very first physical session in Seattle this summer.

The Insight Data Science Fellows Program in Seattle will leverage our experience from running the fellowship in Silicon Valley, New York, Boston and remotely, while adapting to the specific needs of the cutting-edge Seattle data and technology ecosystem. A group of Insight Data Science Fellows who hail from PhD programs and postdoctoral positions across the US will be selected for this first Seattle session. They will work on data projects at our office in Seattle, meet the leaders of data teams at leading companies and start-ups and receive extensive mentorship from the Insight alumni network and the Insight team. At the end of the program they will interview with top data teams and start their careers as data scientists, continuing to grow the Insight community in Seattle.

We are looking forward to helping future Insight Fellows launch their careers in the Greater Seattle Area. Applications are now open for in Seattle for the July 2017 session. To learn more and apply visit the Insight Data Science Fellows Program website.|||

Insight is expanding to Seattle this summer. The first session of the Insight Data Science Fellows Program in Seattle will begin this July, with mentorship from data teams at Facebook, Amazon…