La Tabla is a magical table—put things on it and they come to life. Make music and animations. Play games. Design your own pinball tables. Use your body, your friends, paper, drawings, game pieces—whatever strikes your fancy.

Of course we had to make the granddaddy of video games! Cut your own paddles out of foam core. As many players as you want: four, eight, three, a hundred, one, or zero. It's up to you. Redesign the playfield. Cheat. You and your friends make the rules.

La Tabla has a ball pit, because let's be honest—a pile of bouncing balls is all you really need to have fun.

Make music that sounds great—no musical experience necessary! Sheets of paper become musical scores for a variety of instruments: software synthesizers, MIDI instruments, and robits—tiny robots that play the xylophone! Draw, place objects, or use your hands to manipulate the song.

Ever wanted to design your own pinball table? It's never been easier. Use paper and objects to design your layout. Play it with a game controller. La Tabla Pinball is a great tool for learning the fundamentals of level design. Touch, experiment with, and rapidly iterate your table layout.

Play anything. La Tabla makes activities—games, toys, and tools—open to playful and improvisational reimagining.

Have an idea for a La Tabla project? Of course you do! Join the upcoming game jam. Sign up for emails and we'll send the invite. Viva La Tabla!

La Tabla is Chaim Gingold's (Spore, Earth: A Primer) first project since finishing his Ph.D. about play. While doing his dissertation research, Chaim became fascinated by adventure playgrounds—unusual playgrounds that children themselves build out of wood, nails, and junk. Chaim became interested in designing flexible play environments in which players could introduce whatever materials and rules they wanted, and which combined the digital and physical. Meanwhile, his colleagues (Bret Victor, Robert Ochshorn, and Toby Schachman) had begun experimenting with projection mapping and computer vision, which inspired Chaim to begin making La Tabla.

It began with the bouncing balls and pong game. Chaim then joined forces with talented designer/programmer/musician Luke Iannini (Rumpus, Artikulator), to create the music mode. Luke contributed his expertise in music and sound synthesis, design and coding chops, and psychedelic shader powers. Another colleague, Paula Te, built the Arduino powered xylophone, and contributed sketches for the music characters. The rest is history.

La Tabla introduces a groundbreaking way to interact with computers. Rather than using a finger to click on a mouse or poke at a screen, you reach into the simulation world with two hands, bringing the full force of your hominid dexterity and playfulness to the table. Because you can put whatever you like—coins, stones, books, drawings, yourself—into the simulation world, play is surprisingly improvisational and open-ended. Playing with others doesn't require sharing a mouse, keyboard, or network connection. Everyone sees and touches the same thing, which is such a profound way to interact that we take it for granted during our everyday, non-computerized, life.|||

