Show the ring directly on your finger

This morning i was at a goldsmiths office and we talked about Augmented Reality (a cool guy, check it out if you need a goldsmiths in dublin). He told me that it would be nice if augmented reality could put the ring directly on the finger of the customer. It would make the decision much easier. So i started thinking, here is what i came up with during lunch.

The person would put the ring on her finger, and put her hand on the table. Then she use her phone and point it at the ring. The phone uses the camera and show the video on the screen. The software detects the location of the ring-marker, and replace it by the 3d model. So the person sees the ring directly on her finger.

Good moment to take a picture to save the moment. Thus the customer can take those home and decide.

The first step is to localize the ring on the video, so we need some kind of markers. Obviously not something like hiro pattern, but something easily recognisable. It will be a special ring that you can build, or 3d print. Let’s call it a marker-ring.

It will be matte to avoid light reflection. It will have a drawing on it. The color will be easily distinguishable on the video. Say the ring itself will be green background color, and the ink of the drawing will be hotpink, pattern color.

The phone sensors provide the gravity, so the software knows what is the table orientation compared to the phone orientation. So we know the ring is vertical on the table (as the user got her hand on a table). This information can be used to make the detection more accurate.

The customer will wear the ring, so we should not display the bottom part of the ring as it is hidden by her finger. So how to handle the finger occlusion ? Here are some ideas

Here is what i came up with.it was a fun lunch! Augmented reality applied to some real world problem :)

I have written this post mainly to be sure i won’t forget the idea but i have no intention to actually implement it. Maybe somebody else will :)|||

This morning i was at a goldsmiths office and we talked about Augmented Reality (a cool guy, check it out if you need a goldsmiths in dublin). He told me that it would be nice if augmented reality…