When Uber bought Anthony Levandowski's startup Otto for $680 million, an unnamed third party conducted a "due diligence review." Now, Levandowski and his lawyers are fighting hard to keep that review under wraps.

Google's Waymo self-driving car spinoff sued Uber in February. Waymo said that Otto, and now Uber, are using technology that Levandowski stole from Google, where he worked until early 2016.

In a document filed in court this afternoon, Levandowski says that US District Judge William Alsup should modify an earlier discovery order to protect Levandowski's Fifth Amendment rights. Levandowski's lawyers want the court to make clear that neither Uber nor Levandowski should be compelled to say who did the review or what documents, if any, were reviewed.

"[R]equiring disclosure of these facts would separately violate Mr. Levandowski's Fifth Amendment right not to be compelled to reveal the existence, location, possession, or identity of any documents that might furnish a link in a chain of possible incrimination," states the motion (PDF).

Levandowski's lawyers want to avoid disclosing even a "privilege log," which would be a list of documents they believe are protected by attorney-client privilege. Even revealing such a log "would violate Mr. Levandowski's right against self-incrimination," the motion advises.

Judge steams as Uber exec withholds documents and pleads the 5th In a closed-door hearing last week, a lawyer for Levandowski said his client couldn't turn over or even talk about some documents because there's a "potential for criminal action." The hearing's events became public knowledge after news organisations acquired transcripts of what happened.

Plaintiffs are certainly free to use any legitimate tools of civil discovery to locate evidence they deem relevant to their civil lawsuit. But they are not free to use the power and authority of this Court to order disclosures that are protected under Mr. Levandowski's Fifth Amendment rights. The Court cannot, consistent with the Fifth Amendment, order Mr. Levandowski—or any counsel owing obligations of attorney-client confidentiality to him—to disclose information that could furnish a "link in the chain" to the existence, possession, location, or identity of evidence that may be used in any possible criminal prosecution of Mr. Levandowski.

Google must reply to Levandowski's motion tomorrow, and a hearing on the matter is scheduled for Thursday. US District Judge William Alsup will address other discovery matters in a hearing today.|||

Showing a privilege log “would violate... the right against self-incrimination.”