For a long time I have wanted to build something from scratch that people would love and use. I have a decent job, where I have an impact. But I would like to create something that solves a problem from beginning to end. As a backend engineer, I make internals of systems. When solving an issue for an average person, an API is not enough - users interact with software via user interface, something that I have always neglected. Command line tool is all I need to interact with the program. But this is not a common way of using computers.

I decided it was time to communicate with the User. My platform of choice became iOS and the Swift language. After a couple weeks of learning how to build apps, I realized two things.

Because I want my code to be perfect and error-prone I never finish anything. I spend all the time focusing on the fist module, making it perfect. Refactoring it so it is a “native” code for the language. Easy to read. Easy to understand. You can spend a lifetime on 100 lines of code making it perfect. There will always be something to improve. What I forgot is that the code was a means of communication. Code talks to the user but also the fellow programmers. I completely forgot about the fact that the code was meant to do something useful. When having good tools (XCode is quite good at this) creating user interface is something special. Previously I tried HTML/CSS/JS and instead of making UI i used to struggle to make interface look like I imagined. When tools are not in my way I started to think about the actual user experience. And then I drifted to completely new waters.

Let’s be honest. I know nothing about design. But I was intrigued. I have a friend who always drew nice pictures on the back of his notebook at school, now he is a designer. After a quick Skype he pointed me to a few design tools: Sketch, Flinto, Avocode and others. I ended up doing mockups in Flinto with only rectangles. It was fun. After I finished, I had a complete “clickable” version. I had the vision for the app, I knew what it was going to look like.

And because of my obsession with code quality, I got stuck on Register/Log-in module. As I got frustrated with lack of progress I stopped developing the project.

After a couple of months, I saw “Abstract: The Art of Design” on Netflix. Just the first episode. Then I watched “Objectified”. I was enlightened.

Designers are the real interface to the industry world. They are the hackers, who make today’s inventions usable by others.

But what about us programmers, software engineers? Are we just dumb code-monkeys?

Yes and No.

All what dev ( developers?)do is translating natural language to the one that the machine can understand. We can make an art of it, but the end user will not see the difference. Of course you can argue that a clean and beautiful code is less buggy, but that is not the point. The actual art behind programming to me is being able to take a slice of reality and formalize it as code. That is the line of communication between user and the program - finding the right abstractions that will encapsulate the logic into one coherent piece of functionality. But this is not the art of programming that we strive for.

What we appreciate the most is what we see. The code itself. We love to make it readable, pure, short and concise. While users of your program will not care about the code itself - people who write it tend to care about it more than the product that the code constitutes. Nonetheless, the code itself is the way of communication with other programmers and therefore a form of design.

Worlds of design and software development have a lot in common. At some level they are both all about communication and solving problems in the most efficient way. Take IKEA for example. People say that the quality of their products is low. Maybe the piece of wood they used is not the best one, but I always feel that every product was carefully designed. No pointless parts, wasted space, unusable features.

We often do not appreciate a good design - maybe because a good design is hidden from the user. Like an operating system – as long as you are not aware of it, it does its job.|||

The relationship between designers and software engineers.