Gitment is a comment system based on GitHub Issues, which can be used in the frontend without any server-side implementation.

Click here to register an OAuth application, and you will get a client ID and a client secret.

Make sure the callback URL is right. Generally it's the origin of your site, like https://imsun.net.

After the page published, you should visit your page, login with your GitHub account(make sure you're repo's owner), and click the initialize button, to create a related issue in your repo. After that, others can leave their comments.

The DOM element to which comments will be rendered. Can be an HTML element or element's id. When omitted, this function will create a new element.

This function returns the element to which comments be rendered.

Same like . But only renders the header.

Same like . But only renders comments list.

Same like . But only renders the editor.

Same like . But only renders the footer.

Initialize a new page. Returns a and resolves when initialized.

Update data and views. Returns a and resolves when data updated.

Post comment in the editor. Returns a and resolves when posted.

Jump to the target page of comments. Notice that starts from . Returns a and resolves when comments loaded.

Like current page. Returns a and resolves when liked.

Like a comment. Returns a and resolves when liked.

Gitment is easy to customize. You can use your own CSS or write a theme. (The difference is that customized CSS can't modify DOM structure)

Gitment does't use any atomic CSS, making it easier and more flexible to customize. You can inspect the DOM structure in the browser and write your own styles.

A Gitment theme is an object contains several render functions.

By default Gitment has five render functions: , , , , . The last four render independent components and function renders them together. All of them can be used independently.

You can override any render function above or write your own render function.

For example, you can override the function to put editor before comments list, and render a new component.

Each render function should receive a state object and a gitment instance, and return an HTML element. It will be wrapped attached to the Gitment instance with the same name.

Gitment uses MobX to detect states used in render functions. Once used states change, Gitment will call the render function to get a new element and render it. Unused states' changing won't affect rendered elements.

Client secret is necessary for OAuth, without which users can't login or comment with their GitHub accounts. Although GitHub does't recommend to hard code client secret in the frontend, you can still do that because GitHub will verify your callback URL. In theory, no one else can use your secret except your site.

If you find a way to hack it, please open an issue.

https://gh-oauth.imsun.net is an simple open-source service to proxy one request during users logging in. Because GitHub does't attach a CORS header to it.

This service won't record or store anything, only proxy and attach a CORS header to that request. So that users can login in the frontend without any server-side implementation.

For more details, checkout this project.|||

gitment - A comment system based on GitHub Issues.