IBM Cloud today announced a major boost to its cloud services, adding the power of Tesla P100 GPUs and the NVIDIA deep learning platform to their offerings. Tesla P100 is the world’s most powerful data center GPU ever built, engineered to deliver giant leaps in performance for deep learning.

Launching later this month, IBM Cloud’s P100-based offerings expand the scale and scope of cloud services based on NVIDIA’s GPU computing platform, which are now available from every major public cloud service provider.

IBM’s new offering will provide organizations with near-instant access to Tesla P100 to test and run applications that have the potential to solve problems that were once unsolvable.

Tesla P100 and our GPU computing platform is already enabling customers to make breakthroughs in such diverse areas as fraud detection and prevention, genomic research into curing disease, eliminating millions of tons of waste through better inventory management, and automation of manufacturing tasks too dangerous for humans.

IBM Cloud customers will have the option to equip individual IBM Bluemix bare metal servers with two NVIDIA Tesla P100 data center GPUs. These powerful GPU-accelerated cloud instances, deliver the performance of up to 25 non-accelerated servers, dramatically saving money for HPC and AI workloads.

With all key deep learning frameworks GPU-accelerated and over 400 HPC applications in a broad range of domains, including the top 10 high performance computing applications, IBM Cloud customers can quickly tap into the power of the our GPU platform to boost performance, accelerate time to results and save money.

As the artificial intelligence era takes hold, developers around the world are seeking faster and easier access to our latest GPU computing AI platforms.

For many, consuming our technology through a public cloud is a perfect solution in terms of speed of access, flexibility and scalability. Developers can, with literally a few clicks, have near-instant access to our platform. And, in terms of scalability, they have the world’s largest data centers at their disposal to scale their solutions immediately or as needed.

We’re working with IBM and other cloud providers to put our technology into the hands of more developers faster. We know that, equipped with our most advanced technology, developers around the world will accelerate the AI era for the benefit of all.|||

IBM Cloud today announced a major boost to its cloud services, adding the power of Tesla P100 GPUs and the NVIDIA deep learning platform to their offerings.