The first two months of this process was spent finishing the dome of BB-8.  At the time, my plan was to create a static office decoration.  With that approach in mind, I didn't give much thought to anything beyond 'make it look as awesome as possible.'   This section shows the stages of printing/prepping/finishing my first BB-8 dome which ultimately ended up being way too heavy for the functional droid project this ended up becoming.  Below you can see the log for the building of this dome

As with the deprecated dome, I had an issue with some un-used body panels.  This one isn't quite as linear as the dome because I worked on it in parallel with the internal drive mechanism.  For the sake of organization over chronology, I moved all the pictures of these body parts to this next section.  So bear with my Tarantino-ing here.

So why all these useless parts?  As I mentioned earlier, there was a point in the build when I knew I would not be satisfied putting in all these hours for a simple decoration.  After seeing some successful approaches to drive mechanisms I decided to give a functional droid a shot.  James Bruton of XRobots' V3 design was the one that appealed to me most. Due to some initial size changes and being hindered by a smaller printer, I started recreating the file in 3D Studio Max so I can export print files and change things on demand to test ideas/accommodate the parts I bought which would ultimately be different than the parts XRobot's used his build.

With the Makerbot down, I called makersupport and got the impression "best case scenario" would be a few weeks.  I had been eyeing up the Taz5 anyway, so this hiccup ended up being the final push I needed to make the purchase.  Amazon Prime had it to my door in 2 days.

In addition to needing more magnetic pull, the heavier head will require a bit more counter-weight.  Adding static mass to the bottom of the ball will keep the top-heavy droid from falling out of control.  I had a bit of lead left over from my flywheel fill, so I decided to create some weight containers that would attach to the banana.

My goal at this point is to make this next installation to the ball the last one. Getting all this stuff in and out is tricky and stressful.  Once everything is "in there, in there" I can start adding the top half parts and wiring. I'm trying to think of any parts I can add on now which won't hinder the installation but will save me time on having to install 'into' the ball.

I solved my wiggly motor problem and made the ball a lot smoother but didn't correct the tilted axis part at all. That was due to all the weight in my saddle bags being towards the back of the ball. So before I can go further I have to balance this out. I know it can be done with the inertial measurement unit (IMU) and stabilization through software, but why not at least try to start with a balanced droid?  One problem, though, I'm out of lead shot.

Now that all the mechanics are in, I can start on some of the electronics. The first thing I need to do is pair my two bluetooth modules. Then get the remote controller transmitting data over that bluetooth. Then get the ball all wired up and receiving that data.

I'm a little late catching up on the blog, but that's only because I usually update the blog when I hit a roadblock...and generally speaking that hasn't happened lately.  I did have a pretty busy work week last week that kept me away from droid progress, but I more than made up for it this weekend.   First, I got the bluetooh modules paired so the remote control can talk to the droid.  Not much I can post to "show" that, but suffice it to say it works and has been tested again and again, were good.

Now let's get the hand set taken care of.



I tested everything out with some code printing to the Serial Monitor of my Arduino and we're all good. Handset controls talking to Arduino Pro Mini Talking to Bluetooth talking to other bluetooth talking to Arduino Mega (cchhhaaaaiiiinnnnn keep us together [RUNIN THE SHADOWS])

Next up is to mount all the electronics into the droid. But before I can do that I have one small piece of maintenance that needs to be done. In part 9 of James's series he noticed a "fundamental mechanical flaw" in the design. Long story short it can be corrected with a set of guide wheels running higher on the potentiometer side. I installed those before I congested everything with the electronics mounts.



There is a lot of repetition in the next 4 videos.  I was making them and posting them for various audiences (friends who kind of get what I'm doing, my facebook friends who don't know what I'm doing, and the BB-8 club who know even better than I do what I'm doing) so rather than try to decide which video was best I just posted everything I had from that week.  The videos show a progression from getting the side to side stabilization working to driving it front to back for the first time.

Generally speaking, I'm happy with the locomotion. Time to start focusing on the body skins/panels. First I have to tackle the issue of how I am going to attach them.  One thing I can't stress enough is how awesome/important it is to find someone in the club who is building a droid similar to yours and bounce ideas off of.  For me, that person was Ian Martin over at Dejarik Creations.  We were both pretty much building the droid in the same way, the only difference was after finishing the cheese wheel, I focused first on the inside on the ball and he focused first on the outside of the ball.  This worked out great as we both had someone on the other side who had already tackled some problems.  This was most prevalent in the case of the external frame.  Ian NAILED it.  It was perfect. I just had to modify it to fit my larger cheese and it was printing the same day.

Now it's time to start focusing on the body panels. For the triangles I am reprinting them as Cary triangles with the built in hole for mounting.  There are holes in the frame to align with these.

This next bit was the second scariest part of the build (the first being powering up the motors for the first time before I knew everything worked). I'm going to be drilling straight into the cheese to embed the inserts.|||

Click here to follow the build progress of my full size functional BB-8 replica!