Today, we are pleased to announce the beta availability of Red Hat Software Collections 2.4, Red Hat’s newest installment of open source web development tools, dynamic languages, and databases. Delivered on a more frequent release cadence than Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Red Hat Software Collections delivers developer agility and production stability by helping to accelerate the creation of modern applications that can then be more confidently deployed into production.

Also available today is Red Hat Developer Toolset 6.1 Beta, which helps to streamline application development on Red Hat’s enterprise Linux platform by giving developers access to the latest, stable open source C and C++ compilers and complementary development and performance profiling tools. Accessible through the Red Hat Developer Program and related Red Hat Enterprise Linux subscriptions, including the no-cost Red Hat Enterprise Linux Developer subscription, Red Hat Developer Toolset enables developers to compile applications once and deploy across multiple versions of Red Hat Enterprise Linux.

Updated components within Red Hat Developer Toolset 6.0 Beta include the latest stable versions of the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) 6, 6.3.1, and GNU Debugger (GDB). Red Hat Developer Toolset 6.1 Beta continues to be accessible across architectures, supported on both Red Hat Enterprise Linux for Power and Red Hat Enterprise Linux for z Systems and available on Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server for ARM Developer Preview.

Additionally, for developers looking to take advantage of Linux containers, many of the most popular Red Hat Software Collections are available as dockerfiles and docker-formatted images, with the latter made available via the Red Hat Customer Portal.

Applications built with Red Hat Software Collections can be deployed into production with greater confidence than by using standalone, unsupported developer languages and tools, as most software collections and components are supported for three years. In addition to Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 and 7, applications built with Red Hat Software Collections containers can also be deployed to Red Hat Enterprise Linux Atomic Host and Red Hat OpenShift Container Platform, giving more choice and flexibility for application portfolios.

Red Hat Software Collections 2.4 Beta and Red Hat Developer Toolset 6.1 Beta are now available to customers and partners with select active Red Hat Enterprise Linux subscriptions.  For more information on installation or to view the complete release notes, please visit the Red Hat Customer Portal.|||

Today, we are pleased to announce the beta availability of Red Hat Software Collections 2.4, Red Hat’s newest installment of open source web development tools, dynamic languages, and databases. Delivered on a more frequent release cadence than Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Red Hat Software Collections delivers developer agility and production stability by helping to accelerate the creation of modern applications that can then be more confidently deployed into production.