In Deep Red America, The Rise of the Abortion Doula “Just as a laboring patient needs emotional and physical support in the delivery process, women accessing abortion care also need the same support.”

In January, winter rains washed across the Arizona desert, obscuring the mountains around the city of Tucson. Temperatures swung from balmy 70-degree days to below freezing at night. And 19-year-old Rose* became pregnant. (She requested a pseudonym for privacy.) She was reeling from a painful breakup with a long-term boyfriend, living with her parents, and earning minimum wage part-time.

She knew immediately that she was not ready to raise a child on her own. “I never considered having it,” said Rose. “I knew.”

Soon after the pregnancy was confirmed, Rose made an appointment with a doctor for a surgical abortion a few weeks later. She felt anxious and overwhelmed by the entire experience, and did not have a support network of friends or family whom she could confide in.

An acquaintance told her about Dora Martinez, who works full-time at a local nonprofit and part-time providing physical, emotional, and informational support to people seeking abortions. Rose immediately called her. After hearing her story, Martinez, a “full-spectrum doula,” agreed to work with Rose for a nominal fee.

As her abortion doula, Martinez texted with Rose and talked to her by phone whenever Rose needed support in the days leading up to the procedure. Rose opened up about her feelings as the date drew nearer, and Martinez helped her anticipate what to expect during and after the abortion. She also agreed to accompany her to the clinic and to drive her home afterwards, fulfilling the mandatory accompaniment policy of the Tucson clinic. But the night before the procedure, Rose’s partner suddenly refused to contribute the money he had promised for the abortion.

“I thought, I can’t even support myself right now and I can’t support a kid,” said Rose, “but I can’t afford to go through with [the abortion] either. I don’t have any money.”

At six weeks pregnant, and with less money than she had expected, Rose was able to end the pregnancy with misoprostol, a medication that causes contractions of the uterus leading to a miscarriage. The medication was cheaper than the surgical abortion would have been, but it also meant a longer process and, ultimately, a home abortion. Rose procured it on her own, and after taking it, immediately called Martinez for support.

Rose called out of work for three days. She stayed in her bedroom, breathing through the cramps, and tried not to make any noise. “My family was right on the other side of the wall,” she recalled. She felt completely alone except for Martinez, who remained on the other end of the phone, texting with Rose throughout the night and into the morning.|||

In January, winter rains washed across the Arizona desert, obscuring the mountains around the city of Tucson. Temperatures swung from balmy 70-degree days to below freezing at night. And 19-year-old…