Join New Haircut (hosted by Alpha) for an innovative workshop on putting Design Sprints to work for your team and projects.

You'll learn the tools & techniques of the same proven, structured framework that Google Ventures has used to design, prototype and validate solutions for Uber, the United Nations, Slack, the US Dept of Defense, Home Depot and more.

The workshop is fast-paced, hands-on, time-boxed, and immersive. We'll move from an initial product idea to a hi-fidelity prototype that we'll use to test on live customers. In 2 intensive days, you'll learn and practice different ideation techniques and the best methods to empathize with your customers like Lightning Demos, Sketching, User Story Mapping, Prototyping and Customer Interviews.

You'll also be trained on critical components not included in the Sprint book that will ensure you're framing the right challenges for your sprints, as well as how to effectively move into product development.

By the end of the workshop, you'll have the right knowledge and process to drive hi-impact innovation inside your organization.





This workshop is best suited for creatives & product leaders from technology-focused companies that want to dive deep into product roles and leading edge Design Thinking and Design Sprint practices.

Product Managers, VPs of Innovation, VPs / Directors of Product, VPs / Directors of UX, VPs Engineering / CTOs, UX Designers, or Creative Directors can use this training to drive user-centered product design within the rest of their organization.

This workshop is not for those looking to sit back and listen to theory. You should come prepared to work hard with others in an intense, time-boxed, result-driven environment.

Because we build and ship products monthly @ New Haircut, you’ll hear first-hand takeaways from sprints we have run with our clients. We learn by doing. And so we'll offer you the same opportunity when it comes learning design sprints.

You'll also gain the opportunity to connect and collaborate with fellow creatives, makers, entrepreneurs, and executives.|||

Eventbrite - New Haircut presents Immersive Design Sprint Workshop: NYC - Thursday, April 27, 2017 | Friday, April 28, 2017 at Alpha, New York, NY. Find event and ticket information.