It’s easy to see why newbie data scientists often feel overwhelmed by their career choice. The list of skills, languages, and platforms that needs to be mastered can seem endless.

The good news is that this is patently untrue. The list is NOT endless. In fact, it’s fairly short — four bullet points long, all rooted in a single overarching principle: Focus on the building blocks that can hold you in good stead throughout your career.

Because of the pace at which technology is changing, those new to the field might feel like they’re perpetually playing catch up. When, in fact, because technology is constantly changing, you’re better off focusing mainly on the fundamentals.

Here are the four areas I recommend that you master:

Next, let’s break each of those points down.

More than proficiency at a single language or even a set of languages, data scientists need to be masters at flexibility. They need to be able to migrate languages and jump back and forth between whichever language best helps solve the problem.

To that end, you’ll be best served by learning “building block” languages. These include a statistical computing language like R and a general purpose one like Python.

Once you’re familiar with both R and Python, you’ll find that learning any new language becomes much easier. Both are currently the foundational blocks of this field, and new languages will almost certainly share characteristics with them.

An important note: You don’t have to be an expert in either of these languages, but you do need to be familiar enough such that you can research your own questions, tackle coding issues, and debug your own code without much help.

Here too, I advise avoiding buzzwords and focusing on the basics. While interviewing candidates, I often sense their need to impress with the latest news in machine learning and artificial intelligence.

But buzzwords are meaningless without fundamentals. Instead, one needs to focus on core skills like evaluating machine learning classifiers and understanding the types of classification errors that are most important to the client. There is, after all, more value in a true cost analysis than in accuracy rates.

Similarly, it’s important to understand how to compare various machine learning algorithms, and to have the ability to choose the correct parameters for models. Some of these base machine learning classifiers include logistic and linear regression, Naive Bayes, random forests, and clusterings such as k-means. But remember that this is a skill that needs to be developed over time rather than learned all at once. Which is to say that as a new entrant, you shouldn’t be focusing too much of your time on machine learning or artificial intelligence. Your time will be better utilized on non-technical skills — more on that below.

It’s a common mistake to assume that technical skills are the biggest drivers of ultimate success. I’d argue that communication skills and problem-solving abilities are perhaps a little more important. These qualities will help you drive impactful results — whether that be increasing revenue for a company, innovating on a product, or disrupting an entire industry. You’ll go from being a SQL monkey to a trusted business partner.

3. Finally, recognize that your job is more than just analysis. It is also about making data and insights accessible to non-technical audiences. Most clients do not speak data; they speak revenue, marketing, sales, or product. It’s your job as a data scientist to translate technical scientific matters into business context.

Forget everything else you read. If you’re an aspiring data scientist, make these four pillars your mantra, and success will invariably follow. Good luck!|||

It’s easy to see why newbie data scientists often feel overwhelmed by their career choice. The list of skills, languages, and platforms that needs to be mastered can seem endless. The good news is…