Apple has been accused of falsely and misleadingly telling customers that it wasn't required to fix their iPhones and iPads if they'd previously taken the devices to a third-party repairer.

The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has taken the electronics giant to the Federal Court, alleging that it breached consumer law by telling customers - who had encountered the "error 53" malfunction - that it didn't have to remedy a fault if the device had been earlier repaired by a third party.

In 2015 and 2016, Apple customers around the world were left with useless iPhones after they had installed the latest operating system. In most cases, they had previously had their phones repaired - usually the replacement of a cracked screen - by an unauthorised shop.

Apple was accused of extending its monopoly over the iPhone ecosystem, forcing customers to use its higher-priced repair service.

The ACCC said Apple was in the wrong because Australian consumers, by law, were entitled to a free repair if a product was not of acceptable quality or fit for purpose.

"Consumer guarantees are not extinguished simply because a consumer has goods repaired by a third party, that is the essential issue here, and for Apple to suggest otherwise is, we allege, misleading and deceptive conduct," ACCC chairman Rod Sims said.

"It not only impacts those consumers but can dissuade other customers from making informed choices about their repair options including where they may be offered at lower cost than the manufacturer."

The error largely affected iPhone 6 and 6 Plus models.

Amid the outrage last year over "error 53", Apple issued an apology and a software update that reversed what had, until then, been described as an irreversible condition.

It had initially insisted the error was a result of a security feature that was designed to prevent fraudulent use of the fingerprint sensors in newer model iPhones.

In the US, a class action was launched, but this was thrown out because the plaintiffs "lack[ed] standing to pursue injunctive relief" and could not provide sufficient evidence that they had suffered permanent data loss.

"Apple has commenced an outreach program to re-contact every consumer who contacted Apple concerning 'error 53'. Whether everybody who had a problem made contact with Apple is another matter, but I accept they have [provided a remedy]," Mr Sims said.

"But it doesn't excuse the underlying behaviour and our concerns go beyond 'error 53'."

The ACCC accepted a court enforceable undertaking from Apple in 2013, after similar behaviour where it told consumers it wasn't required to provide a repair, refund or replacement, when this was not the case.

"The ACCC was concerned that Apple was applying its own warranties and refund policies effectively to the exclusion of the consumer guarantees contained in the Australian Consumer Law," Mr Sims said at the time.

The ACCC is seeking pecuniary penalties, injunctions, declarations, compliance program orders, corrective notices, and costs.

Apple did not respond to Fairfax Media's request for comment.|||

Apple has been accused of falsely and misleadingly telling customers that it wasn't required to fix their iPhones and iPads.