It looks like competition in schools like mine are pretty bad; everyone seems to agree on this.

On one hand, we could stop dealing with a whole bunch of the tragedies and stress that come from competing so hard if we just, y’know, stopped competing so hard.

On the other hand, the above statement seems pretty surface-level and doesn’t accurately represent what the real situation is like.

Let’s say you’re a high school student. You want to go to a Famous University because that’ll raise your social status, which is good because then all the pretty boys and girls will like you. You know that GPA seems to be a big factor for a lot of schools, and it seems like all the other smart kids are taking AP classes to boost their GPA.

Last year, you tried that. And it was hell. You took a bunch of APs, and you just barely pulled through with the help of some stimulants and a messed-up sleep schedule. So maybe taking that many classes this year isn’t the best idea.

What do you do for this year?

Well, you could just take fewer AP classes this year; then you’d probably feel less like shit every morning. But then you’d also be losing an edge for college…*2

Still, you’re pretty sure that Rick, Morty, Heather, and all the other kids are just as tired as you are. So maybe you could convince them to also not take as many classes this year? Then you’d all still be on equal footing — and you’d all be more rested.

Except that everyone would do better if they were the only ones taking the AP classes, which screws the whole plan over. If you want to beat out all the other students, you want everyone else to be taking less hard classes, just so you can take those extra hard classes and stand out.

This ends up destroying trust — of course everyone would all outwardly agree to be against this whole dangerous competition situation. But on the inside, they might be scheming how to secretly take one more AP class than you to get an edge.

Then you’d likely all see each other in the same AP Game Theory game class you’d all promised to not take.

You want to gain an advantage over everyone else, so you’re trying really hard to do well. But so everyone else wants an advantage too. Maybe everyone would like to take a less extreme workload, but they can’t. If you tried to get the other students to “protest” by taking less hard classes, they’re better off refusing or lying to screw you over.

There’s a sense in which every person would like to slow down, but they can’t because they have no guarantee that other people will slow down with them. So the safest option for each person is to just keep running full speed, even it ends up wrecking themselves. As a result, we end up at this equilibrium where most of the competitive students are taking the literal maximum number of hard classes that they can without seriously endangering their health.

Except that sometimes they do endanger their health because they’ve really tried to take on way too much, and we say that this is sad because what else would you say? That this is an acceptable side effect of our competitive culture?

So everyone goes around talking about how bad this situation is and how they’d like it for things to change. Except that everyone is totally incentivized to just say this aloud and continue scheming internally how to betray the others, so nobody even knows if everyone else really means it when they say they things should change.

And we can’t really depend on universities to make the change because they’re competing for students, which in turn keeps the students going, and sometimes employers are also picky about Famous Universities, which keeps the cycle going in the first place.

The whole mess ends up looking like a giant faceless god on a meaningless rampage.

Let me back up.

There’s this guy, Scott Alexander, who’s a psychiatrist and a fantastic blogger, who wrote this experimental essay called Meditations on Moloch. In addition to being something like 14,000 words, Scott mixes poetry with game theory with granite cocks to talk about this ancient Canaanite deity, Moloch. He uses Moloch as a metaphor to represent this entire category of lose-lose situations where nobody really wants things to go wrong, but they do anyway.

Also, there’s a bit in there about dead whales.

Anyway, Scott actually uses education as an example of Moloch in his essay, and I’m using his essay as a starting point here. As for what exactly Moloch is… once he brings in the economics and evolution, it gets a little complex.

But basically, Moloch is basically an attempt to summarize some ideas from game theory, two of which are the n-player Prisoner’s Dilemma and the tragedy of the commons.

For explanation, here’s the two-person version of the Prisoner’s Dilemma:

Imagine you are one of two gentlemen looking to engage in a feisty round of fisticuffs:

The convention is for both of you to show up with only your fists (C-C). Still, you could easily win if you bring a revolver with you; then you’d easily win the duel (C-D). That’d be cheating, of course, but the other gentleman is likely thinking the same thing... And if you have some uncertainty, it’s probably better to bring some insurance. Then you show up with revolvers, and you both end up with bullet holes instead of bruises (D-D).

This situation is, I think, fairly analogous to what’s happening in the competitive school environment — there’s just more than 2 people involved. Without guarantees about everyone else, it can feel like the only thing to do is to keep pushing ourselves.

Moloch is trying to point at this general situation where many individuals are trying to compete, and there’s an opportunity to take on more risk for an advantage. In the end, everyone plays it safe and ends up taking the risk (e.g. bringing a revolver to the fisticuffs, overloading on AP classes) just to survive.

The tragedy of the commons is basically the above situation taken to its logical conclusion: When everyone tries to gain an advantage, it can actually be worse for everyone.

The canonical example is that of a “commons” in the olden times, a piece of land that no one owned. Every herder would like to bring their animals to graze, as this was a free resource, but if every herder brought their animals to graze, then the commons would eventually disappear, and everyone would lose out.

In the same way, when everyone in the school system is pushing themselves to the hardest, we all lose out.

Everything goes to hell and then suddenly we’ve unleashed a giant faceless god on a meaningless rampage, as we keep trying harder and harder to compete, at great cost to ourselves and those around us (e.g. more dead gentlemen, more stressed students).

So I think Moloch can help explain, in part, why we don’t just see people trying less hard. It’s not so much that they don’t want to, but without guarantees that other people won’t betray them, they actually can’t.|||

An attempt to explain why competition leads to bad things. A god is used as a metaphor. Features game theory, the SAT, and some questionable solutions to this whole thing.