Seven months after Comcast was cautioned by a commercial watchdog to check itself before ruining itself when it came to badmouthing DirectTV, the similar organization has suggested that the cable behemoth stop ads that supposedly inflated its competitor’s issue with satellite signal interruptions.

The National Advertising Division- an independent industry watchdog managed by the Council of Better Business Bureaus- investigated grievances leveled at Comcast by DirectTV, finding that some of the claims made in the advertisement were not backed.

According to NAD, DirecTV challenged Comcast’s ‘Bad Weather’ commercials, saying they grossly inflated the degree to which satellite signal of DirecTV is interrupted during poor weather.

DirecTV claimed that Comcast’s advertising misinforms consumers into trusting that with weather-related signal disturbances are routine and long for DirecTV customers and that something as facile as rain generally causes satellite customers to miss to whole evenings of their beloved shows.

At question were declarations made in two versions of Comcast’s ‘Bad Weather’ ads, which featured an intro to the tune of ‘Time After Time’ of Cyndi Lauper.

The first version of the commercial counted the lyrics ‘If it rains or it storms, you might lose TV…. No shows tonight…When there’s snow or swift winds, or even hail…. Kiss your shows goodbye.”

The spot also featured the denial severe weather (heavy rain or snow) may interfere with a satellite signal causing the picture to freeze or pixelate” two times.

The revised commercial counted an extra denial that “picture outages may not interfere with entire shows or all shows in an evening. The likelihood, frequency, and duration of interference will depend on the storm.”

NAD has noticed its decision that the phrases ‘no shows tonight’ and ‘kiss you shows goodbye’ are precise claims that “literally tell the user that in poor weather they will not receive satellite television service.”

With the finding, NAD suggested that both the authentic and revised version of the “Bad Weather” commercial be stopped.

It also informed Comcast that in coming time advertising the company should evade language or imagery of an absolute nature or the insinuation that service interruption in stern weather is typical or an inevitably and will last for whole programs or an evening’s worth of TV watching.

In a statement to NAD, Comcast said it would stand by the advice.

While the company says, it took problem with some findings, it “nevertheless praises NAD’s review and testing and, as a firm supporter of voluntary advertising self-directive, receives and agrees to obey with NAD’s suggestions.”

This isn’t the first-time NAD has pondered in on satellite dependability commercials of Comcast. NAD notes that it has earlier investigated same claims charged against Comcast by DirecTV. In those examples, it also found the commercials — which counted claims that DirecTV service was not reliable — to be uncorroborated.

The watchdog says that neither Comcast nor DirecTV staged fresh evidence about service obligation. Rest if you’re Comcast user then you are free to take Comcast tech support by getting in touch with professionals. If you find nay technical error annoys you then simply need to make a call on comcast 24 7 support number for the best fixation or solution.|||

Seven months after Comcast was cautioned by a commercial watchdog to check itself before ruining itself when it came to badmouthing DirectTV, the similar org...