While we spend a lot of money on Adwords, two thirds of new Bitrix24 account registrations don’t cost us anything. Like most SaaS services, we do ‘invest’ in SEO. My personal SEO skills are less then basic and I’ll be the first to admit that I’ve never used a professional SEO tool in my life. We’ve just hired a professional SEO agency last month, so our total ‘investment’ in SEO has been a whooping $2.5K since Bitrix24 was launched in 2012. Our landing pages are extremely basic, are done in house and probably are underoptimized (or overoptimized, again, SEO doesn’t come easy to me). Here are a few that we’ve added yesterday, just so that you know what I am talking about here

Like I said, nothing fancy.

I’ve talked to a number of SEO specialists and agencies over the past four years and what always struck me is how different our approach is. SEO agencies mostly talk about semantic kernel and backlinks and meta tags and behavior signaling and social media signaling and …

I view SEO differently. For me personally, SEO is about market research and product positioning. Consider search phrase ‘free Salesforce alternatives’. We are currently ranked #1 for the phrase, as seen in the screenshot. Of course, your results may be different, due to Google’s behavioral algorithms.

My thinking was as follows. Salesforce is an extremely powerful and popular CRM, probably the best in the world. It is also extremely expensive and out of the reach for most small businesses. So it’s no surprise that many people are searching for a free Salesforce alternative. I am 99% sure that I know EXACTLY what they are looking for. They want CRM that is as powerful as Salesforce, and they want it free. You can use SEO tools to estimate the number of people who enter this query each and every month.

I know CRM market very well. And I knew that (before Bitrix24) people searching for a free Salesforce alternative would end up empty handed. We saw an opening and the rest is history. That is how we think about SEO — a product market match. Find a niche that’s underserved and all traffic will be yours, even if your website doesn’t come on top.

SEO companies and SEO specialists, as well as their clients, usually think differently. If they see that ‘free Salesforce alternatives’ query is popular enough for them, they only work on keywords, tags and anchors. They will write ‘perfect’ text with the right keyword ‘weight’, only ‘free’ will refer to free trial or an extremely limited free plan that’s nowhere close to offering features that Salesforce is famous for. Their thinking is (probably) ‘those people are stupid, they don’t really need free Salesforce alternative, we’ll convince them they need to pay for our CRM after the free trial is over, even if it doesn’t come even close to Salesforce’.

Personally, I don’t think people are stupid. I don’t believe that people who are looking for a free full featured CRM stop on the first Google result, register free trial and then start paying after the trial is over. I am 99% confident that those people search and search, ask around, register with professional forums and communities and do other things until they find Bitrix24, Hubspot CRM and other free CRM that really are free. Even if those aren’t on the first page at the moment (and it’s just a matter of time before they will, if I understand correctly how Google works).

Again, we use this approach extensively. You can learn A LOT about what people really are looking for, just by studying keywords. This information should be used to adapt your PRODUCT or BUSINESS MODEL or POSITIONING and not just H1 tags or descriptions. That’s my main beef with SEO consultants, who tend to be very technical and narrow minded in their thinking.

This approach seems to deliver great results to us. We get thousands or free registrations each and every day in a market where typical CRM or project management lead cost is $30-$50 per registration. That’s millions of dollars each and every year in saved customer acquisition costs. More importantly, our competitors who seem to heavily invest in SEO (guessing from thousands or tens of thousands of landing pages) still appear have much fewer registrations than us.

So, you decide which SEO path you want to take.|||

While we spend a lot of money on Adwords, two thirds of new Bitrix24 account registrations don’t cost us anything. Like most SaaS services, we do ‘invest’ in SEO. My personal SEO skills are less then…