What Is Amazon’s FBA Program And Why Do People Love It?Whether you’ve sold online before on a site like eBay or Craigslist, whether you only buy stuff online or whether you’ve never bought anything online before Selling on Amazon is a great field to get into. Especially in today’s online market. Did you know that Amazon.com is now valued higher as a company than Walmart is?

 Even as a beginner to selling online, the tools and resources are all laid out for you. All you need is a strong work ethic and a desire to succeed.

 Here are five reasons to start an ecommerce business selling on Amazon.com now.

At the moment this article was written Amazon had just sold over $105 Billion in Revenue. If you were to look at them as a nation, they would be the 7th largest GDP in the world. The real crazy thing about Amazon is that their growth is growing faster every year. In 2014 revenue was around $74 Billion. In 2015 they exceeded $82 Billion… and now at $105 Billion in 2016, that is a growth of over 40% in the last 3 years. Online sales this year are expected to peak at nearly $1.6 trillion and by the end of 2018, almost $2.5 trillion. In the U.S. alone, ecommerce growth is anticipated to be somewhere between 11.6 and 16.5 percent from 2013 to 2018.

In choosing a business model, it’s always important to examine trends and to move into growth markets whenever possible. The stats back up the notion that the ecommerce model is a good choice for entrepreneurs that are looking to start a new company, or those that are interested in diversifying and expanding.

 If you want to get into ecommerce, there has scarcely been a better time. The opportunities are growing by the day.

For brick-and-mortar businesses, location is of primary importance. It can make a huge difference in terms of visibility and sales. On Amazon you can leverage the traffic that is already on it’s site. In just the US, 82 Million people go to Amazon.com every day to buy products.

 This seems obvious enough, but the implications are more far-reaching than you might even know. The trend of “pop-up” shops are on the rise, as some merchants are choosing to meet their customers in-person with little more than a tablet, a card reader and a few sample products in hand. This means proactive ecommerce merchants can build awareness for their businesses at parks, subway stations and high visibility street corners — without violating any regulations or laws, of course.

 Ecommerce has a certain “passive” appeal to it, and while it is certainly possible to earn while you sleep, business owners should be looking to leverage technology at every turn to expand their businesses.

Amazon made it easier than any of the old sites like eBay or Craigslist, you can be up and running on Amazon in a matter of 10 minutes. All you need is a bank account, a major credit card or debit card, and products to list for sale. It’s as simple as that. There is no need to learn about SEO, Driving Traffic, Affiliate Marketing, or having to deal with developers writing code for you. It’s simple, fast and easy.

 The most challenging aspect of getting set up is product, but if you are passionate about a specific line of products — especially if they have helped you personally — it makes it much easier to walk through the process of building relationships with distributors or product sourcing. Additionally, it’s that passion that’s going to drive you to do the work you need to do to build a successful business.

As you can imagine, that number is only going to grow. Think about it. Do you buy online? Do you buy on Amazon? Have you ever purchased multiple products on Amazon at the same time? Why do you do that? Because it’s easy, right? That’s what people think of when they think of Amazon. They think Easy, they think Secure, Fast, Good Price, Reliable…it goes on and on. The key as an ecommerce business owner is to establish trust and credibility with leads and customers. From developing an attractive and easily navigable website to creating content that helps your customers, there are many different aspects to earning their trust, but if you commit to constant improvement, in time, you’ll build a loyal following.

 It isn’t too much of a stretch to say that trust is one of the most important aspects of running an ecommerce business. People clearly trust Amazon.com more than they did in the past, but security and privacy concerns are still foremost in many people’s minds.

 Related: Free Amazon Training: Click Here To Start Selling On Amazon!

Let me ask you another question, have you ever sold something on eBay? How about Etsy or Craigslist? If you have I’m guessing that you’ve sold one item at a time. Imagine selling 3 items to the same person. Imagine selling 5 or 10… or making 50 different sales on Amazon in one day. That’s why Amazon is the place to take your business. I have sold on eBay for 17 years.. and in those 17 years I built a business that would sell an average of 700-1000 products a month. Now don’t get me wrong, that’s a good business. But I had to employ staff to fulfill those orders. And we had to package up each order and get it shipped out on time so that I could make my cut. I now sell 10,000-15,000 per month on Amazon. And Amazon handles all the work! They handle the shipping, the packaging, the cost of the shipping and all my customer service.

 You need to look into Amazon, you’ll love it.

Most entrepreneurs have other business ideas they would one day love to explore. Once you’ve built up a successful online business selling it may provide you with the capital you need to move onto greener pastures.

 There are many great reasons to start an ecommerce business. If you’re interested in being your own boss and selling products you are passionate about, it’s something worth considering.

 Related: Free Amazon Training: Click Here To Start Selling On Amazon!|||

