As a real estate professional, clients are your lifeblood.

Without clients, you cannot close deals.

Without clients, you cannot grow your business.

Without clients, you cannot pay your bills.

So the burning question is how do I get more clients. While there is no silver bullet or magic pill, there are some tried and true methods for growing your business. In part one of this series, we are going to cover five strategies on how to do just that. You may be familiar with some of these at a glance but read through them, because there is some helpful advice, resources, and tools for each of them.

Okay, we all know that referrals are the most obvious and well-known way to get new clients. However, far too often we just wait for referrals to fall in our lap. After all, a happy client should spread our name, right? Some will, but sometimes they are busy and won’t go out of their way.

Instead of waiting, find two happy clients who have not sent you a referral and send them a quick email asking them for one.

Seriously, we are going to do this right now. You can come back and finish this post after you have sent the emails.

Below is an example, feel free to edit it so it sounds like you.

Tip: Don’t beat around the bush or leave it open ended, and always keep it short.

How are you and [Spouse Name] enjoying your new home? I enjoyed working with you on the purchase and would love to hear about how it is going. On a side note, I am looking to expand my business. Do you have any friends, family, or colleagues in need of real estate brokerage services? As you may already know, my services include: Can you connect me to anyone in your network that could use my services right now?

When I say “lost clients,” I am referring to clients you have corresponded with in the past but who’s business you did not win. This could be listing that fell through because the market was not just right, or the person who called you to find out if a house was still on the market but seemed to vanish after you corresponded a few times.

Go through your email and find prospective clients whom you have interacted with in the last two months. Send them a follow-up email asking them how their house hunting is coming along, and if there is anything that you can do help them.

This tactic is about being helpful and showing you care about the client. Even if they still don’t need your services at this moment, you are still putting yourself on their radar, and that might lead to some referrals coming your way.

3. Follow up with your network

Browse through your email, phone contact list, and contact management system (CRM) and connect with people you have interacted with in the past. This could be an attorney, mortgage professional, title agent, appraiser, and the list goes on and on. A quick email or phone call asking them how their business is doing and if there is anything you can do to help can go a long way. Whether it is giving feedback, advice, tips or doing a small task to assist them can be rewarding, and it strengthens the relationship.

Today, social media provides us with a plethora of places to run a targeted ad campaign. Nearly all of the services let you set a small daily budget for those of us that are cash-strapped or want to test the waters.

If you are new to online marketing, PPC University is an amazing resource to learn about running an effective campaign or check out Kudu, a service that will manage and run a campaign for you.

For visitors who come to your website and leave, you can use a retargeting service like Adroll or Perfect Audience. These platforms allow you to track who visits your site and later serve them ads via Facebook, Twitter, and other online marketing channels.

Blogging is an amazing way to build relationships and to show the world that your an expert in the field. Start by blogging about topics that tie into your services. If you a primarily a listing agent, talk about marketing a listing, staging a home, or how to run an effective open house.

You do not have to blog every day because it is not about creating lots of posts, it is about creating quality content. Content that entertains, educates or inspires people is what people share and remember. By posting quality content, you will slowly build an audience, one that will generate new business for you.

One of the hardest parts about blogging is driving traffic to your posts. After publishing an article, you can post it on sites like GrowthHackers, Inbound, Reddit (find a subreddit for your blog), Hacker News, your Facebook page, and your Twitter feed. You should also email each company or person you mention in the post letting them know you spoke about them. You never know, they may promote your blog for you. Additionally, you should email a link to your network of people whom you think might find the post interesting.

To do blogging right, you have to spend some time since it must often be done to achieve the best results. If you are not the best writer in the world, there are tools that can help you grammatically format your blog. Microsoft Word and Pages for Mac have grammar checking built in, or you can also use a site like Grammarly to help you format your sentences. If writing is not for you, check out Scripted, it is a great content writing service that you can use.

In part 1, we have only covered five ways to start growing your business. Subscribe today to be alerted when part 2 of this article is published.|||

As a real estate professional, clients are your lifeblood. So the burning question is how do I get more clients. While there is no silver bullet or magic pill, there are some tried and true methods for growing your business.