I’ve probably started to write something like this fifty times over the past couple of years, but I could never bring myself to do it. Partially because I don’t expect anyone to care about “our incredible journey,” and partially because it just hurts too much to think about. I hope I am now at the point where I can write without it hurting too much.

Grasswire, this silly little company, was my life. Outside of my family it was all I thought about for four straight years. Day and night, little sleep, complete and utter obsession. I was willing to do anything I needed to to make it successful.

And I failed. I let down my co-founder, my family, our customers, and our investors.

Grasswire was (and is) a crowdsourced news organization. Our thesis was that raw social media is lacking something — though there’s content all over, the goal of Grasswire is to bring it together, fact-check it, and make it consumable for the everyday person. I thought we could crowdsource the missing second half of journalism that social media hadn’t replaced.

We were right (I think). It was working, and just before we raised our second VC round we had our biggest month ever — 500,000 visitors. All from content that was discovered, fact-checked and summarized by unpaid volunteer contributors.

The night of the Paris shootings we had thousands of people online using the platform to find and verify what was happening. I was fielding multiple Twitter DMs offering to invest $1M+ in our next round, and our coverage was noted by nearly every news organization that night and the next day. We were set.

One of the interested parties was a billionaire who was the longtime CEO of a media organization that’s a household name. We met several times, he and his fund wanted to take most of the $2m round we were raising, and the deal was all but done. The term sheet had been signed for about a month, we had been going through due diligence, we had flights and a hotel ready for the first board meeting — everything seemed fine.

I was always nervous that something could possibly go wrong, but what happened caught me very offguard.

I was skiing with my family over the Christmas holidays (December 23), when I followed up yet again with the fund that was leading the round to make sure they were wiring the funds soon (we were close to out of money). Instead I got a phone call out of the blue saying curtly, “We decided not to do the deal,” with little to no explanation, and he hung up.

And that was it.

Eventually all of the investors either got spooked or offered to put in little enough that I knew we wouldn’t make it to raise another round. And just like that, in one moment, for reasons I may never understand, we were done. I was devastated.

I think some people thought I up and quit, some investors included. Of course I didn’t quit.

No one talks much about this part of starting a company. The nitty gritty aftermath of failure.

I spent every dollar I had making our employees and contractors whole, even borrowing quite a bit from my parents. We were a remote company, and I was now an unemployed Internet who-knows-what-he-does living in the middle of nowhere, deeply in debt, with a newborn baby that only recently came home after a long and expensive stay in the hospital.

When it became clear that we had failed, the people that I needed to lean on the most started to turn on me. Some of our investors were livid. As the CEO, everything was my fault.

I’m still not sure if there’s something I could have done to save the company, or if it was some flaw that spooked the investor. I was so lost and scared and confused. And no one talks about this, but some of the people on whom I thought I could lean on the most turned on me the hardest.

That hurts the most.

We open sourced the code and some of the Grasswire community is still around, doing what they’ve always done, but I can barely bring myself to jump in the Slack channel and talk to them. I failed them too.

I eventually got quite a few job offers in San Francisco (largely thanks to a friend who spread my name amongst the Y Combinator network), we picked the most promising company, and we packed the family up and headed to the Bay Area. We crawled out of debt by writing a book, but that’s another story.

And after a few days to decompress, I started talking with my wife about what the next company should be. More on that in a future post.|||

I’ve probably started to write something like this fifty times over the past couple of years, but I could never bring myself to do it. Partially because I don’t expect anyone to care about “our…