One of the best books I read last year was Deep Work by Cal Newport.

Here’s a breakdown of the book with takeaways and favorite quotes. All of the quotes are from Cal Newport unless noted.

Deep Work is the ability to focus without distraction on a cognitively demanding task.

Deep work is contrasted with shallow work which is described as noncognitively demanding, logistical-style tasks, often performed while distracted. These efforts tend not to create much new value in the world and are easy to replicate.

Deep work is required for learning hard things fast. Acquiring rare and valuable skills isn’t enough though. You need to produce tangible results that people value.

Knowledge workers in particular are prone to business because it’s harder to show the value you are producing otherwise. Cal coins the term: Busyness as Proxy for Productivity:

Instead of accomplishing meaningful work, we want to look busy, and feel accomplished.

No matter your profession, approach your work is a craft and push your mind to its limits.

The Monastic Philosophy involves significantly removing yourself from the masses in order to devote yourself to a significant project. Donald Knuth is a CS professor at Stanford who got rid of his email address and had this great quote:

This mode isn’t for most people, but if you are in academia or a field that requires significant output, it’s something to consider.

The Bimodal Philosophy is the Monastic Philosophy but for people who value the non deep pursuits in their life, like relational commitments.

The Rhythmic Philosophy is about building habits into your day. This approval generally works best for most people. If you can build time into your day for focused work, it will become second nature, like brushing your teeth.

If you decide on this approach, you should decide in advance:

The Journalistic Philosophy is not for the deep work novice. This approach is where you fit time for Deep Work wherever you can. People with young children often employ this philosophy.

You don’t need many goals. You need goals of extreme significance.

Things worth doing require endurance. If you want to accomplish something difficult, it better be important to you. You won’t finish it otherwise. David Brooks says it well:

The purpose of a daily schedule is to approach your day with intentionality. It’s not to force yourself into a rigid system. By asking yourself, “What are the most important things I need to accomplish today” and then writing an hour by hour breakdown of what you’ll do, you’re more likely to accomplish meaningful work.

It’s also important to put more thought into your leisure time. Cal warns of using the internet to entertain yourself, and suggests structured hobbies. Deciding in advance what you’ll do with your free time is the big idea here. Give your time the respect it deserves.

What happens when you get stuck on a difficult problem, do you turn to Facebook? If you want to stretch your brain you need to have the ability to say no to highly stimulating activities. You can improve at this by getting comfortable with boredom.

Social media does provide value for people, but that doesn’t mean it’s enough value to warrant its negative effects. By leaving a social platform for 30 days you’re in a better position to determine whether or not it should be in your life.

Give your work boundaries. Most people can only sustain 1-4 hours of deep work in a given day. There are serious diminishing returns on the time you spend in deep work after 4 hours.

Saying no to people is important. A helpful tactic that Cal recommends is to be clear in your refusal, but ambiguous in your reasons for refusing. Also, he tells people to avoid offering a consolation prize to people when you say no.

You probably can’t avoid email altogether, but you can mitigate the effects it has on you. Generally, you don’t need to respond to emails immediately, and you can tackle them in bulk. Also, a lot of emails don’t need responses. It’s the senders responsibility to convince you that you need to respond.

Tim Ferris has a good quote here:

This book is extremely practical. Personally, it the reason I was able to finish Learning D3 last year. I’ve implemented many of the strategies to great effect with side projects and my full time job. I hope you’re able to read it yourself. You can buy the book here.|||

One of the best books I read last year was Deep Work by Cal Newport.