Careers in technology are in high demand as the current job market is geared toward information-based advancement in digital design and production. The hub of the tech boom was the infamous Silicon Valley, which has grown to such extremes that it’s saturated with tech workers, reducing job availability and raising the cost of living.

Recently, however, tech hubs have extended beyond Silicon Valley, largely because the cost of living in Northern California is unaffordable for many people. The newly emerged tech cities provide exciting opportunities for those with careers in the tech industry — in regard to job availability, successful companies, generous starting salaries, reasonable costs of living, and locations in richly appealing city metropolises. Here’s a list of America’s next tech boom cities to consider when you’re seeking a job in the industry:



 Predictions: Here’s what the Seattle tech scene will look like in 5 years

Seattle, which is nestled in the Northwest corner of the U.S between the Cascades and the Puget sound, falls closely behind Silicon Valley in the world of tech. The city is home to companies like Microsoft, Amazon, Nintendo, Tableau and Mozy. There are also many satellite offices within the city for companies like Google and Facebook. Being another incubator for talent, there’s a dense variety of opportunities for jobs in small startups. The average salary for those in the tech industry in Seattle is $103,309.

There are endless recreational opportunities, less than an hour drive outside of the city, which makes it an ideal spot for those who enjoy hiking, backpacking, skiing, kayaking and other outdoor activities. The city itself, is bustling with activities and hosts a variety of artisanal, local businesses, boutiques and restaurants.



 The top start-up mecca in America is far from Silicon Valley

As of July 2015, Austin was reported to have 50,920 tech job openings, with the top five positions listed as java developer, development analyst, technical writer, software engineer, and network administrator. The median rent within the city is somewhere around $1,375, making cost of living still manageable compared to other tech hubs like Silicon Valley. Austin hosts the offices of IBM and Dell, as well as a slew of startup companies. It also serves as the location for satellite campuses for Google and Facebook. The city is rich in culture with a thriving music scene and an emerging culinary culture, and hosts the highly acclaimed SXSW music and film festival each spring. The city is ideal for anyone who is looking for a metropolis that has a heavy focus on the arts.

Denver is a top contender for the metro area for high-tech, startup density. Startups in the area include HomeAdvisor, SolidFire, NetApp and Ping Identity. The average salary comes out to $97,882 and rent prices are reasonable to suit such a salary. The city is spacious with many spaces that allow residents to escape from the metropolitan hustle and bustle. Denver’s City Park — a 330-acre stretch is an ideal recreation spot for active techies wanting to get out for a walk, jog, golf game or boat outing. The city is nestled beneath the mountains, with easy access to ski slopes for winter recreation.



 Before You Fly Over Kansas City, Read This

Kansas City has just begun to emerge as a tech hub that offers a plethora of job opportunities for those with tech talent. The city was the first to obtain Google’s gigabit Internet service, which has drawn in many startup companies. Home costs are reasonable for those who make an average-for-the-area salary (about $90,000). The average cost for a house within the region is just under $200,000 and median rent costs are $1,000 per month.

The city is ideal for those with families, as it has a low crime rate and its neighborhoods boast many family-friendly housing options. The Missouri River is in close proximity to Kansas City and is a great spot for fishing and recreational water sports. The central location is ideal for those who want to explore neighboring U.S. states.

Tech hubs stretch well beyond Silicon Valley, and are much more affordable too!|||

Careers in technology are in high demand as the current job market is geared toward information-based advancement in digital design and production. The hub