The 2nd most starred project for each country shows more variety results:

The first pass results are somehow monotone, and not surprising: FreeCodeCamp was the most starred GitHub project by far in 2016:

Let’s get a list of top projects for each country, this time with some rules:

And these are our results:

Joshua Levy appears on top of the US — Americans show a lot of attention to compensation. It’s great to see Kelsey Hightower in this list too with his Kubernetes in hard mode. On data — I love data, in this case coming from FiveThirtyEight. And thanks Alex Gaynor for teaching us “what happens when”, Ben Brown for chat bots, J Delaney for easy applications, and everyone else listed here and beyond!

China — they love WeChat — and they have their own version of FreeCodeCamp.

Germany — Daniel Quinn is Canadian who lives in the UK, nevertheless Germans starred his project paperless to the top.

UK — great to see Max Woolf and Kelsey Hightower again. And on top of the UK, Rich Harris’s Svelte.

India seems to pay a lot of attention to CS educational repositories.

Brazil — where the top project translates to “love Serenade” and its mission is to give “Artificial Intelligence for social control of public administration”. Tell me more, Irio Musskopf at Data Science Brigade.

Russia — yandex is big there, as well as YoptaScript (as in Ukraine).

France seems to be big into PHP. I’d love to learn more.

Japan — I don’t know much about these projects, but they seem very Japanese oriented.

Canada — seems not only the us cares about stock options compensation.

Australia — not many Australian exclusive projects show up, but some of the ones we already saw. Not sure why relax/relax is big here, as their top maintainers live in Portugal (Bruno Mota, for example).

Taiwan — where the top project mission is to “Make the Taiwan a Better Place to Work”. I like it.

Spain — Karumi is a Spanish company, and their Android framework is the top project for Spain. Great to see open data as their #2.

Netherlands — They also pay a lot of attention to Max’s big list of naughty strings.

South Korea — open government on top. Also interesting to see Apache Zeppelin on top of this country ranking, as I met many of its developers in Seoul (hello Seoul Engineer!).

Italy — where you can find the constitutional reform on top of their GitHub projects (and maybe send pull requests?).

Switzerland — not only Germany has danielquinn/paperless within the top, Switzerland too. But the top project is “an opensource, publicly owned evoting system. It is the result of the collaboration between the Geneva State Chancellery and the Geneva IT Department”. Good.

Portugal — Max Woolf again between the top projects with his big list of naughty strings.

Romania — where a list of cool projects made in Romania is on top of the Romanian projects. Thanks IonicaBizau!

Ireland: Not only the US and Canada care about stock options compensation. Probably due to a big presence of American tech companies, Ireland also shows its interest.

Israel — on top of this list we can see Arik Fraimovich’s re:dash — my favorite open source dashboarding tool. This project is not exclusive to Israel, but since Arik lives there that apparently makes an awareness impact.

Philippines — Rico Sta. Cruz lives there, and his project shows on top.

Chile — my home country! Great to see projects from Juan Antonio Karmy, Agustin Feuerhake, platanus, Yerko Palma, Juan Antonio Karmy on top.

More countries? Find the raw list on a spreadsheet.

Want more stories? Check my Medium, follow me on twitter, and subscribe to reddit.com/r/bigquery. And try BigQuery — every month you get a full terabyte of analysis for free.|||

The first pass results are somehow monotone, and not surprising: FreeCodeCamp was the most starred GitHub project by far in 2016: Joshua Levy appears on top of the US — Americans show a lot of…