VMware, Inc. (NYSE:VMW) is selling off vCloud Air to the biggest cloud hosting provider in Europe, OVH. The deal terms were not revealed.

OVH US, the Reston, Virginia-based United States subsidiary of OVH is understood to be undertaking expansion efforts including putting up new data center sites in areas such as Portland, Oregon as well as in its home state of Virginia. Expansion efforts will also be undertaken in OVH’s other North American facility located in Quebec, Canada. The sale is slated to close in the course of 2017’s second quarter.

Advanced Real-Time Chart: If not automatically loaded with the correct symbol related to this article, you can manually enter it (ex. AAPL) to update the chart.

As a result of the sale, the service is now expected to be renamed to vCloud Air Powered by OVH. Both OVH and VMware have indicated that the migration will be as painless as possible for clients.

“Both companies are committed to providing a seamless transition for current vCloud Air customers,” the chief executive officer and president of OVH, Russell Reeder, said.

Under VMware, vCloud Air offered services aimed at helping firms that run the server virtualization technology of VMware in their private data centers extend out to data centers that are run by third parties. In simple terms, vCloud Air made hybrid cloud possible for VMware’s clients.

By purchasing vCloud Air, OVH will benefit from the fact that the purchase will assist current customers of VMware to migrate their workloads to data centers owned by OVH without disruption. This is according to the chairman and founder of OVH, Octave Klaba.

In an interview with Fortune following the announcement, the chief executive officer of VMware, Pat Gelsinger, disclosed that the sale would include customers, data centers, and vCloud Air’s sales and operations personnel. The technology that remains the core of vCloud Air would, however, not be sold off and would remain a property of VMware. This could potentially mean that partners of vCloud Air and who are rivals of VMware could still get to use this technology.

In Tuesday’s trading session, shares of VMware Inc fell by 0.61% to close the day at $92.23 a share.|||

VMware, Inc. (NYSE:VMW) is selling off vCloud Air to the biggest cloud hosting provider in Europe, OVH. The deal terms were not revealed. OVH US, the Resto...