These are notifications sent directly from your website to the user’s browser and can be delivered even if the user is not accessing your website. To make these notifications more interesting, you could personalize them and show relevant product recommendations to every user. Not to forget, you could include product images, description and price for better recall. This is how a Browser Push Notification looks on desktop and mobile – yes they work with mobile website too.

We could think of multiple ways to use them and achieve your marketing goals across the purchase cycle. For example, you could recommend frequently bought categories to new users and help them with product discovery. Or you could retarget product/cart drop-offs. With loyalty discounts you could bring back an old customer who’s been inactive lately. With Browser Push Notifications added to your tool-kit, you can Engage, Convert and Grow your website users and eventually sales.

Retargeting OR Remarketing is a form of online targeting to advertise for people who have already visited your website, converting them into a potential customer.

In a typical ecommerce case, Retargeting should not only re-engage customers but also enable them to complete their purchase.

A good re-marketing strategy is about learning experience people having on your website and purchase cycle.

Today we have many channels to do remarketing.

Retargeting generates greater online sales by constantly showing your customer retargeting ads, gaining more traction and recognition for your brand.

It is effective because it enables you to focus on people who have already been introduced to your brand (Right Audience) with dynamic creative ads (Right ads) and bring them back when they are online (Right place).

You can read a detailed article here (Retargeting Ads Guide for Marketers)

The homepage of an e-commerce website is a lot like a prime-time television slot. Every product is vying to be there, but only the very best get the slot. It can be thought of as the storefront of your website. This is where you allure, mesmerize, convince, coax, and seduce the visitor down the funnel.

Read all these tips here.

Do you truly know who your buyers are? Do you understand their motivations for buying from you? If the answer to these questions is “no”, there is a good chance you’re not exactly seeing the promised results from your marketing efforts.

Thousands of e-commerce stores across the world struggle with their marketing and product development. And more often than not, this is because they can’t understand or define their target audience.

To solve this problem, you need to dig deep and fully understand your customers. This is where customer personas come into play. In fact,

Here is particularly quick way of understanding your customers|||

