By 2007 streaming technology was beginning to captivate investors and audiences. While several sites vied for attention, the big player was YouTube. It had launched in 2005 with help from Silicon Valley VC firm Sequoia Capital and—thanks to early viral hits like Saturday Night Live’s digital short “Lazy ­Sunday”—would soon be getting 100 million streams a day.

My son was a fledgling comic at the time, and he said to me, “I can’t find anything funny on YouTube. They should have a thing like Hot or Not, where there’s a voting system.” It was a good idea, but it would have to be something separate from YouTube. And it just so happened that about a week later, I had a meeting with Michael Yanover down at CAA.

YouTube’s growth had been staggering. I said to Mark, “It’s entertaining but in an amateurish kind of way, like America’s Funniest Home Videos. Isn’t there room in the marketplace for more professional video?”

The idea was to get the best and brightest from Silicon Valley together with the best and brightest from Hollywood and see what they could do. But it was a very confrontational time between Hollywood and Silicon Valley, because of the copyright problems with YouTube and other sites.

This was pre-social-media, and YouTube was doing to the world what Google and Facebook are doing now—just sucking everything into a vortex, taking everything in. There were plenty of cautionary tales about building something outside that ecosystem.

As we were thinking on it, Will Ferrell—who was a client of CAA—was putting together a company called Gary Sanchez, with Adam McKay and Chris Henchy. Their original premise was to make movies, but they were also contemplating making TV shows. We met with them in a trailer on the Blades of Glory set to pitch this idea of a comedy-video site. We told them, “The consumer doesn’t want to see something too slick, too Hollywood. They like to see professional, and with recognizable people in it, but let’s not drive up a big budget. Let’s keep it guerrilla-style.”

We were just like, “Whatever.” We remembered the first dotcom crash from the early 2000s, and we were superdubious.

We’d seen a number of comedy websites that had failed, and we really weren’t convinced that the internet could be a destination for short-form comedy.

It was stalled out until one seminal meeting when Will and Adam were barricaded in a room, writing the script for Step Brothers.

When the writers are writing a movie, they go off and hole themselves up in some crazy place for weeks on end, so they can finish the script. And they were in the middle of writing, so we all piled into their room in this old, junky hotel.

Eventually, the financiers needed an answer, and we ultimately felt like we had nothing to lose. In hindsight, I guess we didn’t give ourselves enough credit for being able to create interesting and lasting material.

I did kind of miss doing sketches the way we used to do at SNL. Our manager Jimmy Miller was the guy who pushed us: “If you treat it as pure fun, this could be really cool for you guys.” And we liked the idea that anyone could put sketches up, that it was just an open door. If there’s a funny sketch, we’ll put it on the front page.

Initially the idea was to bring on other comics too. So we went to see a couple of other guys’ managers, and everyone said, “No, this is stupid. We’re not going to do it.” Or they wanted some exorbitant amount of money.

We knew we were going to start it really quietly—no promotion, no press. Initially we were just going to put a few videos out there, see how everyone reacts, and then let it spread from there.

My daughter Pearl was going through the stage that some kids do go through, where they’ll repeat anything you say. So my wife, Shira, and I had been doing this game: Shira would say something to her in French, and I would give her, like, a Nietzsche quote or a hip hop lyric, and Pearl would repeat it remarkably well. I had a buddy, Drew Antzis, who liked film stuff, so I called him up and said, “Can you come by Will’s guesthouse? I’m going to be there with Shira and Pearl and Will, and we’re going to do this little idea.” He just showed up with his camera, and we shot it in like 40 minutes, no exaggeration.

There were a few times where we had to really kind of egg her on and say, “No, don’t walk away. Please come back.” I think it was after Will’s son’s birthday party, and I think there was a little bit of sugar involved, so it was pretty energetic.

The first 10 minutes of filming were a train wreck. She was just too distracted by the room. At one point I thought, “Oh, this was a mistake.” And then Will started jumping in and giving her the lines, and once she was able to look at Will—and Will’s obviously great with kids, he has three kids—we started to get on track.

What you see on the site, with the exception of the title card, was the cut that I brought to them. I showed it to my wife’s friends as a little focus group, and it was getting huge laughs. I felt like, “Wow, this is really cool and funny. I want my name on this.” And then everyone was like, “Nah, let’s not put our names on this yet, just in case it totally backfires.”

I just tried to have an honest conversation with her—as honest as one can have with a belligerent 2-year-old landlord.

My wife said, “Don’t you dare make our daughter a child star.” And I was like, “Honey, it’s a goof-around video. Because of Ferrell, it’ll get like a million hits. Don’t worry about it.”

We said, we should email 10 friends with a link to this website. And that’s it. That’s the marketing plan.

I was here in New York when we put “The Landlord” up, and I remember it had about 100 views when I went to lunch—and when I came back, it already had 60,000 views. We were like “Oh my God. This is working.” I was like, “Let’s shut it down, it’s too big!” But it kept going.

Within a week, The Ellen DeGeneres Show wanted Pearl on the show, and People magazine wanted to do a spread. Jackie Chan was doing some movie, and they needed a little kid, and they wanted Pearl to do it. My wife was so pissed at me: “What have you done?” [Laughs.] We said no to all of it.

It was the perfect storm of cursing baby and celebrity and the internet. One million views … 2 million … 3 million. We were calling each other saying, “What’s going on?” I remember McKay yelling, “We’re going to be rich!”

“The Landlord” was dropped in my email box by 10 different friends who all knew I’d enjoy it. There was something so inspiring about it. In this business, you have to have so many ducks in a row to actually create something. It’s such a unique idea to say, “Fuck all that. Let’s just grab a camera and do it. Let’s give opportunity to people who have ideas, not necessarily people with extensive résumés and overseas value.”

There was so much weird shit out there, and you felt like you had to know somebody or have a cool in somewhere to know what videos were worth your time. The idea that something would survive on its own merit was kind of interesting.

Our agents and everybody else started coming at us: “What do you have next?” And we’re like, “Is Will going to have to do a 70-million-view hit video every month to keep it alive?”

For the launch, my son Michael put up a video that got something like 300,000 views—him doing stand-up as a teenager, telling a dolphin joke. By Monday or Tuesday the following week, when the media picked it up, we were serving about 20,000 video plays a second. It’s a miracle the site didn’t crash, except for a few hours later in the week. We soon went from one server to 100 servers.

Before Funny or Die, I had been trying to upload my comedy shorts to all these random sites. It was actually a crowded field back then. HBO had a site [This Just In], NBC had Dot Comedy, and there was Super Deluxe and College Humor. Most of them spent money, and you couldn’t really make money on the internet yet. So we just treated it like, “We can’t spend anything, so let’s try to make cool stuff.”

In those first months, our job was just not to let the site shrivel and die. People were uploading stuff, and a lot of it was just junk—someone in their bedroom, doing a voice that wasn’t that funny. But some of it would actually be kind of surprisingly good. And we were shooting videos ourselves. Sometimes we’d just go, “I have an idea: Let’s just do a bit where I’m a grown-up who wants to, like, be a child again. And then I’m stuck in the tree and I’m afraid.” And we went out the front door of our office, shot this video, and put it up. There was such a hunger for this stuff—even a video like that, which is admittedly not the best video, would get, I dunno, 400,000 hits or something. We would start putting this stuff up, and then, because of “The Landlord,” people started calling us.

Though hardly a rough-and-tumble operation—not many startups get backers as big as CAA and Sequoia—Funny or Die did spend its early years in of a series of glamour-free bungalows in Hollywood, with a small full-time staff and an ever-growing team of work-for-hire comedians, many of whom had gotten their start performing at the Upright Citizens Brigade theaters in New York and Los Angeles. Thanks to the success of “The Landlord,” which today has 85 million views, Funny or Die was able to lure in stars like Eva Longoria, Don Cheadle, and Justin Bieber to appear in videos.

We would just yell across the windows to each other and throw stuff at each other, to the dismay of all of the other production companies. And we were always shooting something. There weren’t any real rules—nothing was established about what to make or how. It was, “Just make it.”

We had one camera and a boom mic, and we bought our own props and held the boom mic for our own shoots. At one point, the COO called me in and was like, “Can you send me some budgets for those videos you’re shooting?” We were just like, “Budgets? I went to Hollywood Toy and Costume and spent 11 bucks on a hat—is that what you want?”

We had so few people working on this thing that I would get up at 4 every morning—after being up late editing—and manually change what videos were on the homepage.

At the beginning it was like, “Come do this video and you’ll get a free meal.” That was exciting, because anything that’s free, especially food, was very exciting at the time. Stuff had to get pulled together really fast—people would pick an idea, and then it would be shot in the next day or two. And at the beginning there was a lot more weirder and more abstract stuff: “OK, what do we all find funny?”

Katie Couric was doing a story about Funny or Die. She interviewed me and asked, “What are you doing here?” And my reply was, “I’m PhotoShopping Tron helmets onto these Fraggles,” which is what I was literally doing at that moment. She didn’t seem to understand what that meant.

One of the company’s favorite videos is called “Stairs,” which is just Funny or Die’s Ryan Perez falling down steps. The world didn’t care about that video, but we were all like, “Yeah!” Usually everyone else helped you pitch your idea and helped you write jokes. That’s how bare-bones it was at first—just some goofballs shooting sketches. And then, over time, we had to get a little more organized. When Mike Farah came on, he gave us some Hollywood know-how.

I’d been working at a production company, and my job ended during the 2007–2008 writer’s strike. I’d met a lot of comedians at UCB, and I started producing short-form comedy videos because there were no other jobs available. You had the strike, you had digital filmmaking being cheaper and easier to access, and you had YouTube.

Within a year, with comedy videos bringing in eight-figure view counts, the company launched noncomedy sites, hoping that the Funny or Die formula—big names + good videos + crowdsourced meritocracy = gold—could work in other arenas. But not everything stuck.

At the time, the mission wasn’t just Funny or Die, it was a model: User-generated content plus a voting mechanism plus celebrity shareholders who were vested in its growth. We were going to try to put that chemistry together with other topics. We got Tony Hawk to do an action sports thing called Shred or Die. We did a deal with Tom Colicchio, one of the top chefs on TV, to do a thing called Eat, Drink, or Die. We had Pwn or Die. Others were being developed—we were looking at weddings and pets and negotiating deals with people.

We weren’t wild about all the other sites. They were saying, “No, no, this can work.” And when they put them in place I was like, “No. There’s no appetite for this.” I think everyone kind of realized that we’d extended the company too far.

Then the fall of 2008 hit. Sequoia Capital called a mandatory meeting—all the CEOs of everyone in their portfolio companies had to be there. They begin a presentation, and the first slide was a tombstone that said, “RIP: Good Times.” Then they proceeded to have a presentation about how horrible the economy was. I literally had to keep myself from throwing up. I went, “Holy fuck.”

Dick said, “We’ve got to live.” I mean, that company would not exist now if he hadn’t reduced expenses.

We cut 30 or 40 percent of the cost out of the company and decided to focus on the one thing we were really good at: comedy.|||

How three guys and a half-baked idea changed online humor forever.