App Academy is an intensive, full-time, web development class in San Francisco and New York City. Over twelve weeks, you'll learn all the skills needed to begin a career as a web developer. Through hands-on projects, we train you to build modern Ruby on Rails and JavaScript web applications. Programming experience isn't required; you will need lots of tenacity and a passion for building cool stuff. App Academy is as low-risk as we can make it. You only pay us if you find a job as a developer... (View In-Depth Report) Word of caution -- I came in already knowing the basics of html, css, ruby, and rails. I also got a job 3 weeks after finishing, first in my cohort. These are not typical stats -- usually about half of a cohort has an offer after three months. But the course material is on point, and if you put your head down and grind for three months, you will get into the software industry, and App Academy ...

Startup Institute is located in domestically in the US as well as internationally. They offer 4 full-time 8 week programs in web development, web design, technical marketing, sales & account management. They also offer a part-time program called RampUp where you can set your own schedule. This track combines instructors from around the tech community, online resources, and in-person meetings with your cohort to create a personalized learning network. Students work together to complete... (View In-Depth Report) Startup Institute gave me an amazing reason to move to NYC, further develop my marketing skills, and build an enormous network overnight. I loved my time there and cherish the friends and connections I made through the program.

The Flatiron School offers both part-time and full-time courses in both web and mobile development. The immersive courses are 12 weeks, full-time, and train people for careers in software development. They've also partnered with New York City to launch the NYC Web Development Fellowship and provide free training to underrepresented groups without college degrees in the tech community. (View In-Depth Report) The bootcamp was the best I could have hoped for. Helped me transition into software development career in no time. Completed the program, had an offer within a month and started working within two. A year before enrolling in Flatiron, I would have never imaged that I'd be doing what I'm doing now. But about the program, what separates Flatiron from other is the Learn.co platform. By the end ...

Fullstack Academy offers two routes. A mix of part-time weekend and nights, Flex Immersive is a JavaScript-driven 24 week program designed for working professionals. The in person course is only 13 weeks. Students will learn the latest web technologies such as Node.js, Angular.jr and MongoDB. In addition to learning new technologies, students have the opportunity to learn lean startup principles, agile project management, the UX design process, and open source development. If you are an... (View In-Depth Report) I was in the Fullstack Spring 2014 class and it was the best decision I've ever made in my life. Web development has always been something that has interested me, so I decided to quit my job to go to a bootcamp. I applied to quite a few bootcamps but during my interview when I spoke with Nimit for the first time (one of the co-founders/lead instructors) I knew that Fullstack Academy was the ...

Anyone Can Learn To Code, based in Chicago, can turn you into a web developer in 12 weeks - and you don't even have to quit your job, as classes are held on weeknights and Sundays. Graduates of this program will master Ruby, Rails, HTML, CSS, JavaScript, AngularJS, and Git. In addition to these technologies, Anyone Can Learn to Code will focus on Agile, Test Driven Development, and Service Oriented Architecture (APIs). Students will also get help with the job search process, building a... (View In-Depth Report) What was your background before coming to Actualize? (Include college/past career) In college, I studied Psychology and Spanish in San Diego State University, and I was on track for a career as a social service professional. I also have a knack for implementing new ideas, and startups fascinated me during that time. I didn't pay attention to it much as I was busy pursuing my degrees then. I ...

Coder Foundry is a .NET coding bootcamp. Microsoft and .Net is the platform that drives the business technology of the top corporations in the U.S. and is the leading technology used to drive enterprise-scale business tech. They have job placement relationships with hundreds of corporations that hire .Net developers. If you're a recent graduate or IT professional looking to polish your programming skills, they offer a full-time and part-time masters course. (View In-Depth Report) Full-Stack Accelerated Course, Full-Stack Immersive Course... View All Courses Coder Foundry offered mentorship, which is what I valued the most out of my experience here.

Metis' classes focus on real-world problems; work is hands-on, team-driven, and led by digital experts and industry leaders. Their web development courses (Ruby on Rails and UX/Front End Development ) are designed by an impressive software studio called "Thoughtbot." Additionally their Data Science course is designed by Datascope Analytics, a data driven consulting company with a team of passionate data scientists, entrepreneurs, and designers. Placement programs are available to all... (View In-Depth Report) Data Visualization with D3.js , Introduction to Data Science , Statistical Foundations for Data Science & Machine Learning, Data Science Bootcamp, Machine Learning: Algorithms & Applications, Explore Data Science: Online Training, Big Data Processing with Apache Spark, Deep Learning with TensorFLow... View All Courses Overall, I really enjoyed the Metis Data Science Bootcamp experience! I came away from the program with a more well-rounded skillset that gives me a starting point for solving data science problems and additional reach-back to a network of other data scientists. I highly recommend checking out Metis if you’re interested in data science! If you're interested in more of my detailed thoughts on ...

There are many bootcamps teaching Ruby on Rails, but not that many which focus on Javascript. Hack Reactor is one of them and has the best student reviews on SwitchUp.Org. Almost 30 five-star reviews have solidified them as the best coding bootcamps in the country. (View In-Depth Report) After graduating from Hack Reactor in September, I wonder why I even bothered going to a four year institution. I've learned 10x more, and in 1/10 of the time, at HR than I did during my entire time at ASU. The instructors here should be the model for teaching in every university, and after you experience learning here, college will seem slow paced and pedantic by comparison (several of my ...

Advertised as an “apprenticeship on steroids,” Dev Bootcamp will whip beginners into full fledged programmers. Their program consists of 9 weeks of remote learning, 9 weeks immersive learning and one career week. Not only do students learn technical languages such as Ruby and JavaScript, they offer interpersonal skills such as engineer empathy. The Engineer Empathy curriculum was inspired by Google’s “emotional intelligence,” workshop series. Dev Bootcamp understands that being a successful... (View In-Depth Report) Ruby, Rails, JavaScript, HTML, CSS, and database systems such as SQL and PostgreSQL The environment is intense but supportive. The curriculum is well-considered and provides a solid foundation before diving into web development. Overall I highly recommend the program. There are two caveats: If you're introverted, the environment might not be for you. The curriculum is 80% pair programming in an open floor plan workspace, so social interaction is constant and distractions are ...

Located in 14 places around the world, General Assembly is a well known brand with a vast global community. They offer both in-person classes and online courses in a variety of skills from web development and user experience design, to business fundamentals, to data science, to product management and digital marketing. In addition to long form classes, they host many one-time low cost workshops. Large companies like American Express and Pepsico have sought out their corporate digital training... (View In-Depth Report) The remote product management course is fast paced and intensive. It teaches you the best practices in UX Design and business and the more technical components of product management. The course is structured to be very interactive and hands-on. You learn a lot from other students based on their product ideas and receive lots of feedback on your ideas. It has also helped us to navigate the ...|||

Reviews and comparison of the best NYC coding bootcamps