

 We learned this too late, but one of the interesting things about falling into a black hole is that you never observe yourself falling into the black hole. If you look down, you see it just below you. You can try to reach down to touch it, but it is impossible. We have already crossed the event horizon and are forever trapped inside. But the thing about black holes is that even after you have passed through the point of no return, if you look up nothing has fundamentally changed. You can still see the universe outside, and if you look down you can still see it. Look.  Notice the huge empty void of nothing? It will all be over very quickly for us of course. But it won’t seem that way to the next dope hurtling into the impossible void that just swallowed us. They are going to see us frozen in time, forever. They will see us frozen in time forever even as, from our point of view, our atoms are torn apart. And all of us, equally doomed, would seem suspended there, not quite dead but very dim, from the point of view of someone not being sucked in. Such is our current political situation.

We can, it is true, calculate our position and know that we are definitely fucked. Sometime around the release of Let the Eagle Soar by Bush II attorney-general  John Ashcroft, in 2003, the amount of idiocy on planet earth reached a critical threshold, and the sheer density of our ruling class created a rupture in spacetime. We cannot correct our course. An infinite amount of energy would now have to be spent to escape. We will soon be spaghettified, zapped, deconstructed electron by electron and quark by quark, until all there is left is a zero-dimensional hairless ball of Twitter scandals slowly decaying until the heat death of the universe. None of us will experience this. All we can see are the poor souls a little further ahead of us, and below them the event horizon of irony which we think we have not yet passed. ‘So far so good. At least I am not trapped in that fucking nightmare.’ How innocent we were before we did the math. Somewhere, with a safe berth of a few light-years, aliens will be able to watch this entire spectacle frozen in time at their own inhuman leisure. In retrospect, that was the most likely reason they never came to within a million kilometers of us.

To be fair, the symptoms of our own disintegration into political background noise have been there long enough. The signs were at first subtle – it would be years before the denunciation of sushi as cultural appropriation. But some were not so subtle. Take for instance the idea that socialists are horrible totalitarians who reduce everything to class. Remember this? It was only last Monday, but time is all spacelike inside this region of confusion, so it could have been 1974 as well, makes no difference, it’s too late anyway. So. The socialists were reducing everything to class. Very totalitarian, you see. ‘A human life is so much more than just work’, they said, eagerly jumping out of the airlock. We tried to warn these people, but they wouldn’t hear it. ‘Listen, aren’t you the totalitarian trying to make everything political except the one thing that seems to make you nervous?’ ‘Look, I think we should definitely work on all these identity issues, but can you not change the subject?’ ‘Isn’t it totalitarian to demand full conformity of the entire person to some exterior ethical idea, and then when this is achieved, to demand more still because if you have to ask someone to do that, it wasn’t interior’. But they had the space bends, and when a cosmonaut gets the bends it is too late. The last hallucinatory transmissions we detected seemed to suggest they had lost all sense, now they claimed they had wanted to see themselves reflected in our hearts, but noticing that these hearts would in that case merely be reflecting their own image, it would not be enough. A horrible lack had engulfed them from within, you see. We cracked open the last of the whiskey then and had a good laugh in their memory. If our hearts were really mirrors, wouldn’t they really be our kindred souls, these narcissist lunatics?

Those poor souls who thought all this. We can still see them just a little further ahead of our present position, but they are not even subatomic gloop now. Whatever ‘now’ means in this post-Minkowskian nightmare. I hope they took some consolation in the fact it is entirely impossible for anything to overtake them. They always prided themselves on being a little bit more advanced than the rest of us. But at the same time, nobody here misses them much.|||

We learned this too late, but one of the interesting things about falling into a black hole is that you never observe yourself falling into the black hole. If you look down, you see it just below you. You can try to reach down to touch it, but it is impossible. We have already crossed…