Canonical and OVH announced they are engaging as partners in public cloud, VPS, bare metal and private cloud. OVH is joining the ranks of other cloud providers included in Canonical’s official programme for distribution of Ubuntu guest images, Certified Public Cloud (CPC).

OVH is one of the leading and fastest-growing global cloud players, and has recently been expanding in North America. Ubuntu has a massive lead in the public cloud arena, running most workloads today thanks to its security, versatility, and policy of regular updates. Being a Ubuntu Certified Public Cloud Partner ensures that when OVH customers choose Ubuntu as their operating system running their virtual machine, VPS server, bare metal server or container on OVH, they are secure in the knowledge that they have the latest Ubuntu image authorised and secured by Canonical.

“We have delivered same-day in-region patches, for every security update since 2013, which has minimised bandwidth costs and downtime for Ubuntu users running on those clouds. OVH users will now benefit from the same”, said Udi Nachmany, head of public cloud at Canonical. “And as Ubuntu is also running 55% of production OpenStack deployments, we are especially happy about a leading public cloud like OVH, based on Ubuntu OpenStack, joining our programme.”

OVH customers will be able to use the same operating system, with the same dependable experience, whether they are working with OVH’s bare metal (Dedicated Servers) or cloud (Public and Private Cloud, and VPS) services.

”As a business that has grown from small into a global giant, innovation has always been part of OVH’s DNA,” Germain Masse, Technical Director at OVH, said. “As part of the new partnership, Canonical will work with OVH to continue to optimise and adjust Ubuntu to new hardware and platform offerings laid out by the group for the customers.”

OVH customers will also be able to purchase professional support for their Ubuntu deployments from Canonical’s Ubuntu Advantage shop. This support also provides access to Canonical Livepatch as well as Extended Security Maintenance for Ubuntu 12.04 LTS.|||

Ubuntu Insights - The Ubuntu resource center