Providing great customer experience is essential to any business that wants to become reference in the market. We saw it in our last blog post (if you've missed it, check it out!). For that, you need to have a customer experience strategy: a document containing a series of guides and "how-to's" to make every single contact between client and company a memorable success.

Clients only come back, or stick to a company, for as long as they're happy. If you have a business based on monthly subscription, for example, or even if your business offers upselling options, satisfied clients are a basic thing. We have mentioned before that, in general, it's cheaper to keep a client than to convert a new one, which is why you should avoid churn.

And there is more: keeping clients will make your MRR (monthly recurring revenue) grow, improve your ROI and allow your business to scale. If you can't keep your current clients, it will send an alert to other leads, and might actually hurt your conversion rates.

Got it? Now let's see how you can actually do that.

Best practices of customer experience only means that the topics we chose here are the most efficient ways to build a rapport with your clients.

Companies don't usually want to be criticized. In fact, most of them won't even acknowledge problems and complaints. But those who do end up better seen in the public eye, will be respected and will grow the client's confidence on doing business with them. That could, and should, be you.

The easiest way to do this is by looking at the feedback clients are given you. And there are a few ways to do that:

• Are clients interacting with you?

Inactiveness is the first alert sign for churn. So if a client stopped opening your emails, logging into your system, or any other kind or interaction you offer, he's sending you a message: I'm getting ready to bolt. That's a very important feedback.

To stop it, you need to first, keep an eye on you metrics to catch on this window of opportunity, and then understand what was the problem, and how to solve it to convince him to stay.

• Do you have a comment section? And do you read it?

Having a place where your client can spontaneously send feedback, or even promoting campaigns with this purpose, can give you a great insight of what people think about your product and company. Asking to assign a score of satisfaction or of probability of indication is a great way to know if you are on the right track.

More important than providing a space for your client is to be ready to read every single text sent. Don't forget to thank the person, preferably with a personal message, for taking that time, and to give an answer about a specific dissatisfaction that your client pointed out. This can do wonders for the success your client experience.

• What can your customer service tell you about the clients that contact the company?

Your customer service team will usually have a lot of information about your clients and users. What are their main problems when using your product? How often does a person contact the support team? What is the activation rate after onboarding? A simple conversation with your team members can give you this valuable insight.

Like we briefly mentioned before, a survey is like a campaign where you'll ask clients to answer a few questions. This could be done by email or an in-app popup screen, and it shouldn't take more than a few minutes to complete it. Just ask nicely for your user's answers or offer something in return, like a small discount code or an exclusive ebook. Again, you'll have information straight from the source.

This is what you are aiming for - or should be. A first-call resolution rate tells your customer that you are committed to solving their problem, that your team is efficient and that your company don't have the typical problems of call service such as long waiting and the classic and convenient disconnection. How can you do that?

Give freedom to your support team. This doesn't mean a black canvas to do everything, but give them certain parameters for negotiation and benefits. We'll tell more about this in the fourth item.

Put yourself in the client's shoes. How would you like to be treated by a company like yours? What would you need to have the perfect operation? Are there any features you would like to see in this product? This means putting the customer first. Having this mindset guarantees that your client will always be treated right, and is one of the best philosophies that result in retention.

Talking to a machine is terrible, and very annoying. That's basically what having a script does: it transforms your customer service into a insensitive machine. And more, it can actually diminish the effectiveness of your customer service. To avoid that, cut scripts!

Let people talk to people, allow your CS and support professionals to interact with clients naturally, find the best solutions for resolving problems and keeping clients happy. It can seem like a huge problem, but is a fairly simple thing to do. And you'll only need to set a few guidelines for your team to follow, but not nearly as strict and script-like as the more traditional strategy.

Not everybody likes to talk on the phone, and there is already such a bad reputation about call centers that people try to avoid it at all costs, even when the company has an internal support team. So be sure to offer different ways to solve the client's problem.

Now that you know what you need to provide the perfect experience, is time to build your customer experience strategy. Think of yourself as a tailor, creating the best fitting tuxedo for your client. So here are a few tips to do that in the SaaS world:

• Be objective, transparent and helpful: remember what we said about putting customer first. Build your strategy based on this, and keep it in mind at every single step.

• Focus on onboarding and customer activation: start the perfect customer experience from the very beginning. Build an onboarding that is both easy and shows everything your product has to offer. This will drive up your activation rate.

Check what are the biggest complaints from clients, and see how you can solve them, the easier ones first: solving problems can be difficult, especially if it involves changing processes. So, start by solving the most frequent problems, than move on to the ones that are easier to solve.

• Here you can use a bit of the GTD method: imagine tasks are like rocks. Some are big, representing the most urgent or bigger problems and projects, and some are very small, link sand. And you need to fill a glass with those rocks. So, you need to make a combination of big and small rocks to fill your day and complete the largest numbers of tasks possible.

Use data analysis and BI to localize bottlenecks in your customer service: information is key to success. So make a habit out of keeping an eye on metrics and data, to identify fast possible problems. With this you can, for example, lower your churn rate .

• Invest in technology: to do what we mentioned above and integrate your entire operation, from attraction to customer service, you need to invest in the perfect platform . And yes, there is such a thing. Something like Pipz Automation can do all of this things, thanks to features like BI, Knowledge Base, Kanban and an integrated CRM.

We hope these tips can help you build your perfect customer experience strategy. If you liked this content, share it on social media so other people can enjoy it too.|||

A good customer experience strategy can make your revenue grow, or destroy your company. We'll tell you why and how