No big news – Netflix is taking over the world. Low monthly payments, quality originals, zero advertising, and ability to watch what & when you want. These are only a few reasons to mention. As the company reaches its remarkable 100 million subscribers, what draws the most attention is its ability to grow internationally. Accordingly to the Netflix Shareholder Letter (Q4 of 2016), 47% of all members are now outside of the US. Even more impressive – 75% of 19 million new subscribers that were added in 2016 are international.

It may sound exaggerated, but Hastings really meant it. The statistic below will prove it. After Canada, Brazil was the first of Netflix's international venture. Even being an unlikely place for streaming services to succeed (due to piracy culture), subscriptions have skyrocketed.

The company doesn't disclose country-focused statistics, but an independent research (Q3 of 2015) pointed Brazil as the fourth biggest country after US, UK, and Canada, with 2.9 million subscribers. Mexico was in fifth, with 1.7 million.

Almost a year later (Aug 2016), a more impressive research is released. 71% of VOD users in Brazil used Netflix – just 13 points behind YouTube. This is a remarkable rate considering it is a free service. Netflix numbers were even higher than Globo – Brazilian biggest media group.

The same research pointed out that 57% of all users surveyed in Brazil were subscribed to Netflix – that's even higher than the US rates (46%).

Another 2016 research reveals that Brazil matched the US in terms of users watching Video on Demand – both with 49% of internet users.

When comparing data of 2015 and 2016, it gets clear something happened in Brazil. A Google Trends research shows it well: In the last 12 months, Brazilians were top searchers of Netflix. Also, 6 of the Top 10 are Latin America countries. The US appears at 8th.

Statistics get more intense when compared over time. Corresponding with the researches showed above, something happened in 2016: Brazil turned over the game by becoming the top searcher of Netflix at Google. We don't have any news since 2015, but I have a strong guess that Brazil went up in the ranking (2nd, maybe?).

It is not in vain that Netflix is getting so popular within Brazil. Many aspects of the product match the country's culture exactly. Here are 5 reasons explained with true statistics.

Internet popularization in Brazil is faster than in any other place. Accordingly to an AT Kearney research, Brazilians have the highest frequency of connection. When asked about how much time they're online, 51% said they are connected all day long. That's more than double of US (25%), UK (24%) and Germany (22%).

When asked about the motivation to go online, Brazilians differ from the global statistics. The two main reasons are: (BR: 98% vs. 95% Global) and (BR 96% vs. 83% Global). When it comes to internet culture (binge-watching and portable entertainment), Brazilians are early adopters.

Let's go practical? Netflix might never publish its growth in the country, but Cable companies do. Accordingly to ABTA (Brazilian Association of Cable Television), the number of cable subscriptions decreased 4,3% between April 2015 and April 2016. This industry is now investing in On Demand services.

Netflix has unveiled the science behind TV watching. About 75% of views are driven by the recommendation algorithm which also helps them license strategic content. No wonder 5 of the 10 most searched series in 2016 are Netflix Originals.

But when you take the Brazilian ranking, it is even more impressive: 8 of the Top 10 are licensed by Netflix and . Netflix is the only VOD service listed.

International content ranks very well among some of the Brazilian groups. But Netflix goes beyond as it releases the first Brazilian original series – "3%". The apocalyptic thriller was between the most watched originals in Brazil and Latin America, accordingly to the Shareholder Letter.

In November '16, the company added a service that perfectly fits the country's needs: offline viewing.

The first reason is broadband infrastructure. A study made by Netflix reveals that Brazil is among the ten countries with the worst connection at an average speed of 2.57 megabits per second. Other Latin America countries perform better.

The second reason is Smartphone Penetration, as 72% of Brazilians already own one. When it comes to watching TV content through smartphones, Brazil matches the US: 29% of users in both countries do so.

A government study found that 41% of Brazilian internet users have downloaded content online illegally (that includes the Secretary of Culture). The Brazilian government has been fighting piracy for a long time and presented this research with the main reasons for piracy inside the country.

When it comes to movie theaters, Brazilian cities have the second most expensive ticket in the world (right after South Africa prices). In 2016 (economic crisis), the average of a single cinema ticket was R$28. That's 41% more than a basic Netflix account (R$19,90). No need to compare, right? A Netflix account is way more useful than a single ticket.

It is so true that cinemas are now offering subscription services – a monthly fee that grants full access to cinemas.

Cable TV isn't any cheaper. In 2016, the average of a basic subscription was R$36/month. 80% more than a basic Netflix account.

Netflix may be well established among groups like Brazilian Elites, Urban Working Youth, Urban Adults and even Company Owners. These groups have close similarities to the US. Its members speak English, follow Hollywood trends, carry the latest smartphones and may even watch the Super Bowl. They correspond to 26,7% of the population. In the meanwhile, Brazil is still an online child as only 49% of the population accesses Internet daily.

However, Brazil is not one unique market. It is a composition of 11 different groups with very distinct consumption habits. To conquer Brazil, Netflix must also focus its content to groups like Urban Peripheries, one of the most connected groups. The key to fully taking over this lucrative market lies in delivering a diverse (and niched) catalog of content – national and international, licensed and original.|||

