Two large tech companies, Google and Amazon, both launched their versions of AI assistants in the last few years. According to CIRP and a number of tech reviewers, the Amazon Echo has outperformed the competition so far.

Google Assistant and Amazon Alexa may not be as advanced as a Sci-Fi imagining (it won’t argue you out of a bad relationship), rather these AIs offer a kind of versatile search engine for a smart and connected home. Both AI systems, Assistant, and Alexa, are integrated into two voice-controlled speakers, Home and Echo, respectively, to answer the user’s questions.

After lagging behind in terms of consumer perception, Google Assistant has just taken a step ahead of Alexa in terms of online shopping–one area Amazon knows well.

At the Shoptalk e-commerce event (March 19-22, Las Vegas), Google reannounced the integration of a new feature into its smart assistant that enables Google Home owners to make purchases online by voice.

It’s worth noting that Amazon Echo, which hit the market about a year before Google Home, does have a similar feature: Alexa users can also shop, but only via the Amazon website.

Although not as rich a catalog as Amazon’s, Google makes orders pass through its Google Express platform, then from there to dozens of local stores. With billions of queries passing through Google, Home could be a force in the online shopping industry.

Purchases made on Google Express may be subject to service and shipping fees. Exceptionally, these fees will be waived for orders placed via Google Home. Through April 30, 2017, Google offers a trial period with free delivery (no shipping and membership fees) on orders that meet certain conditions.

However, the products purchased will be limited to what the catalog of stores, and then the presence of the latter in a given region. Not all the stores listed are available in any single region–that depends on the user’s address.

For now, retailers that have already joined Google Express include Target, Costco, Walgreens, Bed Bath and Beyond, Whole Foods, PetSmart and over 50 other national and local brands and delivery companies. To make orders, the user has just to enter your ZIP code to find available local stores, set your payment method and delivery address, then just say the words–with the possibility of same-day, overnight or 2-day delivery.

Over the coming months, Google Express will add more new features and enable shopping for other products and services as well. Now we can shop at home and without moving our hands.|||

Google Home can now handle your online shopping. Simply by using voice commands, a huge online shopping catalog is available from browsing to S&H.