Samsung today launched the awaited Galaxy series smartphone — Galaxy C7 Pro in India at an exclusive event held in New Delhi. The handset was launched in China this January, featuring a slim and stunning body with a moderate price tag. In India, the Galaxy C7 Pro will go on sale this Tuesday, 11th April as an Amazon exclusive device. It will retail at Rs. 27,990.

Samsung Galaxy C7 Pro features a 5.7-inch Full HD Super AMOLED display with a resolution of 1080 x 1920 pixels. It is powered by an octa-core Qualcomm Snapdragon 626 processor, clocked at 2.2GHz with 4GB RAM and 64GB internal memory (expandable up to 256GB using a microSD card). The handset is just 7mm thin and sports a full metal unibody design. It runs on Android Marshmallow with TouchWiz on top.

In the camera arena, the device offers a 16 MP front and rear camera. Following pursuit to selfie-focused Chinese phone, Samsung is also trying to garner sales for its latest bid by packing a high-resolution front lens with an f/1.9 aperture. The rear camera is further adorned with a dual LED flash and phase detection autofocus (PDAF) having an f/1.9 aperture.

In India, Galaxy C7 Pro will be available in two colors — Navy Blue and Gold. It comes with a Hybrid Dual SIM Slot. The device packs in a decent 3,300 mAh battery pack with USB-C port for charging and data transfer purposes. It also includes a fingerprint scanner and other popular sensors such as an accelerometer, ambient light sensor, digital compass, gyroscope, and proximity sensor.

The device adds its name to the list of devices compatible with Samsung’s payment service — Samsung Pay. The service was officially launched in India about a couple of weeks back and is currently available on the following devices — Galaxy S7, Galaxy S7 edge, Galaxy Note 5, Galaxy S6 edge+, Galaxy A5 (2016), and Galaxy A7 (2016).|||

Samsung Galaxy C7 Pro will go on sale this Tuesday, 11th April as an Amazon exclusive device. For India, the phone has been price tagged at just Rs. 27,990.