A large, multinational company was conducting research on improving employee engagement when preliminary results uncovered a surprising and alarming pattern of gender bias. Initially, the head of HR attacked the messenger, but additional, more-rigorous research confirmed the disturbing findings — and convinced him to take action. If you’re attacked for bringing hard truths to light, start by trying to take the perspective of the person you’ve angered; however poorly delivered, is any of their criticism valid? Next, collect more data that addresses their concerns specifically (otherwise you’ll just talk past each other). Finally, view your challenger as an ally rather than as an opponent. Then you can channel the energy that prompted their fury for good.

I recently conducted a study with a large, multinational company to figure out how to increase employee engagement. After the data collection was complete, I ran the data analysis and found some intriguing results that I was excited to share with the firm. But a troubling result became apparent in my analysis: This organization had rampant discrimination against women, especially ambitious, passionate, talented women. Although this result was based on initial data, and was not particularly rigorous, I was convinced that managers at the collaborating organization would like to hear it so that they could address it.

I couldn’t have been more wrong. In a meeting with the company’s head of HR and a few members of his team, I first presented my overall results about employee engagement. In my last few slides, I turned the presentation toward the results of the gender discrimination analysis that I had conducted. I was expecting an animated conversation, and perhaps even some internal questioning into why the discrimination was occurring and how they could rectify it.

Instead, the head of HR got very angry. He accused me of misrepresenting the facts, citing data from his own records that showed men and women were equally likely to be promoted. In addition, he had never heard from anyone within the organization that gender discrimination was a problem. He strongly believed that the diversity practices his team had championed were industry leading, and that they were sufficient to ward off gender discrimination. Clearly, this topic was important to him, and my findings had touched a nerve.

After his fury (and my shock) was over, I reminded him that the data I presented was just initial pilot data, and should be treated as such. Perhaps if we were to do a more thorough assessment, I argued, we would find that the initial data was inaccurate. In addition, I proposed that a follow-on study that focused on gender discrimination could pinpoint which aspects of the diversity policies were working particularly well, and that he could use these insights to further advocate for his agenda. We landed on a compromise: I would design and run an additional study with a focus on gender discrimination, connecting survey responses to important outcomes such as promotions and turnover.

A few months later, the data came in. My data analysis showed that my initial findings were correct: Gender discrimination was happening in the company. But the head of HR’s major claim wasn’t wrong: Men and women were equally likely to be promoted.

The improved data set allowed us to see how both facts could be true at the same time. We now had detailed insights into which employees were — and, more important, were not — being promoted. Although ambitious, passionate, and talented men were being promoted, their female counterparts were being passed over for promotion, time and again — effectively being pushed out of the organization. That is, the best men were being promoted, but not the best women. Those women who were being promoted were promoted out of tokenism: They weren’t particularly high performing, and often reached a “natural” ceiling early on in their careers due to their limited abilities.

We also now had data on the specific kind of advancement opportunities male and female employees received to learn new skills, make new connections, and increase their visibility in the organization. Compared with their male counterparts, passionate women were less likely to get these kinds of chances.

Armed with this new data, I was invited to present to the head of HR again. Remembering our last meeting, I expected him to be upset. But we had a very different conversation this time. Instead of anger, the data I presented was met with concern. I could place the fact of men and women being equally likely to be promoted in a fuller context, complete with rigorous data from the organization. We had a lively debate into why this asymmetry between men and women existed. Most important, we concluded that the data he measured to track gender discrimination was unable to provide him with the necessary insight to understand whether gender discrimination was a problem.

He has since appointed a task force to tackle the problem of gender discrimination head-on, something he wouldn’t have done if we hadn’t collected the data that we did. This is the power of collecting thorough data in your own organization: Instead of making assumptions on what may or may not be occurring, a thoughtful design of data collection practices allows you to collect the right data to come to better conclusions.

So it’s not just about the data you have. Recall the famous Sherlock Holmes story about the dog that didn’t bark; existing data blinds us, and it is important to shift the focus away from readily available data. Crucially, not having the right data is no excuse. In the case of the head of HR, not hearing about gender discrimination from anyone in the organization allowed him to conclude that women did not face discrimination. Think about what data is not being collected that may help embed existing data in a richer context.

Next time someone angrily challenges your data, there are a few steps you can take. First, try taking their perspective: Understand why your counterpart is responding so forcefully. In many cases, it may simply be that they really care about the outcome. Your goals may even be aligned, and framing your data in a way where their goals are achieved may help you circumvent their anger.

Second, collect more data that specifically takes their criticism to heart. Every comment is a useful comment. Just as a fiction author can’t be upset when readers don’t get the point of what they are trying to say, a researcher must understand how their research is being understood. What is the upset recipient of your analysis responding to, and how can further data collection help you address their concerns?

Third, and last, view your angry challenger not as an opponent, but as an ally. Find a way to collaborate, because once you have their buy-in, they are invested in the joint investigation. As a result, they will be more likely to view you as being part of the team. And then you can channel the energy that prompted their fury for good.|||

Don’t assume you’re right and they’re wrong.