If you are looking for a new smartphone released this year for under 20,000/- INR (Approx $310), the Moto G5 Plus is now another Option. Will it become a huge success or a huge disappointment?

Let’s see, what Motorola has brought to the table with it’s new Moto G Family Smartphone. First of all the Moto G5 Plus looks nothing like its predecessors.

Instead of plastic, you now have an all metal non removable back panel with a full glass front and some plastic on the sides. It may not feel as premium as the Moto G Flagships, but the use of aluminum gives it that reassuring heft.

When you hold it in the palm of your hand, the power button and volume rocker are not very tactile feel. Relatively soft when pressed upon and button placement is a bit too low for our fingers.

Since we are already complaining about minor issues on the phone, we might as well tell you that It would feel much better, if that camera hump wasn’t there either as you can not use tap on display, while it’s flat on a surface without having it wobble and it would have been better if the dimple was not replaced by the raised Moto logo.

On a more positive note, Texture on the power key is much enjoyable. It allows you to easily differentiate which button you are pressing. The overall build feels much more durable and premium and holding the phone is a pleasant experience.

Now, the fastest way to unlock the phone is with the fingerprint sensor found on the front. It performs extremely well even not shutting some of the top flagships on the market.

Not only that, but it can also replace your entire navigation bar with the one button navigation feature found in the Moto App.

Once you enable it, you can swipe left on the sensor to go back, swipe right on sensor to open the Recent Menu and Tap on it to go Home. Tap and Hold the button to lock the screen and press and hold even harder to open Google assistant.

The gesture recognition is reliable and secretive, so if you decide to use this, you will find it to be a great alternative with easy navigation.

While someone else who uses your phone or snatches, it will have a hard time navigating through out the interface, if they have never used the Moto G5 Plus.

Overall this is a great fingerprint scanner, but it would have been better, if they just put the back and recent key on sides like the OnePlus 3T. It gives you a better screen to body ratio.

Without the buttons, there is nothing but the poor use of space. It is much more practical than the all in one nav bar button.

The screen is actually smaller in size from the Moto G4. It is just 5.2 inches and it’s still rocking a 1080p IPS LCD display. But for a low budget smartphone, this is still a very good option with accurate colors great viewing angles and this smartphone works are right in outdoor lighting.

Out of the box the colors are set to vibrant, to enhance the saturation and to make the colors pop, but if you want a more accurate tone than you can set it to standard.

As for the software, this device is running on Android 7.0 Nougat, which unfortunately is not the latest version of Gimp, but at least it is not marshmallow.

The best thing about the UI on most of the Moto phones is their non bloated stock like Android experience, with a few extra Motorola features on the top.

You still have the regular Chop twice for the flashlight, twist for quick capture, swipe to shrink screen and other less popular gestures, but you do get some new bells and whistles, such as the one button navigation feature as discussed above.

The Moto display has been tweaked to include a large battery or clock widget. Which is still a great way to check your notifications without waking the display.

A new way to enable split screen mode in the recent menu by just holding an app and then dragging it to the top to open it in split screen.

A launcher which looks little like the Google Pixel. They pull up after the pour whole folders and the Google free Panel on the left.

The only thing that they may different is the dark transparent theme and the full search bar at the top. It is still pretty snappy, and navigating throughout this launcher is pretty easy. Just like the rest of the interface.

The Moto G5 Plus comes in two versions that vary in the amount of RAM and Storage. One variant is with 3 GB of RAM and 16 GB of Internal Storage and another Variant is with 4 GB and 32 GB of Internal Storage.

Either way both of those variant are packed with Snapdragon 625 Chipset. Which is more than capable of handling this device.

There was little to no lag, application reload time was quick and with the upgrade to the Adreno 506 GPU, gaming on this phone is not that bad. It is obviously not going to compete with the big boys such as Oneplus 3T, Samsung C9 Pro, Oppo F3 Plus or Samsung S8.

But for low budget smartphone, it is at the top of it’s game. The Moto G5 Plus Still has the single speaker at the top which doubles as the earpiece speaker. It is front facing and gets even loud, but gets a little distorted at high points.

It’s obviously not the best speaker out there. It works just fine but for what it’s worth that’s what we have come to expect on low budget smartphones nowadays.

Same goes for the camera, you do get a new hidden trick in the viewfinder allowing it to automatically detect QR codes and barcodes as well as 4K recording.

However, that’s 12 MP sensor with an aperture size of F 1.7 and do auto focus pixels, provides a good experience. It doesn’t have optical image stabilization and now doesn’t even have laser auto focus like the Moto G4 Plus had and you will experience this problem heavily when you will be shooting at night.

It does however focus pretty quick in good lighting. It is even faster than its predecessors. Pictures come out looking solid and crisp in daylight shootings. But there is a bit of softening and overexposure.

In the end results when you are shooting at night, that is when the camera starts to act like a smartphone under 20,000 INR. There are some random times that the pictures come out looking decent.

But no matter what, you will always experience some kind of noise blown out, highlights and washed out colors also, unless you are extremely steady. It is extremely hard to take your picture at night without having it become a blurry mess.

The lack of optical image stabilization is the reason behind this. It is not a horrible camera, but it is not great either. Like we mentioned before it is what we have come to expect on budget smartphones.

Powering all this is still a 3000 mAh battery giving around four hours of on screen time and heavy usage with Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and GPS being Enabled at all times for Google maps, psychic generation model 360 (Android Watch) and snapchat spectacles on light usage.

This thing can easily last around five to six hours, obviously better usage may not match yours. But we can guarantee that you will be a satisfied customer, especially since the phone can easily last you more than a day.

When it does run outta juice, it uses a micro USB port, it is disappointing but at least it charges pretty quick with Turbo Power. Which is just another version of quick charge.

another thing to know about the Moto G5 Plus is that it is still not waterproof, has no NFC for the US models, while international models will have NFC comes unlocked and works on all four major carriers and has a microSD card slot.

It is available for pre-order at a starting price of 16,999/- INR. So, We can only give our recommendation on that one. In our opinion, we think Motorola is still the best way to go when choosing to go cheap. It provides stellar performance, great battery life and insanely fast fingerprint sensor.

Unique software features and an acceptable camera, that’s a huge bargain to be at this low of a price. So, We are recommending any other device near this price tag.

Lets us know in the comments, what you think is the best budget smartphone. We would like to hear your thoughts.|||

If you are looking for a new smartphone released this year for under 20,000/- INR (Approx $310), the Moto G5 Plus is now another Option. Will it become a huge success or a huge disappointment?…