Former Massachusetts securities regulator looks back on when Apple stock was “banned in Boston”

Shares in Apple Inc. may seem like a sure bet right now, with the iconic computer company now second in size only to Exxon Mobil. But this wasn’t always the case: Back at the time of Apple’s IPO in December 1980, the state of Massachusetts actually banned the sale of Apple stock because it was deemed to be too risky for investors.

The Wall Street Journal unearthed this little bit of trivia from its archives as part of its copious Apple-Steve Jobs coverage in the past week. So I sent the Journal’s item to the guy responsible for that decision to hear, in his words, why Apple was, at least briefly, “banned in Boston.”

Michael Unger, the head of the secretary of state’s securities division at the time, tells me there were a couple factors that motivated his staff to employ an infrequently-used rule to block Massachusetts investors from participating in the IPO.

The rule allowed for a ban on buying IPO shares with companies whose offering price represented too high of a multiple of its earnings per share (in Apple’s case, the $22-per-share IPO price was nearly 100 times the previous year’s earnings per share).

Unger says his staff was worried about the frenzy that took place when biotech firm Genentech went public earlier that year. He says his office received a number of calls from frustrated investors who bought into the craze as Genentech’s stock more than doubled in value on the day of its IPO, only to watch it sink back to the range of its IPO price by a couple months later.

Unger also says that it seemed like Cupertino, Calif.-based Apple was ramping up an unusually high volume of product ads leading up to the IPO. While this didn’t technically violate the SEC’s quiet period rules (these were ads for consumers, not investors), the flurry of ads also weighed on Unger’s decision to approve the ban. Unger, of course, also got the approval from his boss at the time, then-secretary of state Mike Connolly.

There’s a reason you don’t hear about such actions any more. Unger says Congress passed a law in the 1990s that allowed federal securities law to trump state-by-state bans like this one.

Unger says he still thinks about that decision 31 years ago, a decision that prompted the San Francisco Chronicle to run a big “Banned in Boston” headline as part of its Apple IPO coverage at the time. A year doesn’t go by when someone at a legal conference doesn’t approach him and say, “Oh, you’re that guy.”

Unger, who now works as a securities lawyer at Rubin and Rudman LLP in Boston, says the ban was a good faith effort to protect investors. Of course, he had no idea Apple would become the corporate and cultural phenomenon it is today. But he also says it’s kind of fun to be remembered for something, even if it is for being the guy who banned Apple.

Unger says he can’t remember how long the ban was in place, but it probably was lifted within a few days after the IPO. Even if Massachusetts investors got in at that point, they would have made a killing: Apple’s stock trades for more than $400 a share today.|||

