A new bill is making way to the house. This one is about increasing the minimum salary requirement for H-1B visa to $130,000.

H-1B visa a nonimmigrant visa in the U.S. that allows employers to temporarily employ foreign workers in speciality occupations. Employees under H-1B need to be paid a minimum salary determined by the government for various occupation types. The visa has been the most common way for tech companies to hire much needed skilled workers not easily available in the U.S.

H-1B visa has, again, recently come under fire from several policy makers about its abuse by outsourcing companies. Legislators posit that outsourcing companies employ foreign workers at lower wages and take away American jobs. These companies hire people in a foreign country and bring them to the U.S. at lower incomes for work that was previously done by American citizens. These employees are not skilled (based on the expected definition) and they exploit the visa for lower quality work.

As a way to reduce this competitive advantage of outsourcing companies, lawmakers want to increase the minimum salary required to hire an employee on H-1B. Their belief is that this would take away the cost advantage and the reason for American companies to outsource work to other nations.

I want to explicitly state that I’m not downplaying issues raised by the legislators or suggesting in any way that current H-1B visa law has no problems.

My hypothesis is that viewing H-1B workers only from an income point of view will lead to bigger losses for the U.S. economy even if it gets a few American citizens employed. There are many benefits of current the H-1B program that go beyond immediate employment.

I haven’t had the chance to read the bill and don’t really know the full extent of changes and implementation. I want to highlight a few things:

Now with that context, I want to share my perspectives being an international student and H-1B visa holder*.

I believe it’s important to consider H-1B just not as a visa for immediate employment, but a larger tool to attract talent at various stages of their lives. We need to understand the lifecycle of a H-1B visa holder starting before they get the visa and after they were employed. If we only focus on the companies/salaries and not on the stories of people, we could miss a large part of the workforce that may not be skilled on day one but adds a lot of value over their lifetime in the U.S.

Here are a few unintended consequences of increasing the minimum wage for H-1B:

If we want to really make U.S. a hotbed of innovation, we need to not only allow people to work here who are great right now, but also who can be great in the future. They may not have a huge impact immediately but they can be a great source of innovation in the coming years. They can bring new perspectives and ideas to workplaces because of diverse backgrounds and help U.S. stay at the top of innovation pyramid.

**there may be few limited scholarships for students from economically backward countries

*I moved to the U.S. in 2010 as an international student for MS at Columbia University in NY. Then was on OPT and finally H-1B. I started a company last year and went through Y Combinator. I wouldn’t have qualified for a visa with the proposed cap.|||

A new bill is making way to the house. This one is about increasing the minimum salary requirement for H-1B visa to $130,000. H-1B visa a nonimmigrant visa in the U.S. that allows employers to…