Follow simple tips that work for everyone Let’s start with general recommendations on how to organize your day in the office and how to be more productive without overworking. There are several simple rules to follow that eliminate distractions, prevent tiredness, and help solve harder tasks.

For team managers, the need to control the entire work process, communications overload, and responsibility for the work environment in their team take productivity problems to a new level. So how can a captain lead the crew to achieving their goals while keeping them motivated and efficient?

Here is some fairly obvious advice on how to be more productive – and yet most of us tend to ignore it. Make sure to follow these simple tips to keep your work environment healthy and stay efficient.

Monday has come around again… We all know that feeling: another week full of chores is almost here, and you don’t really feel that refreshed after the weekend. So what can be done to better prepare for the start of the new week and prevent exhaustion?

Try psychological tricks to increase your productivity… The problem of long projects and large tasks is staying motivated the entire time we are working on them. Scientists recommend using psychological tricks to get the work done, even when you feel fed-up with it. Let’s take a look!

We can develop healthy habits and an attitude necessary to get work done – but there are things that can reduce all that positive progress to zero. So what are our worst enemies at the workplace?

“Not a morning person” could be quite an accurate description of most of us. But morning is precious time, so why waste it trying to kick yourself out of bed and get ready? There are habits and rituals that will help you stay focused and efficient in the morning.

Our time is valuable, so we should handle it carefully. Distribute your work time thoughtfully to get more done without getting stressed and overworked. That’s the way to being more productive, not more tired.

We are taught to work in 45-, 60-, or 90-minute sprints with breaks between them. So what is the best way to make use of these breaks? There are some excellent science-backed tips on how to increase work efficiency by choosing the right activity for your rest periods.|||

Take a look at our compilation of helpful infographics on how to be more productive and follow these recommendations at work and in everyday life.