We know you’ve been wanting faster and easier access to GPU computing for AI in the cloud, so today we are excited to be the first major cloud provider to globally offer the NVIDIA Tesla® P100 GPU card  – currently being revved up in our data centers and will be available in the forthcoming weeks.

NVIDIA and IBM have been partnering since 2014 to bring you the latest GPU technology in the cloud including being first to market in 2015 with the NVIDIA Tesla K80 and the Tesla M60 in 2016.

And now our customers can experience even more power to take on their AI and deep learning workloads with the P100s.

Where supercomputing was once only something afforded by large corporations, by adding NVIDIA GPUs into the cloud, we are making it easily accessible to all.

We’re seeing deep learning and AI transition from traditionally research oriented computation to workloads dealing with infinite computing needs. The advantages of running high performance computing (HPC) in the cloud with NVIDIA GPUs, span industries and today offers financial services, healthcare, and scientific research the ability to perform better and calculate and analyze data faster. In fact, GPUs are now crossing over into business situations to attack business oriented problems, which essentially helps customers of any size or type answer their most complex big data challenges.

Recently, IBM Cloud, together with MapD and Bitfusion, were able to scale up to 64 Tesla™ K80 GPUs across 32 servers to filter, query and aggregate a 40-billion-row data set in just 271 milliseconds. That’s a mind-blowing 147 billion rows per SECOND. Imagine the possibilities with the new P100!

Watch how Bitfusion incorporated its software developed to manage deep learning and GPUs to help our customer MapD add GPUs to their cloud environment to accelerate their data analytics.

When you provision your bare metal server with two NVIDIA Tesla P100 GPU cards, you can see 50 times the performance than its predecessor, the Tesla K80. The addition of the accelerator can deliver up to 65 percent more machine learning capabilities giving you higher throughput than traditional virtualized servers.

For those ready to start trying out GPUs in a cloud environment, we currently offer NVIDIA Tesla M60 and K80, designed for high performance acceleration of scientific computation and data analytics. The Tesla M60 (with NVIDIA GRID software) along with the GRID K2, are engineered for professional grade virtualized graphics—all available on various pre-configured bare metal servers with hourly and monthly options.|||

We know you’ve been wanting faster and easier access to GPU computing for AI in the cloud, so today we are excited to be the first major cloud provi...