Our aim is to give website owners themselves a flexible platform where they can easily manage what or where to show content for their adblock visitors.

Unlike most services, we don't do any ad-replacement, pay or signup walls, acceptable ads or connect to any adnetworks or third parties.

Unlike most scripts you can find around the web which are mostly set-and-forget, lama.io allows you to manage and monitor several creatives from a web accessible interface and gives you a near immediate visual overview of your adblock traffic and performance. Other useful features are country/language detection and google analytics integration.

How is this different from other services, code or library to detect adblock visitors?

Our system is only tested against the most popular browser plugins with mostly default settings. This should still be the vast majority of adblock traffic for most websites.

No. There are a variety of ad-blocking techniques that range from the more common browser plugins (with varying degrees of aggressiveness) to full blown dedicated network filters, etc.

Won't my account get listed on some block list eventually?

If your account gets blocked on any of the major blocking lists, the system is designed with a few configuration parameters that, when changed, may circumvent some of the more common and lightweight blocking techniques and get your account back in working conditions.

However, to avoid a "ping-pong" type situation with the adblock community we recommend that the system be used smartly, sensibly, and above all, creatively, in order to understand new and better ways to engage your adblock traffic and not as a way to spam your visitors with more advertisements.

Getting blocked will depend on several factors. Please consider the following:

Although the system can be used to show any private advertising deals you may have, remember that displaying blatant adverts or non-related content without any type of regard or understanding as to why your visitors block ads in the first place will surely increase the odds of getting blocked. Make sure any advertising or sponsor deals you have are related and valuable to your website's audience.

Displaying big bold warnings reminding the visitor is using adblock has also been demonstrated to yield little results. Most adblock users never whitelist any website and usually ignore such messages. Of course, your mileage may vary. For example, websites or forums with tight communities may be able to succeed with whitelisting instructions or donation messages.

Hiding content or showing overlays is another commonly used way and should only really work if you're ready to completely discard adblock visitors or have some kind of subscription model in place that works for you, as increasingly seen by various online newspapers and websites. The system wasn't built to block content, but due to its flexibility there are ways that you could theoretically remove or overlay your content using the service and some css trickery. We do not recommend this.|||

Frequently Asked Questions - lama.io allows website and business owners to engage, test and optimize their adblock traffic