For 15 amateur quants who made the cut, a chunk of Steven Cohen’s money just got to work behind their code.

Quantopian Inc., the online platform where members build and run computerized trading programs, has begun spreading around the $250 million it got from Point72 Asset Management LP’s chief executive officer last year. One strategy chosen from more than 100,000 submitted for U.S. equities just got $3 million from the crowdsourced firm.

More than a dozen others got smaller chunks of the Point72 Ventures money after Boston-based Quantopian built up trading infrastructure and tested the ideas out. With more than $10 million at work, the funding represents one of the bigger tests for a theory of money management predicated on mining talent from groups of would-be investment stars.

“We are just beginning to give people a chance to put their knowledge to work,” John Fawcett, Quantopian chief executive officer, said in a statement Thursday. “Talent is everywhere in the world, not just at hedge funds located around New York City.”

Quantopian has come along way since its start in 2011, when Fawcett -- a Harvard-educated engineer who goes by “Fawce” -- founded the firm as a free software platform. The startup enticed users with free seminars where professionals, academics and amateurs alike traded quant best practices over pizza and beer.

Today, the platform is more Darwinian battleground than startup Shangri-La, pitting 120,000 members from 180 countries in a competition for capital and 10 percent of the resulting profits.

The promise of backing from Cohen drew out hundreds of thousands of code submissions. That alone turned heads, and other startups like Quantiacs.com and established firms like Two Sigma Investments LP have attempted to replicate it. Now the world finds out if tapping the crowd generates workable strategies.

Quantopian concedes that most of the submissions it received were overfitted, a sin of data analysis where complicated parameters make a strategy look great on paper while dooming it in the wild. In a 2016 study of 888 Quantopian submissions, Thomas Wiecki, the lead data scientist, found that “backtest overfitting is common and wide-spread,” making backtests unreliable predictors of whether a code works in real life.

“Our selection process is first and foremost to mitigate the biggest risk of strategies, which is to overfit,” Jonathan Larkin, chief investment officer, said by phone. Because authors on their platform retain intellectual property, looking under the hood isn’t an option, he added.

Instead, Larkin and his team built an obstacle course of evaluations that the algorithms must endure. First, the code must run successfully on its own for six months. Then, it undergoes an automated screening process and simulated trading environments. From there, the code is watched by human eyes for a more thorough evaluation. Even if it comes out unscathed, Quantopian will only offer a license after a background check and Skype interview with its creator.

From the hundreds of thousands submitted, the number of codes that have survived? Just 25. Even with those, there’s no guarantee.

“Our process is not designed for a 100 percent success rate. Any statistical method of evaluation is imperfect,” said Larkin. “On an ongoing basis when a strategy is live, we continue to evaluate” and pull ones that start to flounder, he said.

For its second challenge, Larkin says Quantopian only accept strategies which exploit new factors, or identifiable characteristics that predict market-beating or risk mitigating results.

That objective might sound fishy to more traditional quants like AQR Capital Management’s Cliff Asness or BlackRock Inc.’s Andrew Ang, who say they have found only four or five workable equity factors in their careers. Old school theoreticians are generally skeptical that more exist after decades of research and real-world inquiry.

“I categorically reject that statement,” Larkin said, citing the crowd-sourced shop’s 15 algorithms with capital backing. “We seek to find strategies that have essentially no loading whatsoever on value, growth, momentum or size.”

The $3 million kicks off the start of upcoming developments at Quantopian. By the end of April, the firm plans to roll out futures trading capabilities. It’s also in the process of launching a commingled fund for late 2017.

“I’ve observed a significant increase in the marketplace of interest toward quantitative strategies and toward organizations that can present a truly differentiated value proposition,” Larkin said. “Quantopian is both of those.”|||

For 15 amateur quants who made the cut, a chunk of Steven Cohen’s money just got to work behind their code.