General Motors essentially ended its San Francisco Bay Area presence after a 2009 bankruptcy filing by the old company led it to abandon a joint-venture auto plant there that it helped run for a quarter century. But the new GM may return to the Golden State in a big way, with plans to add more than 1,100 high-paying jobs at its self-driving car unit.

GM’s Cruise Automation, purchased by the biggest U.S. automaker for about $580 million in early 2016, informed state officials that it wants to invest $14 million to expand operations in San Francisco and add 1,163 full-time employees, according to the state’s business and economic development office. California is prepared to provide tax credits worth $8 million to Cruise if it moves forward with the plan – assuming the incentive package wins final approval on April 13.

Under the plan, GM's total employment in California would rise from 485 people in 2016 to 1,648 by 2021. The average salary for its new employees would be $116,000 a year, according to the proposal.

Kyle Vogt, Cruise’s “robot guru" founder, told Forbes in March that the company now has about 150 employees in San Francisco working on autonomous vehicle technology that will eventually be deployed in rideshare vehicles for General Motors. That’s up from just 46 people when GM bought Cruise March 2016.

The scale of Cruise’s operations, if it does add all those new autonomous car tech workers, would be on par with the biggest competing programs in Silicon Valley, including those of Waymo, formerly the Google Self-Driving Car project, and Uber. It would also bolster the Bay Area’s role as a global center of self-driving vehicle technology.

General Motor in December announced plans to build a fleet of autonomous Chevrolet Bolt electric hatchbacks this year at a plant in Michigan, which would use drive control algorithms and artificial intelligence created by Cruise. Although Vogt declined to confirm a report that  “thousands” of self-driving Bolts will go into service for ride-hailing company Lyft in 2018, he told Forbes that Cruise technology will be deployed soon.

“We’ve had a plan in place for a while and it’s going according to schedule. From what I can tell it’s much faster and going to happen much sooner than most people in the industry think,” Vogt said last month. “We’re planning to deploy in a rideshare environment, and very quickly.”

Aside from winning final approval for California’s tax incentive package, GM’s Cruise faces the considerable challenge of finding enough qualified software engineers and computer scientists needed to master and commercialize autonomous driving technology.

Demand in the Bay Area for people with the necessary skills to be self-driving car engineers is intense owing to a relatively small talent pool at the moment. That’s raised salaries to nosebleed levels, with experienced engineers commanding total compensation of more than $400,000.

Although California is delighted to see GM adding jobs in the state, the carmaker’s 2009 departure from New United Motor Manufacturing, the old JV factory shared with Toyota, had a happier ending than might have been expected.

That’s because Elon Musk found the Fremont plant to be ideal for his purposes. Tesla acquired it in 2010 and now has more than 6,000 assembly workers there – compared with about 5,000 when it was run by Toyota and GM – building $100,000 Tesla Model S sedans and Model X crossovers.

And if all goes well, Musk also wants Teslas built there to gain the ability to drive themselves in another year or two.

Alan Ohnsman covers the intersection of technology, autos and mobility. Follow him on Twitter and LinkedIn.|||

If it goes through with the plan the carmaker's Cruise unit would scale up Bay Area autonomous tech operations to a level on par with those of Alphabet's Waymo and Uber