We have cofounded a travel startup 6 months ago and i am just confused about how to find the best traction channel.

These days i am reading “Traction” book written by Gabriel Weinberg and Justin Mares. Book is really a good guide to understand the basics.

I have tried several channels to get attraction and reached a point but now we need some more powerful channels.

Let me tell you shortly what we do and it would be easier to understand the situation.

We are a marketplace which connects travelers and locals through unique local experiences and tours hosted by locals of the city. (You can check it out . www.localguddy.com )

It is simple locals create their own tours & experiences and make money in their free time by being half guide and half friend for travelers.

They select one of the below guddy types while creating a tour:

1) Local Guddy: Shows you the city with its all the hidden spots, views, gardens and must see places.

2) Food Walker: Shows the best places in the city to taste local foods in several hours

3) Pub Crawler: Shows the nigthlife of the city with its the best pubs and clubs.

4) Hommy Chef: Cooks homemade local foods at home and host travelers for a dinner or a breakfast.

We have +400 tours in more than 40 countries so far.

For the traction channels, the main challenge is to reach the people who are travelling and planning to travel soon:

I will list the traction channels i have tried and comment if they worked or not for me. Please comment the traction channels you tried in travel sector or the channels you would recommend.

Still working on it and i think building affiliate partnerships can be a hack in this market.

Will see and keep you posted. If you have contacts or ideas please let me know!

Partnering with other travel websites like (accommodation, transportation etc.) is going to be helpful for both of you. You will not lose anything by partnering with one more platform so keep building partnerships :)

For example recently we partnered with Erasmusinn and we managed to get really good traction from there because most of the users were matching with our target audience.

I wanted to give it a try. And worked with an influencer. I didn’t want to spend a lot of money. I found several platforms ( Influanza , famebit etc. ) where you can reach influencers who are already willing to work with you. We gave a free tour to an instagram influencer in return, she mentioned about us on her instagram account. hmm it didn’t work that much for us:/ But i think the problem was that there are many fake followers on instagram so next time i will try with a blogger or vlogger and also will try to work with multiple micro influencers. I will keep you posted.

Before new year’s eve, we have shot about 170 personal videos for some of our guddies to celebrate their new years. Each video’s length were around 50–60 secs. And it took really days for us to record each videos (You can see them on our youtube channel)

And i posted them on facebook, twitter and tagged our users. We also sent them via email. Some of our users shared the video and send us really nice messages. We regained some of our old users. 

But these videos didn’t meet with our expectations. We thought this will be a day to remember for our startup, and we will grow viral, we will gain thousands of users.. of course we didn’t :)

I would recommend any startups to make these kind of projects to make your community happy but don’t expect a big change.

No matters which traction channel you will use, you will somehow manage to get visitors into your website. Don’t forget to track your users in your website:

Share your experiences about getting traction in travel market so we can exchange ideas.

Please let me know if you would be interested in partnering with www.localguddy.com

You can reach me via emre@localguddy.com|||

We have cofounded a travel startup 6 months ago and i am just confused about how to find the best traction channel. These days i am reading “Traction” book written by Gabriel Weinberg and Justin…