The recording from San Francisco Android User Group talk, "Extremely Fast Android Builds with Gradle" by Xavier Ducrohet (Lead of Android Developer tools at Google) and Hans Dockter (Founder of Gradle) Tuesday, March 28 at the Google offices in San Francisco. Hans and Xavier talk about the details of the latest performance improvements for Gradle Android builds. 



Talk Abstract:

Android build performance is top of mind for many Android developers. Learn about the latest performance features in the Android build system from Xavier Ducrohet, Lead of Android Developer Tools and Hans Dockter, Founder of Gradle. 



Over the last six months, the Gradle team has focused on improving Gradle core performance where it is most relevant for Android builds. The Android tools team just published an early preview of their upcoming Android Gradle plugin 2.5.0, which comes with significant performance improvements. 



In this meetup, you will learn in-depth about all the improvements. Learn also about what more to expect in the near future. Every Android build will benefit from those improvements, but some more than others. Therefore we will also talk about how to structure and configure your Android builds to get the best results. 



Speaker Bios: 



Hans Dockter is the founder and project lead of the Gradle build system and the CEO of Gradle Inc. a company that provides training, support and consulting for Gradle and all forms of enterprise software project automation in general. Hans is a thought leader in the field of build automation and has successfully been in charge of numerous large-scale enterprise builds. He is also an advocate of Domain Driven Design, having taught classes and delivered presentations on this topic together with Eric Evans. In the earlier days, Hans was also a committer for the JBoss project and founded the JBoss-IDE.



Xavier joined Google in 2007 to work on Android. He’s now the lead for the SDK and Developer Tools for Android, leading the effort to unify Android apps around a single Gradle-based build system, deeply integrated with Android Studio, an IntelliJ-based IDE for Android.|||

The recording from San Francisco Android User Group talk, "Extremely Fast Android Builds with Gradle" by Xavier Ducrohet (Lead of Android Developer tools at ...