I’ve worked in Scala for 6 years on projects ranging in size from 100s to 100k’s of LoC and built with SBT, Pants, and Maven.

I recently surveyed the current state of these three tools and concluded that SBT is better suited than Maven to Scala projects’ needs.

The following is a discussion of the {theoretical,practical} ⅹ {pros,cons} of each.

Build/Package/Release logic is complicated, and deserves sophisticated tools and abstractions just as much as the code it builds.

There are many reasons that projects use Scala over other lanuages:

All these reasons also favor configuring projects’ builds in Scala, as SBT allows, instead of in Python (Pants) or Java+XML (Maven); in many cases, increased expressiveness and safety is more important when configuring build workflows than when writing business-logic-heavy application code!

Instead, prominent Scala projects’ Maven builds are shoehorned into logic-less XML APIs presented by Java-bean-based plugins, which:

Such a complete encapsulation failure would never be tolerated in projects’ source, yet it is ubiquitous in Maven+Scala projects’ builds.

A glaring problem in the Maven-builds of two projects I’ve used and worked on for years, Spark and ADAM, motivated this investigation.

Each releases and versions of several modules (e.g. , ).

They do this by running a shell-script to toggle the current Scala version in the project between and :

Maven-controlled release-processes are run in between applications of these scripts.

In each case, the shell-script uses to comb a regular expression over all files in the repository, rewriting instances of to or vice-versa (and carefully excepting some hits, in ADAM’s case).

Spark’s release flow temporarily rewrites the POM to use Scala 2.10, releases that, then discards those changes, releases 2.11, and s that tree, leaving a history like:

In ADAM, the POM changes are made into small - or -specific branches, each anchored by a git tag, which becomes the canonical SCM-pointer to each release:

As you can see, a second, nested round of POM-regexing also happens ( ) in order to publish for different Spark major-versions as well.

Both of these workflows are distressing for several reasons:

Spark is one of the biggest, most popular, and most active Apache projects; what hope do run-of-the-mill Scala projects have if this is the best release-workflow they can come up with?

Should people copy such a script into every Scala project they create?

A little googling implies that Scala projects are, in fact, copying versions of this script around:

… the list seems to go on.

Maven provides a deep set of abstractions for designing build-scapes:

I assumed this framework would allow me to express a trivial modification ( ) to one of the basic POM attributes ( ; would also suffice), but I was wrong.

I attempted to make this work in Maven in myriad ways:

All of these approaches failed.

Some discussion of specific failure-modes – and a sketch of an idea for actually accomplishing this with Maven – can be found in Appendix A, but suffice it to say that after being blocked in so many novel and frustrating ways from accomplishing something so simple, I began evaluating alternatives to Maven for my Scala-project-management needs.

SBT makes cross-publishing artifacts for different Scala versions trivial: you put a in front of a task on the CLI, and it runs for all Scala-versions you’ve configured the project to build against.

builds JARs, POMs, source- and javadoc-JARs, and tests-JARs if desired (with corresponding sources- and javadoc-JARs), each for arbitrary Scala-binary-versions, and publishes the lot to Maven Central.

While SBT clearly went out of its way to make cross-publishing trivial, the added power from configuring builds in Scala has also proved invaluable.

In short order I ported several dozen Scala projects to SBT, factoring out all repeated build-configuration to hammerlab/sbt-parent along the way; my plan is now to use SBT for all Scala projects for the forseeable future, and recommend that others do the same.

Below I’ll drill in on specific pros and cons:

SBT gets several crucial things right:

Consider this example from hammerlab/genomic-utils, setting a few project-level fields:

An equivalent block would look like:

In reality, the POM would have more boilerplate above and below this just supporting these values, and considerably more when expressing the remaining project configuration:

The point is: Scala code can be made at least as lean for expressing simple attributes as any markup-language.

hammerlab/sbt-parent includes implementations of many repeated configuration blocks that have been factored out for concise re-use across projects.

Some examples in the wild:

Many more such conveniences can be found in the s of the modules in hammerlab/spark-genomics and by reading the hammerlab/sbt-parent implementation.

There seem to be functional plugins for all important tasks from the Maven ecosystem:

In some areas, SBT plugins exist that go beyond what I’ve observed to be possible in the Maven world, e.g. ’s one-step creation of tarballs that can be ed.

In 2017, SBT is a lot more usable than at points in the past, but its learning curve remains steep. Some notes on classes of issues I hit:

SBT decomposes work into “tasks”, “settings” (special-cases of tasks), and “commands”; how/whether to compose/combine any of the three with any of the others, including themselves, is remarkably hard to understand.

However, even within this characterization there are some incorrect assumptions and caveats warranted, so a bit of feeling around in the dark is still inevitable when attempting any nontrivial pipelining.

A gem of SBT’s design is a lazily-eval’d computation-dependency-graph compiled statically from tasks’ references to other tasks/settings, using some macro-magic associated with a method on settings and keys.

As far as I can tell no one has tried to discuss how/why this works in a way that is remotely accessible to a non-SBT-committer.

This SO answer is the only discussion of it I’ve seen anywhere (incidentally, also linked to by sbt-coverage’s implementation above).

SBT uses a “latest wins” heuristic for resolving conflicting versions of dependencies: the newest version of a library found in the dependency tree will be used.

Maven, on the other hand, uses a “nearest wins” strategy: versions declared by dependencies closer to the root of the dependency tree are favored.

This discrepancy can lead to unexpected problems moving between Maven and SBT, or maintaining parallel builds; see this related configuration in Spark’s SBT build, and discussion on this example repo and in the SBT Gitter room.

In some low moments I was able to get help in the SBT Gitter room, particularly from @dwijnand (thanks! 😀).

Among other things, he recommended this excellent blog post as a starting point for understanding SBT’s design/API, which was very helpful.

Doing away with the daily indignities of trying to serialize simple build-logic into Maven’s uncooperative POM framework has been a boon to my ability to create, release, and maintain Scala projects, and I hope that my travelogue here will help others in similar situations.

Realizing that I wanted/needed as much from language/tooling when configuring my builds as I do when writing the code that I later seek to build was an important epiphany, and has led to further revelations about missing functionality in the larger JVM-ecosystem-project-management universe, that I hope to touch on in subsequent posts.

Feel free to drop by any of the hammerlab-org repos linked here, or our public slack channel, to discuss further!

The following are notes on a couple of attempts to set up a Maven-based workflow for cross-publishing differing Scala-binary-versioned artifacts:

Several things I explored involved rewriting POMs, like a does, but perhaps with a real XML parser or in a way that is somehow better-integrated with other Maven workflows.

At the end of the day I found this approach to be suboptimal at a high level: Maven only picks up POM-changes when a new invocation is run, and this feels like a basic breach of the dependency-/worfklow-management contract.

In any case, here are some such attempts that were nevertheless unworkable:

This plugin is in wide use for doing things sort of like what is required for cross-publishing Scala-binary-versioned artifacts, but on investigation I found it to not facilitate much improvement over the status quo.

Its Maven phase parses the POM XML, rewrites the appropriate tag(s) (with… fake XPaths?), and then writes the POM back out, taking care to preserve whitespace and any POM-formatting idiosyncracies. Subsequent -CLI invocations then pick up the values in the rewritten POM.

That sounds like an improvement, but would basically require two actions to run:

Digging in, I found that the plugin adds some overhead to this (values it splices in must be versions of dependencies that it is aware of), and the end-result would still be an unsatisfying rewrite-the-POM-then-run-again state of affairs, so I gave up on this approach.

Like , this plugin is used for similar POM manipulations to those we might desire, e.g. rewriting a bunch of tags using an XML parser.

Also like , unfortunately, its operations are only picked up by subsequent Maven invocations, which breaks the .

I prototyped a custom Maven plugin for doing POM rewrites similar to those discussed above, but was stymied; for one, I wanted to write my plugin in Scala, but this generated the kind of errors (and corresponding empty SERPs) that made me feel that no one had ever attempted as much before, and that it wasn’t likely to be workable.

As also mentioned above, I was also pursuing the “POM-rewriting” approach, not appreciating that what I really wanted was an altogether different model, discussed below.

A couple of approaches sought to use existing Maven-plugin XML APIs to do what I want; they also failed!

I thought I might solve cross-publishing by having a POM for each Scala-binary-version I wanted to publish for, and a parent POM that wrapped and submodules.

Of course, almost everything would be reused in both modules’ POMs, so you’d want most things (like ) specified in the parent.

However, I ran aground: some had to be set in the parent-POM that was published, and the child/implementation modules inevitably inherited whatever was set there: I was back to needing to cross-publish the parent POM, or repeat all dependencies in each child POM.

In discussion of an early draft of this post, @vanzin pointed me to this attempt at solving this problem, which is used in production by cloudera/livy.

At the time of this writing, my understanding is that it faces the same problem described above, per vanzin/multi-scala#1.

AFAICT, classifiers can’t be made to solve this, because Scala 2.10 and 2.11 releases require not just JARs with different names and binary contents, but different dependencies as specified in the POM; this seems to require separate POMs, and therefore separate tuples.

I think that one could write a Maven plugin that, instead of rewriting POMs and requiring a Maven reboot, used APIs like to modify internal Maven state that would govern how all of its usual phases operated.

You could then have a – ideally defined in a parent-POM that Scala projects inherited, to minimize boilerplate – that activated a custom plugin phase that changed the and before proceeding through all requested phases, without messing with transient POM changes or Maven reboots.

As mentioned at the start of the post, I also experimented with porting some repos to Pants.

Pants’ design has some desirable properties over all other tools that I’m aware of:

However, the open-source community / support-base around it is significantly smaller than that of Maven and SBT, and it felt like I’d have to write some plugins myself, in Python, which proved to be a dealbreaker given the option to write build logic in Scala instead.

I hope some of the great features of Pants will become more accessible soon, or that other tools will incorporate them!|||

