Here we tested the hypothesis that entrepreneurs' emotional experience and brain responses toward their own firm resemble those of parents toward their own children. Using fMRI, we measured the brain activity while male entrepreneurs viewed pictures of their own and of a familiar firm, and while fathers viewed pictures of their own and of a familiar child. The entrepreneurs who self-rated as being very closely attached with their venture showed a similar suppression of activity in the posterior cingulate cortex, temporoparietal junction, and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex as fathers during viewing pictures of their own children versus familiar children. In addition, individual differences in the confidence trait influenced the neural encoding of both paternal and entrepreneurial processing. For underconfident fathers, a picture of one's own child was associated with stronger activation and for overconfident fathers with weaker activation in the amygdala and in caudate nucleus, a brain structure associated with processing of rewards. Similar association with activation, yet more widespread in the emotional processing network, was observed in entrepreneurs suggesting a similar neural basis for increased sensitivity to threats and potential risks concerning one's venture and child. In conclusion, both entrepreneurial and parental love seem to be supported by brain structures associated with reward and emotional processing as well as social understanding. Hum Brain Mapp 38:2923–2938, 2017. © 2017 The Authors Human Brain Mapping Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Entrepreneurship has major economic value; it substantially contributes to employment, innovation, productivity, and economic growth [Van Praag and Versloot, 2007; Carree and Thruik, 2010]. Emotional attachment entrepreneurs create to their new ventures is integral in sustaining entrepreneurial efforts for long periods of time [Shane et al., 2003]. In addition, emotions entrepreneurs experience have an influence on new venture creation, growth, and performance [Baum and Locke, 2004; Baron, 2008]. Previous studies have examined how entrepreneurs experience emotions such as grief [e.g., Shepherd et al., 2009], fear [e.g., Foo, 2011], and passion [Cardon et al., 2009; Murnieks et al., 2014] toward their own venture. By inspiring individuals and motivating them to persist in the face of difficulties, entrepreneurial passion strongly impacts on the positive outcomes of the venture creation process [Cardon et al., 2005, Cardon and Kirk, 2015; Murnieks et al., 2014]. It also has a positive relationship with funding potential [Chen et al., 2009; Mitteness et al., 2012] and venture growth [Baum et al. 2001]. While aiming to create something remarkable, passionate entrepreneurs exert a high impact on the society [Ma and Tan, 2006].

In the postemergence stage—the time period that starts from a firm's establishment—entrepreneur's emotional experience toward the venture has been suggested to resemble parental love [Mirabella, 1993; Shankland, 2000; Cardon et al., 2005]. An entrepreneur's experienced closeness to the venture increases with its formation and has been expected to be like the intimate and committed relation between a parent and a child [e.g., Shaver and Mikulincer, 2006]. Similar to parents do for their children, entrepreneurs make altruistic and sacrificing acts for their ventures and frequently put the ventures' needs ahead of their own needs [Cardon et al., 2005]. Such a relationship of attachment is found particularly in the early stages of postemergence, as the venture's dependence on the entrepreneur wanes at maturity as growth saturates [Cardon et al., 2005].

In the pre-emergence stage, that entails opportunity-recognition and venture-formation activities, an entrepreneur's emotional attachment to a venture can often be described as anxious-ambivalent: passion, that reflects a drive and motivational energy, is intensified but intimacy and commitment manifest at a considerably lesser intensity [Hazan and Shaver, 1987]. Compared with earlier developmental stages, entrepreneur's emotional experience in the postemergence stage is increasingly self-regulated [Carver and Scheier, 1998; Gross, 1999] and reflects a more balanced manifestation of intimacy, passion, and commitment—the three elements of love [Sternberg, 1986, 1997]. The triangular theory of love suggests that parental love is reflected in a balanced manifestation of the three love components, and, for entrepreneurial love to be akin to paternal love, a similar balanced manifestation should be witnessed in entrepreneurs' evaluation of the strength of the components.

In this study, we compare the neural basis of entrepreneurial attachment with the neural basis of parental attachment. Love can be conceptualized as a “peak experience” that is an intense, beyond ordinary, emotion [Acevedo and Aron, 2009]. Schindehutte et al. [2006] found that peak experiences are particularly associated with high growth ventures, and therefore we focused on entrepreneurs that expected the annual growth of their firm to exceed 20% in the 3 years following the experiment. Focusing on entrepreneurs with growth orientation naturally limited our subject pool. There is plenty of research showing that the ventures of female entrepreneurs are less likely to grow, and that they are less likely to seek growth than their male counterparts [Autio and Pathak, 2010; Fairlie and Robb, 2009; Orser and Hogarth-Scott, 2002; Rosa et al., 1996]. Therefore, we made the decision of studying only male entrepreneurs and fathers.

Entrepreneurs' relationship with their firm is often characterized by unrealistic expectations that often cannot be met. Similarly, parents create idealistic images of their children and put their child on an unachievable pedestal [Cardon et al., 2005]. Here we hypothesize that confidence is related with attachment relationships of entrepreneurs and ventures as well as fathers and their children. We base our hypothesis on the observations that, on the one hand, overconfidence is typical for entrepreneurs and explains entry to entrepreneurship [e.g., Cooper et al. 1988; Hyytinen et al. 2014; Cain et al., 2015], and, on the other hand, overconfidence is more characteristic of men than of women [e.g., Barber and Odean, 2001]. The entrepreneur's optimistic view of his venture is also likely to reflect the belief that their own abilities are better than that of average entrepreneurs [e.g., Hayward et al. 2006; Hyytinen et al. 2014]. In this study, we measure overconfidence as a difference between individual's confidence in his judgment and the accuracy of those judgments [e.g., Fischhoff et al. 1977].

Based on the literature on entrepreneurship, we hypothesize that an entrepreneur's emotional attachments to his new venture is comparable to attachments that are formed between a parent and a child. In the fMRI experiment, entrepreneurs viewed pictures of their own firm and of a familiar firm, and fathers viewed pictures of their own child/children and pictures of a familiar child/children. Viewing pictures of one's own child versus a familiar child has been associated with differential activation in brain regions that are linked to motivation and reward (striatum, including caudate nucleus), social cognition and mentalizing (posterior superior temporal sulcus (STS), ventromedial prefrontal cortex, temporal poles, anterior cingulate cortex, insula, inferior parietal lobule, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, and inferior frontal gyrus), and emotion processing (amygdala, ventral anterior cingulate cortex, insula) [Abraham et al., 2014; Atzil et al., 2012; Bartels and Zeki, 2004; Leibenluft et al., 2004]. Although the majority of these studies have been conducted with mothers as subjects, recent studies comparing mothering and fathering have in general found similar neural basis and synchronous brain activation for both groups. In particular, high activation of STS and amygdala has been associated with parenting, both with mothers and fathers, and high STS activation especially with fathers [Abraham et al., 2014]. Two other areas in the emotional processing network, namely the middle insula and the ventral anterior cingulate cortex (vACC), are also relevant for parental love and caregiving [Abraham et al., 2014; Bartels and Zeki, 2004]. In addition, fathers' faces elicited activity in the caudate nucleus in a study of adult children viewing pictures of their parents [Arsalidou et al., 2010].

Based on the literature on the neural basis of paternal love, we hypothesize that the neuronal activations relating especially to reward, motivation and affective experiences are salient and similar between the two groups. As a parent–child relationship is to a large extent social by nature and an entrepreneur–firm relationship is more unidirectional, we expected to find differential activation patterns in brain regions related to social cognition.|||

