What Do Silicon Valley Workers Think About a Crackdown on H-1B Work Visas?

With the U.S. Department of Homeland Security announcing on Monday a new process and increased oversight on H1-B visas, used often in Silicon Valley to bring in temporary foreign technology workers, technology employers are growing more concerned.

The new oversight and re-emphasized guidelines by the USCIS, which will likely limit the use H1B visas for engineering positions, and increases legal fees associated with getting approval, could really impact hiring for both venture-backed startups and Silicon Valley giants.

Although many technology luminaries inside and outside of Silicon Valley believe H1B visas are one of the few answers to the growing shortage of technology talent in America and are vital to innovation, the current administration has been clear that it intends to curb back the use of them — especially among computer programmers.

They state that curbing back the program will open up more jobs for American workers — and potentially increase the diversity of the technology workforce with more opportunities for minorities. Last year, the program capped out a week after opening up with 85,000 H1B visas after receiving 236,000 applications.

The team here at Anthology has been looking closely at the H1B visa program and how changes to it may impact the job opportunities available for passive job seekers on our platform and beyond.

To get a gauge on what employees think of the tightening of the program we decided to ask 200 new passive job-seekers on the Anthology platform in March — from companies like Facebook, Uber, Snapchat, and many more — Which of the following options describes your thoughts on tightening the supply of H-1B work visas (Choose all that apply)?

Below is what we found. It’s worth noting that although we didn’t ask users their work status, job portability while in America under an H1B visa can be extremely difficult. Therefore, it’s likely that the vast majority of technology workers responding are not currently using an H1B visa.

Over two-thirds of those surveyed work at technology companies or hold technology roles in top hiring markets like San Francisco, New York, Seattle, Los Angeles, Boston, Chicago, DC, Austin and Denver.

Given what we noted previously, it was interesting that so many technology workers (who are likely not H1B visa workers) noted it will negatively affect innovators and entrepreneurs. Remember these are likely workers who would likely benefit professionally by a clamp down on the program with more opportunities. However, they’re thinking mostly that this will hurt innovators and entrepreneurs.

Clearly, there could be a trickle-down impact on respondents in terms of their job opportunities. If there are fewer true innovators and entrepreneurs in the U.S. or less access to top talent for them, the bottom line of businesses could be impacted.

Mark Zuckerberg, for one, wants to increase the number of H1B visas each year. He’s noted in the past that the U.S. “kicks out the more than 40% of math and science graduate students who are not US citizens after educating them.” Under his view, this limits innovators and entrepreneurs access to top global talent.

Furthermore, a quarter of all entrepreneurs in the U.S. are immigrants. While they may originally stay in the U.S. after schooling to work for another company — ultimately they become key job creators.

Even if workers noted it will negatively affect innovators and entrepreneurs alike, many also said it could lead to more job opportunities for them. More than twice as many of those surveyed said it will lead to more job opportunities currently for them versus fewer job opportunities.

It may also mean higher wages. Some have argued that the use of temporary foreign workers with little ability to move to another company enables Silicon Valley companies to put an artificial cap on salaries. If temporary work visas are pulled back and more technology workers are allowed to freely move between companies for higher salaries — income across the board will go up for technology workers.

Some technology workers thoughts on the tightening of foreign work visas center on it being beneficial for American innovators and entrepreneurs. If you define “American innovation” as only innovation created by those born here in America that may be true. But the argument does seem to run contrarian to the proverbial melting pot that America has portrayed.

Furthermore, as we noted above, more than a quarter of American entrepreneurs weren’t originally born here in the U.S. Some of America’s most innovative companies were founded by immigrants and many are lead today by immigrants. For instance, Google co-founder Sergey Brin was an immigrant and its current CEO Sundar Pichai is as well.

While we noted that the vast majority of users on Anthology and those surveyed are likely not H1B visa workers, there was a percentage of respondents that believed this clampdown on H1B visas could lead to fewer job opportunities for them. What do we make of this group of respondents?

They could potentially be on an H1B visa, or perhaps, on different types of temporary work visas like an F1 Study Visa, an L1 Intra-Company Transfer Visa, or K and V Fiancee visas.

With the current administration steadfast putting American workers first, it seems any worker in the U.S. that isn’t a permanent resident may have a right to think these recent changes could impact their future opportunities in the U.S.

At the very least, the 900,000+ H1B visa holders currently in the U.S., who hold nearly 13% of tech jobs, are certainly unsure about their future job opportunities in the U.S.|||

With the U.S. Department of Homeland Security announcing on Monday a new process and increased oversight on H1-B visas, used often in Silicon Valley to bring in temporary foreign technology workers…