The camera market is very familiar with an onboard flash, present in almost every camera – from point-and-shoot models to high end DSLRs. However, the onboard flash is best used in a setting that is completely opposite to what most hobby photographers use their flash for: as a fill light during good light conditions rather than a primary source of light in low light conditions. Therefore the predominant demand for a flash that illuminates low light conditions without seeming “harsh” remains unfulfilled by an onboard flash. Here is where an external flash comes in. An external flash not only produces better pictures as compared to an onboard flash, but also has a host of other benefits, including- saving your camera battery’s life, firing the flash more often without having to wait longer between shots, illuminating subjects at a greater distance, illuminating wider shots, and many more.

Now that you’re convinced about the value and advantages of an external flash, let us help you find the best flash for Canon camera!

This product is a great fit as a Canon flash, with 8 pieces of LED lamp for different levels. If you can and know how to shoot in manual mode and control your flash, this flash is for you.

Here are its specifications:

This Canon flash is very easy to use, having professional features and an outstanding build quality. It is dependable and fun to use with a very economical price.

Check out its specifications below:

This product is a powerful external flash for Canon in a 7-item kit. There is a 1-year limited warranty for this Canon flash. It is compatible with all cameras having a standard hot shoe mount.

The specifications for this canon flash are:

This Canon flash is a unit capable of lighting up long range. It can be triggered with YN560-TX, RF-603, RF-602 wireless transmitters.

Other specifications of this external flash for Canon are-

This Canon external flash is another great value-for-money option to choose. The external flash is big and sturdy and provides great pictures with the ability to do so at different angles.

This PowerExtra Canon Flash has a variety of other features:

This best flash for Canon cameras from Canon, has a compact body and provides efficiency in space along with style. It has very convenient controls that make it easy to use.

Here are some of its other features:

These Canon external flash cameras offer a good value for your money. You could try out any of the above best external flashes for Canon to get the best results in an economical price range.

You may also like:|||

If you are looking for a best external flash for your Canon camera which gives true value for the money, then checkout this list of top-rated canon flashes.