The OpenAPI spec seems to be the most popular option among the three major formats the community is currently using for describing APIs (RAML and API Blueprint being the two others). It is used by companies of all sizes, including Microsoft, Netflix, IBM, and Lyft, to name a few.

The three major benefits of creating and using an OpenAPI specification are:

Another benefit of the OpenAPI specification is that it does not require you to rewrite your existing API. You can even find unofficial specs for public APIs. However, OpenAPI is not a one-size-fits-all solution. Not all services can be described by the OpenAPI specification, and it was not intended to cover every possible case of RESTful APIs.

The Swagger specification development started in 2010, by Wordnik. It was later acquired by SmartBear, in 2015. In that same year, SmartBear created the OpenAPI Initiative (OAI) under the Linux Foundation, and donated the Swagger specification to it, in order to advance a common standard across industries. A number of tech companies, including Google, IBM, and Microsoft, signed on as founding members of the OpenAPI Initiative, and the Swagger Specification was rebranded as the Open API Specification.

Crafting good APIs is no easy task. OpenAPI brings a lot of benefits to this process, whether you approach it from a design-first or code-first perspective. The ecosystem of tools can help you generate interactive documentation, SDKs for your APIs in multiple languages, and server stubs.

But getting started with OpenAPI can be challenging. Figuring out how to start writing a spec from the ground up or for existing APIs, which tools, cloud providers, and frameworks support the specification, the differences between 1.2, 2.0, and the upcoming 3.0 versions, and finding open-source generators for your SDKs are only a few of the questions you can run into.

That's why we decided to aggregate the best resources in a single place, and hopefully, guide you on this journey in implementing and making the most of your OpenAPI specification.

We broke down this guide into the following topics:

We really hope you find this useful, and please let us know if you think there are any additional resources we can add here.|||

The OpenAPI Specification, formerly known as Swagger Specification, is a 
simple yet powerful way of describing RESTful APIs, in a machine and human 
readable format, using JSON or YAML. It has a large ecosystem of tools that 
can help you design, build, document, test, and visualize your APIs.

Crafting good APIs is no easy task. OpenAPI brings a lot of benefits to 
this process, whether you approach it from a design-first or code-first 
perspective. The ecosystem of tools can help you generate interactive 
documentation, SDKs for your APIs in multiple languages, and server stubs.

But getting started with OpenAPI can be challenging. Figuring out how to 
start writing a spec from the ground up or for existing APIs, which tools, 
cloud providers, and frameworks support the specification, the differences 
between 1.2, 2.0, and the upcoming 3.0 versions, and finding open-source 
generators for your SDKs are only a few of the questions you can run into.

That's why we decided to aggregate the best resources in a single place, 
and hopefully, guide you on this journey in implementing and making the 
most of your OpenAPI specification [...]