Welcome to the Jungle, Slash. At least the caged kind when the Guns N' Roses guitarist plays the Greater Los Angeles Zoo Association's 2017 Beastly Ball on May 20 to benefit the new Species Conservation Action Network. Joining Slash will be special guests Jack Black, Grace Potter and Bernard Fowler, who will be backed by Jimmy Vivino and The Basic Cable Band (Conan O’Brien Show).

The show is produced in partnership with Citi, Live Nation and NextVR and is part of the larger "Backstage with Citi" concert series which rewards card members with access to thousands of events annually. In addition to Slash's zoo performance broadcast in virtual reality, fans will have access to watch VR behind-the-scenes footage, an interview with the guitarist and  his rehearsal.

"I'm honored and proud to be a part of the L.A. Zoo's 50th Anniversary Beastly Ball," said Slash in a statement. "It's going to be the biggest yet, and I'm really looking forward to jamming live with some good friends."

Slash, a collector of exotic reptiles, is also an animal rights supporter having worked on behalf of number of conservation organizations, including the International Fund for Animal Welfare and Animal Asia. He is also a board trustee of the Greater Los Angeles Zoo Association.

The live VR content will be available on a Google Daydream or Samsung Gear VR headset, along with a compatible smartphone, by downloading the NextVR app from the Oculus store for GearVR or the Google Play store for Daydream.

"With our friends at Live Nation and Next VR, we continue to push the boundaries in the music space to bring fans unprecedented access beyond attendance," said Citi's Jennifer Breithaupt, managing director, media, advertising and global Entertainment, in a statement. "With virtual reality, we can bring fans in for an unparalleled experience with their favorite artists and we couldn’t be more excited to kick off our concert series with Slash and friends."

The L.A. Zoo's new Species Conservation Action Network will use the proceeds to help identify and respond to urgent animal conservation issues around the world. For the Beastly Ball, guests, according to a press release "are invited to dress in safari casual attire, stroll through the Zoo during a rare after-hours visit observing its inhabitants, watching animal feedings, chatting with keepers, viewing small animals up close."

The event will also feature a live auction and a mobile-bidding silent auction comprised of hundreds of items and one-of-a-kind opportunities, plus opportunities to donate a Program Book ad or make other gifts in honor of The Annenberg Foundation, National Geographic Society, Slash or the Greater Los Angeles Zoo Association.

Fans can go here for additional details on the concert and can visit Citi Private Pass for more information on the virtual reality concert series.|||

Welcome to the Jungle, indeed. At least when Guns N' Roses guitarist Slash plays the Greater Los Angeles Zoo Association's 2017 Beastly Ball in May to benefit the new Species Conservation Action Network.