Context awareness is the future of mobile applications. Apps that know the context of each interaction can provide a better experience, create better services, and invent completely new opportunities. Context awareness for a mobile app means knowing basic information such as where the user is (e.g. at home), what they will do next (e.g. drive), where they are going next (e.g work), and when they will arrive (e.g. 9:18am). As you can see, understanding context is very hard because it means not only knowing now, but predicting what is about to come. The SetSDK is here to help.

Already, any mobile developer can use the SetSDK to make their apps understand context and be proactive from that awareness. For transportation apps (car services, ride sharing, public transit routing, for example), that means being able to know where the user wants to go next. In fact, any app that asks the user, “where to?” can use our SDK to shave 20-30 seconds off the time it takes the user to input a destination. Today, I wanted to dig a bit more into the API behind the SetSDK feature for predicting where a user wants to go.

This API is all about predicting where the user is going next. The API is designed to be used after a user signals an intent to go someplace. It then will return an ordered list of most likely next destinations. Set does this by building a predictive model of user locations throughout the day and week, so for any moment in time, the developer simply needs to hit the getDestination API to find out where Set thinks they are headed. The API is young and quickly improving, but already we’re seeing some exciting results.

One of the core use-cases for this API is to improve the user-experience in applications that regularly ask the users to input there next destination. Using Set, those apps can now pre-fill those interfaces with highly accurate predictions of where the user is headed, shaving significant time off the interaction and improving overall app experience.

Let’s take a look at the code it takes to predict a user’s next destination (or see the more customizable version here),

Here, we get a user’s intent simply by them navigating to a screen in our application. For a ride-share app, this would be where the user enters their desired destination. But first, the app takes that intent to run getDestination in order to predict where the user wants to go before they have to type anything. It’s that simple! If you are interested in trying it out, checkout our documentation or our tutorial on building an MVVM app with Set inside.

Our goal at Set is to be able to predict any type of user behavior, but many of our models start with location. Internally we use a more generic version of this method to help create real-time predictions throughout the day. We started hearing a lot of interesting use-cases for this specific version of the API, so wanted to get it out to developers to start building.

Are you building an app that would be better if it could anticipate where its users want to go, get in touch! We’d love to hear from you.|||

Context awareness is the future of mobile applications. Apps that know the context of each interaction can provide a better experience, create better services, and invent completely new opportunities…