We hear of Mark Zuckerberg's possible interest in running for president. We refer to Elon by his first name. Bill Gates is the richest man in the world.

And every college kid dreams of becoming a tech billionaire. There's a certain 'hollywoodization' of entrepreneurship.

It's also much easier to start a business. Throw up a website using one of the many templates out there, host it on Amazon Web Services or GoDaddy, find a problem you think exists, and go about trying to solve it.

In some cases, folks even try to raise money before the idea is fully fleshed out. It feels that easy. What this has led to is a false narrative about the required level of understanding of what you need to build a business.

It's the easiest time in the world to start a business, but it's also never been harder to build one.

I hear this gap in the foundational understanding of business and technology in the many conversations I have with founders. While I recommend that actually doing the work of starting a business and screwing it up is the best way to learn, I also share the story of 'the Elephant and the blind men':

A group of blind men all touch an elephant to learn what it is like. Each one touches a different part and consequently think it is something other than an elephant.

One cannot tell the whole from the parts; just because you think you see a small part of a problem in an industry does not mean you understand how to solve the problem. Most entrepreneurs jump into solving a problem without truly understanding the whole picture, or the 'why' of the problem.

To help these founders along, I recommend some books that provide a systems understanding of technology. Here are nine books that'll ramp you up quickly so that, when you do step out there to start your business, you understand the trends you're riding, what part of the business cycle you're in, and what foundational systems/models you're going up against.|||

These books will help you understand the trends you’re riding, what part of the business cycle you’re in, and what you’re up against.