French IoT firm Sigfox has unveiled a new “GPS-free” internet of things geolocation service designed to allow companies to track assets around the world.

Enabled by Sigfox’s network, which currently is available in parts of 31 countries, Spot’it is an asset-tracking service enabling any existing Sigfox module to become a geolocation device without the need to perform hardware or software upgrades. The company said the service does not rely on energy intensive GPS technology, require additional processing or any more energy than what Sigfox-enabled devices already consume.

Spot’it is embedded in Sigfox’s network footprint and once a device is registered into the Sigfox Cloud, the geolocation service is available in all territories where the network is present. Sigfox Spot’it service is said to work indoor and outdoor.

“Spot’it is not only set to transform the global freight industry, but we anticipate that new services will be developed,” explained Sigfox Chief Marketing Officer Laetitia Jay, in a statement. “Imagine a new service where shipping companies can be alerted when containers stray into regions that they aren’t supposed to be in. From fraud detection to new insurance and geo-marketing business models, the possibilities are endless.”

Spanish device maker and solution provider SayMe and South Korean module manufacturer Wisol signed an alliance to become the largest low-power wide area network IoT solution maker in the world, the two firms said in a statement.

Under terms of the alliance, SayMe will focus on the design and development of vertical IoT solutions, and Wisol will focus on the manufacturing of mass-scale electronic components manufacturing.

SayMe mainly focuses on the development of low-power wireless sensor solutions for “industry 4.0” and smart cities. The Spanish firm owns a proprietary technology platform said to combine hardware equipment and software applications to develop industrial solutions designed to improve energy and operational efficiency.|||

Spot’it is a new asset-tracking service that enables any Sigfox module to become a geolocation device, without the need to perform upgrades.