The Internet has lots of fantastic resources to learn anything by yourself. Since we are “DEVELOPERS”, we should know how to learn any language, structure and etc.

I’ve tried to collect all the good websites for you guys to follow up, keep in updated and walk one more step further in your life solidly.

There will be more to add to this list as many of you guess. So if you want to be pinged when this list updated, please leave a mail address in the comments, so that you can get the News fastly!

I don’t want to talk more, so:

Best List-Blog to follow to keep on updated about the world. Especially about the CS Technologies, Software Development, and Entrepreneurship.

TechCrunch is one of the best places for Entrepreneurs to follow for being informed about the both Tech World and especially the life that goes on in Silicon Valley.

Wired is also a great place to keep updated about the Tech world.

TheVerge has lots of members who follows its news daily. I believe they have really good sources for the Tech World.

If you are an Entrepreneur, you should look into all continent’s Startups. Which means you should keep update yourself with the news and also new ideas from all around the world. I give you this website for your own good. Asia has some awesome Startups for all entrepreneurs to be flame up their minds.

I believe you all heard Reddit. So I do not feel I should give you an explanation about it.

Would you be interested in Tech News and Entrepreneur Lifestyle in Turkey? I say you should.

Would you like to see open source projects by Google?

I would like to share some great groups in Reddit. So this part is only going to be about Reddit Groups.

This subreddit group is discussing the career opportunities and how to react them when you had one. It is very important for you to prepare yourself as a Googler, an Amazon Developer or a Facebook Engineer etc. So I say you should take a look at here.

Yeah, f*cking interesting things going around here.

Do I need to say if you are an Entrepreneur? Aren’t we all?

One of the best.

Web Developer? Then you should check.

Personally, I don’t read here, but I know that some folks are flaming in here and if you are interested in Network Security, then dive in.

One of my favorite!

Did I hear “Oh I know here, pfffs”? There are still people who don’t know Medium yet!

How can I say this… There is no regret when you are in Quora. I believe Quora is the best place on the internet that you need to spend your time. Believe me, you can thank me later.

Design lover? You know where to go.

My precious channel. Do not forget to Subscribe it!

Did you see their subscriber numbers! OMG!!

SlideNerd is a great resource for both professionals and beginners. It covers all sort of programming topics:  Java, JavaScript, Python, Android, iOS, Swift, all easy to follow and understand.

Google Developers channel offers reports, reviews, tutorials, lessons, talks, and best practices about Android, Chrome, Web Development, Polymer, Performance, iOS and more relevant topics. You will also learn and get the latest news on Google services and technologies around mobile, the web and the cloud.

Many great, clear, focused and easy to follow tutorials you will find on Will Stern’s web development channel. There are especially great web development tutorials for beginners.

With LearnCode.academy you can quickly learn Node.js, Angular.js, Backbone.js, Deployment Strategies, HTML, CSS, JavaScript, Sublime Text, CSS Layouts, Responsive Design, Server Administration, Deployment Strategies, and more.

You are going to see this link on so many blogs.

DevTips is a good channel for web designers who want to improve their skills and a useful place for web developers as you can find great videos and tutorials on CSS, HTML5, RWD, and more. You might also find interesting videos related to IT businesses, entrepreneurship, career, personal growth and interviews with famous web designers and developers.

Oh baby yesss, this is the best!

Inside is bigger than outside.

Are you a Web Developer, or wanna be?

Are you a world class chef? come prove it

Evolution of codes.. Get in!

You want to fight? Game on!

One of my favorite. Learn programming by building games.

No need to be harsh, right cantwedronethatguy?|||

In this post, a developer's most needed list has been shared. You are going to find best video tutorials, hands-on tutorial websites, blogs and news sites.