You will receive the file from me via email in about 5 minutes. (If you need any help, tweet me @annavitals) It will come as a .zip file, so please unzip first (no emailing me that PPT does not want to open the zip file, ok? ;)

When you download the slides, you will also be subscribed to my free 5-day email course "Persuasive Presentations and Infographics". I will show the secrets of persuasive presentations for 1. making sales, 2. raising money, 3. educating your audience.

Anyway, in the course, I'll show you how to edit these templates in PowerPoint and how to create persuasive presentations without spending hours on design.

I've made this quick video on the fly to show how to edit the slides (the look on my face is from being freezing cold.)

As I mentioned, I am a designer at Adioma.

I didn't start out as a designer, though. I started out as a lawyer. (It's a long story).

Fast forward five years of doing infographics, and I started seeing some trends in what makes presentations persuasive. And ... what makes them sell.

Why give a presentation if it won't persuade anyone, right? That's why I am sharing this template for free.

Why did I choose these particular slides?

I took the best infographics I made for Google, Cisco, and WorldBank, and stripped them to their most persuasive parts (visually, I mean). Then I thought, why not make them into fully editable slides. That's what this deck is.

The slides include icons, charts and diagrams, timelines, illustrations, fully editable shapes and colors for Powerpoint, Keynote, and Google Slides.

I made a quick preview of the slides with transitions here. With some background music, the show is on, what do you think?

Oh, and btw, the template includes multiple color schemes, animated transitions, icons that you can drag and drop on any slide, charts, graphs, and infographics.

Optionally, (again, only if you like the templates, of course)

Did I mention that I included both light and dark versions? Well, here they are.

Yep, the slides include everything I'm showing here

Optionally, (but only if you like the slides!)|||

