

How many of you use's the safari browser? If you don't, reading this features will inspire you immediately. The features to be added are one that will explore your web experience.



A new version of Safari out with the release of iOS 10.3 and macOS Sierra 10.12.4. Safari on iOS 10.3 and Safari 10.1 on macOS come's with many great features, development and improvements from WebKit that i asure you, you will be very excited about it.



In the process of this release making the safari browser more effective and powerful too, it also makes web development alot easier for its users, even simplifying the ongoing maintenance of your code.

Everyone are happy and interested in seeing how web developers can translate these new improvements into a better experiences for it's users around the world.



These are some quick look at features included in this release.



What is fetch? If you may ask. 

Fetch is a modern replacement for

{code}XMLHttpRequest{code}. Meaning instead of using the {code}XMLHttpRequest{code}, fetch is used in this release.



It helps to give a simplified approach to request resources asynchronously over the network. Compared to the

{code}XMLHttpRequest{code}, Fetch API allows for cleaner, more readable code that is less difficult to maintain.



You can discover more about it in the Fetch Living Standard .



#2. ECMAScript 2016 & ECMAScript 2017

 WebKit supported in the Safari 10.1 with both ECMAScript 2016 and ECMAScript 2017, which are the latest standards revisions for the JavaScript language. ECMAScript 2016 adds small incremental improvements, but the 2017 standard brings several substantial improvements to JavaScript.



The custom elements allows web authors to create another components defined by their own desired HTML elements without the depending on the JavaScript framework.



This is just a brief info, for full information, read the Introducing Custom Elements blog post.



The CSS Grid Layout, gives web users a new layout system based on a grid of columns and rows in a container.



Read more in this blogpost.



Do you know that the WebKit’s IndexedDB implementation has significant improvements in this release too?



 It’s now very fast, with standards compliant, and also supports new IndexedDB 2.0 features too.



You can discover more information from the Indexed Database API 2.0 specification.





Using Safari on macOS devices, requesting Pointer Lock on an element gives developers the capability to hide the mouse pointer and also access the raw mouse movement data.



Discover more from the Pointer Lock specifications





#7. Improved Fixed and Sticky Element Positioning



When you use pinch-to-zoom, fixed and sticky element positioning has an improved behavior using a "visual viewports" approach.



The {code}download{code} attribute for anchor elements is now available in the new Safari 10.1 on macOS devices.



 What it does is that it indicates the link is a download link that should be downloading a file instead of stressing your self navigating to the linked resource.



Try and discover more from the Downloading resources section in the HTML specification.



New Modern devices support a broader range of colors. Now, web authors can use CSS colors in wide-gamut color spaces, including the Display P3 color space.



To discover more info, see the CSS Color Module Level 4 standards specification.



In the new Safari on iOS, HTML Media Capture extends file input controls in forms to allow you use the camera and microphone on your device to capture data.



Read wild, some more details are available in the HTML Media Capture specification .





The Input Events makes it simple implementing rich text editing experiences on the web in content editable regions.



You can increase your knowledge by reading more about Enhanced Editing with Input Events .



#12. Interactive Form Validation

Wow! Even with support for HTML Interactive Form Validation, users can create forms with data validation constraints that are checked automatically by the browser when the form is submitted, all without the using JavaScript.



You can even read alot more about the HTML Interactive Form Validation in Web Kit.



Web Kit used to restrict keyboard input in HTML5 full screen mode, know that?.



  With the new Safari 10.1 on Mac OS devices, while using HTML5 full screen mode, Web kit will automatically remove the keyboard input restrictions,for you.



The Gamepad API makes it possible to use game controllers in your web apps. Any gamepad that works on Mac OS without additional drivers will work on a Mac. All MFi gamepads are supported on iOS.



Inquire more about the API in the Gamepad specifications



|||

os x 10.10 safari
os x 10.10 safari crash
os x 10.10 safari slow
os x 10.10 safari version
os x 10.10.1 safari
os x 10.10.3 safari
os x 10.11 safari
os x 10.11.3 safari problems
os x 10.11.4 safari
os x 10.11.4 safari freeze
safari 10.1 beta
safari 10.1 download
safari 10.1 for windows
safari 10.1 preview
safari 10.1 release
safari 10.1 release date
safari 10.1 release notes
safari for mac 10.1
safari mac os 10.1
safari mac os x 10.1 download