Merging code to harden the Linux kernel against attack has never been a task for the faint of heart. Kernel developers have a history of resisting such changes on the grounds of ABI compatibility, code complexity or, seemingly, simple pride wounded by the suggestion that their code might be buggy. The biggest blocker, though, tends to be performance; kernel developers work hard to make operations run quickly, and they tend to take a dim view of patches that slow the kernel down again — which hardening patches can do. Performance pressure tends to be especially high in the network stack, so it is unsurprising that another hardening patch has run into trouble there.

The patch in question converts the network stack to the new type introduced for 4.11. This type is meant to take over reference-count duties from adding, in the process, checks for overflows and underflows. A number of recent kernel exploits have taken advantage of reference-count errors, usually as a way to provoke a use-after-free vulnerability. By detecting those problems, the type can close off a whole family of exploit techniques, hardening the kernel in a significant way.

Networking developer Eric Dumazet was quick to point out the cost of switching to : what was once a simple atomic operation becomes an external function call with added checking logic, making the whole thing quite a bit more expensive. In the high-speed networking world, where the processing-time budget for a packet is measured in nanoseconds, this cost is more than unwelcome. And, it seems, there is a bit of wounded pride mixed in as well:

By adding all this bloat, we assert linux kernel is terminally buggy and every atomic_inc() we did was suspicious, and need to be always instrumented/validated.

But, as Kees Cook pointed out in his reply, it may well be time to give up a little pride, and some processor time too:

This IS the assertion, unfortunately. With average 5 year lifetimes on security flaws, and many of the last couple years' public exploits being refcount flaws, this is something we have to get done. We need the default kernel to be much more self-protective, and this is one of many places to make it happen.

Making the kernel more robust is a generally accepted goal, but that in itself is not enough to get hardening patches accepted. In this case, networking maintainer David Miller was quite clear on what he thought of this patch: "the refcount_t facility as-is is unacceptable for networking". That leaves developers wanting to harden reference-counting code throughout the kernel in a bit of a difficult position.

As it happens, that position was made even harder by two things: nobody had actually quantified the cost of the new primitives, and there are no benchmarks that can be used to measure the effect of the changes on the network stack. As a result, it is not really even possible to begin a conversation on what would have to be done to make this work acceptable to the networking developers.

With regard to the cost, Peter Zijlstra ran some tests on various Intel processors. He concluded that the cost of the new primitives was about 20 additional processor cycles in the uncontended case. The contended case (where more than one thread is trying to update the count at the same time) is far more expensive with or without , though, leading him to conclude that "reducing contention is far more effective than removing straight line instruction count". Networking developers have said in the past that the processing budget for a packet is about 200 cycles, so expending an additional 20 on a reference-count operation (of which there may be several while processing a single packet) is going to hurt.

The only way to properly quantify how much it hurts, though, is with a test that exercises the entire networking stack under heavy load. It turns out that this is not easy to do; Dumazet admitted that "there is no good test simulating real-world workloads, which are mostly using TCP flows". That news didn't sit well with Cook, who responded that "without a meaningful test, it's weird to reject a change for performance reasons". No such test has materialized, though, so it is going to be hard to say much more about the impact of the changes than "that's going to hurt".

What might happen in this case is that the change to could be made optional by way of a configuration parameter. That is expressly what the hardening developers wanted not to do: hardening code is not effective if it isn't actually running in production kernels. But providing such an option may be the only way to get reference-count checking into the network stack. At that point, it will be up to distributors to decide, as they configure their kernels, whether they think 20 cycles per operation is too high a cost to pay for a degree of immunity from reference-count exploits.|||

