If you mean getting sucked through an active turbofan’s intake then no, if you stand somewhere near an active jet engine, you’re not going to survive.

You see these blades? These are titanium blades would suck a gigantic volume of air into the engine and ready to be mixed with fuel within the engine’s nacelle then combust into the hot gas that would create thrust.

These blades spin at a rate of 1,000 to 20,000 revolutions per minute; you would get chopped into bits faster than you could blink if you’re standing near an engine on full throttle and got sucked in.

Then your chomped up body would meet this:

That row of several spinning, serrated blades made up the axial flow compressor. This is where the air which the fan blades sucked in be sped up and compressed. The farther into the engine, the smaller the blades became to add more energy to the airflow.

Which would mean the bits of your body would get sliced and diced into even smaller pieces as it passed through the compressor.

Then the biological goo that used to be you would be pushed into the combustion chamber.

…where fuel is mixed with the high-speed air, which is slowed down by a component called a diffuser to allow air to be better mixed with the jet fuel.

The engine would flicker slightly at this point when foreign contamination that is you get mixed up as well with the fuel, but since the process happened extremely fast, this isn’t going to lead to a dead engine.

As you can see above, the gassificated pieces of your body would pass through the last section (Which is also composed of spinning blades).

The turbine is simply just a part that keeps the entire engine working by exploiting the energy of the hot gas shooting out of the combustion chamber to spin the fan blades in the intake at the front.

Finally, you would shoot out of the nozzle.

However, the blades aren’t made to handle physical stress being you, so as soon as you get sucked in, the inner blades within the nacelle would break and either decrease its efficiency or deaden the engine entirely.

#EDIT 1: (WARNING - GRAPHIC CONTENTS AHEAD. PROCEED AT YOUR OWN RISK.)

It was a sunny day in 2006, at El Paso Airport, Texas when Continental Flight 1515 - a 737 carrying 114 passengers on-board prepares its engines for a short flight to Houston. The jet was intentionally spooled up to check its behaviour on the ground.

A ground worker didn’t receive the notice and stood too close while the test was conducted.

This is the aftermath:

This just portrays my point perfectly - YOU DON’T WANT TO BE NEAR TO A JET ENGINE WHEN IT’S ON.

One gentleman in the comment section has said that a turbofan engine isn’t a food processor - I disagree: It is. And it’s very good at doing its job.

#EDIT 2: There’s a pretty disturbing footage of a flight crewmember on the deck of USS Theodore Roosevelt CVN-71 that describes exactly how dangerous jet intakes are and how fast you would get sucked in being foolish and not careful around these possible death machines.

This happened in less than seconds, and fortunately - he survived with minimal injuries.

The things that saved this guy is that all military jets’ intakes have set of stator vanes in front before the compressor blades.

These are non-moving airfoils in-between the rotating compressor wheels, they would increase the air’s pressure and straighten the airflow out in preparation for the compressor blades, and they’re wedged before every rotors.

He was stuck there, coupled with the tiny size of the intake itself - his head didn’t get dissected by the blades.

In commercial jets, rotors are FIRST.

…so don’t try your luck with a 737 or a 777.

You won’t be that lucky.|||

