You may have come across some designs where a non web safe font or premium font is used.

Now the question is how to use those fonts in websites?

Two options are there:

First option is to buy the premium font but you need to have a good budget because most premium fonts are quite expensive.

Second option is to find alternative google fonts which I personally like and recommend. Because its free and has very good cross browser support. But if you want to generate your own web safe font(not premium fonts) you can use Fontsquirrel.

Today I will show you which google fonts you can use as alternative to some of the most popular premium fonts.

Segoe UI is a font by Microsoft and its used by them in their various products and marketing materials. Many designers love to use this font but unfortunately we can’t convert this into a webkit font so the best alternative google font according to me is Open Sans, it’s a Sans Serif type font and has very similar font face.

Futura is a geometric sans-serif typeface by Paul Renner. It’s a premium font so without obtaining license it can’t be used on websites, so what if this font is used in a design? What I do for this type of scenario, I use alternative google font and the best alternative I have found is Muli it’s a Sans Serif type font and has very similar font face to Futura font.

Proxima Nova is a sans-serif typeface by Mark Simonson. It has 48 styles and it’s a premium font like Futura so the best alternative google font is Roboto in my opinion, it a Sans Serif type font and looks very similar to Proxima Nova.

Gotham is a geometric sans-serif typefaces designed by Tobias Frere-Jones . This font family have many variation of fonts and also have web font versions but has to be purchased, so I have found Montserrat to be the best suited alternative font from google.

Museo Sans is a sans-serif typefaces by Exljbris Font Foundry. Though some fonts are free in this font family like Museo Sans 500 and Museo Sans 500 Italic and you can use it as desktop and as web kit fonts but rest fonts in this font family are licensed, so for this best alternative google font is Droid Sans.

Gibson is a humanist sans serif typeface designed by Rod McDonald. This is a beautiful and very popular font but if you want a free alternative then you can go with Noto sans.

Though it’s not identical to Gibson but very similar with some exceptions like Noto sans has x-height taller typeface than Gibson.

Helvetica Neue is one of the most popular fonts going around and its designed by Max Miedinger . But if you don’t have the budget to purchase this font you can go for Work Sans.

Helvetica Neue has many weights but Light or Ultra Light are most commonly used, similarly Work Sans has Light or Ultra Light weight along with some other weights.

Though there are some major differences between these two typefaces but it’s a good free alternative. One of the differences is Work Sans typeface has more letter-spacing than Helvetica Neue but you can use letter-spacing in css to minimize the difference.

Avenir is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by famous type designer Adrian Frutiger. Avenir is one of the best selling typeface but when it comes to a free alternative then Prompt is the closest.

Both typefaces are very similar even the letter “Q” matches.

Museo Slab is the slab-serif companion to Museo Sans by Exljbris Font Foundry. Roboto Slab is a very good free alternative, the typeface face is very closely matched, letters like “K” is almost identical.

Zona Pro is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Kostas Bartsokas. This typeface has rounded shape base and when it’s about google font alternative to Zona Pro Poppins is the closest.

Both font has similar rounded shape typeface with some obvious differences.

Boxed is a semi-modular geometric font by Josep Patau. This font is designed to look good on small screen as well as in print but it’s a premium font.

So if you are looking for a free alternative then go for Coda. It doesn’t have as many font weight options as Boxed but the regular weight looks very similar.

Brandon Grotesque is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by German type designer Hannes von Döhren. It has 6 weights and each with matching italics.

A good alternative font can be Lato, it has very similar font face with similar weight options. Lato lowercase letters has x-height taller than Brandon Grotesque.

Intro is a sans-serif typeface designed by Svetoslav Simov. It has 50 different styles and if you are looking for a free alternative to Intro let me tell you it’s not easy to find a similar font that too with so many options.

But fortunately Signika from google font looks relatively similar specially in terms of those small curves but it has just two weights. So in the given situation Signika is the best free alternative.

Nexa is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Svetoslav Simov. The Nexa family includes 16 styles & weights – 8 uprights with 8 italics.

A good free alternative is Poppins it’s typeface is very similar. Though the numeric typeface is bit different from each other.

Trade Gothic is a grotesque sans-serif typeface designed by Jackson Burke. It has many styles and weights.

Libre Franklin is a great free alternative with one visible difference is that it has little more letter spacing than Trade Gothic.

Sofia Pro is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Olivier Gourvat. It has 16 weights and is one of the most popular fonts.

It’s a premium font so if you want to use a free alternative you can go for Muli, the typefaces are very similar.

Pluto Sans is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Hannes von Döhren and published through HVD Fonts in 2012. This font is bit expensive so a free alternative google font can be Montserrat.

Though Montserrat doesn’t have as many font weight as Pluto Sans but it matches very closely with few exceptions.

Museo Sans Cyrillic is the sans-serif companion to the Museo typeface designed by Jos Buivenga and Irina Smirnova.

Raleway is a free alternative to Museo Sans Cyrillic as most of the typeface match very closely except for few letters.

Sanchez is a slab serif typeface designed by Daniel Hernández, it has 6 different style with matching italics.

Though Sanchez is a premium font but its available in google fonts for free with limited weight options designed by the same designer.

Glober is a sans-serif typeface with 18 weights – nine uprights with nine italics designed by Ivan Petrov and Svetoslav Simov.

Gudea can be a good free alternative to Glober with limited weight options.

Brandon Text is the companion of the famous Brandon Grotesque type family designed by Hannes von Döhren.

Like Brandon Grotesque Lato is the best free alternative to Brandon Text, since Brandon Text typeface has x-height little taller than Brandon Grotesque so Lato is even better match here.

Verb is a sans-serif typeface designed by Ryan Martinson with 72 fonts with four subfamilies including Regular, Condensed, Extra Condensed, and Compressed.

Though it’s very unlikely to find a free alternative font with this wide range of options but Nobile can be a decent fit specially for the regular subfamily.

Acta is a serif typeface designed by Dino dos Santos. It has 6 weights with matching italics. Lustria is good free alternative but it only has one weight option, so you need to play around with css to apply some other basic weights like bold and italic.

Frutiger is a sans-serif typeface designed by Adrian Frutiger, this font is neither purely geometric nor humanistic its designed in such a way that each individual character is quickly and easily recognized.

The font has many weights and styles.

Hind can be a good free alternative but it only has 4 basic weights.

VAG Rounded is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Gerry Barney, it has 16 style and weights. By the name you can guess the typeface is bit rounded and a free alternative can be Fredoka One it also has rounded typeface looks similar specially for bold weight.

Avenir Next Pro is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Adrian Frutiger and Akira Kobayashi. This font face has 32 fonts with 8 weights, each with a roman and italic version.

Prompt is very good free alternative with very closely matched typeface and has wide range of weights and styles too.

Centrale Sans is a geometric base sans-serif typeface designed by Alexander Nedelev and Veronika Slavova. It has humanistic features that makes this typeface more warm and friendly.

For Centrale Sans too Lato can be a good alternative though one noticeable difference between the two font face is that Lato seems bit condensed compare to Centrale Sans.

Univers is a neo-grotesque typeface designed by Adrian Frutiger. This font series includes light to dark, extra condensed to extended.

Nunito Sans is a relatively close match to this font. Nunito Sans has a bit taller x-height.

Uni Sans is a sans-serif typeface designed by Svetoslav Simov with 14 weights – seven uprights and seven italics. This typeface is quite unique because of its unique curving specially on lowercase letters.

Let’s be honest here it’s not easy to find a proper alternative to such a unique typeface specially in google fonts. So the closest alternative can be Ubuntu, it also has some similar curves specially on letters like “r”, “a”, “l”.

Museo is a serif typeface in the Museo typeface family designed by Jos Buivenga, is a beautiful font with beautiful curves.

Because of these beautiful curves it’s very hard to find a suitable alternative in google fonts, Roboto Slab is the closest contender with its own curves but difference is quite visible.

Gill Sans is a humanist sans-serif typeface designed by Eric Gill. Among many weights and style for basics weights like “Light” to “Bold” Lato can be a good alternative.

Centar Sans is a sans-serif typeface designed by Lecter Johnson. Centar Sans has many weight and style though “Regular” weight are free with webfonts, but if you are looking for a alternative in google fonts you can choose Droid Sans.

Averta is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Kostas Bartsokas. Averta comes in eight weights with matching italics and supports over two hundred languages.

For basic weights and english language a good alternative is Poppins, most letters matches closely except the x-height of the lowercase.

Linotype Didot is a serif typeface designed by Adrian Frutiger, it has many different styles including some symbol.

For “Regular” and “Bold” weight a decent alternative is Suranna.

Minion is a serif typeface designed by Robert Slimbach owned by Adobe. This typeface has 5 weights with matching italics.

Crimson Text is a suitable alternative for Minion it also has that feel of classical typeface.

Museo Sans Rounded is the sans-serif companion to the Museo typeface family designed by Jos Buivenga.

A free alternative can be Nunito simply because it’s the best match with combination of rounded edges and typeface.

Mostra Nuova is a serif typeface designed by Mark Simonson , it’s a very unique looking typeface it includes 20 stylistic sets with many alternate characters and case sensitive forms.

Because of this uniqueness it’s almost impossible to find an alternative in google fonts but the closest we can get is Josefin Sans. Let’s admit that it’s not best alternative as per typeface but overall it looks somewhat close.

FF DIN is a sans-serif typeface designed by Albert-Jan Pool is one of the most popular fonts. The font has 20 weights.

When it comes to finding a good free alternative look no further than Roboto. It’s the best alternative available within google fonts.

Geogrotesque is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Eduardo Manso. This typeface has subtle rounded finish.

A similar font you can find is Armata and can be used as a free alternative. This type face also has that rounded finish.

Trivia Sans is a sans-serif typeface designed by František Štorm with 14 weights – seven uprights with seven italics.

A closely matched alternative can be Pontano Sans but it only has 1 weight and its little more condensed.

Larsseit is a contemporary sans-serif typeface designed by Nico Inosanto. This includes 6 weights, from UltraThin to Black, with their corresponding italics.

Similar to Brandon Grotesque, Centrale Sans- Lato is a good free alternative in google fonts. Though numeric typeface is bit different.

Bauer Bodoni is a serif typeface designed by Giambattista Bodoni. The typeface is known for its huge contrast between thick and thin strokes.

Such contrast can be found in Suranna too which makes it a good alternative but with only one weight the options are somewhat limited.

Proxima Nova Soft is a sans-serif typeface designed by Mark Simonson, the design is based on popular font Proxima Nova with rounded corners.

Because of the rounded corner feel you can use Varela Round as an alternative.

Swiss 721 is a sans-serif typeface designed by Max Miedinger, this typeface has many style and weights.

For basic weight and styles Raleway can be a very good fit.

DIN Next is a sans-serif typeface designed by Akira Kobayashi, this has multiple combinations of style and weights.

Roboto can be used as a free alternative for DIN Next because most of the typeface matches with few obvious exceptions. For condensed version Roboto Condensed can be used.

Franklin Gothic is a grotesque sans-serif typeface designed by Morris Fuller Benton. This font has 23 weights including upright and italics.

If you are looking for a similar looking font in google font you can use Libre Franklin it has similar typeface but its x-height is taller.

ITC Avant Garde Gothic is a sans-serif typeface designed by multiple designers. The font family consists of 5 weights (4 for condensed), with complementary obliques for widest width fonts.

For Regular weight Questrial can be used as an alternative.

Helvetica Neue Pro is a sans-serif typeface designed by Max Miedinger. Like for Helvetica Neue Work Sans can be used as an alternative.

Velino Text is a sans-serif typeface designed by Dino dos Santos, it has 12 weights – 6 uprights with 6 italics.

This typeface is very close to the typeface of Droid Serif only thing is that Droid Serif is x-size larger so you need to adjust the font size accordingly.

Myriad Pro is a humanist sans-serif typeface designed by Robert Slimbach and Carol Twombly for Adobe Systems. Though you can find webkit version for using it in your website but when it comes to google font alternatives you can use Hind Guntur.

Both the typeface is very close to each other so it can be a good fit.

League Gothic is a condensed sans-serif typeface released by The League of Moveable Type. It’s an open-source font that you use for free it also have the webfont.

But for some reason if you are looking for an alternative in google fonts you certainly can use Oswald, though League Gothic is bit more condensed in weight but you can make that adjustment in css.

Calluna is a serif typeface designed by Jos Buivenga. Crimson Text is a suitable alternative.

Corbel is a sans-serif typeface designed by Jeremy Tankard it has 4 weights – 2 uprights with 2 italics.

A free alternative can be Nunito Sans, it has similar typeface but a little rounded than Corbel. What makes it a good option is that most of the typeface are very similar though the numeric typeface is completely different.

Bebas Neue is a free sans-serif typeface designed by Ryoichi Tsunekawa. It’s a popular font among designers specially used for headlines. But one problem with this typeface that its only available in uppercase.

So if you want an alternative font with lowercase capabilities then go for Oswald, but you need to adjust the font size as Oswald is x-size bigger than Bebas Neue.

FF Tisa is a serif typeface designed by Mitja Miklavcic it has 14 weights – 7 uprights with 7 italics. Because of its typeface it is ideal fit for advertising, logo as well as web design.

If you are looking for a free alternative you can choose Bitter but it doesn’t have “Light” and “Extra Bold” weight options.

FF Meta is a humanist sans-serif typeface designed by Erik Spiekermann, it has 28 weights, ranging from Hairline to Black in Condensed and Normal.

Fira Sans can be a good fit as free alternative in google font. Best thing about Fira Sans is that it also changes lowercase typeface of letter “a” in italic weight like FF Meta.

Baskerville is a serif typeface designed by John Baskerville. It has multiple style and weights.

Libre Baskerville the name itself suggests that this typeface was designed as an alternative of Baskerville, though it doesn’t have all the style and weights as the original one but does have the basic ones.

Clarendon is a slab serif typeface designed by Robert Besley, the typeface is available in five weights.

Ultra is a good alternative but it has only one weight mostly matches with the bold weight.

Azo Sans is a sans-serif typeface designed by Rui Abreu. It’s a mixture of geometric shape with humanistic quality.

Lato can be used as a free alternative for Azo Sans. Both has a relatively similar typeface with multiple weight options.

Bodoni Poster is designed by Chauncey H. Griffith. This font has 2 weights.

Gravitas One is a very good alternative for “Regular” weight but the x-height of lowercase is bit taller than Bodoni Poster.

Apercu is a grotesque sans-serif typeface released Colophon. It has 4 weights with matching italics.

Raleway is a good alternative to Apercu within google fonts. The typeface matches to good extent and it’s the best possible option here.

GT Walsheim is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Noël Leu. It has 8 weights with matching italics.

In google fonts Poppins is a good alternative for GT Walsheim with few exceptions.

Caslon is an serif typeface designed by William Caslon, Caslon is available in 3 weights with matching italics.

Lusitana is a good free alternative within google fonts. The typeface is closely matched with few visible differences.

Georgia is a transitional serif typeface designed by Matthew Carter. “Pro” version was released in 2011 that included new weights and condensed versions and it’s a premium font.

Source Serif Pro is a very good alternative to Georgia.

Garamond is a serif typeface designed by Jean Jannon and Tony Stan. Garamond typeface has many styles and weights to choose from.

But for “Regular” weight EB Garamond is a good alternative but it only has 1 weight, with the name you can guess the regular weight can match very well.

Courier is a monospaced slab serif font designed by Howard Kettler as a typewriter face but was later redrawn by Adrian Frutiger for the IBM Selectric series. It has 2 weights with matching italics.

When it comes to finding a typewriter font in google fonts you will find few options but closest matching alternative to Courier is Cutive Mono. This too has a very similar letter spacing.

Sentinel is a slab serif typeface designed by Jonathan Hoefler and Tobias Frere-Jones. Sentinel is available in 6 weights with matching italics.

Domine can be used as an alternative though the typeface is not identical but is very close.

Though Hind lowercase typeface has x-height taller but it’s the best alternative available within google fonts library.

Freight Text is a serif typeface designed by Joshua Darden. Freight Text is available in 5 weights each with matching italics and small caps styles.

It’s difficult to find a font with this many styling and weight options within google font library, so for regular and bold weight Sumana is the best fit.

Brown is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Aurèle Sack, it has 4 weights with matching italics. One unique feature of Brown is that it has styling called “Reclin” which allows backward sloping.



Thus far the backward sloping style is not available in any fonts of google font library. So we can only look for normal styling in alternative font, with that in mind Poppins is the best option available.

Tiempos Text is a serif typeface designed by Kris Sowersby. It has 4 weights with matching italics.

Crimson Text is a very close match to Tiempos Text and you can use it as an alternative.

Maison Neue is a grotesque sans-serif typeface designed by Timo Gaessner. Maison Neue is available in 5 weights and each with matching italics.

Didact Gothic can be used as an alternative to Maison Neue as most of typeface matches with few exceptions.

Akkurat is a grotesque sans-serif typeface designed by Laurenz Brunner. It has 3 weights with matching italics.

Work Sans is a very good match for Akkurat with few mismatches. Akkurat typeface is bit more condensed than Work Sans.

Calibre is a neo-grotesque/geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Kris Sowersby. It has 7 weights with matching italics.

Poppins can be used as an alternative to Calibre with few visible differences.

Circular is a geometric sans-serif typeface designed by Laurenz Brunner, it has 4 weights with matching italics.

For Circular too Raleway can be a good alternative.

Din 2014 is a contemporary version of DIN typeface designed by Vasily Biryukov. Din 2014 comes with 6 weights with matching italics and 6 narrow ones.

Roboto is a good alternative it may not be as oval as Din 2014 in shape but its close enough.

GT Sectra is a calligraphic serif typeface designed by Marc Kappeler, Dominik Huber and Noël Leu. This typeface has 5 weights with matching italics.

Poly is a good fit to be used as an alternative for GT Sectra.

Freight Display is the display version of the typeface Freight Text, designed by Joshua Darden. It’s available in 6 weights with matching italics.

Source Serif Pro is a good option with few clear mismatches, specially the contrast between thick and thin strokes but the overall typeface is close enough to be used as an alternative.

Plantin is a serif typeface designed by Frank Hinman Pierpont. Crimson Text is the closest alternative for Plantin available within google fonts library.

Miller is a serif typeface family designed by Matthew Carter. It’s a large typeface family it includes special display version as well as small caps and italic small caps.

For black and bold weight you can use Abril Fatface as a free alternative.

Akzidenz Grotesk is a grotesque sans-serif typeface, it has many weights.

Archivo Black can be used as an alternative for bold weight as it only has one weight. For other wights you can use Work Sans but it’s not as closely matched as Archivo Black in typeface.

Adelle Sans is the sans-serif companion to the popular Adelle typeface designed by Veronika Burian and José Scaglione. It has 7 weights with matching italics.

Source Sans Pro again is the best fit among the options available in google fonts.

Graphik is a sans-serif typeface designed by Christian Schwartz. Poppins is a great alternative with some visible differences.

Stanley is a serif typeface designed by Ludovic Balland. Domine can be a good fit for Stanley.

Freight Sans is the sans-serif companion to the typeface Freight Text designed by Joshua Darden. It has 5 weights with matching italics.

Century Schoolbook is a serif typeface designed by Morris Fuller, it has 2 weights with matching italics. Abhaya Libre is close enough match to be considered as an alternative. Though Century Schoolbook has less letter spacing and more x-height for lowercase.

Apercu Mono is the monospaced companion to Apercu. It has 2 weights. Roboto Mono is a good alternative, as the name suggests it also a monospaced typeface with very similar look.

Tiempos Headline is a serif typeface designed by Kris Sowersby. For its regular weights Crimson Text is a great alternative.

Benton Sans is a grotesque sans-serif typeface designed by Tobias Frere-Jones. Benton Sans is available in 8 weights with matching italics, small caps, condensed, compressed and extra-compressed widths.

Though Oswald is only available in extra-light to bold weight but within this range of weights it’s a good alternative to Benton Sans.

Founders Grotesk is a grotesque sans-serif typeface designed by Kris Sowersby. It has 4 weights with matching italics.

With wide range of weights Raleway is a good alternative.

Whitney is a humanist sans-serif typeface designed by Tobias Frere-Jones. Whitney has wide range of styles, weights and symbols.

Adelle is a slab serif typeface designed by Veronika Burian and José Scaglione. It’s available in 7 weights with matching italics.

Roboto Slab is good alternative because this typeface also has those beautiful edges.

P22 Underground is a sans-serif typeface designed by Edward Johnston, is available in small caps, petite caps and titling versions, all with full range of weights.

Cabin is good alternative but to a certain extent limited because it doesn’t have small caps, petite caps and titling versions, for regulars weights it’s a good option.

Pro Tips: If you have the budget always go for premium fonts, as you can see alternative fonts are decent substitute but not exact replacement.

So we have covered a wide range of premium fonts alternative google fonts, so if you didn’t find the font you were looking for or you have found better alternative font then do leave your comments at the section below.

If you like the post don’t forget to share with your friends.

To make it easy for you, I have made a Definitive List that includes all the premium fonts and their alternatives mentioned here.

The definitive list also includes 4 bonus premium fonts alternative that I didn’t include in this post.

Download the free Alternative Google Fonts -The Definitive List now:|||

Find out which alternative google fonts you can use for some of the most popular premium fonts.