Rkt (or Rocket) is an open source container runtime developed and maintained by CoreOS. It’s focused on security and composability, meeting high requirements for production environments. Its installation and utilization is clearer and more simple than that of other similar containers.

Rkt is a good alternative because you can build an App Container Image (ACI)—the native rkt image format—from different sources. And registration isn’t necessary to distribute the image, which facilitates internal utilization and improves security. It is possible to access an ACI hosted on any server by direct URL.

It’s possible to install rkt directly on Linux and CoreOS. Or run via Vagrant to cover MacOS and Windows. In the steps below, Vagrant will be used for building the environment. Download and install Vagrant according to your operating system.

CoreOS provides app container Images from your open source projects. One of these projects is etcd—Etcd is a distributed key value store that allows you to serve data between machines, and it’s easy to add to rkt.

To add an etcd ACI, run it by name:

Another way to obtain and add an ACI is Quay. Quay is a tool to store containers safely and privately.

To add an ACI from Quay, find the desirable ACI and copy the name to run:

You can also add an ACI from Docker:

To create an ACI, you’ll need a build tool for container images. One of these tools is acbuild. Acbuild works only on Linux, and you will need to install Go to use it.

Add the new repository to install Go:

Edit your ~/.bashrc and add these lines to the end of the file:

To test the ACI, you’ll need bash scripts, Go, or C to start the image. In this test, we will use a C file just to confirm the ACI works.

Define a name for the ACI:

Copy the executable of the C file to the ACI:

Set the executable to run in boot:

Define a name for the ACI file:

Finish the creation of the ACI:

The result is a displayed string defined in the C file:

Now we can share the ACI file privately, or publicly with anyone.

Rkt is an easy and fast solution to containerize images, distribute them to development teams, and make them available to anyone who needs them. Rkt is not as well known as Docker, but works very similarly with safety in mind. As DevOps becomes mandatory, rkt is a tool I recommend people learn and use.|||

Rkt (or Rocket) is an open source container runtime developed and maintained by CoreOS. It’s focused on security