Something a little different for this blog; a comparison of four tools which aim to do a similar job, to convert OpenApi / Swagger definitions into simple markdown which can be rendered by Slate (or one of its ports). Slate itself and its alternative implementations / ports will likely be the subject of a follow-up post on this blog.

Disclaimer: the author of this blog post is also the author of one of the tools compared ( ), and shins, the Node.js port of Slate used here to convert each tool's Slate markdown into HTML.

When I started I could not find any tools to directly convert OpenAPI / Swagger definitions to Slate, except for which is written in PHP and was at the time in an unmaintained state. Some weeks later on and two more tools, developed in Node.js (like ) have appeared, and has seen further development, hence this comparison.

Because uses the common-mark compatible markdown-it as its markdown processor, there may be differences in the rendered HTML compared to that produced by , the markdown library used by Ruby Slate.

Each tool may be optimised for a particular Slate CSS theme. This is not taken into account here, but where an example site is provided, it is linked to below.

Only the example has been used so far to compare each tool, which may not demonstrate all features to best effect.

If you use Java and/or Swagger-CodeGen, two other projects which have been brought to my attention may be worth looking at:

First up is:

is a BSD-licensed Node.js-based tool developed by Scrive which describes itself as

As documented in the project's README, has a few limitations / design decisions to be aware of:

is also a Node.js-based tool, under the MIT license, developed by Lav Kumar Vishwakarma, which describes itself as

includes Slate's file by default, so you need to remember to update this to include your API documentation.

is in some way the granddaddy of all these tools, predating them by about 18-months.

It is written as a PHP application by Andrey Putilov and the project description is

I wasn't originally going to include in this comparison, because by the author's own admission it was no-longer maintained, had several outstanding issues, and being written in PHP wasn't something that was immediately easy for me to test (much like Slate, being written in Ruby - and not supporting Windows, which may be the reason a number of

 Node.js-based ports exist).

However, as of this writing, the latest commit to was only five hours ago, and deploying a slightly hacked version of the code to heroku allowed me to see the example output.

As above, is written by the author of this blog post, and the author of , so you might want to stop reading here!|||

There's more than one way to skin an API