A team of six quietly surround their victim, who is walking down the sidewalk with his phone held up to his ear. He is oblivious. One team member deftly reaches out and snatches the phone from behind the victim. At the same time, another team member shoves the victim in the back, startling and disorienting him. By the time the victim turns around, the phone-snatcher is lost in the crowd, and everyone on the team walks along as if nothing happened.

Louisiana's public defender's office is largely nonexistent so poor people just plead guilty Louisiana has always been a backward place for criminal justice, the only state in the union that funds its public defenders’ office with conviction fees, leaving a public defender’s office that averages $238 spent on each accused.

Sheyla Veronica White was working at her desk at Cinque Terre Energy Partners in Fort Lauderdale, Florida when a piece of a sprinkler fell from the ceiling and unfortunately just missed her. Why unfortunately? Because if it hit her, she could file a worker’s compensation claim. So she promptly picked up the metal piece and […]

Jeff Sessions orders prosecutors to charge Americans "with the most serious offense you can prove" Racist, perjuring Attorney General Jeff Sessions has issued guidance to federal prosecutors, ordering them to charge the people they will face in court with “the most serious offense you can prove,” paving the way for a surge in America’s already-shameful record of racially biased, family destroying, community-devastating, private-prison-enriching mass incarceration, which already outstrips the rates […]

Trim back the wire clutter on your desk with a charge and sync dock Keep your desktop clean and free of excess cables with a Charge & Sync dock, available now in the Boing Boing Store. This unassuming design features an s-shaped profile for maximum stability, non-slip feet, and a sturdy mounting point for your phone. With this dock, you can keep an eye on notifications while preventing damage […]

Get some use out of your car's CD player - with a phone mount If you drive daily, especially to new destinations, it’s wise to have a smartphone car mount. Aside from making map directions considerably easier to follow, they also keeps your phone in a central location so you can keep an eye on notifications without taking your eyes off the road. While most mounts attach to your dashboard […]

Drone race like it is the Boonta Eve Classic Looking to break into the rapidly growing world of drone racing? Maybe? Just looking for a solid remote-controlled camera quadcopter to shoot aerial footage? Either way, the Aerix Black Talon 2.0’s friendly controls and stable flight make it a great option for novice and intermediate flyers.The Aerix Black Talon drone is able to fly at 15 […]|||

