With blessings from six different religious leaders and a nod to the ancient tree spirits, the last steel beam was lifted Thursday to the top of the Salesforce Tower, the tallest building in San Francisco.

It was a day of speeches and pride for the 1,070-foot tower, which rises on Mission Street between Fremont and First streets, and looms over the city’s skyline. It can be seen from all parts of the Bay Area.

“This tower is more than an office building,” said Fred Clarke, one of the principal architects on the project. “It is fundamentally an act of optimism, comparable to a pyramid or an obelisk, marking a new place on Earth reaching for the heavens.”

The last piece of steel — a 14-foot-long beam, painted white and covered with the signatures of workers, was lifted to the top of the building, 61 stories above the street about midday. Topping off the building is one of the oldest traditions in construction, and the beam had a 6-foot-tall cedar tree attached to it.

It was a nod to an ancient rite. In the days when all buildings were wooden, crews crowed the highest point with a green tree to appease the spirits of wood and the forest.

The tree may bring luck, but the tower is the result of skill — of the thousands of workers who built it; of Boston Properties, which owns it; and mostly of Salesforce, which will be the prime tenant.

Many of the speakers at the topping-off ceremony hailed the building as the tallest west of Chicago. Reports that a Los Angeles building is 30 feet taller were not mentioned.

Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff, who was the driving force behind the tower, said he remembered back when he was a little boy, watching the Bank of America building and the Transamerica Pyramid being built.

“I remember my grandfather telling me this was the new face of San Francisco going up,” he said.

Now his company’s office building towers over the older skyscrapers. For years, the Transamerica, at 853 feet, was the city’s tallest. The Salesforce Tower is 217 feet higher.

“Salesforce was born and raised in San Francisco just 15 years ago,” said Elizabeth Pinkham, Salesforce’s executive vice president for real estate. She was showing off the view from the 60th floor to reporters and guests. “Never in a million years would you think Salesforce would be here atop the tallest San Francisco tower.”

Salesforce will be the main tenant with offices on floors three to 30 and on the 60th and 61st floors. Benioff said the very top floor, which will be named the Ohana Floor, after the Hawaiian word for family, will be open to nonprofit and community groups for events. “And we won’t charge them, either,” he said.

Making the top of the tower available, Benioff said, is part of giving back to the community.

It was a cloudy day with a touch of rain, but the city, the bay and the bridges looked like scale models from the top of the tower.

“This is an amazing building,” Smit, the engineer, said. “On a clear day, you can see the Farallon Islands from up here.” He smiled. “And with a bit of imagination, you can see Hawaii,” he said.

That may not be true, but you can see the city’s high-tech future. “This is the centerpiece of the city,” Mayor Ed Lee said at the opening ceremony.

Tall as it is, the original plan was for a tower that would have been 100 feet higher. That was too tall for Benioff.

“We scaled it down a bit,” he said. “That’s the backstory.”|||

With blessings from six different religious leaders and a nod to the ancient tree spirits, the last steel beam was lifted Thursday to the top of the Salesforce Tower, the tallest building in San Francisco.  The last piece of steel — a 14-foot-long beam, painted white and covered with the signatures of workers, was lifted to the top of the building, 61 stories above the street about midday.  Topping off the building is one of the oldest traditions in construction, and the beam had a 6-foot-tall cedar tree attached to it.  In the days when all buildings were wooden, crews crowed the highest point with a green tree to appease the spirits of wood and the forest.  The tree may bring luck, but the tower is the result of skill — of the thousands of workers who built it; of Boston Properties, which owns it; and mostly of Salesforce, which will be the prime tenant.  Many of the speakers at the topping-off ceremony hailed the building as the tallest west of Chicago.  Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff, who was the driving force behind the tower, said he remembered back when he was a little boy, watching the Bank of America building and the Transamerica Pyramid being built.  [...] his company’s office building towers over the older skyscrapers.  “Salesforce was born and raised in San Francisco just 15 years ago,” said Elizabeth Pinkham, Salesforce’s executive vice president for real estate.  Benioff said the very top floor, which will be named the Ohana Floor, after the Hawaiian word for family, will be open to nonprofit and community groups for events.