With the digital transformation well underway, the sudden explosion of data due to the advent of Big Data, Predictive Analytics, IoT has left several companies gasping for breath and struggling to connect the massive influx of data. Old data architecture, legacy on-premise applications, and traditional data integration tools like ETL (Extract, Transform and Load) have only added to the burden.

From cloud and on-premise applications to customer-partner information, social data and others, the exponential increase in data might seem like a great flood. But with this flood has come the realization that implementing the right data-driven initiatives can help enterprises acquire more customers, increase profitability, customer retention and improve ROI. The need of the hour is a powerful, unified, modern integration platform to help “accelerate this digital transformation,” and harness the data flood to generate valuable and relevant business insights for better decision making.

Talend Data Fabric is an exclusive data integration platform that “combines Talend products into a common set of powerful, easy-to-use tools for any integration style: real-time or batch, big data or master data management, on-premises or in the cloud.” (Source: Talend Data Fabric). As an agile, solution, it not only connects all the systems in an organization but offers real-time integration for generating data-driven insights. The Talend Data Fabric offers the flexibility, scalability, and agility of a single, design environment called Talend Studio with multiple connectors acting as bridges for several data sources and applications.

As a comprehensive, unified, modern data integration platform the Talend Data Fabric offers several benefits besides being open source, lightweight, optimized for big data and budget-friendly. The following are the four key benefits:

1.      Unified, Agile and customer-centric – It consolidates data integration, big data, cloud, data preparation, master data management and application integration on a single platform with a common design, development and management environment for simplicity and ease-of-use. This expedites the time-to-market and response to business needs.

2.      Modern real-time architecture for meeting data challenges – By providing a consolidated view of historical and real-time data on a single platform, it generates real-time, actionable insights which can be leveraged to increase sales, reduce overhead costs and transform the way business is conducted.

3.      Self-service Data Integration and Instant value – It offers the flexibility of self-service data integration and governance allowing companies to easily clean, process and transform their raw data into strategic, actionable assets with a single point of access and control.

4.      Budget-friendly pricing with no vendor lock-in, no extra fees – Last, but not the least, Talend Data Fabric offers a scalable platform with a lower cost of ownership, a subscription-based model with per user charges and no hidden, extra fees per connector.

A unique, comprehensive combination of Talend Studio products, the features of the Talend Data Fabric are as follows:

CyByte Inc. is a global Business Intelligence, Mobility solutions, Enterprise solutions and Strategic Consultation Service provider located in Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

For more information about our Talend-based solutions and customized data integration offerings, please Contact Us.|||

