A DNA test proved that a retired postman fathered more than 1300 illegitimate children.

On 27 February 2016, the World News Daily Report web site published an article positing that a retired postman had fathered more than 1,300 illegitimate children:

An 87-year-old former postman has been proven to have fathered over 1,300 illegitimate children after a private investigator hired by a Tennessee family discovered the shocking truth. “Contraception wasn’t very popular in those days,” he told local reporters in his defense. “I have nothing to be ashamed of. The 60s were the good old days and I did a great Johnny Cash impression which played out real good with the ladies,” he explained. “Some even thought I was Johnny Cash for real,” he recalls laughingly. “I don’t know if they really believed it or if they were trying to convince themselves, but who was I to say no to a quickie?” he acknowledged.

There was no truth to this story, which originated with World News Daily Report (WNDR), a fake news site that does not publish factual stories (as noted in their disclaimer):

WNDR assumes however all responsibility for the satirical nature of its articles and for the fictional nature of their content. All characters appearing in the articles in this website – even those based on real people –  are entirely fictional and any resemblance between them and any persons, living, dead, or undead is purely a miracle.

In addition to the disclaimer, the fake news story about a postman’s fathering 1,300 illegitimate children was given away as fiction because it featured two unrelated images that were lifted (like all of WNDR’s photographs) from other sites:

The first image, which purportedly depicts the prolific postman, actually shows a 97-year-old World War II veteran. The second image, which supposedly captures the reported who uncovered the story, is actually picture of David Stockman, the budget director during the Reagan administration.|||

Reports that an 87-year-old man had fathered hundreds of children originated from a well-known fake news site.