

 As a spiritual entrepreneur creating the business and life of your dreams, you want to attract high end clients and starting to make lots of money whilst helping others.

But what happens when you start acting before you align energetically with the vibration of what you want?

You become desperate and anxious and start trying every single thing that comes to you.

You try that marketing technique from an email that just popped up in your email account, you watch entrepreneur webinars where they sell you a wonderful sales system to attract high end clients, you try to build a mailing list and send emails everyday, you write funnel pages, etc, etc.

Doing all these things is not wrong per se and there are many techniques and systems that are really good.

But, what is not right is doing them from a place of non alignment. And that place feels off, comes from desperation, from anxiety, from exhaustion.

You try hundreds of things because none seem to work for you. Or they work, you get some few results, but they’re not consistent and you get frustrated.

Eventually you end up exhausted and even questioning your whole business.

This creates so much resistance in yourself and your business and everything gets stuck.

And the worst thing is, other people will feel that energy coming from you and from what you do, and you’ll end up attracting the wrong clients, or not attracting anyone at all.

Because the amazing clients you want to attract are not on that vibration of lack and desperation.

That is exactly the feeling of acting from a place of non alignment. And that’s what a lot of spiritual entrepreneurs are not aware.

That the reason nothing seems to work is because they are putting the action before the alignment and not paying attention to how they feel.

They feel that they must be doing something wrong, or that they didn’t implement that technique right, etc.

When the real reason is not on the doing, but on the being!

When you’re in alignment with what you want, vibrating inside the vortex and acting from inspired action, everything should FEEL GOOD!

You don’t come from anxiety, desperation or exhaustion. You come from joy, happiness, excitement and divine guidance.

You might even put marketing and sales systems in place, but they’re aligned and they feel right to you. You feel excited about them and things just flow. There’s no resistance.

It’s not shooting everywhere anymore in hopes something works. It is working with what feels right TO YOU and your business.

That’s why as a spiritual entrepreneur you need to focus on the being before the doing.

With the Law of Attraction, you attract not what you want, but who you are. You need to do the energetic shift from a place of lack and frustration to a place of abundance and joy.

When you feel good with your life and your business in the now, and you’re committed to only accept what feels right to you, everything you do will be based on inspired and divine guidance.

It will feel good, it will flow and you’ll then be in a position to attract the high end clients you want that are a pleasure to work with, without any need to exhaust yourself doing things you don’t like.

Because you will be a vibrational match to those clients, you’ll be like a magnet to them. The Universe will help bringing them to you effortlessly.

That’s how you achieve a successful and joyful business and the life of your dreams.

And that’s why I am committed to help and coach my clients in doing that energetic shift into that place of abundance and joy.

Click the image to know more:|||

As a spiritual entrepreneur creating the business and life of your dreams, you want to attract high end clients and starting to make lots of money whilst