To put it lightly, I have a wandering mind. Sometimes I intentionally go on a mental excursion, but more often than not I just get lost. These are techniques that I use to find myself again and get back on track.

For those looking for an out of body experience, the best way I know of , other than use of illicit substances, is to jump on a logic train. Start asking questions of everything, and assume that your first gut instinct is already proven true. Conspiracy theories, yes! Speaking behind your back, surely! Personal data in the hands of your enemies, who doesn’t? These are just to get you started. I’m sure you can be more creative: think pyramids.

Now you are lost. You have a bunch of thoughts in your head that are surely garbage and now you can either sift through the bog that you’ve created or crawl back to your starting position. I suggest just taking in the experience and get familiar with being lost. This is the first of my pillars of meditation: realize that/when you are lost.

Now to get back on a track. Due to meditation being a settling exercise rather than simply a rhetorical tool, I don’t suggest that you go back to where your started. Search for something new that you believe in before making the trip back to your original frame of mind. This could be a new emotional frame or empathetic context. It could be something as small as a new connection between similar concepts. I am a hoarder of concepts and contexts, so I personally find use in this result without further refinement. For skeptics, I suggest that you consider new contexts as yet another check on your sturdy philosophical base. Whatever happens, even if you don’t find something new, this sort of mental jogging can help train in general cognition.

This is where my brand of meditation differs greatly from other forms that I know of. I believe in intensional stressing and stretching. I view my foundations and ideology to be something akin to ones own physical body. In the respect that you can do aerobics and anaerobics to tone your muscles and expand your cardio profile, you can also push the limits of memory and logic. Emotions however, are a different animal altogether.

Once you feel that you have centered yourself/found yourself. Then you can begin to perform the ritualistic forms of meditation, each exercising a different attribute of cognition, and finally reaching a heightened state of emotion and/or emotional stability.

First on my meditation routine is waking up in the morning. For many this can be as simple as drinking a cup of coffee. For me personally, coffee never had much affect, so I tried a few things and found just plain old meditation to be most affective. To wake up, I simply think of the restraints that chain me to my bed and call me to sleep. I am fairly claustrophobic, so when I feel surrounded and cornered by my own body’s chemistry, a switch flips on and immediately a fair dose of adrenaline has me standing on my feet again. I don’t have much trouble waking up.

Once at work, after meetings or routine, I jump into creative work. For this, I again need to let my mind wander. This time however, I have an intended destination. Sometimes it is writing a new article or programming a widget. These are things that occupy time, but don’t require full cognitive function. The only time I hit a wall, some call it writer’s block, is when I need to ask myself what should I do next? To go diving into that ocean again, I have a host of games that I play with myself or others. The goal here is to use the entropy of my immediate environment to generate unusual and creative concepts.

To keep this short, I won’t expand on any of the specific mental gymnastic games to play. You can subscribe if you want to hear more later.

The third meditation on my daily routine then, is traditional clearing of the mind. This helps me to go to sleep, because I have strong insomniac tendencies. Clear your mind. Clear your mind. Clear your mind. Now it is morning, wake up!|||

To put it lightly, I have a wandering mind. Sometimes I intentionally go on a mental excursion, but more often than not I just get lost. These are techniques that I use to find myself again and get…