Nothing can be as essential for businesses as a satisfied customer. Happy customers are the most valuable asset for organizations. It is imperative for the companies to become available for addressing any issues customer may have The call center is one of the smart tactics to deal with, while answering the various customer queries and inquiries.

Recently, Amazon Web Services (AWS) has launched a cloud-based customer call center system. As we all know, Amazon is one of the leading eCommerce brands for online shopping. Since a decade, the company has planned to develop their own support center to serve the consumers more strategically. Finally, we have the result. AWS has developed the Amazon Connect, an Integrated Virtual Response (IVR) system, and released the solution on 27th March 2017.

The Market for the Integrated Virtual Response system is quite large having well-established industry players such as SAP, Oracle, Salesforce, etc. Launching Amazon Connect, AWS has introduced a more sophisticated system to channelize the call center operations. Amazon is already using this robust system and also released it for other large to small scale organizations.

Amazon Connect enables users to set up their contact center, and design customized contact flows. As the system is completely web-based, onboard agents of the call center can manage the customer contacts effectively into it. It’s a highly sophisticated system that supports more complex interaction and routing. Amazon Connect also holds the proficiency to create a customized call tree and other Integrated Virtual Responses.

Organizations can configure and run the Amazon Connect without the assistance of IT professional or consultant. No need to purchase any pre-agent license and deploy any hardware. The highly scalable system facilitates companies with the pay-as-you-go model. So, this is the best solution for the organizations who have to deal with spiky, unpredictable or both types of call volumes.

AWS Lambda allows the system to run the code in Serverless architecture as a part of a customer contact. The code pulls the data from a database or a CRM software and uses the data in order to cater users with more personalized customer experience.

CloudWatch boosts the performance of Amazon Connect by allowing to integrate various real-time operational metrics. The metrics help users in tracking the frequency of incoming calls per second, the number of calls held in queues, etc. Using these metrics, companies can analyze the performance of their call center and make a strategic decision regarding the availability of the agents on-hand.

Using Amazon S3, the Integrated Virtual Responses system ‘Amazon Connect’ facilities users with encrypted and unlimited storage of reports and audio calls.

Amazon Lex allows organizations to build the contact flows with natural language to get the same natural language understanding and automatic speech recognition that empowers Amazon Alexa. It allows callers to simply convey what they are exactly looking for rather than selecting the things from a menu.

Utilizing Amazon Kinesis services, Amazon Connect can stream contact trace records. Companies can be pushed to Amazon Redshift or Amazon S3 and analyzed through analytics tools like Amazon QuickSight, etc.

Amazon Connect can create a new directory or take reference from an existing active directory. The directory allows companies to store user permission and identities.

With Amazon Connect, users need not to deploy or manage a cloud infrastructure. It also facilities companies with the high-end flexibility to scale your contact center up or down as per the changing requirements. The system holds an extreme onboarding capacity up to ten of thousands of agents to boost your business cycle. Moreover, when it comes to payment, you need to pay only for the time caller are interacting with Amazon Connect.

Being an open platform, Amazon Connect can be easily integrated with other software such as the AWS platform, customer relationship management (CRM) and so on. Using Amazon S3, businesses can store call recordings as well as control lifecycle and access of the data. Companies can also integrate the AWS Lambda to run a code for back-end service or a serverless application to build effective contact flow experiences that adapt to your customer needs in real-time.

It requires just a few clicks in the AWS Management console and your agents can start taking calls within minutes. Using drag and drop Contact Flow Editor, businesses can generate contact flows that enable them to have efficient and effective customer interaction without any coding.

It’s an on-demand service so the charges would be applicable as per your usage. No upfront charges, no commitments, and no minimum monthly fee. You need to pay for the time when your end customers interact with the Amazon Connect. Here, costing does not depend on agent seats, maintenance, and capacity.

Amazon Connect runs on the established infrastructure of Amazon Web Services. So, there is a surety about the scalability, high availability and fault tolerance of the system.

Having a team of AWS enthusiasts, at BitCanopy, we try to cover all the latest updates released by AWS to facilitate our readers with the latest technology trends and enrich their knowledge base. Bitcanopy is an AWS based could cost optimization product that helps organizations in managing their cloud usage and spend smartly.

If you found this article useful to read, then what are you waiting for? Spread the word by hitting the heart! ❤|||

Nothing can be as essential for businesses as a satisfied customer. Happy customers are the most valuable asset for organizations. It is imperative for the companies to become available for…