In September of 2015, I dropped out of college, packed my bags, and moved to San Francisco. For reasons.

When I made that decision, I did it without having anything to fall back on; so I, in a fit of desperation, just started throwing my resume into the wind to see if anyone had any vague interest in what I had to offer. According to a spreadsheet I’d kept, I reached out to about 50 different companies—40 of which called me back for interviews. And for reasons unknown, I agreed to go through with them (pro-tip: don’t do that, ever).

After what felt like 500 hours of coding challenges on the floor of my unfurnished apartment, I was on the train heading from DC to SF with a handful of on-site interviews lined up. It wasn’t until the following week, when I got my first offer, that I realized I didn’t actually want to work at any of the places where I was going into the final round.

I’d gone into things with the hopes of working somewhere that was on the small-side, where I thought I could have a larger impact on the direction the company moved in as it grew overtime. But I also wanted it to be somewhere that I felt like the products I’m working on really matter to the people who use them. When I looked at the places I was still interviewing with, they were either companies that were so large that, even if the projects I contributed to touched a lot of people, I was just an air molecule in the tire of a monster truck, designed by people I’d probably never meet. Or, they were smaller startups with products I didn’t use, or have all that much interest in using for the most part.

So I turned down the offer, cancelled the rest of my interviews, and asked one of the mid-sized companies I’d been talking to if I could intern with them for a few months while I took time to really figure out what I wanted to do with my life.

When that internship came to a close, I’d decided on three companies I could see myself working for. I ended up with offers from two of them: LendUp—a small, social-good startup that had recently attracted a former-coworker of mine—and [not-LendUp]—a mid-sized startup with a product I used, like, all of the time.

As someone who’d spent the past three years up until this point hopping around from one internship to the next, I was, naturally, overcome with all levels of anxiety around the thought of settling down and becoming a real adult working 9 to 5 (or more), job security, and a retirement plan. Medical insurance.

I also genuinely liked both of the places I was caught between (which, I admit, is not an actual problem. But it didn’t make the choice “obvious”). This meant I had to think long and hard about what I really needed. At some point during my decision-making process — specifically, while I was on-site at [not-LendUp], talking to some of its employees, and trying to get a general sense of what it’s like to exist there as a human being—I got a text from my friend at LendUp saying that Jake, the co-founder and CTO, wanted to talk to me to better understand why I was having such a hard time choosing.

You see, the truth of the matter is that I’d been scarred by my most recent internship in a way that made me realize the value of a company’s internal culture. I’d been given a manager who had no interest in my personal development, and who was willing to let me fall by the wayside without giving any indication that I wasn’t meeting their expectations. I needed to know that I was committing to a place that didn’t have a culture so focused on individual growth that people threw each other under the bus just to get one more step ahead.

When [not-LendUp] heard that Jake and I had scheduled a phone call, they also gave me the option of talking to either their CTO or their VP of Engineering. Since the VP of Eng is more culture-focused, I thought it’d make the most sense to talk to them to get the answers I was looking for.

I sat down with some of my housemates and, with their help, put together a list of three questions that I needed answers for, to get a real sense of what I was getting myself into:

1. What’s the retention rate of engineers? 2. What’s the ratio of junior to senior-level engineers? 3. How do they define “mentorship”?

The first was important because it reflected how happy people were with the company overall. The second could mean one of two things: 1) if the ratio was skewed too heavily in one direction, either the company was having a hard time attracting—or, even worse, didn’t value—younger talent (senior-heavy), or 2) there was little-to-no upward mobility (junior-heavy). The third would tell me what resources I’d have available to help get up to speed when I started.

Both companies seemed to have similar enough mentorship programs for new employees. LendUp assigns a senior engineer to be your go-to person for your first couple of months while you get into the swing of things. They’re always there at the ready to pair program with you, and always available to point you in the right direction when you get stuck. When it came to junior to senior-level numbers, both had a ratio close to 50:50.

Finally, while [not-LendUp] had a pretty great retention rate—somewhere in the high 90% range—LendUp had only ever lost one engineer. Which was literally insane. And, even though a few have left in the time since I started, it’s still very clear that this is a company that’s good at keeping people around.

Throughout the process, my confidence was growing and I was feeling like I couldn’t go wrong—either would be a good choice. But I was still feeling like I needed to dig a little deeper to find what would really make me happy.

That’s when I thought back to a conversation I’d had with a venture capitalist I’d met earlier in the year. He had made an off-handed remark about how it “doesn’t matter” if he funds a lot of companies that have products that don’t do anything to change the world because, in his mind, “there was enough venture money to go around”.

I told him that I fundamentally disagreed with him, because, even if there was theoretically enough money to fund both the meaningless and the meaningful, there were a limited number of people available to work on those things—and the sexy-looking startup that’s adding no real value to the world is almost always going to win the fight for talent.

It was then that it really hit me. I needed to work somewhere that was going to be the change I wanted to see. And I had to start with me.

Contribute to the conversation on Hacker News.|||

A better alternative to Payday Loans. LendUp offers online loans and credit cards with free financial education and the opportunity to build credit (where available).