This week’s article is about the mental discomfort experienced by humans and foxes, who hold two or more contradicting thoughts or/and beliefs at the same time. Let’s look at what is cognitive dissonance and see how it relates to design.

The fable of “The Fox and the Grapes”, by Aesop, can be seen as an example of cognitive dissonance.

It seems the fox held two incompatible thoughts simultaneously, Desire and Frustration. The criticism used by the fox was a way to neutralize this dis-balance and reduce the mental conflict.

Humans subconsciously strive for internal consistency. Experiencing inconsistency leads to psychological discomfort. This leads to higher motivation to avoid information that can contradict our own beliefs and values. Thus, we can stay in balance and be happy.

Most of the time, people try to reduce their cognitive dissonance in four ways:

Creating and resolving cognitive dissonance can have really powerful impact on users. It can be used to influence people behavior.

Cognitive dissonance can be used as means of persuasion. Frequently in design it can be seen as Foot-in-the-Door Technique.

This technique works and has been proven many times by many services.

Frequently, when people sign up for free services or limited promotions they might have done it because it was promoted to them and not because they really had the need for it. This is where a small cognitive dissonance appears. So they start dealing with the cognitive dissonance using one of the 4 typical ways from the previous section.

Using the Foot-in-the-Door technique, increases the likelihood of someone doing what you want them to do. It is important, not to be too pushy with the asking of favors, because it will send the user flying out of the door. :) Giving the users time to rest and sort out their thoughts is crucial if you want this technique to work well.

Each time you ask the user for a favor with your design, you create a small cognitive dissonance that is proportional to the size of favor. That’s why the product/service flow needs to be designed in a way where the user can have a rest period to resolve the cognitive dissonance by himself.

The more favors the user has done previously for you, the more you can ask from him/her next time. Getting the user invested in your product creates trust and dependency.

Use cognitive dissonance sparingly and you will be able to befriend many users with your design.

Creating dissonance in the user’s mind is frequently used in marketing. It is very efficient strategy and that’s why so many companies are using it.

However, sometimes it gets misused. Instead of using to warm up the users and provide them with good experience, marketers(including designers) are getting too aggressive. They try to directly push the user in the door and flip him on headstand so all the money can drop from his pocket. That’s not cool!

For example, popup modals that are creating a strong cognitive dissonance for the sake of conversion.

The modal above tries to tell me “Hey are you that stupid that you don’t want free assets and 10% discount?” This creates a cognitive dissonance in my head. But there is no space for panic. Designers have provided an “OUT” way of that dissonance. It is in front of my face, I just need to click “Continue”.

I actually have an improvement idea. They can make a second popup after I close the first one. “Are you sure you really don’t want 10% discount?” to make me doubt my first decision. This way they will overload my cognitive dissonance capacity and I will close the whole browser tab! Personally, I have several sites that I’ve stopped visiting after experiencing these types of modals.

Designers must avoid creating such manipulative and unethical designs. Even if it helps the conversion rate in the short term, in the long term it creates bad user experience.

Cognitive dissonance gives you the power to persuade users and turn them into “friends” of your product. That is only if you use it wisely. Be a good designer and persuade users ethically, so they can have nice experience with your creations.

Pushing too hard against the user’s cognition can break the experience.

If you found this article useful tap the 💚 so others can enjoy it, too.

Thanks for your time! Connect with me on LinkedIn and Twitter.

Some of the previous Design principles:|||

This week’s article is about the mental discomfort experienced by humans and foxes, who hold two or more contradicting thoughts or/and beliefs at the same time. Let’s look at what is cognitive…