We just released Rayon 0.7. This is a pretty exciting release, because it marks the official first step towards Rayon 1.0. In addition, it marks the first release where Rayon’s parallel iterators reach “feature parity” with the standard sequential iterators! To mark the moment, I thought I’d post the release notes here on the blog:

This release marks the first step towards Rayon 1.0. For best performance, it is important that all Rayon users update to at least Rayon 0.7. This is because, as of Rayon 0.7, we have taken steps to ensure that, no matter how many versions of rayon are actively in use, there will only be a single global scheduler. This is achieved via the crate, which is being released at version 1.0, and which encapsulates the core schedule APIs like . (Note: the crate is, to some degree, an implementation detail, and not intended to be imported directly; it’s entire API surface is mirrored through the rayon crate.)

We have also done a lot of work reorganizing the API for Rayon 0.7 in preparation for 1.0. The names of iterator types have been changed and reorganized (but few users are expected to be naming those types explicitly anyhow). In addition, a number of parallel iterator methods have been adjusted to match those in the standard iterator traits more closely. See the “Breaking Changes” section below for details.

Finally, Rayon 0.7 includes a number of new features and new parallel iterator methods. As of this release, Rayon’s parallel iterators have officially reached parity with sequential iterators – that is, every sequential iterator method that makes any sense in parallel is supported in some capacity.

In the move towards 1.0, there have been a number of minor breaking changes:

Experimental features require the use of the feature. Their APIs may change or disappear entirely in future releases (even minor releases) and hence they should be avoided for production code.

Thanks to the following people for their contributions to this release:|||

We just released Rayon 0.7. This is a pretty exciting release, because it marks the official first step towards Rayon 1.0. In addition, it marks the first re...