I still visit my research lab quite often. It’s always nice to be in the zone where boundaries of knowledge are being pushed further and excitement is in the air. I like this ritual as this is a place where one can discuss linux kernel code and philosophy of life all in a single sentence while we quietly sip our hipster coffee cups.

In the lab, Abder is working these days on some cool hypercall stuff. The exact details of his work are quite complex, but he calls his tool hypertrace. I think I am sold on the name already. Hypercalls are like syscalls, but instead of such calls going to a kernel, they are made from guest to the hypervisor with arguments and an identifier value (just like syscalls). The hypervisor then brokers the privileged operation for the guest. Pretty neat. Here is some kernel documentation on hypercalls.

So Abder steered one recent discussion towards internals of KVM and wanted to know the latency caused by a hypercall he was introducing for his experiments (as I said he is introducing new hypercall with an id – for example 42). His analysis usecase was quite specific – he wanted to trace the sequence to know the exact latency he was causing for a given duration. In addition the tracing overhead needs to be minimum and is for a short duration only. This is somewhat trivial. These 3 tracepoints are there in the kernel already and he could latch on to them. Essentially, he needs to look for  argument of the tracepoint and it should be a  (18), which would denote that a hypercall is coming up next. Then he could look at the next event and find the time-delta to get the latency. Even though it is possible by traditional tracing such as LTTng and Ftrace to record events, Abder was only interested in his specific hypercall ( = 42) along with the that happened before (with = 18) and after that. This is not straightforward. It’s not possible to do such specific tracing with traditional tracers at a high speed and low overhead. This means the selection of events should not just be a simple filter, but should be stateful. Just when Abder was about to embark on a journey of kprobes and kernel modules, I once more got the opportunity of being Morpheus and said “What if I told you…“

Jokes apart, here is a small demo of eBPF/BCC script that allows us to hook onto the 3 aforementioned tracepoints in the Linux kernel and conditionally record the trace events:

The interface in BCC allows us to use static tracepoints in the kernel. For example, whenever a occurs in the kernel, the first probe is executed and it records the event if the exit reason was . At the same time it updates a BPF hash map, which basically acts like a flag here for other events. I recommend you to check out Lesson 12 from the BCC Python Developer Tutorial if this seems interesting to you 🙂 In addition, perhaps the reference guide lists the most important C and Python APIs for BCC.

To test the above example out, we can introduce our own hypercall in the VM using this small test program :

While the BPF program is running, if we do a hypercall, we get the following output :

So we see how in a few minutes we could precisely gather only those events that were of interest to us – saving us from the hassle of setting up other traces or kernel modules. eBPF/BCC based analysis allowed us to conditionally trace only a certain subsection of events instead of the huge flow of events that we would have had to analyze offline. KVM  internals are like a dark dungeon and I feel as if I am embarking on a quest here. There are a lot more upcoming KVM related analysis we are doing with eBPF/BCC. Stay tuned for updates! If you find any more interesting usecases for eBPF in the meantime, let me know. I would love to try them out! As always, comments, corrections and criticisms are welcome.|||

I still visit my research lab quite often. It's always nice to be in the zone where boundaries of knowledge are being pushed further and excitement is in the air. I like this ritual as this is a place where one can discuss linux kernel code and philosophy of life all in a single sentence while we…