Today we are opening up access to several new Direct Message APIs so that developers can build better personalized customer experiences at scale. These APIs are designed to help businesses use the entire Twitter platform, from public Tweets to private Direct Messages, to deliver faster, richer, and more engaging human- and bot-powered customer service, marketing, and engagement experiences.

These APIs enable innovative interactions in Direct Messages, like what @United has created for exploring travel.

We are constantly working to create industry-leading experiences for our customers. Twitter is a place where our customers engage with us 24/7 about a variety of aspects of travel. The new features that Twitter released have enabled us to create real-time engagements with customers to offer an array of services, from discovering where to go on their next trip, to answering common travel questions faster and easier. We’re excited to use these features to deliver additional experiences that connect people and unite the world through travel. KC Geen Director of Digital Marketing and Customer Acquisition at United Airlines

To help developers build richer engagement experiences, we’re releasing a new API and several new endpoints. Today’s release includes:

In addition to these services, we are also publishing information for two features that are still in private beta so developers can see what exists and can let us know if they’re interested in using these features.

As part of today’s release, we’ve also published an update to our Automation Rules to give clear guidance on how bots may engage with people on Twitter. We encourage you to read them before you get started building.

These new APIs and endpoints are part of our ongoing investment in the Twitter API. Be sure to check out our post about the future of the API platform where you can learn more about where we’re focusing our energy, and see a roadmap with the updates we have planned.

In the coming months, we plan on releasing several major updates to the Account Activity API so it can be used as the primary source of account updates for customer engagement applications. These include:

As we release these updates, we will start to retire related legacy services. The Account Activity API will eventually replace User streams and Site streams, and the new Direct Message REST endpoints will eventually replace the existing endpoints used to send and retrieve messages.

We plan to provide at least a six month migration window after these new services graduate from beta. We’ll announce the deprecation date then and encourage you to start using these new beta services in the meantime.

To see a deep dive into the details of using these services and the key benefits compared to the legacy services, check out our forum post.

You can access the new beta REST endpoints in the same way you access the existing REST API v1.1 endpoints. Once you have created an app through apps.twitter.com, you can start using those services.

For the Account Activity API we’re onboarding new developers in waves to ensure a smooth experience. To get access, please complete this application to help us understand what you’re building. We’ll get back to you as soon as we can, but bear with us as we expect to have a lot of developers applying for access.

Thanks for building on our API platform. We’re thrilled to be making these APIs and endpoints more broadly available today and can’t wait to see the new experiences that you create.|||

Today we are opening up access to several new Direct Message APIs so that developers can build better personalized customer experiences at scale. These APIs are designed to help businesses use the ...