Chatbots are the latest in the technology hype curve. Even Skype, where dating app scammer tries to scam you from your hard earned cash, has chatbots and APIs. Most of these bots just do one thing, from teaching English, to finding news articles, predicting the weather, or buying purses.

To hell with these simple bots! Hold my beer for me as I reveal my master plan to raise my series Z, hire the CEO, CTO, CAO, CBO, CCO, CDO and bring in the #disruption.

First: The user approaches the universal conversational interface, and types in what they want

Through advanced deep learning enabled by cloud and mobile, the bot seeks out its answer on the world wide web, and then returns curated results.

Even better, through the magic of #geofencing and #bigdata, we are able to generate a map of all nearby pizza stores, and send it to the user

It will literally be the AI that organizes the world’s information and makes it universally accessible and useful

This is all sounding suspiciously similar to the OTHER AI mastermind that will end us all

Chatbots are marketed as virtual assistants that understand what you want, and brings it to you. The idea of a conversational AI seems like the Next Big Thing™.

For simple automation in Slack, not much interfacing is limited. It acts almost like a smartphone notification of sorts. But when they are marketed as full services crammed into textual interfaces, you have problems.

You have to cram in a stupid amount of language processing just to make it not screw up on simple language processing tasks.

A chat framework also severely limits the number of effective interactive options. Facebook, for example, offer five cards with their framework, giving up to five images and a few options for each card.

Remember call centers? Remember how great it was talking with one of those? Offering all the options from 1–9, and a real person behind the lines! No? Well, Okay.

That does bring up another question: how do you discover these AI services? Is there a directory for them? How am I supposed to talk to Chick Fil-A if I never knew that Chick Fil-A did fast food? It is currently another question left unanswered by the platform providers.

Rather than seeing chatbots as “intelligent” AI toddlers that cries and falls over whenever the smallest thing goes wrong, it’s time to boil them down to their fundamental interactions:

Text in, text out, maybe something useful happens.

Decades of design conventions, human-computer interactivities studies, GUI designs, all gone, laid waste by text in, text out.

Search engines has been doing text in, text out for years, there’s now also AI assistants, like Siri, Cortana, Google Now, that now does audio in, services out. Let’s have a look at a few examples:

What if we ask Google a simple maths question?

What if we want to find shoe shops in Brooklyn?

Here’s an idea: what if we take all of the existing chatbots, connect it with Google and Siri, and create an interactive experience for users and connect with people when they are needed?

In this model, users are still doing what they usually do: search for things that they need, and rather than taking you to a long list of websites, what if an AI “chatbot” came over to help you with your query?

It solves the immediate discovery problem — the people who want to click on websites for clothing are the people who need clothes and are searching for them.

Hell, you could even do what Google is doing with the calculator, make a mini shopping app. The different agents from different shops would then compete for “floor space”, trying to show you their inventory so you can make purchases directly from Google’s interface, or from your smartphone’s personal assistant. Need further assistance/research? Chat with the bots there!

Imagine the world where you tell Siri to fetch you some pizza, and be taken to an AI “chatbot” that actually chats. There’s great potential for interactivity here, rather than pure text.

To be fair, it seems like Amazon is experimenting with Alexa in this direction, as well as Cortana. Google even started to show more creative responses amongst search results.

There is great potential for “chatbots” when they aren’t bound by the limited interface, nor the fact that they have to conform to being a “chat person”.

Chatbots, as an intelligent agent providing services, is an interesting development. The severe limitations imposed by their platform restricts their potential. However, it does not have to be this way, we have better interfaces, we have better ways of receiving inputs from the user, and responding in dynamic, intuitive ways.

Moving intelligent agents away from chat interfaces and put them front and center with your personal assistant, or even the search engine will be far more impactful and offer much more meaningful ways of interacting with them. As well as opportunities for these platform providers.

What are your thoughts? Let me know.

If you enjoyed this article, follow me on Twitter: @NoPtrException.|||

A look at chatbots, conversational interfaces, and a brave stab at a richer future