Mastodon is the new social media platform, a decentralized alternative to Twitter that is currently blowing up. This is a step by step guide on how to run your own Mastodon instance on Digital Ocean.

This droplet has almost everything we will need preinstalled.

You will receive an email from DO with the credentials you can use to log in to start setting up the server.

Connect to the server as a root user, using ip and password from the email:

You will be prompted to change the default password, so do that.

Then create a new user with the username you like, and grant him the sudo powers:

Let's also immediately point your domain name to the droplet. After buying the domain(I recommend using namecheap), change the Custom DNS settings to look like this:

Then, in DO's networking tab, create a domain, and add an A record pointing to the droplet:

Now you will be able to ssh into your server using your new username and a domain name:

Update and upgrade all the software:

Install nginx(we'll use it to serve our droplet on the right port), and your favorite text editor:

Now let's add docker to the sudo group, that will allow us to run all the docker commands without sudo:

Clone the repo and cd into it:

Now let's configure some settings. First, rename the file into and open it.

Create a SendGrid account, go to Settings > API Keys, and generate an API key.

Then set up the config like this:

Open the file , and enter the information about your instance(title, description, etc).

Before we can build the containers, we need to add a swap file, without it my $10/month droplet was running out of memory during the build process. To add swap, execute these commands:

Now let's finally build our containers! (It will take a few minutes)

Now we need to run several commands in the db container to create the database.

Create a user for your db(use the username and password you've just set in the .env.production)

Create a database, giving the ownership rights to the user:

Now you can get back to your own user, and run the migrations:

Now you can precompile the assets:

After this has finished, restart the containers:

And now your mastodon instance will run on yourdomain.com:3000!!

First, follow this guide to generate SSL keys and set up the basic nginx configuration.

Then, because the docker containers are serving the application on the port 3000, we will need to use nginx to proxy all the requests to them.

Create the file , and copy the settings from here.

Now, after you restart nginx:

It will serve your Mastodon instance!

Congratulations =) Create an account, test things, and invite some people to use your instance!

I also recommend submitting a link to your instance to this list to make it easier for people to discover it.

If something doesn't work or you have any questions - feel free to email me at raymestalez@gmail.com, or toot at me at @rayalez@hackertribe.io. I will be happy to help!

Also, everyone is always welcome to join the instance I’m hosting and maintaining — hackertribe.io.|||

Deploying Mastodon on Digital Ocean

Mastodon is the new social media platform, a decentralized alternative to Twitter that is currently blowing up. This is ...