Visit SpinaliS Canada booth No 29 at the West Vancouver Spring Home Show 2017 and SAVE 10% on all of the SpinaliS chairs for active sitting!

Are you looking for the latest trends in home improvement? Speak to professionals in the industry and get exclusive deals at the largest Home Show in West Vancouver. Don’t forget to enter the free draws at participating displays!

This year we will have an Outdoor Recreation area featuring brand new boats from M&P Mercury Sales, ranked Western Canada’s #1 boat and yacht dealer!

FREE Shipping Anywhere in Canada

 Alberta AB, British Columbia BC, Manitoba MN, New Brunswick NB, Newfoundland and Labrador NL, Northwest Territories NT, Nova Scotia NS, Nunavut NU, Ontario ON, Prince Edward Island PEI, Quebec QC, Saskatchewan SK, Yukon YT (Alberta, Colombie-Britannique, Nouveau-Brunswick, Terre-Neuve-et-Labrador, Territoires du Nord-Ouest, Nouvelle-Écosse, Nunavut, Ontario, Île-du-Prince-Édouard, Québec, Saskatchewan, Yukon)

Medical Device

 SpinaliS chairs were developed with a help of doctors and evaluated as a Class I medical device. Clinical evaluation of the medical device was processed by multiple clinics in Europe. However, in Canada, it is not possible to claim SpinaliS chairs to write your taxes off and they are not covered by any kind of medical insurance or health plan, yet.

Abs and Back Workout

 Work out while sitting on any of the SpinaliS chairs and performing your daily tasks at the office or home.

Back Pain Relief

 SpinaliS Chairs will work out your core muscles for you. Just sit, do your thing and leave everything else up to SpinaliS.

Stylish Office Chairs

 Design of the SpinaliS Chairs is an eye candy – your customers will definitely notice them!

Yoga Ball Alternative

 It is recommended not to sit longer than 2 hours on a yoga ball, but on the SpinaliS chairs you can sit all day long.

Standing Desk Alternative

 SpinaliS chairs will actually make your body to work out and get you into a great shape without the hard task of standing or exercising.

Who does use SpinaliS?

 Google, Dubai Airport, SONY, IBM, DELL, Skoda Auto, CSOB Bank, Unicredit Bank, Vodafone and many more.

Our team of experienced and result driven graphic designers and online marketing specialists will design custom tailored promotional banners that will generate hot leads for your business.

Call us now at 778 938 9883 for a FREE CONSULTATION!

Ness Op Media Ltd. offers powerful web marketing and marketing solutions for the medium size businesses and start-ups. We guarantee rapid growth of your company without spending money on expensive Google AdWords and Facebook Newsfeeds. Tell us what you want and see the difference within a month .. guaranteed!|||

Visit SpinaliS Canada booth No 29 at the West Vancouver Spring Home Show 2017 and SAVE 10% on all of the SpinaliS chairs for active sitting!