Being an entrepreneur is probably one of the most rewarding experiences any person can have.   It is also one of the most challenging – and that’s coming from an attorney (turned entrepreneur) who regularly pulled all-nighters, and even stayed up for 52 hours straight working on a deal.

Creating value is a difficult process, and at times, can seem like a daunting and lonely process.  For this reason, we have created a list of the top 10 influencers (in no particular order) that we pay close attention to at ShouldiSign.com.  These influencers provide everything from motivation to insights and tips related to product, growth and marketing and everything in between.

What can be said about entrepreneurship that hasn’t already been said by Gary? Not a whole lot.  If you are looking for inspiration and insights on what it truly takes to be an entrepreneur in today’s age – check out Gary Vee’s youtube channel, the DailyVee.

Melinda, also known as the SmallBizLady, is a leading small business expert.  Among other things, she provides great advice on how to start and grow a business, effectively market it and leverage social media.  Her blog is a great resource tool for any small business.

Gerard Adams, dubbed the Millennial Mentor, is best known for the company he co-founded and sold for $50 million – Elite Daily.  More recently, he is the brainchild behind Fownders, an accelerator that helps startups grow and achieve their desired ends.  His blog provides insights, tips and lessons he has learned over his years as being a transformational entrepreneur.

If you are an entrepreneur, you need to be resourceful and Adam’s blog provides great free resources for small businesses, whether it is free business document templates, online resources and e-guides.  You can check them out here.

As Ivana’s twitter handle suggests, she is a marketing wiz for small businesses.  Her website provides great tips for entrepreneurs trying to find resourceful ways to market, while maintaining a small budget.  She also holds a weekly tweet chat  #BizapaloozaChat, which runs on Mondays at 2pm ET and Thursdays at 8pm ET.  It is a great way to connect with like-minded individuals and gain insights for your business.

Anita Campbell knows small business.  Her website covers topics related to marketing, social media and technology, and provides insights on the latest trends small businesses care about.  Do you know where food retailers should advertise to get the most bang for their buck?  You will once you check out this article.

Barbara is the author of several books, including the Small Business Survival Book and Small Business Taxes 2017.  With her background as an attorney, she provides some great and practical advice that can positively affect a business’s bottom line.  Check out her website.

Seth is a founder, best-selling author and speaker.  He has been there and done that and his writings comes from a place of experience.  If you don’t believe me, check out his books Tribes and Purple Cow.  He also maintains a great blog which put simply, makes you constantly think on how your business can be improved.  Case in point – see this.

John is a notable online influencer and serial entrepreneur who has started, grown and successfully sold several businesses.  He knows what it takes to market, and specifically market online.  You can learn more about him here.

Neil is the co-founder of Crazy Egg, Hello Bar and KISSmetrics.  Aside from being a successful entrepreneur, he is a guru in the online marketing space.  If you ever wanted to learn how to build an email list, obtain organic traffic, generate backlinks to your website, create viral content, look no further.  His website has some amazing information on all these topics and more.|||

List of top 10 influencers for entrepreneurs in 2017 that provide motivation, insights and tips related to product, growth and everything in between.