Flint began with a vision where all applications and services we use today will be living in the Cloud. With the ever advancing browser platform technology and web frontend performances, it’s not surprising that most things we do today with the internet can be done through a single browser window. We are stepping into an era where installable apps will soon become history.

Powered by Cloud technology, driven by the open source community, equipped with an optimised custom kernel, bundled with the best browser platform and incorporating numerous user experience enhancements, Flint OS is here to take you to a new horizon of computing.

Flint OS now works perfectly on most x86 and ARM based hardware platforms. We are particularly interested in making Flint OS run on single-board-computer (SBC) solutions based on ARM architecture, such as the Raspberry Pi, SBCs with RK3288 and RK3399 chips. With this, we breathe new life into the arena for the touch-enabled interactive terminals. Our clients include dual-screen smart POS machines, interactive classroom whiteboards, connected shopping mall wayfinders, smart vending machines and automated digital signages just to name a few. We provide the best user experience with minimal maintenance and development cost.

Flint OS loves the Raspberry Pi and STEM education. We have created a comprehensive set of JavaScript APIs to interface with the Raspberry Pi hardware and peripherals, providing young users to understand programming and electronics by the most intuitive JavaScript language. We also welcome educators and the community to create new courses with the open web technologies stack.

Flint OS can be deployed and managed across schools and organisations big or small, via a centralised cloud-driven management portal. Either utilising older hardware or incorporated into new hardware giving business customers flexibility in their purchasing decisions.

We are happy to customise Flint OS according to your needs and the use-case scenarios, including porting Flint OS to your existing hardware platforms, optimising end user experiences, bundling with designated software applications and bespoke developments.

We offer consulting services for industrial solutions, providing Flint OS and hardware solutions for smart device vendors, migrating applications to the web platform and integrating Flint OS into existing framework.

We also provide IT-as-a-Service for schools and businesses using Flint OS and our partner cloud-driven SaaS. Flint OS can be centrally deployed and managed for your organisation, benefits include improving efficiency, freeing from malware nuisance, lowering management overhead and also revitalising old and obsolete hardware.|||

Flint OS is a fast, simple, secure and productive operating system, powered by the open source Chromium OS.