This is the first in a series of blog posts about our journey re-imagining school subjects.

This story is about discovery and motivation in learning. We find that children are motivated to learn when they are invested in what they are doing and are discovering because they want to.

When I was 4 years old I went to a Steiner School for a year. A Steiner School allows children to learn at their own pace and tries to make learning as fun and exciting as possible.

I remember my 4 year old self baking bread, making candles and wondering around a big room filled with toys.

One spring, everyone in my class was given a sunflower seed. We all went into the garden, planted them and put a label with our name on next to our sunflower. Everyone was a little competitive as to who’s sunflower would grow the highest. Unfortunately, everyone's sunflower died quite early. I can’t remember if we forgot to water them or there was a freak frost but I do remember that I was a quite an upset 4 year old.

I really enjoyed going to school at the Steiner School (from what I can remember). However, after a year I had to move to a regular primary (elementary) school.

My primary school was small; there were 6 kids in my year and only 30 children in the whole school.

On my first day we had a science lesson. We were learning about plants and trees. I remember my teacher asking everyone whether a plant was a living thing or not. Nobody seemed to be able to answer the question and I was reluctant to put my hand up as it was my first day. Eventually I did, and said that I thought that plants were living things as they can grow and die.

I didn’t really think about it at the time but I was the only child in a class of 20 that knew that a plant was a living thing. It wasn’t the case that the other kids hadn’t been taught it and I had. That was the first science lesson of my life and everyone else had already “learnt” that plants were alive — there was a collective “ahh yes” when I answered — but they had only “learnt” about it in the lecturing sense of the word.

Skipping forward to a year and a half ago, I decided to take an online course on learning and education. I wanted to know how children learn best — what’s the “best” way for children to be educated. A lot of people that I speak to complain about the education system but I was curious to see if we actually knew how we could make learning better.

The course was created by MIT (one of the top tier universities in America) and it was all online. I learnt all about how children SHOULD be learning. I learnt about constructionism and constructivism; learning by making and learning through experience. I learnt about blended learning; where we give children control over the pace of their learning. And I learnt about learning through discovery; children discovering the meaning behind a concept for themselves.

It was both enlightening and baffling at the same time. We know so much about how children learn best, yet we barely use any of it in our school system today.

The course itself however, was the embodiment of irony, and a great example of how we still use these outdated methods of teaching. Here were a series of lessons that were developed by one of the top universities in the world about the best way to teach and learn, yet it was your traditional lecture style videos — no learning by doing or making in sight.

I was hooked though. Over the next half a year I read as much about alternative education and new ways of learning as I could get my hands on.

I learnt about a school in Mexico that has achieved incredible maths scores by teaching maths by asking “big questions of students”. I discovered a school in Germany that focuses on motivating it’s students to learn, not lecturing them. It was constantly on my mind, we know how to teach children for the better, we just generally, don’t.

I knew that I had to do something. I started with what I knew and looked at the UK national curriculum to see what children are supposed to be learning at various ages. This is what the national curriculum thinks children should know animals:

These didn’t seem like unreasonable things to know although they did seem a little… Rigid. Regardless, I started thinking up some lessons that I could use to teach children about the concepts above. My initial lesson plans looked something like this:

These lessons relied a lot on the “discovery” idea for learning — asking a child a question and allowing them to discover the answer for themselves. The theory behind this is that it allows the child to learn and progress at the rate that they are understanding what they’re researching - constructing an understanding of an idea by discovering it for oneself.

For instance, when learning about how a polar bear is adapted to it’s environment, the child will have to learn about habitats and and the specific needs of polar bears. They will learn more and more as they try to come up with an answer to the question.

I now needed to test my lessons. I reached out to various Facebook groups in the local area asking if anyone would be interested in helping me test some of my lessons. There was a fantastic response to what I was trying to do and lots of people were happy to help. I went into different homes and tried my lessons with various kids. The kids liked the lessons and learnt a fair amount about what animals and habitats were.

It still seemed a little same-y though. Sure, the children were enjoying the learning and they were more engaged than they would have been if I was simply explaining about habitats but they were still trying to find answers to random questions set by somebody else.

They weren’t motivated to discover for themselves. They were doing the discovery but they were doing it because somebody else told them that it was important.

I did notice something interesting though. When the children were asked to design their own animal they took pride in their creations.

I’d asked the children to design an animal that could run, fly and swim. They imagined dragons mixed with pigs mixed with fish, horses mixed with birds mixed with dolphins and entirely new creations all together.|||

This story is about discovery and motivation in learning. We find that children are motivated to learn when they are invested in what they are doing and are discovering because they want to. When I…