With three months under its belt, 2017 is outpacing almost every other year for warmth in the contiguous U.S. According to monthly data released by NOAA’s National Centers for Environmental Information on Thursday, the average U.S. temperature for the January-through-March period this year came in at 40.3°F, a full 5.1°F above the 20th-century average. Only one other year has managed to top 40°F across the Jan-Mar interval. That would be 2012 (41.4°F), propelled by the historic “warm wave” of March 2012.

Six states in the Sunbelt were off to a record-warm start to the year: New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina. The only states with near- or below-average temperatures for the year so far are Oregon (58th coolest out of 123 years) and Washington (29th coolest).

From Missouri southward and eastward, it’s been largely on the drier-than-average side, but that’s hardly the case elsewhere. Seven western states, plus Michigan, have experienced top-ten-wettest conditions for January through March. Sharing big time in the hydrological wealth was California. This winter’s heavy rains severely damaged the Oroville Dam and cut off parts of Big Sur (with State Route 1 still closed), but they also ended the punishing five-year drought for most of the state. The benchmark manual snow measurement at Philips Station in the central Sierra on March 30 found 94.4 inches of snowpack and 46.1 inches of water content as of March 30. The latter represents 183% of the long-term average for this time of year.

“Clearly, even though we had that hiatus of storms in March, we still got a very substantial snowpack,” said Frank Gehrke (California Department of Water Resources).

The temperature and precipitation patterns above are roughly consistent with La Niña, which tends to produce relatively cold, wet winters toward the northwest U.S. and relatively mild, dry winters toward the southeast. But to get the actual temperature results from 2017, you have to give that national fingerprint a big upward boost—the kind one would expect from long-term human-produced warming. Watch for an update from Jeff Masters next week on global temperatures, which are also running very high considering the influence of La Niña.

Of course, the La Niña event of 2016–17 wasn’t much of one. In fact, it tied with 1967–68 as the shortest La Niña event in NOAA records, going back to 1950. Both of these paltry events met the bare-minimum requirement for longevity: at least five overlapping three-month periods with sea-surface temperatures in the Niño3.4 region of at least 0.5°C below the seasonal average.

March itself was the 6th warmest and 51st driest in 123 years of U.S. recordkeeping. New Mexico and Colorado saw their warmest March on record. The only below-average areas for temperature were New York and the New England states, although none of them made it into the top 20 for coolest March.

The New England chill led to a very counterintuitive outcome for Boston: March actually came in colder than December, January, or February. It’s the first winter on record for Boston where a month from meteorological spring—March—ended up as the coldest month. A closer look reveals that this convoluted outcome was more a function of January, normally Boston’s coldest month, than of March itself:

Just in case you’re wondering, Boston has never seen a September warmer than June, July, and August.

Have a great weekend, everyone! We'll be keeping one eye on Tropical Cyclone Ernie, which grew explosively in the Indian Ocean northwest of Australia on Friday local time and is now close to Category 5 status. Fortunately, Ernie will not be heading toward any major land areas before its expected weakening in several days.|||

With three months under its belt, 2017 is outpacing almost every other year for warmth in the contiguous U.S. According to monthly data released by NOAA’s National Centers for Environmental Information.