But I found Yelp’s UI to be frustrating when trying to make a reservation to Liholiho (awesome Hawaiian food BTW). I wanted it to list out all available reservations in the couple of weeks, but I needed to keep clicking “show the next three days”, until I found something that worked for me.

So I got to thinking… could I use my Google Chrome Developer Tools superpowers to get more information quicker?

tl;dr: I used the network panel in Chrome Developer Tools to get a cURL command that I could modify and run on the terminal to get a greater number of search results.

For reference, here’s what the reservation system looks like. You have to click “search the next 3 days” a bunch of times to see all the results.

Each I clicked the “next three days” button, I assumed that a network call would be involved. So I opened the network panel of Google Chrome Developer Tools with the XHR filter enabled to confirm my suspicions. (The XHR filter simply displays only the http requests made to the server for AJAX or JSON data).

Every time I clicked 3 days, I saw a new request to an API called search_availability. Bingo!

I copied this request as “curl” and pasted it into my terminal:

Here’s what the terminal looked like after I pasted the command:

That response looked something like this:

Awesome, I now had a way to hack the data sent into the reservation system, and the ability to get output. But that output was not very readable, so I copied the results into the console of my chrome devtools:

What if I could change the total number of days requested to something larger than 2 days?

Check out this part of the request where I found days_before and days_after:

I simply changed days_after to something like 14, go those results on the terminal and pasted them into the console of devtools.

After sorting through that data, I found ONE reservation before 10PM on April 26. Hey, it’s a popular restaurant.

Then I simply searched for that day in Yelp’s UI and booked the reservation*.

*Note: OK, OK my wife will kill me but I didn’t actually book it this time.

Or should I say, this is NOT a vulnerability in Yelp. It is just how the web works. I’m given a user token or cookie that is sent to the Yelp server with the request. That token is associated with my account, and the Yelp people could go back in the logs and single me out if I start doing any mass scraping of their data.

On their backend, they could limit the number of days that come through on any request if this starts bogging down, but this sort of manual hacking is probably low on their list of worries.

Now that the secret to hacking network requests is out of the bag, I might also mention that Liholiho also offers an off menu item of house-made spam if you request it. It’s damn good. You should go there if you live near San Francisco.

Please also recommend and follow. It helps this kind of content like this get found!|||

But I found Yelp’s UI to be frustrating when trying to make a reservation to Liholiho (awesome Hawaiian food BTW). I wanted it to list out all available reservations in the couple of weeks, but I…