Say you are the king and queen of Spain and I am Columbus. That is; you are an high-risk investor, and I’m a high-risk entrepreneur. I want to sail west to China and want you to finance me. Let me walk you through my pitch.

First I remind you how we used to get spices from the far east. We had caravans. The (original) Silk Road. They stopped working after the fall of the Pax Mongolica. Now the traders get robbed. It’s too dangerous, so the path is closed for trade.

The Portuguese figured out that you could go by boat around Africa. They got rich. You didn’t. You literally missed the boat. You copied their idea and sent your own merchants. But you missed out on early windfall and had to scramble just to catch up.

You were able to make some incremental improvements to the route. But to dominate the market and put the Portuguese back in their place you need to get spices radically faster. Slightly faster ships won’t do, better usage of ocean currents isn’t enough, you need to change the game.

But you wish you could get more spices, faster, and with less risk.

Now I am telling you that I have a new route: going west. West instead of East. Contrarian thinking to say the least.

Now, you might not think the world is flat anymore, but you don’t know what’s beyond the islands. The reigning wisdom says that the ocean path is further than any ship can sail but no one has come up with hard evidence. There is uncertainty.

If the common wisdom is correct, I will sail into certain death and you will — only — lose the money you invested.

But… what if I’m right? The upside is immense. Spain would own the market for spices and no slight improvements from the Portuguese will change the balance. We are talking complete domination of one of the largest markets with consistent and proven demand. It might even grow when we can get the price of spices down! The return/risk ratio is off the charts.

As you like the idea, even if you wouldn’t want to be on the ship, you join me on the docks. You get to see my ships, my crew, and all of our thinking. We seem to be credible, confident, and the other sailors clearly respect us.

There are a lot of uncertainties and doubts, but you feel that the crew is well aware of what we know and what we are going to learn. Everyone is willing to take the risk.

You decide that it would be almost irresponsible not to make this voyage. If you don’t try it, the Portuguese probably will. That’s a risk you can’t afford taking. And besides, if this ship goes under you have others.

It all seems plausible, and while others have made expeditions of similar length before, it would be the first time someone attempted this route.

Most startups who meet investors don’t talk about the spices; the market, target group, and what they are trying to achieve. They brag about the ships. They might be able to sail faster than anyone, but they still don’t know why or where. And just like the old sailors, they care way too much about their beards.

Secondly, as an investor, I am sometimes in doubt if you are after bringing home any spices at all. Some entrepreneurs I meet just want to be Columbus in the history books. The famous entrepreneur who just raised an eight digit round. Investors invest in people who are after the spices.

Just like most entrepreneurs, Columbus underestimated the length of the voyage. He thought the long trip was 3,700 km, when it was twice that. And costs and dangers weren’t linear as the problem was food supply.

He also didn’t find a better route to India, nor any spices. But he did find America. Any investor will tell you that an ambitious endeavor with the right crew will find something. It might not be the planned destination, sometimes entrepreneurs find larger markets or adjacent problems that turn out more lucrative. Sometimes the destination wasn’t all it was supposed to. But you still need a target to prepare and strive, and the target needs to be worth the voyage.

Explain how people solve a problem today, what it is worth for them and why your innovative solution will render previous methods outdated.

You, potentially, have a new solution. You have a great team, experiments and prototypes you built together, and some proof that you can solve this. Columbus had a map, a wild hypothesis, and had a crew that could sail.

Investors want to take the smallest risk for the highest reward. When they perceive that the risk of them missing out on your voyage is higher than the risk of financing your ship, they will back you. It’s not enough that you enjoy sailing.

And then, well. Don’t be like the guy. He was in legal battles, horny for titles (“Great Admiral of the Ocean?!”), and an abusing tyrant. Who died at 41. Strive to be better. But you got to give it to him; he could raise money.|||

Say you are the king and queen of Spain and I am Columbus. That is; you are an high-risk investor, and I’m a high-risk entrepreneur. I want to sail west to China and want you to finance me. Let me…