Mac OS X Mountain Lion is the desktop version of Apple OS that incorporates large applications and iOS synchronization services, as well as some special features of this version.As with Windows 10, many of the new features of OS X Mountain Lion were designed to unify Apple Operating Systems between their desktops and laptops, and its hugely popular iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch. Contrary to popular opinion, Apple is not in the process of transforming OS X into mobile IOS. There is simply nothing to gain there and most of the underlying iOS structure came from OS X at first.What Apple is doing, is trying to unify the two halves of this set, so some of the most used features of iOS devices are now present in OS X Mountain Lion, as we will see later. This allows a pleasant and welcoming experience on the Mac for Apple Fanboy Apple fans who already have an iPhone or an iPad. And those users are legion at this point. With some devices already on the market, and millions being sold quarterly, Apple’s core business is now mobile telephony. Everything that makes the Mac, now and in the future, is going to do to support that business.

These are some of the new features and applications built into Mac OS X Mountain Lion. Many of these functions were already present on iOS, so they will be welcomed by users of Apple’s mobile operating system.

Once you have installed Mountain Lion, your Mac will reboot and then you will be prompted to sign in to iCloud with your Apple ID. After doing so, you can track mail, contacts, calendar, messages, FaceTime, Game Center, Safari, Reminders, iTunes, Notes and the Mac App Store. You can also customize which applications you want to use with iCloud.You can also access the iCloud document library, which is a convenient and consistent way to access your iCloud documents on all your Mac computers and iOS devices. For example, if you are using pages, you can see all documents from iCloud pages with the latest one at the top. The iCloud document library also includes Actions sheets for messages and mail so you can share documents stored in iCloud.

Reminders organizes your life. It allows you to make lists and set expiration dates, priority levels and alerts, as well as deadlines that are approaching. If you need to find a certain reminder, you can use the search field to quickly access it. You can even set up a location your Mac, iPhone, iPad or iPod will remind you when you get there.

Another iOS app to make the jump to the Mac is Notes. It is not exactly as its name implies, letting down anything that comes to mind. You can even take notes with photos, URLs and attachments, and you can add, delete and flip through your notes or just do a quick search if you know what you are looking for. You can also set important notes on your desktop so you do not forget them and take them with you on your other Apple devices through iCloud. A new Share button allows you to send your notes through the mail application or messages.

The messaging app has an intuitive design that makes it easy to follow conversations. Your current conversations are shown on the right, while the ongoing chats are on the left, with the latest on the top. The message app stores the message history so that a conversation can be retrieved right where you left off, even if you accidentally close the chat window. To start a conversation, start typing a friend’s name in the “To” field and messages will work along with contacts to auto-complete. Make sure you’ve connected to iCloud contacts to ensure that all of your friends’ contact information is available on all Apple devices. You can use the search field to quickly find certain messages and go full screen to take advantage of the Mac computer screen.

One thing that is missing on the Mac, and which is available on Apple’s iOS devices, is the notification center. Now available through Mac OS X Mountain Lion, it allows you to be aware of all email, message, calendar alert and software updates. The Notification Center is located at the top right of the screen, taking the original place of Spotlight. Do not worry. Spotlight is still there.

If your Mac includes flash memory (ie MacBook Pro models with Retina Display), you will be able to take advantage of Power Nap, which allows your Mac to perform tasks while they are at rest. With Power Nap, your Mac will be periodically updated: Mail, contacts, calendars, reminders, notes, Photo Gallery, and documents in the cloud, while including an energy-saving standby mode. Power Nap can also download software updates and make backups with Time Machine. When updating in sleep mode, the system sounds are off, with the lights and fans in non-disturbing mode. After your Mac wakes up, it will be updated and ready to go.

Although not a Siri, Dictation allows you to speak anything that can be written. Convert your words into text using the built-in microphone of your Mac. There are several options for using dictation. The first way is to open a text editor and convert it into dictation. Another way is to use the key combination (press the function key twice). The final way is to choose dictation from the Edit menu of any application. Dictation works with any OS X application.

With Mac OS X Mountain Lion, you will find the addition of the new Share button. Available in most native Apple applications, it allows you to share photos, videos, documents and links via email, messages. In addition, you can write directly to Twitter, Flickr and Vimeo after you have logged in and set up your accounts. Sharing actions appear in the application you are using so you can share quickly and easily without having to switch to another application or drag a file.

Twitter is now integrated into your favorite Apple applications on Mac OS X Mountain Lion. Just log in once in Settings and you will be able to tweet directly from the application you are in. You can be logged in to multiple Twitter accounts, just make sure you are tweeting from the correct account. When you log in, the Contacts application will show your Twitter friends, profile photos, and usernames on your contact cards so you know who is tweeting. You can also tweet links and photos directly from Safari, iPhoto, Photo Booth or Quick Look with the new Tweet sheet.

Although the Safari web browser is nothing new, in this new version of OS X you will receive several new features to make web browsing more convenient. There is now only one search field for both search terms and Internet addresses. While searching, Safari suggests a number of web pages with great odds of success. These success suggestions improve over time as you select the results. Of course, the new Share button is integrated into Safari so you can easily share web pages using mail, messages, Facebook and Twitter. There is also a tab view that supports Multi-Touch gestures with the Apple trackpad, such as sliding two fingers and pinching.

As it should be, Facebook is also present in Mac OS X Mountain Lion. You will only have to log in once in your Facebook account linked to your Mac. Once you are logged in, you will receive notifications in the notification center, your Facebook friends will be added to the Contacts application, and the ability to add photos Profiles in Mail, Contacts and Calendar. You will also be able to select Facebook from the Share menu, a handy menu that includes the content you have published, including photos that can be added to your photo albums.

This OS X 10.8 update includes improvements to the stability, security, and of course compatibility of your Mac, plus some fixes like:

Fixed problem that prevented the display of messages in Mail.Improved AFP file transfer over an 802.11ac Wi-Fi network.Fixed the error that prevented the automatic activation of a wallpaper.Improved reliability of Xsan.The .dmg file you download here already includes the 10.8.5 update, so you will not have to worry about anything anymore, rather than focus on your day to day life with the Mac.Mac OS X Mountain Lion is designed to take advantage of the significant halo effect of the iPhone, iPad and any other iOS devices. Future releases of OS X will continue to take the features of the mobile platform in order to make people feel comfortable and in order to make the two very different platforms feel as a cohesive whole.|||

Mac OS X Mountain Lion 10.8.5 Download Free Mac Os, as well as some special features of this version