Lately, on LinkedIn, people are debating (constantly) whether social selling or old-school selling is better. There's no doubt that if you were trying to sell to Elon Musk, your best bet would be to do so from a tweet and not a cold call. We live in a time where we can watch a multi-billionaire do business live in 140 characters or less.

About two months ago, someone sent Musk a tweet about Tesla's charging stations and how people have been leaving their cars parked at the stations for too long. Within a matter of minutes, Musk took to Twitter and announced they would be towing any cars left unattended.

This one tweet resulted in Musk personally doing what it takes to solve a problem that was facing the community of car owners he's created. You can't tweet the CEO of Exxon and tell them to clear up gas pumps. I mean you can, but he sure isn't going to tweet you back. He's probably not even on Twitter; his intern is.

The entire world is literally watching Elon Musk close billion-dollar deals on a social network.

Last month, Musk sent a tweet announcing Tesla's launch in the UAE. Most CEOs would set up a press conference and make a big grandstanding spectacle out of it. Yet Musk simply sent one tweet and all the news stations picked up the story.

As far as I know, there's only one other billionaire on twitter conducting business like this: Donald Trump.

Musk is using the power of Twitter to communicate with leaders and influencers in South Australia to get them on board and help him solve their energy problem. How cool is that? You can follow Musk and watch him tweet high-level people, get a response, then close those people and bring them on board. It's a beautiful thing to watch.

Think about this. One of the smartest people on the planet, who also happens to be a billionaire, is solving world problems and creating new markets by sending messages with less than 140 characters.

There are a lot of lessons to be learned from Musk's tweeting process.

First off, let's talk about why Twitter. There's something to be said about keeping things short and sweet. Especially when you are an important person and limited on time. Twitter also forces you to simplify your message so even a fifth grader can understand what you mean.

Simplicity is key. Even for smart people. Simplicity doesn't equal stupidity. Simplicity equals understanding. Maybe, just maybe, your sales pitch is a bit too long. When scientists mapped the human genome, it took them less than five minutes to explain it to the Nobel Prize committee. Yet, some salespeople can't pitch a house in less than 30 minutes. Overcomplication is our worst enemy.

Second, Musk is leveraging the old "the world is watching you" close. He's called out leaders in a way that makes it impossible for him to be ignored. It's brilliant. He's using his tech savvy and his influence to help the people, instead of just helping himself.

The coolest thing to watch Musk do is round up other influencers who'll retweet and direct tweet the person he wants to reach. He's created a Twitter syndicate of sorts, and it's working just as he planned. It's the modern day version of "Who Do You Know?"

Many of us have been using these techniques online for years now. It's nothing new, but it's new to see a billionaire mastermind buying into the idea and using it for all it's worth. It certainly validates the legitimacy of social selling, and takes things to a whole new level. I don't think people do billion-dollar deals from cold calls.

Take Musk's lead. Start using social media to connect with your prospects and close them on your stuff. If it works for a billionaire, closing world leaders, it will work for you closing your deals.|||

There are only two billionaires using Twitter to close massive deals.