Thank you for contacting me regarding S.J. Res. 34.  I appreciate the time you have taken to inform me of your thoughts on this issue.

The internet has been a source of tremendous economic growth and an invaluable communications tool since it was widely deployed across America. Like you, I believe that all Americans deserve a fair understanding of their privacy expectations when engaging in online activity.

As you may know, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has been the federal agency responsible for consumer protection, including enforcing Internet privacy standards for the last two decades.  The FTC has successfully created a regulatory system that maintains robust consumer privacy protections while encouraging continued online innovation.  The FTC’s regulatory framework for Internet privacy applies consistent security standards across multiple business sectors, which provides consumers with stable privacy expectations across all aspects of online activity.

The FCC’s broadband privacy rule circumvents the FTC’s jurisdictional expertise in online privacy protections by issuing new privacy regulations only for Internet Service Providers (ISPs).  This unprecedented move diminishes FTC’s authority and imposes an uneven patchwork of regulations across the Internet community.  The complete consumer online experience consists of multiple components in addition to ISPs, including: websites; apps; browsers; and operating systems.  Subjecting only one of these players to overly-prescriptive privacy regulations creates inaccurate security expectations for consumers, while creating a duplicative and unnecessary regulatory burden that stifles innovation.

Senator Flake introduced S.J. Res. 34, a resolution of disapproval under the Congressional Review Act (CRA).  The CRA is an oversight tool that allows Congress to pass resolutions, such as S.J. Res 34, to overturn last minute federal regulations issued by a previous Administration.  S.J. Res. 34 was passed by the Senate on March 23, 2017, passed by the House on March 28, 2017 with my support, and was subsequently signed into law by the President on April 3, 2017.  This resolution overturns the FCC’s ISPs privacy requirements rule, ensuring continued comprehensive consumer privacy protections, while providing transparency and certainty for consumers online.

Thank you again for contacting me.  Your thoughts and opinions are of critical importance to me as I work to represent Indiana’s 5th District in Congress.  Although we may not agree on this matter, I sincerely appreciate your comments and look forward to hearing from you in the future.|||

