Those who are on the lookout for the best wireless routers 2017 would certainly find this article interesting and informative. We will have a look at five different makes and models of routers so that we can get a different perspective and have an insight into different makes and models.

Here is a short list of best wireless routers 2017. You can quickly have a look at this list, if you have time then you can read our posts.

There are some reasons why this could consider as a quality router.First and foremost it is one of the few routers which come with an open source support which goes a long way in getting the best of support at all points of time. For many years now, Netgear has been known to be a reputed and trustworthy brand when it comes to making routers and other modem accessories and tools. Hence in keeping this with tradition, this particular brand also has quite a few features which share worth mentioning.

The Best Of Dual Core Processor

This particular model comes with 1 GHz dual core processor and can easily handle AC 1900 Wi-fi with 600-1300 Mbps speed. Further, it has some of the best features which help in lag-free gaming and also when it comes to smooth streaming of videos or music. The router is easy to install and in fact, be done automatically. It also allows easy access to internet provider gateway for the available upgrade of the Wifi when needed.

It also has a unique Quilt feature. By making use of this feature, it is now possible to share all photos which are available in social media. Further, this is a router which also comes with attached USB storage. The router also has inbuilt software such as Open VPN Connect App, automatic Windows PC backup software and it is also one of few routers which are time machine compatible.

The router also has 2 USB ports, the first one being USB 3.0 & the second one USB 2.0 port. Additionally, it has five other ports of 10/100/1000 Mbps which divided into 1 WAN and 4 LAN Gigabit Ethernet ports. It also has a unique Beamforming + technology. This goes a long way in improving range and along with high powered amplifiers & antennas make it super for high-quality wi-fi coverage.

Amongst the various other features, this model comes with remote access. This makes it easy to manage home network efficiently even when you are not at home. It also features other functions such as Readyshare and ReadyCLOUD USB. This makes it convenient for accessing USB space from anyplace and at any time. It also comes with a Nighthawk AC1900 Smart Wi-fi router, along with three antennas which are detachable. It also has a power adapter, Ethernet cable, quick install guide just to name a few. It is one of the few routers which have an upstream and downstream QoS. This goes a long way in having the best quality video and gaming streaming experience. The free automatic backup software is also another feature which is worth mentioning. It can be used both with Windows PC and Mac machines.

The Best Of Beamforming + Technology

This particular model of Nighthawk comes with a highly advanced Beamforming+ technology. This technology helps a lot in improving performance, and the range of coverage is also much more when compared to most other brands which are available in the market today. It also is possible to get open source support through my open router website. This goes a long way in ensuring that customers can get access to quality services at any point of time. It also comes with the standard warranty and guarantees terms and conditions. The Beamforming + technology is worth having a look at because it focuses on Wifi signals and can easily use in smartphones, laptops, and tablets. It also helps quite a bit as far as electric signal boosting is concerned.

It is one of the few Best Wireless Routers 2017 which can help a lot in supporting multiple WiFi devices and other connections of the highest quality. It also is possible to extend WiFi coverage and could help a lot in reducing dead spots to almost zero, provided it installed in the right location. It has gone a long way in enhancing signal strength quite tremendously. On the whole, there is no doubt that it is extremely reliable, and increases and boosts speed and optimizes the range for various wifi devices. It is a router which certainly offers the best value for money to its customers and those who have used it have reasons to be happy about their decision.

When all the three connections are enabled, is it possible to see three different links?

When the smart connect feature is enabled, what we will see is 2 SSIDs, one for the 5 GHZ connection and the other for the 2.4 one.

Does the machine support time-machine backups which were the case with Nighthawk models?

Yes, it does support the backup.

When all the above features and factors taken into account, there are reasons to believe that this particular model of the router from Netgear is an excellent device to have. It is very customer friendly, easy to use, and it certainly is long lasting and can provide trouble free services for many years to come. It is also very reasonably priced and when bought from outlets like Amazon.com you can be sure that you will get some benefits and advantages regarding price and of course the luxury of free home delivery.

TP-Link for many decades now has been at the forefront of offering some of the best models and makes of routers, modems, and other such accessories. In line with this rich tradition, they have come out with one of the most modern routers which the best of wireless connectivity. It also has some other features including quality bandwidth, internal and external antennas and much more. Here is a look at some of the main character of this particular model of router.

This is a phenomenal Wireless Dual Band Gigabit Router which offers a total of 1.75 Gbps bandwidth. This includes 1300 Mbps at 5 GHz and 450 Mbps at 2.4 GHz. Hence it can well and truly support some devices, to say the least. It also is configured in such a way that it can support 802.11 AC. It, therefore, becomes well and truly the next generation Wi-FI and can easily be connected to various extra devices. The Dual USB ports help to share media files and other files quite easily. It also can be connected to printers locally either through remote FTP server or with various other networked devices. It also features the best of security features with a technology called Guest Network Access.

It also has a unique IP based bandwidth control feature. This helps a lot in making things easy for the end user whenever there is a need for efficient managing of bandwidth as far. This is applicable for individual devices that connected to the router. It also has a high-quality one-touch WPA wireless security encryption. This can be accessed using the WPS button. The Setup Assistant is easy to use, and it also provides multi-language support. This helps a lot in providing hassle free and fast installation process. It comes with a 2-year warranty, and as far as technical support is concerned, it is unlimited. All that is required is a telephonic call, and the service engineers will be there to attend the call immediately.

They also provide live online 24/7 technical support for those who wish to make use of it. They also have a reliable hotline which also works round the clock. It has a single core processor making it very reliable and dependable. It also comes with three internal and three external antennas. It also features four Gigabit Ethernet ports and 1 Gigabit WAN port. The device also comes with 2x USB of 2.0. All these features help a lot in the end users when it comes to playing games, or for live streaming of videos or audios. The need to wait for buffering can completely avoid. It has the required technology to ensure play without interruption. The dual band antennas are very powerful making wi-fi coverage available throughout the home.

The wireless AC feature is another point worth mentioning as far as this router is concerned. This is because of the incredibly powerful CPU which plays a significant role in faster processing. It goes a long way in balancing the demand for your devices. This helps a lot in keeping the connections reliable and uninterrupted even for extended periods of time. It also is possible to download files and share media because of the high-quality processor which manages each and every wi-fi quite effortlessly and seamlessly. It also takes care of the entire hardware and software function extremely efficiently. The intuitive mobile interface makes it possible to manage and setup the wi-fi by using the free TP-Link Tether app.

It is one of the few routers which perhaps offer lifetime service and industry leading warranty. This is because of a hugely efficient and customer friendly 24/7 support and a toll-free technical assistance. They also can help a lot when it comes to installation and setup. This is irrespective of the date of which you might have purchased the device. Added to this is the 2-year warranty which goes a long way in ensuring that you can use the device without having to worry about the lack of service. When all the above factors are taken into account there, one can be sure that this is one of the most sought after and popular models of wireless routers available in the market today.

Does it have a phone connection?

Though it has a phone connection, it is not possible to connect with the help of a VOIP phone. It has to connect to an adaptor and the then used.

What is a current model available? Is it V1 or V2

Though both models are available, the market asks for more of V2 variants and therefore getting V1 could be a problem.

After going through the various features and weighing the pros and cons, it can safely conclude that this particular model from V-Link is a good buy and it has some of the most customer friendly features. The coverage area is right, the strength of the signal is also quite dependable and trustworthy, and on the whole, it can safely say that it offers the best value for money. The service standards are also of high quality, dependable and there are very few occasions where the router has been down for many hours at a stretch.

Coming from the house of ASUS this AC-1900 model is feature rich, dependable, sturdy and cost-effective. It has multiple uses, and it is feature rich, and the specific needs and requirements of customers have addressed quite well. It works both as a LAN router and also as a wi-fi transmitter. We will have a look at some of the unique features and functions which go a long way in making it a cost-effective, efficient and reliable router for various uses.

Amongst the various features, it has the latest 802.11 as the technology available which helps the user to achieve a combined speed of 1900 Mbps. The dual band option is also worth mentioning, and new the 1GHz dual-core CPU supports in the best of multitasking. This is possible because it comes with dedicated and separate lanes both for wifi and USB data.

Further, the router setup can also be done effortlessly using the readily accessible and usable ASUSWRT interface which is web based. It also is possible to manage and monitor the network quite quickly even from a mobile or smart phone device or even from tablets and iPhones.

It also has a very new and unique AiProtection feature that powered by the outstanding Trend MicroTM services. This goes a long way in providing protection at multiple stages and insulates the data from being corrupted or falling into the wrong hands. Hence it is especially useful for offices and homes where there is regular use of sensitive data which has to be seen only by a single entity or within a closed circle. The wireless technology is so powerful and advanced that it be almost as good as any wired gigabit connection. This is possible because of the unique Broadcom TurboQAM technology. The dual core processor as mentioned above helps a lot in almost eliminating performance drops which are usually the case with many other similar routers available in the market today.

It can use for the best for multitasking purposes. Whether it is smooth and uninterrupted 4K video sharing, online gaming of low latency, or downloading at a rapid pace all that is possible simultaneously and users will not feel that all this is being simultaneous. It also comes with 4 number of Gigabit LAN ports, 3.0 ports and USB 2.0 facility. It is one of the few routers which had achieved the highest ASUS scores when it measured over six study factors. These six factors are Security, Wi-fi range, upload and download speed, multitasking and other capabilities, and the number of features which it provides. It is quite likely that there will be only one or two brands and models which will be able to meet all the above parameters successfully and achieve the desired scores.

Many customers have sung praise as far as the coverage range is concerned. This has enhanced with the help of the time tested and proven ASUS radar. It also has an exclusive ASUS RF fine-tuning which helps a lot in strengthening the wireless connectivity using the highly acclaimed and established 802.11 a beamforming technology. This helps a lot in much higher power amplification. It also goes a long way in improving extended coverage, increases the speed at which the data transported and last but not the least goes a long way in enhancing the overall stability of the router. It also has a brilliant and customer friendly user interface which helps in gaining easy access to 3-step web based installation along with other useful features.

The entire unit comes packed with some useful accessories. Of course, the most important device is the router itself. It also comes with Ethernet Cable (RJ-45), quick start guide which well written and easy to understand, power adapter and last but not the least a quality support CD. The support CD contains the soft copy of the user manual and other utility-related information. It also comes with a two-year warranty which goes a long way in increasing customer trust and confidence with the product. It has some of the most advanced and dependable network security features. The overall weight, when packed, is 1.4 lbs, and the product dimensions are 3.3 inches x 6.3 inches x 8.6 inches.

What is the actual range of the router?

It can quickly cover a total area of 2300 square feet even if it is a two story house. As far as the kitchen and other regions are concerned you can expect a speed of 28 Mbps. This is equal to the speed which you get in a computer room using Ethernet connection. This is not too bad, to say the least.

Is it the best router on the market?

As far as home use is concerned, this could rate as one of the best in the market. It is because of easy setup, coverage area, and other such attributes.

Whether it is the ergonomic look, the quality of coverage, the high performing CPU, and processor, or the quality of download and upload speed, one can safely state that it is perhaps one of the best routers available in the market, especially for home use. While there are some concerns regarding service standards, the same are few and far between.

The NETGEAR Nighthawk AC1900 wifi and cable modem router according to many customers is a dream come to the product. This is one fo the Best Wireless Routers 2017 because of the various features and benefits it comes packed with. Further, the fact that it is from the stables of NETGEAR is also one more reason why customers place so much confidence and trust on this product. Hence it would be interesting to have a look at the various features and functions of this router and then draw a conclusion.

This is a quality two in one 3.0 cable modem using DOCSIS. It also comes with a high performing WiFI router which can efficiently deliver a wifi capacity of AC1900. It can also easily handle a modem speed of 960 Mbps. It is also certified to work very well with reputed cable network provider including the likes of Comcast and XFINITY, Cox Premier, Warner MAXX and Ultimate. This is one of the most sought after routers for those who are satisfied only with the fastest internet speeds offered by XFINITY and other such service providers. However, it has to borne in mind that it is not compatible with CBVS or cable bundled voice services. But this is not a big problem considering that this technology is not very much in use.

It is possible to eliminate monthly rental fees for hiring cable modems. This could help save at least $120 per year. It also comes with some of the most effective and user-friendly manuals. It also features 24×8 channel bonding. In other words, this enables the user to be sure that they can watch the best of cable TV channels at speeds not less than 960 Mbps. When there is need to use the internet to the best of speeds during peak hours, this could be the best choice. Since this technology uses data channel for delivering the internet to your home, you can be sure about avoiding the problems associated with peak congestion. The router helps in always maintaining the fastest download speeds, and you can also be sure about the most reliable connection.

It has been able to win a 4.5 customer rating from almost 4500 customer reviews which certainly is great news. It comes with a dimension of 11.02 x 11.61 x 3.94 inches and has a weight of just around 3.43 lbs when packed. It uses the best of Ethernet connectivity technology to ensure seamless and flawless upload, download of data and also streaming audio and video. It can also be set up quite quickly without the need for a service call. This is because of the easy setup features and also because of the best online services which are available. It uses the best of PC: Mac or Unix as the hardware platform. Hence it is a robust and highly reliable platform on which the router built.

This well and truly is a one-stop solution for both data usage and cable viewing needs. It comes with some of the best future-proofed attributes. In other words, it already has 16 download channels available in it. The price is reasonable. The setup is simply amazing as mentioned above and even those with the basic knowledge of routers can quickly assemble it. It very ergonomically designed and occupies tiny space. The modem can easily pair with any wireless system, and it will work fine. The router would require you to pay for 50 Mbps download speed and 5 Mbps upload speed. This is highly cost efficient and especially when you are using it for watching cable programs.

Those who have a Comcast connection (150/10mbits/sec) would certainly have many reasons to have a closer look at this particular router model. This is because once the customers use this router they can be confident that they will be enjoying a speed of 180/12mbits/sec which certainly is a bargain, to say the least. When speed tests run, customers can be sure that they will find the signal to be superbly linear. The chances of downtime and drops are relatively rare, and the setup hiccups are also not there. The latency is also of the best quality and could be as low as 11/12 ms. This is without any doubt the minimum one can expect as far as a Hybrid Fiber Coaxial Connection is concerned.

How be the firmware updated? Should the user do it or will the Internet Service Provider do it?

Netgear has confirmed that the firmware can be updated only by the ISP. This is not exactly what the customers want, and this problem needs to be solved.

Does This Work On Time Warner Cable Network?

The answer is yes, and it does work very well on Time Warner Network.

In fine, Best Wireless Routers 2017 though this is an expensive router when one looks at the various features, functions, and options it offers, it certainly is worth the money in more ways than one. The fact that you can do away with cable connections is perhaps the biggest takeaway as far as this router is concerned.|||

Those who are on the lookout for the best wireless routers 2017 would certainly find this article interesting and informative. Here is a list of wifi router