As promised (with a day of delay), here is an update on what happened in the last two weeks on making Firefox faster as part of the Quantum Flow project.

Last week we had a big work week at the Mozilla Toronto office.  Many members of the various teams were attending and the week was packed with a lot of planning around the performance issues that have been identified in each area so far, and what we are planning to do in each area for Firefox 57 and beyond.  I tried to attend as many of the discussions as I could, but of course many of the discussions were happening concurrently so I’m sure a lot of details is going to be missing, but here is a super high level of some of the plans that were being discussed.

Another thing that happened last week was that I gave a talk on Friday as an introduction on how to use the Gecko Profiler to find performance issues in Firefox.  During the week a few people had expressed interest to sit down with me and look over my shoulder as I use the profiler to analyze some performance problems, and due to the lack of time to sit down with people 1:1 we decided to do a recorded talk.  This was decided a few minutes before the talk happened.  🙂  So, I didn’t really have anything prepared in advance, which was both good and bad, since the talk is basically me live profiling Firefox, and it shows how you can start from scratch and go all the way to a bug report.  The recording is here: < https://air.mozilla.org/ gecko-profiler-introduction/ >, if you’re interested in learning how to use the profiler and/or how to read and analyze a profile you may want to check it out!  BTW if you ever felt like you could use documentation and/or training material on how to use a profiler (or how to do that more effectively) please feel free to contact me privately with ideas on what you would like to learn.  We haven’t been so great on the documentation front, and many people have been pointing this out to me, and I hear and acknowledge your feedback!  I’d like to try to improve this situation, and your feedback on what you’d like to learn about will help prioritize what’s more important.

In hindsight, looking back at the work week, I wish we had more people from the front-end teams also attend the work week.  The planning of the work week happened a couple of months or so earlier but due to the nature of this project, the measurements lead us to the various areas of the code base, and now we have a fair amount of issues in the front-end code and I think perhaps the work week was a bit too much focused on Gecko.  But on the flip side, I also found the breadth of topics to cover in one week a bit too much, so perhaps adding more people and more meetings to the agenda wouldn’t have been a net benefit.  A lesson to learn for the next time!

On the bug fixing front, we had a great couple of weeks, there is a long list of really great work that happened, and a list of really amazing individuals to be recognized and appreciated for their contributions.  As always I know I’ll be missing a few people, so apologies in advance for that!|||

