Charles was a German-born, American mathematician, electrical engineer, who spent most of his life in Schenectady, New York, as a professor at Union College.

You can thank him for the thing we all most depend on in life:

Charles helped shape the development of alternating current (AC), and is the reason you can plug your toaster, blender, TV or lamps into the sockets on your wall.

As soon as General Electric got word of this little (he was indeed just 4 feet tall) genius’s work in New York, they bought out the company he worked for in 1892, and with it, the man’s expertise.

In 1965, a Life magazine reader, Jack B. Scott, wrote in to tell the story of an encounter his father had made with the so-called “Wizard of Schenectady” at Henry Ford’s River Rouge plant in Dearborn, Michigan.

Ford’s engineers had a problem they couldn’t fix, and so Steinmetz went down there on behalf of GE. Here’s the excerpt from Smithsonian Magazine:

For the record, $10,000 in this era, say 1905, would be worth $1,960,000, considered in today’s value of the income of a skilled worker.

Have you ever paid someone by the hour yourself? Did you think of them as an invaluable advisor? Or rather as a commodity you needed quick access to?

It’s ironic: In order to push into the highest spheres of hourly pay rate, you first have to leave it altogether.

You’ll have to spend thousands of hours, unpaid hours, researching, learning, studying, practicing and adapting your skills in the real world.

Only that will give you the deep domain expertise you need to reach the top 1% of your field — and that comes with great financial reward.

However, by the time you get there, you’ll probably long have forgotten your struggle for more dollars per hour, because your greatest feeling of accomplishment will come from standing next to your peers.

Just like Charles Steinmetz, a little giant among giants, on April 23, 1921, giving Albert Einstein, Albert Hull and several other brilliant minds of his time a tour of the Radio Corporation of America (RCA).|||

Charles was a German-born, American mathematician, electrical engineer, who spent most of his life in Schenectady, New York, as a professor at Union College. Charles helped shape the development of…