New York Public Library is digitizing its collection of New York City Directories, 1786 through 1922/3, serving them free through the NYPL Digital Collections portal. The first batch—1849/50 through 1923—have already been scanned, and the 1786–1848/9 directories are right now being scanned. The whole collection will be going online over the coming months. Staff at NYPL are currently teaching computers to read the wobbly typeset, to interpret the strange abbreviations, and the occasionally slightly less than geometric layout of the directories to make the old print text machine readable. The goal is to make the directories text searchable in powerful new ways, in order to build datasets that will inform research in New York City history, genealogy, and beyond. More technical posts on this work will follow.

Why are city directories interesting? I wrote a post about this in 2012, Direct Me NYC 1786: A History of City Directories in the United States and New York City, that described what city directories  are and why they are useful research tools. In summary, city directories record historical information that describes New York City and its history: the names and addresses of its residents, the names and addresses of  churches, businesses, schools, police stations, courts, and other government offices, as well as the names of individuals associated with those institutions, as far back as 1786. David Franks' 1786 directory, for instance, lists important historical figures. On page 63, under Lawyers, we find best friends Alexander Hamilton (1757–1804) and Aaron Burr (1756–1836), Brockholst Livingston (1757–1823), who served on the Supreme Court (1807–1823),  and Richard Varick (1753–1831), Mayor of New York City (1788–1789).

City directories contain much more than lists of names and addresses. They record the price of travel and postage, the kinds of occupations undertaken in the city, the layout of streets, and at what time the sun was predicted to rise and set. Not for nothing were the early directories often referred to as almanacs.

In addition to textual information, city directories feature many images, including maps, illustrations of buildings, and advertisements, occasionally printed on  colored or decorative paper. Directories record the city's built and commercial history.

Previously the directories for New York City (i.e. what we now might call Manhattan) were available only in the Library, either on microfilm, or via subscription databases, the original print directories now being too delicate to be regularly served to patrons. One or two could be found on the Internet, but coverage there was patchy. In many instances, the directories were reproduced from microfilm only. The Library has, where possible, scanned the directories, presenting them as hi-res, color surrogates of the original print copies. Now anyone and everyone will be able to access the directories free of charge, online.

Initially the city directories will be browseable, through NYPL Digital Collections, but the Library wants to make the directories work harder, to integrate them with other digital collections: maps, deeds, census records, family histories, prints, photographs, and so on. The directories will eventually be text searchable, enabling researchers to create new datasets. For instance, and I'm speaking theoretically here, researchers might be able to track addresses across directories. Where, for instance, were theaters on Broadway located overtime? Where did people live and work? Can we see in datasets derived from the information in the directories a history of commuting? Where were cemeteries located in New York? What types of business were most prevalent? What were the different types of family names listed in New York City? How many people were listed in the directories? Where did our ancestors live in the city during the years covered? The potential for new knowledge creation is limitless.  Expect to hear more on these datasets, and their implications for the Library's NYC Space/Time Directory soon.

So what do we have now? Initially the city directories can be accessed and browsed through Digital Collections. Eventually around 175,000 pages of information, featuring the names of millions of New Yorkers, will be online.

Here are some viewing tips.

To browse the directory like a book, click the “View as Book” icon. Tip: it’s the icon to the left of the image that looks like an open book. Click each page to turn to the next, until you find the page you want. You can scoot ahead lots of pages by opening the drop down “Jump to” menu and clicking the page you want, or by dragging the pointer at the bottom of the page, from left to right.

Once you have found the page you want, I recommend clicking the individual page link at the top of the browser, above the corresponding page, to look at that page on its own. I recommend this because this option allows you to use the Scroll Wheel Zoom, to zoom right in on the text.

Let’s look at a directory in detail. Doggett’s New York City Directory for 1850-51, cost $2 (a princely sum), and recorded the names and addresses of some 80, 290 New Yorkers living or doing business as far North as 42nd Street. New York City’s population in 1850 was around 696,000.

Next is the Index to the Appendix (the Appendix was later expanded and renamed the City Register, a classified listing made up of business card-style advertisements). This is a useful index for finding the names and addresses of asylums,banks, churches and burial grounds, courts, foreign consuls, hotels, newspapers, police stations, post offices, schools, and more besides. Want to know the price of a stamp? How many people lived in New York in 1840 and 1845? Who the various members of city government were? The names of the railroad companies? Packet steamer destinations? Where to catch a bus? It's all here.

Next is an Alphabetical List of Nurses (might one of these nurses have delivered your ancestor? Or be your ancestor?). Then an almanac, tables showing the times that the sun and moon set and rose (vital information in 1850), followed by Names Too Late For Insertion, Removal, & C, which is just that: genealogists might consult this page if you can’t find a name listed in the main city directory section.

Flipping past some interesting advertisements, we find the City Directory itself. Following a key to the abbreviations used in the directory (al. for alleyway, n.r. for North River, ct. for court, etc), we see listed the names, occupations, residential addresses, and business addresses of our New York ancestors. The first few entries offer further clues. Elias E. Aaron, at 214 Tenth,  is late a commission merchant, i.e. he is retired: some life news right there. Clarissa Abbot, who lives at 47 Grand Street, is the widow of the late Abijah Abbot. Many women are not listed in the directories until they become widows, and often the name of their deceased husband is included. The 1855 New York State Census lists a Clarissa Abott, 29, widow, living in the First Ward of New York City, with her three children, Mary, 10, Kate, 8, and Frank, 6. Could this be the widow Clarissa listed in the 1850 directory? The dates work.

Business addresses are usually listed first. Some entries even describe how business was done, below, for Timothy Abbott, coal merchant.

Individuals are identified by professional calling (Rev., elsewhere Dr.), and all manner of occupations are represented, some common today, many forgotten: cooper, druggist, carman, tailor, drygoods, musician, inspector, saddler, milliner, carpenter, importer, steamboats, weaver, tinsmith, sugarmaker,  and more besides.

Dipping into the directory, one finds all sorts of characters from mid-19th century New York City history. For instance...

James Harper (1795-1865), and his brothers Fletcher (1806-1877), John, and Joseph launched Harper’s, the second oldest monthly magazine printed in the U.S., in June 1850. They ran their publishing business, Harpers & Brothers, at 82 Cliff Street, and would go on to publish Harper’s Weekly in 1857, and Harper’s Bazar (later Harper’s Bazaar) in 1867.|||

New York Public Library is digitizing its collection of New York City Directories, 1786 through 1922/3, serving them free through the NYPL Digital Collections portal. The first batch—1849/50 through 1923—have already been scanned, and the 1786–1848/9 directories are right now being scanned. The whole collection will be going online over the coming months.