Stack overflow command line written in python. Using SoCLI you can search and browse stack overflow without leaving the terminal. Just use the socli command:

Install python and just use pip command to install socli:

Download and install python. Dont forget to check the option "Add to path".

Open a command prompt with administrative privileges and use pip command to install socli:

Use easy_install if your python path have a space in it Read more:"Failed to create process":

Use the command below to update your existing version of socli to the newest version, so that you won't miss any features:

Just use socli command followed by the search query:

The above command will search for the query "for loop in python syntax" and displays the first most voted question in stack overflow with its most voted answer. Pretty quick, right?

You can search the stack overflow interactively by using the command below:

This will display a list of questions from stack overflow for the query "html error 404" and it will allow you to choose any of the question you like interactively. When you chose a question, it will display the complete description of the chosed question with its most voted answer. Now you can browse through all the answers of that questions on stack overflow interactively.

Manual search This will allow you to choose a question number for example:

Will search for "javascript porotype function" in stack overflow and displays the second question that contains it.

Stack overflow supports topic by using tags. socli allows you to query stack overflow based on specific tags. Just specify the tag via the following command:

You can also specify multiple tags, Just seporate them with a comma:

See the complete list of tags here.

Just use the command below to set your user ID in socli. When you execute the command next time, it will automaticially fetch the data.

if your are an extensive user of StackOverflow, socli allows you to set your own API key to overcome the StackOverflow API Limitations. Just use the command below:

You can get an API Key here by registering as a new app. Please don't use SoCLI as app name.

If you can't find an answer for your question in stack overflow, socli allows you to creata a new question via the web browswer. Just type the command below and socli will open the new question page of stack overflow in the web browser for you:

socli has the following syntax

It refers to query to search in stack overflow.

These are the amazing features of socli:

Please check out the list of issues.

If you are willing to contribute to SoCLI project, You are awesome! Just follow the steps below:

Special thanks to these superheroes:

If you are experiencing any bugs, don’t forget to open a new issue.

Support us with a monthly donation and help us continue our activities. [Become a backer]

Become a sponsor and get your logo on our README on Github with a link to your site. [Become a sponsor]

Hope you liked this project, don't forget to give it a star|||

socli - Stack overflow command line client. Search and browse stack overflow without leaving the terminal :computer: