When people think about why we need privacy, they usually come up with thoughts of insurers cancelling health policies due to hints that their customers haven’t declared conditions, or concerns about employees having no privacy from their bosses.

But it goes much deeper than that, to fundamental psychology.

The very core of what we feel and how we behave is under threat.

Back in 1923, Freud formed the now well-known model of the psyche around the idea of the Id, Ego and Superego. The Superego “motivates us to behave in a socially responsible and acceptable manner,” with Freud theorising that it develops from early childhood, based around the moral teachings of parents.

The superego is the one that makes us want to please others.

To live by their rules.

The important thing to remember about the Superego is that it’s just one part of each person’s personality, and not even necessarily the dominant force. As Wikipedia explains, “the super-ego aims for perfection” but we all know that perfection is something rarely attained.

Rarely, that is, unless we think again about social media, and that perfectly crafted Facebook profile. There, we can detag the photos where we’re not at our best, share only what we wish to, and sculpt a Superego aimed to please ourselves, our friends, our colleagues and our families. Achieving all of this at once is something that’s patently absurd when translated back to real life.

So, if that crafted profile is our online Superego, what do we do now we find out that all the web searches our “more hidden personality” make are coming out in the open too?

Well, social science suggests that what we’ll do is alter our behaviour.

There are many examples of people behaving differently because they know they’re being watched. In academia, these are most commonly referred to as The Heisenberg Effect and The Hawthorn Effect. The latter is named after a US factory when a psychologist carried out experiments with light levels, which inadvertently proved workers are more productive when they know they’re being watched.

But we don’t need formal experiments to know that such “observer effects” exist. We all know people drive differently when there’s a police car behind, and that children modify their behaviour when they know a teacher or parent is watching. A performer uses the energy coming from people watching them, to do a better show. But they are choosing to perform.

Widespread knowledge that we are under constant surveillance risks kicking off a permanent Hawthorn Effect. In a futile attempt to live up to a “perfect” superego, people will constantly miss out on opportunities to learn and grow. They will look outside for validation, rather than inside at their true personality.|||

Ever since social media became an integral part of modern life, the line between public and personal has blurred. Social media’s success was initially boosted because it came across as a platform for…