Panic button systems for offices is a top priority in the security world these days. Technology driven panic button systems work in specific ways where traditional hardwired panic buttons are not very handy. For instance, an annoyed criminal enters your facility and catches an unsuspecting victim off guard. There is no certainty that the traditional device is functional to send out the alert to responders. Furthermore, the victim may not be able to access a phone to alert responders of the potential threat, either. This level of vulnerability leaves your employees and your facility unprotected. There lies the possibility of a disaster that could have been more efficiently managed with an updated panic button system.

There are many benefits tech-driven panic button systems for offices offers that other tools do not. Setting up panic buttons in the common areas of your facility increases security. Also, this type of setup allows employees to easily access the duress buttons in the event of an emergency. Quick access to these panic buttons cuts response time down to mere seconds rather than several minutes. Responders also have the information provided by the alert system to handle the emergency more efficiently.

Panic button systems for offices are not very expensive to install. Very little effort is needed to set up these programs, so daily office activities are rarely disrupted. Technology-based panic buttons are icons disguised in the tray icons or on the screensaver of your computer workstation. Equally, many panic button providers offer optional hardware devices that are easily hidden from a criminal during a volatile emergency situation. Which in turn, also provides the peace-of-mind needed to operate a safe work environment.

Did you know roughly 2 million Americans will experience at least one case of workplace violence this year? Adding a technology-driven duress button at your facility can increase the chances of successfully triggering an alert in a crisis. Moreover, these innovative systems send out mass notifications to multiple responders with a push of a button. The outcome of these emergency situations tends to be more favorable when the first responders are notified with more accurate information quickly. Research suggest that there is little hope of reasoning with a criminal. Usually, their mind is set on the actions of violence before they walk into any facility they have targeted.

There are several different types of crisis situations that we experience in the workplace. These cases range from health issues, verbal/written threats, stalking/harassment, and active shooter situations. These actions can be from an outside threat or an inside source. Locations for violence are often chosen because the site is considered a “soft target.”  The chances for a crisis to occur is 56% higher in areas that have little to no protection versus a facility that has optimal security measures.

The Federal Bureau of Investigations says that potential victims should be prepared for approximately 5-7 minutes before law enforcement arrive. That is a lifetime in the middle of an adrenaline-fueled situation. The first minute during an ongoing crisis is the most important. There are no second chances, that is why it is important to plan in advance how to handle the EPA (Emergency Action Plan). With a tech-driven panic button system, you can inform and mobilize responders and other employees of the incident. A quick response time and organized plan action can save lives no matter the crisis. Why have a panic button system for offices? You cannot predict when a disaster will occur. Wouldn’t you rather be protected just in case?|||

Technology driven panic button systems for offices are used in a wide variety of industries. Panic button systems for offices are used throughout.