Four days after President Woodrow Wilson called for a special session of Congress in early April 1917, the U.S. officially declared war against the German Empire, becoming an associated power with the Allied Forces and entering into one of the bloodiest conflicts to ever grip Europe. It would still take more than two months for the first troops to arrive in the fields of France, but the U.S. had finally chosen a side.

Although often overshadowed by the heroics and horrors of World War II, "The Great War" was a major turning point in American history and its relationship with European powers. Even to this day, World War I continues to influence our lives in obvious and subtle ways. Here are some Popular Mechanics covers and their corresponding stories during the "The War to End All Wars."

When the three British armored cruisers "Aboukir," "Hogue," and "Cressy" were all sunk within the space of about an hour by one German submarine, the world was given a startling demonstration of the possibilities of this type of underwater fighting craft. In the subsequent fighting at sea, these vessels have played such an important part as to give considerable justification to Admiral Sir Percy Scott's prediction that when submarines have been fully developed they will entirely displace the great dreadnaughts that form the principal fighting strength of the navies of the present time.

The primitive warrior who used poisoned arrows when he did not intend to eat his victim could never have given the modern fighter any lessons in savagery. Poisoned arrows are not being used in the European war, but apparently only for the reason that they are out of date and do not destroy life on a sufficiently large scale to meet the requirements of a twentieth-century war. To get satisfactory results the modern science of chemistry has been called into service. Poison gasses are used, and if the wind is not right for this, liquid fire is thrown into the enemy's trenches. With the conditions favorable, a dense volume of poison gas that follows the found in a cloud fifteen feet or more in depth is sent down on the wind to the enemy's position.

Since Europe has been merged in hostilities, scarcely a month has passed unmarked either by the development of some new agent of destruction, or the introduction of some new medium of defense. The creative genius of half the world has been concentrated in an effort to make war more terrible on the one hand, and safer on the other. And first, one belligerent and then the other has met crucial emergencies by ingenious, no to say startling, inventions.

The apparent deadlock on the western frontier has presented a perplexing situation. For months the armies have fought battles more sanguinary than Waterloo without making progress except in terms of yards. Trench warfare has been responsible for this. Any kind of an offensive movement has meant heavy losses.

To make the trench less secure for the enemy is an object which each of the belligerents is striving to accomplish. A step in this direction is found in the work of a British inventor who has developed a wheeled body shield that affords immunity from rifle bullets and shrapnel when advancing upon fortified positions.

Pupils of one of the primary schools at Rheims wearing respirators to protect themselves against the asphyxiating gasses blown back from the battle lines. Hundreds of school children and other non-combatants don masks of this type. In many villages, families are supplied with respirators and the community warned when gas clouds approach.|||

On April 6, 1917, a special session of congress declared war on the German Empire, officially signaling America's commitment to fight in World War 1.