If our goal is to improve student instruction, we should focus on how we prepare teachers on the job after they’ve been hired. It starts with establishing a learning organization where teachers regularly share, analyze, give feedback on and reflect on lessons and practices. Teachers should be learners first.

Sadly, in my experience, few schools have the culture or capacity to function as learning organizations. Teacher evaluations are typically seen by all parties as adversarial—something to get through rather than as a vital tool for feedback, growth and thoughtful discussions around practices and beliefs. Precious little time is built into the school year, never mind the school day, for professional learning.

As a curriculum leader, I was responsible for making sure the curriculum followed state standards, evaluating classroom materials, providing professional development and coaching teachers. Coaching is rarely found outside of the largest or most affluent districts. Establishing trust between coaches and teachers can be challenging. Many teachers view coaches with open hostility—as an insult to a staff’s basic competency. It’s interesting that highly-paid professional athletes accept coaching as a matter of course, but educators do not.

This distrust is a huge barrier to improving a teacher’s performance.

Massachusetts implemented statewide student testing to provide districts with more detailed performance data and to increase accountability. Districts receive a public “score card” every year and students have to pass the tests to graduate. Schools quickly recognized the need to improve, and saw that huge gaps in performance exist between classrooms in the same building. So they adopted new math programs as a quick way to close those gaps and improve teaching.

A math program is a lot more than a textbook—it includes supplementary materials, such as lessons, assessments and interventions for students who need additional help. Because these materials are tightly woven into the program, it’s next to impossible to swap out or move around lessons and units. Trying to tinker with a math program to see how it works is a lot like tinkering with a modern car engine.

The move to these programs, while well-intentioned, has done more harm than policymakers and school administrators realize. By insisting I teach straight from a script provided by Pearson Education, the publisher of many popular programs, I’m asked to turn off my brain and not experiment or try out new ideas. Now, some may balk at the thought of inexperienced teachers experimenting on actual students, but how do we learn and grow if we can’t try and fail? A “teacher-proof” curriculum prevents teachers from learning and becoming experts.

At one school, we improved our instruction by focusing on the most important standards for students to learn. Compared to other countries, the U.S. math curriculum has traditionally emphasized coverage over depth. By analyzing how students construct understanding from grade to grade and identifying those skills and concepts used most often, our teachers realized they could go deeper and spend more time on a core set of standards. Then, to address consistency across classrooms, we still encouraged teachers to experiment—but experiments had to be shared, replicated, and evaluated so we could decide, collectively, if a new strategy should be adopted school-wide. This was consistency implemented from the bottom up, not imposed from the top down.

The work we did was incredibly slow, complex and difficult. Teachers are reluctant to give up or share closely held practices. We had to establish new norms and shift mindsets before we were able to openly discuss which standards to prioritize and strategies to adopt. Making decisions by finding consensus required new levels of trust and respect. At first, many teachers wanted to go back to teaching behind closed doors. But once they observed their students and themselves learning and growing, they became excited and committed and test scores began to improve. Unfortunately, when a few key people moved on, the district chose to adopt a new math program.

While it is always tempting to fix the problems right in front of us, are we addressing symptoms or root causes? Instead of focusing on teacher certification exams, we should make sure our schools have the culture and capacity to function as learning organizations for everyone in the building, not only students. That means investing time and resources into creating systems so teachers and other staff members can experiment and learn together, reach consensus and make strategic decisions. It starts with trust.

Bright is made possible by funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Bright retains editorial independence. The Creative Commons license applies only to the text of this article. All rights are reserved in the images. If you’d like to reproduce this on your site for noncommercial purposes, please contact us. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.|||

Recently, Nicole Comforto wrote an essay in Bright on problems with teacher certification exams. In the comments, a few of us took issue with her focus on a single, relatively unimportant component…