A note to female founders: The agenda is upside down.

Says every startup event director, venture capitalist firm partner, and female entrepreneur in Silicon Valley. These days being a female founder, supporting one, or connecting with one is a badge of honor people wear. Being a female founder feels like being privileged. Everybody wants to be one, support one, or connect with one. As a female founder myself, I somehow enjoy the little extra attention. And I’m sure many others do too, and many more even need that extra attention to survive.

I have no doubt females are the minorities in the startup space. Heck, I run an InvestTech startup and to my surprise 8 out of 10 of my future users are men. Numbers tell me the story that a majority of women do not identify themselves as a founder just like they do not identify themselves as a stock market investor. So, I concur that all the attention given to the female founders is justified. It’s all good, until as with everything else in life, when you focus on something, you run the risk of overdoing it. In the hopes of removing a barrier, you create a problem, an obsession of some sort. The cause of removing one’s barrier becomes the barrier.

All the attention given to the subject of female founders is there to remove the barriers for females to dare, start, build, and succeed. I’m astonished that “daring, building, and succeeding” is not at the forefront of conversations at female entrepreneurship communities. The first rule of being or supporting a female founder, should be building a great product or company. Not why “I can’t access funds”, or “why do investors want to date me and not fund me”, and so on. I’m not saying these things are not the realities we have to deal with, but teaching women how to build great companies and products that people would want to buy and engage with should be the primary focus. And then help them overcome those challenges.

The agenda is backwards! The agenda of a typical female focused community I have come across so far are about “giving them access to capital”, “changing the mindset of what a successful founder looks like”, “creating female-only event” to name a few. However I have yet to come across one that prioritizes building a good product or company. All other priorities are good and dandy, but nothing - and I truly believe nothing - replaces the confidence and the opportunities that comes from building something meaningful.

With a strong product your odds are in your favor to turn the tables around, change the mindset, and get the attention/capital you deserve. When it comes to be a female founder, you first need to be a founder and then a female. Otherwise you are just a female!

Hoda Mehr is the CEO and co-founder of San Francisco startup Invest Groove, a stock market research and idea validation platform that aims to empower regular people to make informed decisions based on easy-to-understand structure and well-researched insights.|||

A note to female startup founders -By Hoda Mehr- A note to female founders: The agenda is upside down. [[MORE]]““We’ve got to get a female into that panel!” “We need to fund and publicly report the...