Saturday Night Live may have embraced online culture years ago—long live Digital Shorts—but with the newfound popularity and cultural relevancy of its 42nd season, the late-night show is making another move to be an even more integral part of the digital age. NBC and Apple joined forces Friday to unveil a new S.N.L. iMessage app that is launching with the help of nearly 100 familiar faces.

The app—which is available for iPhone and iPad—comes with 95 digital “stickers” that will allow users to pepper their texting with favorite characters from the annals of S.N.L. history, including Drunk Uncle, Matt Foley, Mary Katherine Gallagher, Hans and Franz, and the Coneheads. The roster of characters was originally hand-picked by S.N.L.’s digital team for the 2015 launch of S.N.L.’s existing iPhone and iPad app, which now comes bundled with the new messaging service. So while none of the 95 stickers feature characters from S.N.L.’s current, highly rated season, the app development team has a number of ambitious plans for the future.

Michael Scogin, NBC’s vice president of digital for late night, says that eventually the messaging app will come with GIFs, short videos, and viral catchphrases that can be inserted into an iMessage. The content, he says, will closely resemble the snippets of the show that the digital team already crafts in real-time to appear on social media during any given episode. In other words, in the future, S.N.L. fans might be able to text one another gifs of sketches that just aired. And with Saturday Night Live soon breaking four decades of tradition to air at same time all across the nation, those media-filled messages can happen coast to coast.

Though anyone can create a sticker pack, this splashy rollout speaks to Apple’s increased association with entertainment mega-brands like Game of Thrones, Star Wars, and Marvel, which have become an inescapable part of how brand obsessives communicate. Now, with its stock at an all-time high, S.N.L. has officially joined that list.

But when it comes to adding sticker versions of the familiar faces that helped shoot S.N.L. back to the top of the cultural conversation this past season, NBC might encounter a bit of a snag. Scogin said that, thus far, they haven’t fully explored the potential legal issues around including stickers that refer to impressions of real people. In other words, designing stickers for original characters like Alec Baldwin’s Pete Schweddy is no problem—but Baldwin’s Donald Trump may be another issue. Those questions shouldn’t factor into future gif or video options.

As for new stickers, Scogins says S.N.L. fans can voice their preference for which contemporary original characters should join the ranks of the 95 rolling out this Friday, either by rating and reviewing the app in the App Store or reaching out via the show’s various social media channels. David S. Pumpkins will surely be on his way for Halloween.|||

The long-running series has come for your text messages with a new app and sticker pack.