Non-binary performer Asia Kate Dillon has been earning acclaim for their portrayal of financial whiz Taylor Mason on the Showtime show Billions , and as Variety reports , Showtime understandably submitted Dillon for consideration for this year's Emmy Awards. When the network asked Dillon whether they'd like to be considered for best supporting actor or best supporting actress, Dillon challenged the Television Academy on whether the distinction was even necessary — and was assured they could choose their own category.

As Dillon told Variety , they wanted clarification from the Academy about whether "actor" and "actress" referred to sex or identity so that they could choose for themselves which category made the most sense. Dillon sent a letter to the Academy that read, in part, "The reason I’m hoping to engage you in a conversation about this is because if the categories of ‘actor’ and ‘actress’ are in fact supposed to represent ‘best performance by a person who identifies as a woman’ and ‘best performance by a person who identifies as a man,’ then there is no room for my identity within that award system binary."

They continued, "Furthermore, if the categories of ‘actor’ and ‘actress’ are meant to denote assigned sex, I ask, respectfully, why is that necessary?"

Dillon heard quickly from the Academy that "anyone can submit under either category for any reason," a response that satisfied them as a step in the direction of gender neutrality. Dillon has chosen to be considered for the best supporting actor award.

"Given the choice between actor and actress, 'actor' is a non-gendered word that I use,” they explained. "I think this is a really good place to start a larger conversation about the categories themselves, and what changes are possible and what may or may not be coming." This demonstration of the Academy's respect for Dillon's gender identity could signal a future in which the awards show does away with gendered categories altogether. For now, we share Dillon's encouragement that the Academy hasn't shied away from the issue.|||

Non-binary performer Asia Kate Dillon is earning acclaim for their work on the show Billions. They also just successfully challenged the Emmy Awards' actor/actress binary.