As a small business owner, you have a variety of responsibilities. Each of these centers around cutting as many expenses as possible while still taking that power position of success you deserve and desire.

Fortunately, in today’s world, technology is on your side if you take proper action to save money.

The question remains, what are the easiest ways to make sure that you are moving in the best direction for the economic welfare of your company? Those secrets are about to be revealed.

Accounting software has made tremendous leaps and bounds since the early days. Making sure your financials are in order and remain that way is far less expensive today than ever before. This is largely because of advancements in accounting software on and off the cloud.

With traditional telecommunication services businesses were required to spend a significant part of their capital earnings on technology. This was especially true for those that found it customary to engage in International calling options.

VoIP has been a real game changer in this arena. That’s even more true when you use Zadarma with VoIP as telecommunication savings of up to 90% can be realized. What’s more, Zadarma goes over and beyond the US / Canada limitations of other similar apps by allowing connectivity from 40 different companies. That drives your expense down even further when conducting international business.

Company meetings that went beyond simple telephony technology used to culminate in everyone traveling to a certain location to meetup. This resulted in heavy expenses related to transportation, accommodations and food just to name a few. Today, many of these expenses, which become even more costly when International travel is involved, can be reduced or avoided altogether thanks to tools like Skype, Go to Meeting, Google Hangouts and more.

At first glance you may not think of Telecommuting as a money saver, though it certainly does have an appeal to many of those that are working for you. However, when you need not secure office space for all your workers the inevitable result is that you will experience tremendous economical savings.

The Internet has moved us closer to a paperless society. While there are still times for hardcopy details to be transferred, it is nothing like it used to be. That saves money. But it gets better. When notes can be left on the cloud by all people involved, your company increases organization which decreases confusion. That saves time, which saves money.

How much does it cost to hire an employee?

Most any top CEO would answer that by saying, too much. It Doesn’t mean it is not necessary to do, but rather it is a pat answer to wishing for another option, which is sometimes available. It just depends on the level of complexity involved with the job requirements at hand when considering outsourcing options.

Thanks to technology there are many places where you can secure top services for less. Upwork is one such location but there certainly are others.

Old marketing methods via radio, TV, newspaper, magazines and the like generate serious expenses for small businesses. Fortunately, there is another way in today’s world. No matter if you are using free marketing methods tied into social media and SEO or going for the paid approach with the power of PPC, if done right, you save money when marketing online today.

As should be clear by now, technology brings savings to your small business venture. Exactly how you choose to realize those savings is up to you. While 7 key ways have been identified above, there are others.

Which one’s have you experienced the best results from?

What changes do you see coming to realize savings you deserve and desire?

Please leave your thoughts in the comments below and let’s help businesses everywhere power up their savings.|||

As a small business owner, you have a variety of responsibilities. Each of these centers around cutting as many expenses as possible while still taking that power position of success you deserve and…