The goal was to find the tool companies who make and who own most of the tool brands you know and love.

All the research is boiled down into two useful infographics:

Below each graphic is an in-depth look how the data was found (tax forms, annual reports etc.) and any assumptions made. Enjoy.

The following public records were reviewed to source the info required to create the infographics:

All crucial information was captured in spreadsheets as detailed notes and tabulated data.

Then we began planning and creating the two infographics in OmniGraffle Professional – a diagramming and graphic design software by Omni Group. After many hours inputing logos & data, adjusting lines, circle sizes, colors & alignments the final result emerged. Here it is.

In this infographic, the size of each company’s hand & power tool revenue is shown by circle area. Stanley Black & Decker is inside the biggest circle because it has the largest revenue from hand & power tools. Close behind is Bosch’s hand and power tool business. And so on until we reach Positec, JPW Industries and Ingersoll Rand with the smaller circles representing their smaller respective revenues.

To find out the dollar value of the world power and hand tools market 5 industry reports were used as data points.

In this $5,000 report the two following points are the key takeaways:

In this $6,500 Industry Study, these two facts were key takeaways:

Statista.com is a data analysis website that has a wide range of free and premium industry reports, statistics and analysis. The most interesting tidbit we found investigating hand and power tools is this:

Using the numbers above as starting data points and a spreadsheet with all the tool companies (who own and who make tool brands) 2015 tool sales as additional data points… The market size estimates are:

Most of the companies (who make and who own tool brands) sales figures are available in tax forms and company annual reports. But even with that information some estimations have to be made to arrive at the tools only sales numbers. Here are some notes how we arrived at estimations for the following companies.

The Bosch annual report tells us their Consumer Goods division had 17.1 billion euros revenue (~18.5 billion USD) in 2015. The division consists of power tools (drills, jigsaws, impact screwdrivers, lawn mowers, best pressure washers etc.) and household appliances (fridges, washing machines, dryers, ovens etc.).

The household appliances portion of the Bosch Consumer Goods division was a 50:50 joint venture with Siemens until Bosch bought out Siemens for 3 billion euros (~3.25 billion USD) in late 2014. That was for the 50% share that Siemens owned, valuing the total household appliance company at 6 billion euros (6.5 billion USD). The company reported 10.5 billion euros revenue in 2013. So what’s the 2015 revenue to give us the portion that is power tools? With a growth rate of 4% yearly the revenue is 11.36 billion euros in 2015 leaving  5.74 billion euros (~$6.2B USD) as power tools revenue.

You’ll notice there is an ‘Other’ row in the above table. In that row are Home Depot, Lowe’s and Harbor Freight Tools. Since these companies don’t manufacture their own tools they were not included in the above infographic. However, they still collect substantial revenues from the global tool market with their home brand tools – Husky, Kobalt and US General, for example.

Within The Home Depot and Lowe’s financials you can see they both report more than $5B in tool category sales. Combine that with Harbor Freight and we’re at $12.4B. But a sizeable portion of this is going to external manufacturers and brands.

Looking at Home Depot and Lowe’s, we estimated both companies are collecting around $500M for home brands and $4.5B from selling other companies brands on their shelves. This estimate came from looking at their online stores portion of products that are home brand vs. external brands in the tools & hardware categories. When you include cost to purchase the home brand tools from the OEM and the consignment cost of the external brands’ tools, the cut they get of the total is probably around 30%. That gives Home Depot and Lowe’s somewhere close to $1.5B in global tool market revenue each. And leaves Harbor Freight around the same.

We believe this to be in the ballpark as you have to realize the OEMs and external brands are taking their share of the tool market revenue from the reported Home Depot, Lowe’s and Harbor Freight sales.

Rectangles contain logos of brands owned by the parent companies in the middle. Not all brands owned by the parent companies are in the rectangle – just the most well-known. Hilti and Makita only sell tools under their own names. Take a look. What brands owned by parent companies surprise you?

The findings show the tool industry is mature and highly consolidated. Two companies: Stanley Black & Decker Inc. and Robert Bosch GmbH sit at the top of the tool industry controlling 26% of the global market. They have gained this much control by aggressively acquiring the best most trusted tool brands. It is surprising to find out who owns and who makes well-known brands like Milwaukee, Ridgid, DeWALT and Craftsman.

Simple, it’s because of the ‘Tool Makers‘ part of the title. They aren’t makers.

The Home Depot, Lowe’s and Harbor Freight are not original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) or original design manufacturers (ODMs). They are purchasing companies who form partnerships with OEMs and ODMs (like Stanley Black & Decker) to get their tools made for them to distribute under their own brand names.

In many tool categories these big-box hardware stores simply buy from an OEM and slap their Husky, Kobalt or Drillmaster stickers on the product for sale. In other categories, they approach ODMs with specific product specifications and then work with them to get the tool built to their specs. Exactly which categories of Husky, Kobalt and Harbor Freight tools are ODM or OEM is impossible to find in their tax documents or annual reports.

Check out the favorite tool brands each parent company owns. Below the image is a list of the brands and the location of the parent company who owns them’s Global HQ.

See the tool brands owned and made by Stanley Black & Decker:

Stanley Black & Decker is the largest tool manufacturer in the world with many well-known brands under their corporate umbrella. Their Global HQ is in New Britain, Connecticut.

You can see the logos of the most well-known tool brands owned by Bosch here:

Bosch’s Consumer Goods division sells power tools and household appliances. They own many brands in both industries. Their Global HQ is in Gerlingen, Germany. It is 9km west of Stuttgart.

What brands does Fortive make and own?

Fortive Corp. spun out from Danaher Corp. in 2016 to become its own company. It is foremely the Tools & Measurement division of Danaher. It operates out of the Fluke Corp. headquarters in Everett, Washington.

TTi is one of the fastest growing tool manufacturers in the world. Here are the brands TTi now owns and makes in their sprawling China based production facility:

TTi also makes products for other brands, including Ridgid. TTi Group’s Global HQ is in Kowloon, Hong Kong.

Hilti doesn’t own any subsidiary tool brands. They make Hilti brand pro tools.

Hilti is still a family owned company based in Schaan, Lichtenstein. They are known for their professional tools and are very popular throughout the world. Hilti has more than 23,000 employees.

See the tool brands made and owned by Illinois Tool Works:

Illinois Tool Works is a global diversified manufacturing company with more than 250 brands and companies under its corporate umbrella. It has headquarters in Glenview, Illinois.

Like Hilti, Makita just makes Makita brand tools & equipment for DIYers, pros and general tradespeople.

Makita is a large power tool manufacturing company based in Anjo, Japan. They are well-known for their rechargeable power tools and were the first to produce a rechargeable drill. They introduced it in 1969.

Check out the tool brands Snap-on owns and makes:

Snap-on is best known as the company / tool brand that visits you at work with a van full of tools for you to buy. They started as a socket wrench company and now offer a wide-range of tools for professionals in the automotive, aviation, marine and railroad industries. The Snap-on Global HQ is in Kenosha, Wisconsin.

Emerson owns these brands but gets an OEM (TTi) to produce the products.

Emerson Electric is a massive company with a sizeable tools business. They are best known for their process-automation products and services (valves, regulators, measurement & analytical instruments). The Emerson Global HQ is in Ferguson, Missouri.

Apex Tool Group owns and makes a lot of brands in the tool and equipment industry. Here they are in logo form:

Bain Capital owns Apex Tool Group. Bain also owns a large/majority number of shares in the following companies: Domino’s Pizza, Toys “R” Us, Burger King, Dollarama, Staples Inc and The Weather Channel. Bain bought Apex Tool Group for $1.6B from Cooper Industries and Danaher (formed company as joint venture of tool segments) in 2012. Apex Tool Group has headquarters in Sparks, Maryland.

Harbour Freight buys their tools direct from manufacturer and then offer them as home brands for affordable prices. Here is a selection of the brands they own and sell under:

Harbor Freight Tools is a private company with headquarters in Calabasas, California.

Hitachi owns and makes Metabo and Hitachi tools. They bought Metabo in late 2015 for nearly $180 million.

Hitachi Koki operates as a subsidiary to Hitachi, Ltd. Hitachi Koki manufactures and sells power tools and power equipment. It has HQ in Tokyo, Japan.

Textron is a diversified manufacturer in aircraft, industrial and automotive products. Within their industrial segment they make tools and equipment and sell them under the brands shown here:

Lowe’s sells a range of external brands in the tools & power equipment categories. They also own two home brands in the tool and equipment niche:

Kobalt is their mid-tier tool brand and Blue Hawk is geared towards beginners. Lowe’s has a massive 275-acre corporate campus in Mooresville, North Carolina. It was built starting in 2011 and is designed to be environmentally sustainable (LEED Gold Certified). Check out Lowe’s HQ here. One of the main features of the campus is a functional 7-acre lake. It is home to over 10,000 employees.

The Home Depot owns two home brands in the tools category. They also exclusively sell brands of power tools and equipment such as Ryobi and WORX. Overall, they have sales of hand and power tool/equipment over $5 billion per year.

The Home Depot has Global HQ in Cobb County, Georgia. It is a large building but not a corporate campus type setup like Lowe’s has. The Home Depot is the largest home improvement store in the USA, reporting 50% more revenue than Lowe’s (second biggest) in 2016.

Well known for their screwdrivers and hand tools, Ideal Industries is the brand owner of Western Forge, Pratt-Read and SK Pro Tools.

Ideal Industries is based out of Sycamore, Illinois. Ideal Industries is now well-known for their Pratt-Read, Western Forge brands and SK Tools brands, which they acquired in three separate deals in 2010. It is rumoured they paid ~$50 million for Western Forge and a fair bit less for Pratt-Read.

Here are the tool brands Positec owns:

Positec is a tool manufacturing company with Global HQ in Suzhou, China and North American HQ in Charlotte, North Carolina. Positec tool brands sell at all the big-box stores: Lowe’s, The Home Depot, Walmart and Costco.

See the brands owned and made by tool and machinery parent company JPW Industries:

JPW Industries is based out of La Vergne Tennessee. It was originally known as Walter Meirer Manufacturing, Inc., and represented the tools arm of Swiss based Walter Meier AG. In 2013, Tenex Capital Management purchased Walter Meirer Manufacturing, Inc. and named it JPW Industries to represent the three main brands – JET, Powermatic and Wilton.



While researching the tool brands people are most interested in some common questions kept showing up. Namely, the “who owns” and “who makes” the popular tool brands questions. Here’s a chart to show the total monthly searches for the combo of who owns plus who makes each of the top tool brands:

Disclaimer: All logos (trademarks) appearing on PressureWashr.com are the property of their respective owners.|||

Find out the parent companies who make and who own the majority of tool brands you know and love. 50% of global tool market revenue goes to just 4 tool industry behemoths. These behemoths own 100s of brands through hand and power tool industry consolidation over many years.