For a long time I have been preaching (some days it feels like it anyway) that cloud computing isn’t about someone else simply running your IT hardware and software. It’s about re-engineering your business processes and data to take advantage of a whole new paradigm in computing. This week a prime example of this came up and I wanted to share it with the wider community to illustrate that exact point.



For years now we have provided a service for students to request printed copies of their Record of Achievement (ROA) - in essence a academic transcript but only containing their NCEA achievements. Its traditionally been an expensive operation, requiring specialised printers and paper to ensure these documents are difficult to modify or falsify.

Moving forward we want to make these ROAs available in a digital format but ensure we can provide the same (or better) levels of assurance around their accuracy and authenticity, The value of these documents (and the qualifications they represent) hinges on the trust and confidence others put in them.

We wanted to make the digital ROA as portable as practical so using the PDF format made sense and the PDF format provides for a secured version (usually denoted by a little green tick) so we thought we were onto a winner - and a straight forward solution - but we discovered that:

Given some conservative volume estimates the digital signing of PDFs would cost around $75,000 a year. At about this time we started to think there must be a simpler (and cost effective) way to do this.

Enter a simple and elegant solution - a AWS-based serverless implementation to compute the SHA-256 on the ROA document produced and store that SHA Hash in a simple DynamoDB instance meaning we can (within reason) prove the accuracy and authenticity of every document we produce using the ROA generation service.

All that was required to complete the solution was a way for people who receive the digital ROA from a student (for example, as applying for further study) to check the SHA Hash to validate the document was issued by NZQA.

For that a ReactJS app was built, providing a file upload functionality which computes the SHA-256 Hash on the client device and simply compares it with the record of Hashes in the DynamoDB store - all using our existing API Gateway infrastructure. All built on top of Amazon’s Serverless Architecture.

Given our volume estimates (and the efficient design of the services) we will be using the cheapest or free tiers of the AWS components (for example, Lambda functions bill up at around 200ms). 



So in total the cost of running the service (based on 10,000 ROAs being produced and 20,000 being checked per month) is made up of:

There are likely to be some (minor) support costs associated with the service but these will be picked up as part of operational support/business as usual activities.

So in a nutshell with some lateral thinking we were able to build a cloud-native service which meets the customer need for around $50 per year versus roughly $75,000 per year. So tell me again how cloud is just the same old thing in a different guise? A pretty impressive result all round.



Very early on we recognised that we needed to partner with the right organisations to help us on our journey of cloud adoption. One of our key partners has been a New Zealand AWS Partner called API Talent. 



We started working with Wyn and Seb when they could count their staff on one hand and have since watched them grow into a leader in the cloud computing and AWS space in this part of the world. We now simply see them as an extension of our team. It’s partnerships like that which have allowed us to leverage the power of the cloud to build next generation business solutions like this digital ROA service.



We have also built an API-based ROA service to allow for system to system interactions and enable things like integration with mobile apps.



That’s why I love Cloud Computing and its isn’t about someone else running your hardware and software.  A special shout out to Phil for his out of the box thinking!

|||

Economics of API and Serverless For a long time I have been preaching (some days it feels like it anyway) that cloud computing isn’t about someone else simply running your IT hardware and software....