I haven’t cussed in 5 years. My willpower has skyrocketed.

I’ve tried a number of multi-year experiments to boost my willpower:

And yet by far the easiest thing I’ve done to strengthen my will was to quit saying certain 4-letter English words.

Five years ago, I decided that going forward, I would refrain from saying any cuss word that you couldn’t find in the Old Testament.

My commitment was immediately put to the test. I was at my brother’s house (a no-shoes household), and we had dimmed the lights so we could watch a movie. I was walking back to his living room with a bowl of freshly-popped popcorn, when suddenly a solid wood table leg appeared out of the shadows.

I stubbed my toe so hard that the entire table screeched across his hardwood floor.

My family went silent. They glanced down at my gushing pinky toe. Then up at my face.

“Woah!” my brother’s wife said. “Doesn’t that hurt?”

I just stood there, squeezing my popcorn bowl. Through my clenched teeth — and without really thinking about it — I said: “Not if you’re tough.”

I don’t know what came over me. In truth, my toe hurt like crazy. Whatever it was, that night a family-wide meme was born.

Ever since, whenever someone in our family gets injured somehow, they jokingly reply to inevitable questions about pain with “Not if you’re tough.” Then everybody laughs.

If this had happened before I’d taken my vow of profanity silence, I would have no doubt jumped up and down shouting curse words. But instead, a serene side began to emerge and take hold of my personality.

Darn. Heck. Shoot. There were softer versions of pretty much every cuss word out there, and I quickly adopted these.

But one word was missing. The big one that everyone uses as a verb, adjective, and even a noun — sometimes all in the same sentence. And no, “fudge” wasn’t going to cut it for me.

Fortunately, my wife and I had just binge-watched the entire series of Battlestar Galactica over one rainy winter in Shanghai.|||

And yet by far the easiest thing I’ve done to strengthen my will was to quit saying certain 4-letter English words. Five years ago, I decided that going forward, I would refrain from saying any cuss…