ActionControl is a simple and secure authentication and authorization system which let you to authenticate and authorize directly in your controllers.

I've tested it with a Rails 4.2.5 App but I think it should work with a lot versions of Rails since the gem uses just basic stuff of Rails.

Just add the following line to the Gemfile of Rails:

And then and you are ready to go.

With ActionControl authentication and authorization is done in you controllers. To enable authentication and authorization in one of your controllers, just add a before action for and and the user has to authenticate and authorize on every call. You probably want to control authentication and authorization for every controller action you have in your app. To enable this just add the before action to the .

If you try to open a page you will get an or . This means that you have to instruct ActionControl when a user is authorized and when not. You can do this by creating a method called and in your controller.

If the user is now signed in, he is authenticated and authorized if he is an admin, otherwise an or will be raised. Now you just have to catch this error and react accordingly. Rails has the convinient for this case.

In this example above, the user will be redirected to the root with a flash message. But you can do whatever you want. For example redirect to the sign in page.

ActionControl also has a view helper methods implemented which help you to distinguish between RESTful controller actions.

The following methods are available:

So you can for example do:

This is pretty much everything you have to do for basic authentication or authorization! As you can see it's quite flexible and straightforward to use.

The authorization is done in a simple before action. Before callbacks are done in a specific order. If you set something which is needed in the or method you have to call the before action after the other method again.

For example if you set in your controller in the before action and you want to use this in action you have to add the or method after the again, otherwise won't be available in or .

Create pull requests on Github and help us to improve this Gem. There are some guidelines to follow:|||

action_control - An access control system for your controller