On April 21, 2015, a Tesla Model S P85D rolled off a transporter in front of Car and Driver headquarters, its cherry-red paint spattered with mud as if it had come from its Fremont, California, assembly plant by way of the Oregon Trail. The car’s unceremonious arrival belied the magnitude of the moment; the very first electric car to undergo a Car and Driver long-term test made the impending seismic shifts facing our industry feel very real and very close. You’ll note something similar the day you take delivery of your first plug-in vehicle.

We knew that Tesla was driving massive changes in a century-plus-old industry, but we’d soon be surprised to discover that the Model S was itself capable of change. When we took delivery of the car, Tesla was tout­ing 691 horsepower from a car that would practically drive itself—just as soon as the engineers finished writing the software. Plugging the Model S in behind the office, we could feed the car with our 40-amp circuit, adding 22 miles of predicted range per hour of charging.

Nineteen months later, when our Model S embarked on a 4000-mile sendoff from Ann Arbor to Los Angeles via New York City, the car that completed that journey could steer itself down the highway, its two electric motors were now understood to make a combined 463 horsepower, and the 17-inch touchscreen, twice upgraded by software updates, had learned to plot the necessary high-speed-charging breaks on long-distance routes. Those stops would be dictated by Tesla’s network of proprietary Superchargers, which had grown from 188 U.S. locations to 325 during our time with the car, including a station just three miles from our Ann Arbor office. When we needed a quick jolt of electricity, that Supercharger could refill the battery at a rate roughly 10 times faster than that very first charge at 1585 Eisenhower Place. Our Model S was still red when it completed its 40,000-mile tour of duty, but in many ways, it was as if we were living with a different car.

Our P85D (read: performance, 85-kWh battery, dual-motor all-wheel drive) started with a steep $105,670 base price. We inflated that figure with 21-inch wheels ($4500), a panoramic glass roof ($2500), air springs ($2250), high-capacity onboard chargers ($1500), red paint ($1500), and a carbon-fiber spoiler ($1000). Inside, we splurged on Tesla’s aggressively bolstered “next-generation” seats ($3500), a high-fidelity sound system ($2500), a rear-facing third row of seats ($2500), carbon-fiber interior trim ($800), a cold-weather package ($750), and a tech package that included the hardware needed to enable Autopilot’s self-driving features ($4250). The final price of $136,720 is spendy—even by BMW 7-series standards.

Our car’s big battery pack made electric living easy. The EPA rates the P85D at 253 miles per charge while our own real-world range test extracted 206 miles during a 75-mph highway cruise. The exact number wasn’t as important as the fact that the Model S effortlessly covered our staff’s day-to-day demands with plenty of juice to spare. It wasn’t off-limits to staffers with long commutes, nor did we ever feel uneasy taking the car for a weekend, when charging was less convenient or assured. There’s good reason newer EVs are targeting the 200-mile threshold that Tesla cracked.

We charged at our office every weekday, initially using a 240-volt, 40-amp circuit that required more than 10 hours to replenish the depleted pack. We soon upgraded to a 100-amp line that could push 58 miles’ worth of electricity into the car every hour. Those who charge overnight at home can make do with 30- or 40-amp circuits, but we became convinced some form of 240-volt service is required for Tesla ownership, especially in cold-weather climates. Over the course of a 20-degree weekend with minimal charging, one editor saw 134 miles of driving range disappear to warming the battery, heating the cabin, and reduced efficiency. Our Model S rarely enjoyed the warmth of a garage, whether it was plugged in or not, which would have increased the vehicle’s overall efficiency and reduced the winter range losses we experienced.

The quiet, smooth Model S is a prolific commuter. In fact, the electric life was so seamless that we concocted a cross-country drive to see how the car performed in an extreme-use case. We wanted to know if an EV could truly replace an internal-combustion-powered vehicle as an only car.

Any trip that requires one or two Supercharger stops is relatively painless. Anything longer, however, quickly becomes tedious. Our coast-to-coast routine involved two or three hours of driving, followed by about 45 minutes of charging, rinse, repeat. We covered 3647 miles in four days, spending 57 hours behind the wheel and another 15 hours, 22 minutes plugged in (not including overnight charging). The slightly slower pace necessary (speed kills range) and the frequent extended stops mean a long-haul Tesla travels at Teamster speed. We passed and drafted familiar trucks for days at a time through middle Ameri­ca, but the real inconvenience is that your meals are dictated by Supercharger locations. Some stops are so bereft of services that you’ll yearn for the chance to eat at a Cracker Barrel.

I go where I'm towed.



 Key:

 - Repairs

 - Damage

 - Maintenance 

 - Normal Wear

 - Oil Additions





April 21, 2015

84 miles: Tesla Model S P85D arrives



May 4, 2015

 1029 miles: Replace left-front tire due to tear in sidewall, $552



June 30, 2015

 5705 miles: Replace cracked windshield, $945



August 20, 2015

 9427 miles: Car transported to Tesla's Cleveland service center to address a clicking noise coming from the front-right corner, a roof-rack-mount cover that flips up at speed, and a driver's seat that rubs and squeaks against the center armrest. Technicians torque all suspension fasteners and fix the roof-rack flap, and order a replacement for the bent driver's seat, $0



October 25, 2015

 12,100 miles: Attempt by service ranger to install a new driver's seat at our office; strips a bolt trying to remove the old seat, $0

 The 12,500-mile service involves inspections plus replacing the wiper blades, the cabin air filter, and the batteries in the key fobs. The tech also upgrades our vehicle's firmware, unlocking Autopilot functionality, $432



November 2, 2015

 13,174 miles: Car towed to service center in Cleveland to replace the driver's seat, $0



November 19, 2015

13,905 miles: Swap to 19-inch Dunlop SP Winter Sport 3D DSST RunOnFlat winter tires



April 21, 2016

23,272 miles: Reinstall 21-inch Michelin Pilot Sport PS2 summer tires



May 17, 2016

 25,172 miles: Car hauled to Cleveland. In addition to the tasks performed at the first service, the second includes replacement of the air-conditioning desiccant bag and brake fluid, $756



 Service center orders another replacement for the creaking driver's seat and seals the tray around the leaking sunroof, $0



May 24, 2016

 25,839 miles: Repair bent wheel, $280



June 17, 2016

 28,630 miles: Repair rock chip in windshield, $30



July 28, 2016

 31,018 miles: Car trucked to Tesla's Cleveland service center where they replace the driver's front lower control arm to address a clunking noise and clean out the sunroof drain lines to stop the leaking that persists, $0



August 8, 2016

 31,387 miles: Discover both front wheels are bent; replace worn front tires, $805



August 17, 2016

 32,287 miles: Straighten one front wheel and learn that the other is damaged beyond repair, $135



August 25, 2016

 32,698 miles: Driver's seat replaced at our office, $0

 Service ranger also delivers a new front wheel, $1188



September 27, 2016

 34,174 miles: Repair rock chip in windshield, $50



November 16, 2016

 34,549 miles: Car retrieved by the Cleveland service center to address a clunking front suspension. Technicians replace the right-front anti-roll-bar end link and the chrome tailgate trim, which is allowing water in the taillights, $0



December 5, 2016

40,000 miles: Model S finishes its long-term tour I go where I'm towed.Key:- Repairs- Damage- Maintenance- Normal Wear- Oil AdditionsTesla Model S P85D arrivesReplace left-front tire due to tear in sidewall, $552Replace cracked windshield, $945Car transported to Tesla's Cleveland service center to address a clicking noise coming from the front-right corner, a roof-rack-mount cover that flips up at speed, and a driver's seat that rubs and squeaks against the center armrest. Technicians torque all suspension fasteners and fix the roof-rack flap, and order a replacement for the bent driver's seat, $0Attempt by service ranger to install a new driver's seat at our office; strips a bolt trying to remove the old seat, $0The 12,500-mile service involves inspections plus replacing the wiper blades, the cabin air filter, and the batteries in the key fobs. The tech also upgrades our vehicle's firmware, unlocking Autopilot functionality, $432Car towed to service center in Cleveland to replace the driver's seat, $0Swap to 19-inch Dunlop SP Winter Sport 3D DSST RunOnFlat winter tiresReinstall 21-inch Michelin Pilot Sport PS2 summer tiresCar hauled to Cleveland. In addition to the tasks performed at the first service, the second includes replacement of the air-conditioning desiccant bag and brake fluid, $756Service center orders another replacement for the creaking driver's seat and seals the tray around the leaking sunroof, $0Repair bent wheel, $280Repair rock chip in windshield, $30Car trucked to Tesla's Cleveland service center where they replace the driver's front lower control arm to address a clunking noise and clean out the sunroof drain lines to stop the leaking that persists, $0Discover both front wheels are bent; replace worn front tires, $805Straighten one front wheel and learn that the other is damaged beyond repair, $135Driver's seat replaced at our office, $0Service ranger also delivers a new front wheel, $1188Repair rock chip in windshield, $50Car retrieved by the Cleveland service center to address a clunking front suspension. Technicians replace the right-front anti-roll-bar end link and the chrome tailgate trim, which is allowing water in the taillights, $0Model S finishes its long-term tour

Tesla should be celebrated for building the infrastructure that’s crucial to electric-vehicle adoption. No other automaker has made such a commitment. The difference between a Tesla Model S and a Nissan Leaf is as much about the Supercharger network as it is the larger-capacity battery pack.

That, plus eye-popping, neck-straining performance. Tesla admitted that its origi­nal 691-hp figure was bogus in September 2015. The motors can churn out that much muscle when juiced from, say a nuclear reactor, but the onboard batteries can only send enough power to generate 463 ponies. While correcting the record didn’t make the Model S any slower, Tesla’s own software did. In January 2017, Tesla admitted that its software limits maximum output after a car exceeds a predetermined number of launches and hard accelerations in order to protect the powertrain. We have no doubt that our adolescent drivers crossed that threshold. The company also said it will remove this protection with the next software update, probably to ward off lawsuits as much as to appease customers. Between its initial and final performance tests, our P85D slowed from a 3.3-second zero-to-60-mph sprint to 3.7 seconds. The quarter-mile stretched another half-second beyond the first run of 11.8 seconds.

Time certainly made our Tesla smarter. A software update in October 2015 enabled Autopilot, which combines adaptive cruise control, a self-steering lane-keeping program, and automated lane changes (activated by triggering the turn signal). Autopilot can cover scores of highway miles without driver involvement, and yet it occasionally yanked—suddenly and alarmingly—at the steering wheel when it lost the scent of lane markers, causing the vehicle to swerve out of its lane.

Tesla’s blind-spot monitor relies on the ultrasonic sensors that most automakers use only as parking-lot spotters. CEO Elon Musk says Tesla prefers this approach because, compared with the radar-based alternative, the sensors work at lower speeds and better detect “soft” objects, such as humans. But ultrasonic sensors have less range than radar, so they can’t spot a fast-closing car in the next lane. That makes the automatic lane change a dicey proposition. New Teslas wear eight cameras that provide a 360-degree view around the car, upgrading their lane-changing capabilities.

While the instrument cluster implores the driver to keep their hands on the wheel during Autopilot use, the system’s seeming competence easily lulls you into false confidence and dumb behavior such as texting or, in the case of our drivers, writing notes in the car’s logbook. There’s no doubt that Tesla’s Autopilot is more capable than the nervous, lawyer-handicapped systems offered by every other automaker, but it’s far from finished. Autopilot’s inability to handle all scenarios was highlighted in the May 2016 fatal accident in which a Model S operating on Autopilot broadsided a semi-trailer that crossed the Tesla’s path.

We’ve been promised that EVs will reduce operating costs, but Tesla’s service prices don’t reflect its vehicles’ simplicity. The 12,500-mile maintenance stop involves replacing the cabin air filter, the windshield-wiper blades, and the key-fob batteries and performing an inspection. It cost $432. Every second service calls for replacing the brake fluid and the air-conditioning desiccant bag, upping the price to $756. It appears that even in the electric future, the service department remains a profit center.

For us, service visits were three-day affairs that started with a 180-mile transfer to the Cleveland service center. Michigan’s franchise laws prohibit Tesla from setting up direct-to-consumer factory stores here or using its team of mobile rangers to service cars in the state. Tesla did perform some tasks at our office, as it can legally work on company-owned cars in Michigan.

In the big picture, our Model S proved dependable, with none of the showstopping battery or motor failures that troubled some early cars. Several build-quality issues did remind us, however, that Tesla is the youngest automaker by a large margin. Adding to the irritation, the service center was often slow to schedule minor warranty work. Note the three-month lag between ordering and installing the third driver’s seat in our Service Timeline. That driver’s seat (along with the first replacement) developed enough play in the frame to noisily rub against the center console. Halfway through the test, the sunroof began to leak during rainstorms and required two service visits to correct. The chrome trim on the rear hatch had to be replaced after the original allowed moisture into the taillamps. The 5010-pound P85D also consumed a control arm and an anti-roll-bar end link, and it wore through its Michelin Pilot Sport PS2s in 15,000 miles. We sacrificed one windshield, one tire, and one wheel to Michigan roads.

The Model S’s novel and distinctive aura is equal parts Silicon Valley ingenuity and startup naiveté. In its quest to redefine the user experience, Tesla forgot several simple features that we take for granted. There are no grab handles above the doors, no sunshade for the glass roof, and no rear wiper. The fixed rear headrests impinge on rearward sightlines, and our seven-passenger Model S had just three cupholders.

While the in-car technology feels so very of-the-moment, less sophisticated cars better withstand the test of time. Our Model S’s 3G modem was outmoded the day it arrived at our office, and the navigation system frequently displayed blank gray tiles while Google Maps loaded. Simpler tasks such as changing radio stations left the impression that the 17-inch touchscreen was aging ungracefully, slowing down the way an old smartphone does. That complaint first appeared in the logbook with just 11,861 miles on the clock, while another driver counted a 10-second lag between tapping the screen and hearing a new station.

Our long-distance road trip highlighted that Tesla’s range estimate is consistently optimistic. This discrepancy demanded that the driver perform constant mental math, evaluating how quickly the predicted range was falling compared with the climbing odometer. Over 40,000 miles, the predicted range dropped 1.4 miles for every mile driven.

We averaged 69 MPGe, well below the EPA’s 93 combined MPGe. With electricity at a national average of 13 cents per kWh, running our Tesla cost the same as driving a 38-mpg car with gas at $2.40 per gallon.

Efficiency, though, seems like one of the less compelling arguments for buying a Tesla. The Model S’s appeal lies in the thrill of instant torque, the comfort of seamless acceleration, the tranquility of near-silent idling, and the convenience of at-home refueling. Tesla alone made EVs cool, with its focus on the primal desire for style and performance. We just hope that the company can embrace the kind of continuous improvement we witnessed in the Model S. If Musk can advance its build quality and send a SpaceX rocket to retrieve its pricing from the upper stratosphere, as he intends to with the $35,000 Model 3, Tesla’s transformation from startup to automotive institution will be complete.

The Model S’s embedded trip planner keeps a conservative store of electricity in reserve and favors frequent but short charging. As we crossed middle America, the nav system recommended stopping at almost every Supercharger along our route. But because the charging rate slows as the battery fills, we found it quicker to ignore Tesla's recommendations, drive the car to near empty, and plug it in for only slightly longer charges. Our routine: Drive between 120 and 200 miles at roughly 5 mph over the speed limit, charge for 20 to 45 minutes to a predicted range 50 miles greater than what was needed for the next stint, then get back on the road. We typically arrived at the subsequent stop with 20 to 30 miles of remaining range, although uphill stints caused us to slash our speed or tuck in behind semis on a couple occasions. Starting with 247 miles of range and climbing a little more than 1000 feet over 190 miles into Weatherford, Oklahoma, we rolled to the plug with just two miles of indicated range.

Traveling in this manner requires some advanced planning to know which chargers to visit and which to bypass. We used Google Maps and plugged in our chosen charging stops knowing that we wouldn’t risk a run longer than 200 miles.

In hindsight, we would have added one preplanning task: Noting the nearby amenities that are listed on Tesla’s Supercharger web page. You can’t escape mediocre megachain dining along the Supercharger network, but you can prevent the disappointment of pulling up to a charger at dinner time only to discover that it’s located at a secluded hotel. And even the best-planned trip requires a good pair of walking shoes. It often takes a decent hike—sometimes across lawns, through landscaping berms, or along busy roads—to refuel the passengers.

“The heavy regenerative braking works well in this car. I wish all EVs and hybrids had it.” —Mike Sutton

“Autopilot is the first system that convinces me that maybe the autonomous future isn’t that far away after all.” —Dave VanderWerp

“The cabin heats up faster in this car than in many internal-combustion [powered] cars.” —Kirk Seaman

“The touchscreen responds to pokes and swipes like a five-year-old iPhone that’s received three too many operating-system updates.” —Eric Tingwall

“When I began writing this, the odo read 16,061. Now it reads 16,063. Wait, who was driving?” —Alexander Stoklosa|||

Read what happened during our 40,000-mile torture test of Tesla's Model S, our first-ever long-term EV. Read the full story at Car and Driver.