Update: We’re back! Check out our Flume 2.6 release announcement with all the information for migrating to our new direct version.

As of today, Apple has removed Flume for Mac from sale on the Mac App Store. This blog post will try to explain as much of the situation as possible, and provide information for new and existing users.

Just over a week ago, we announced the Flume 2.5 update, which included countless new features and bug fixes, and constitutes one of our biggest releases yet. Just minutes before submitting the update to Apple, we received notification from Apple that after re-reviewing our app by seemingly random selection, we had one week to make significant changes or be removed from the App Store. Due to the timing of the notification, the 2.5 update was submitted unchanged, while we tried to seek further clarification from Apple as the notification suggested we could. Repeated attempts to receive clarification and assurances from Apple went unanswered. Eventually the 2.5 update was reviewed and after more than 48 hours, rejected for the same reasons as the previous notification.

As of this morning, Apple has now removed the previous version (2.4.2) from the App Store without any further replies to our questions/concerns.

The App Stores have a set of guidelines, and all apps submitted and available on the App Store must adhere to these guidelines to be approved by Apple. Specifically, Apple believes Flume to be in violation of App Store guidelines section 5.2.2.

We will not argue with this point too much - Flume’s operation is indeed not explicitly authorized by Instagram (said third-party). We make that clear in our Terms of Use. The reference to “third-party social media alterations” is a vague statement however, and the only issue they chose to highlight was Flume’s uploading capabilities. Liking or un-liking media, following and unfollowing profiles or even viewing the feed can all be considered “social media alterations”. Knowing this to be the case, we wanted to clarify with Apple if Flume would be permitted to stay on the Mac App Store:

Unfortunately, as mentioned above, Apple chose to not reply, leaving us with very little recourse. While it may be potentially still possible to submit an update removing the upload feature, doing so would be an immediate downgrade, despite the other bug fixes and improvements that ship in Flume 2.5. Since it is not possible to install previous versions of apps on the App Store, the decision was made to leave the current 2.4.2 version available for as long as possible.

We feel that this is a lose-lose-lose-lose situation. We lose access to inform our customers, and lose our reputation. Our customers lose access to features / an app they loved. We lose our income/business through the purchase of Flume Pro. Apple loses a high-quality, localized, accessible and top rating app, rated the #1 Photography app in many countries. Customers lose confidence in the App Store. Developers lose confidence in the abilities and merits of the App Store review process. The list could go on…

The inconsistency of the decision strikes us the most however - 39 Instagram related apps still remain live on the App Store, 13 of which provide upload features - but we’re not strangers to this fact. Apple’s relations with its developer community has been tempestuous over the last years, with many high profile names ditching the App Store in favour of direct distribution. It’s also a big reason why Setapp was created. Again, we won’t argue that Apple is wrong here about the reason - we will however argue that their communication or understanding of the issue has been missing.

Update: Flume 2.6 is now available!

Update: Flume 2.6 is now available!

Over the next days, we are scrambling to implement all that is necessary to provide a direct version of Flume 2.5, that will be available from our website. Please follow us on Twitter (@flumeapp) for updates.

We can reassure you that if you have Flume 2.4.2 installed, Flume will continue to operate for the foreseeable future. However, please keep in mind that Instagram regularly “turns off” access to older versions of their own applications. When this occurs, Flume 2.4.2 will also receive the same cut-off date. We cannot provide any estimation as to when this might occur, and our efforts will be on providing Flume 2.5 via direct download as soon as we can.

9 months ago, Instagram killed off the developer community, in an attempt to reduce spam accounts, increase engagement with their own apps, and reduce the plethora of apps that were stealing user data, providing bad user experiences, or damaging the Instagram brand.

Agree or disagree, Flume fills a void that Instagram doesn’t currently fill however. Our efforts have always been to provide an alternative to which there actually is no official alternative. Displaying Instagram’s Sponsored Posts and providing access to create Promotions and view Insights are just two examples of our own efforts to aid Instagram in their goals. It’s the reason we don’t (and won’t) make Flume for any other platform but macOS.

To us, it’s been very clear over the last 22 months that Flume is something you not only wanted, but loved. From the visually impaired, to the grandmothers, to the international community, to the social media managers, to the casual parent and to the Instagram-addicted, this hobby project became what it is because of you, especially those that upgraded to Flume Pro, left a review or rating, tweeted about us, or sent us feedback.

A huge and heart-felt thank you.

Update: We’ve updated our Support Portal with a section dedicated to the Mac App Store transition.|||

Flume leaves the Mac App Store Update: We’re back! Check out our Flume 2.6 release announcement with all the information for migrating to our new direct version. As of today, Apple has removed Flume...