[Update: You can now view my talk on this subject.]

For a while now, I've had the tagline you see on this site's header as of this writing:

Like many (if not most) of you, I'm regularly contacted by recruiters. Unsurprisingly, they generally haven't learned anything specific about me, aside from what they find on my LinkedIn or GitHub profile. If they have visited this site, they certainly haven't read the tagline. I'm getting tired of sending out what amounts to the same e-mail (though still probably more customized than the typical recruiter e-mail) over and over again, so I hope those of you who primarily read this blog for useful bits of Ruby info will forgive me this brief and selfish digression.

I am a software developer in Louisville, Kentucky, and I am really freaking happy here.

A common theme in the development community I most readily identify with (the Ruby community) is one of optimizing for happiness. I'd like to think this is largely because the language itself makes developer happiness a design goal. Whatever the reason, in the same way that GitHub has optimized their company for happiness, and Ruby has optimized itself for happiness, I strive to optimize my daily life for happiness.

Duh. Everyone does that, you might think.

Maybe. As I've talked to other programmers, I get the distinct impression that if they are optimizing for happiness, they're being a good deal less intentional about it.

Let's get this out of the way: Being a programmer is one of the most singularly satifying careers in the world. We get to wake up every morning and create things, solve interesting problems, and, if we're doing our jobs well, make people happy. AND WE CAN DO THIS FROM ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD. This means that we get to shape our lives and careers in ways that are impossible in many professions. If that doesn't make you smile, please see your doctor (who, by the way, doesn't get to have as much fun on his job as you do).

Anyway, back to shaping our lives. Since we can do our job from anywhere in the world, and only a company that is either ignorant or supremely distrustful of its employees would insist otherwise (Right? RIGHT?), we can live anywhere, and that choice impacts so many other areas of our lives that we should pick a place that works for us, and then sort out the rest.

So, why did I pick Louisville?

We also have bourbon. ;)

But seriously, I first chose to relocate to Louisville when I was 24. I remember joking when considering the move: "I'm not sure why I'm doing this, all they've got there is horse racing and fried chicken." I was incredibly wrong, and it's only gotten better since then. By the way, you should totally come visit: among a number of other rankings and recognitions, Louisville was named the #1 US Travel Destination of 2013 by Lonely Planet.

Aside from the obvious horse racing and tons of great dining options, it's got a number of other things you'd expect from a "respectable" city:

There's more, but the general point I'm trying to make is that Louisville has what you'd expect from any great city, the difference being that you can drive about 15 minutes in almost any direction and be in a more rural setting. This is a huge pro in my book, because…

Ask any competent programmer his or her thoughts on managing complexity in code, and you're likely to receive a lengthy response. We have an instinctive and universally negative reaction to the introduction of unnecessary complexity in our code, but somehow fail to maintain those defenses in our day-to-day lives.

I grew up in a very rural town in Pennsylvania. I enjoy the quiet, and, though you wouldn't know it if you met me on the street or at a conference, I'm an introvert. Louisville gives me the option of plenty of stuff to do, but plenty of peace and quiet when I want to recharge. I work remotely, but having experienced what we call "rush hour" here, compared to other cities, even if I did have to work in a local office, I wouldn't lose much of my life to the commute (more on commutes in a second).

I think I'm one of the only people in the country who doesn't hate his cable company. They provide me with really reliable and surprisingly-high-speed cable Internet access (50/5 asymmetrical) for what I consider a reasonable price. This makes working remotely a breeze. This is important, because working remotely is a key part of my personal optimization for happiness.

It's often said that "time is money," but nothing could be more misleading. Time is most definitely not money. Some of us have much more of the latter than others, but everyone has the same 24 hours in their day. Therefore, I value my time, and I protect it. When I do decide to "waste" time, I try very hard to do so on my terms. Here, again, Louisville helps me.

I already mentioned that I crave peace and quiet to recharge. If having that place to recharge meant dealing with an hour-long commute each day, or long drives every time I wanted to do anything even remotely entertaining, I don't think I'd make the trade.

Because Louisville is basically a small town with big city perks, I can engineer a simplicity in my daily life that lets me conserve my time and energy for things I find important. It all ties together nicely:

The really awesome thing about being a remote worker is that your cost of living is dependent on where you live, but your value to the company that's hiring you isn't dependent on that, at all. Living in Louisville lets my dollar go farther than any of the "usual places" recruiters are trying to convince me to relocate.

To be honest, it leaves me scratching my head at interactions like this one, an actual exchange with a recruiter from a well-known NYC-based firm:

First, holy form-letter, Batman! But still, in the interest of education, I responded:

Right. Because the cost of moving would be what prevents me from taking a job in NYC.

Let's assume for a moment here that I was anything less than completely satisfied with working for LivingSocial (I'm completely satisfied).

The cost of living in Louisville is 7.6% below national average. The cost of living in NYC is 123.8% above national average. In other words, I'd need to earn over twice as much money to maintain the same quality of life in NYC.

"So live in Jersey, and commute," you say? See previous discussion about exercising control over how I spend my time. Also, Jersey is still significantly more expensive than Louisville.

Similar arguments against San Francisco, DC, and pretty much anywhere else that would require a lengthy commute to make the cost of living increase even bearable. Life's too short to spend so much of it in between the places you truly want to be.

So, time and money are easy to quantify. Here are some other reasons I love working in Louisville:

If you aren't a recruiter (many of whom I will no doubt be sending to this page) but a programmer, and somehow got to this point without getting bored:

Are you happy where you are right now? Or, do you want to move to one of those "it" places when a recruiter asks you to? Great! I'm not going to try to convince you that Louisville's a better choice for you (but it totally is). I just hope you're taking a hard look at the choices you've made and the way you've always looked at your career. Be intentional about your choices.

I'll leave you with this:

I was simultaneously encouraged and frustrated when I read Chad Fowler's The Passionate Programmer. Encouraged, because he was eloquently and succinctly summarizing some of the things I'd come to realize over 15 years in software development. Frustrated, because I wished that I had been able to give that book to my 20-year-old self and prevent him from spending a decade in the cable telecommunications industry, being the guy doing things in a decidedly non-enterprise way, and being seen as the enemy for embracing "agile" techniques before I had ever even heard the term.

In the book, Chad dedicates an entire section to investing in your "product," that product being yourself and your career. For many of us who grew up with parents who encouraged us to work hard and keep our heads down, that's a foreign concept. These are the lessons I wish I had taught my 20 year old self, so he could be a better Product Manager:

Yeah, longer than I thought it would be, actually. Thanks for sticking with me. We now return you to your regularly scheduled Ruby ramblings.|||

Ernie Miller is a programmer with a passion for Ruby, learning, and teaching in Louisville, Kentucky.