The big one. I’ve already covered Assistant Vs Alexa and Siri Vs Alexa. Now it’s time for the two dedicated personal assistants to go head-to-head.

The best way to truly measure their skills is to ask them a few straightforward questions. Well, 54 to be exact.

The questions I’ve chosen to ask are a mix to recommended questions from both services, common questions you might Google, questions crowdsourced from friends and, of course, a few curve balls.

NB: I’ve enabled all necessary skills and actions.

When is the next Arsenal game?

Both got it right.

What time is the next Central Line train to Liverpool Street from Stratford, East London?

Alexa said it couldn’t answer, Home couldn’t either but recognised that it was a public transport question by saying “I can’t answer public transport questions just yet”.

Do I need an umbrella today?

Alexa gave me percentage chance of rain, appealing to my inner gambler. Home said “rain is not expected” and gave me a temperature and climate update.

What is the next NFL game in the UK?

“On September 24th, 2017, the Jaguars will play the Ravens at Wembley stadium in London”, said Alexa. Home had nothing.

How much protein is in two eggs?

What ingredients go into a spaghetti bolognese?

Alexa couldn’t answer, Home gave me me a full list from a top result of a Google search. Useful, but perhaps not a replacement for looking at the full recipe on your phone.

Add those ingredients to my shopping list.

Home literally added “those ingredients” to my shopping list. There’s still some work to be done on contextual follow-up questions.

Add garlic, onions and chopped tomatoes to my shopping list.

Again, Alexa added all three ingredients as one item to my shopping list. Home correctly spaced them out.

What time is the next train to King’s Cross from my closest station?

Neither had an answer.

How long does it take to get from Stratford to King’s Cross station?

Who is the leader of the UK Green Party (trick question, there are two joint leaders of the Green Party).

Alexa answered with a direct question, but only named one leader. Home read out a line from a BBC article that named both leaders.

Home: “How does our solar system keeps its pants up? With an asteroid belt.” horrific

Alexa: “Did you hear about my Dad’s restaurant on the moon? The food is ok, but it had no atmosphere”. Also horrific. It’s interesting that both jokes were space related, though.

What song is this?

Both answered correctly. Interestingly you can’t play music from both devices at the same time with the same Spotify account.

Add this to my ‘liked’ Spotify playlist.

Both just played my ‘liked’ playlist and neither added Skepta’s track. It appears you can only ask unlimited follow questions in certain scenarios.

When’s the best time to plant seeds?

Home gave a detailed answer based on the top result from a Google search Alexa had nothing.

Home gave another detailed Google search answer. Alexa, again, had nothing.

Alexa has a skill called TV guide, which sort of works. It gives specific answers about what’s on certain channels right now. It also gives general answers on what’s on a selection of channels at a specific time. Home doesn’t support TV schedules.

How much energy do you use?

Home gave me an answer to a different question about how much energy we use per Google search. Alexa had nothing.

What questions did I ask today?

Alexa did so with aplomb. Home couldn’t answer.

On page two: the last questions and the result|||

There can only be one winner.