We’re used to hearing these for tornadoes but tonight?

It’s a nice Bright Moon type night, clear sky. Everything as normal for Spring — do a little mowing, fight off some June Bugs on the patio, make a Miller Lite run in the Celica GT-S and vanquish all those who dared to…oh, sorry.

Anyway, the night had been as usual. Then the air raid sirens started going about 11:30. Normally they get to screaming when there’s a weather event.

Whoa, whoa, whoa. Lots of freak outs. Asking for somebody with an answer.

Me? I just laughed. There’s no way this timing is a “Test” and there’s no way there’s actually a threat here. It’s just Murphy’s Laws in one form showing up to screw with everybody who thinks life is like a Network Sitcom.

Oh, those sirens are very un-nerving, but the reactions are almost more entertaining. Come on, this is Texas — we should be out howling at the bright Moon along with the siren screams.

Maybe it’s a real “malfunction” or maybe there’s a Gremlin in the system triggering things. Right now, as the story unfolds, there’s no way to know. In the days ahead, will we find out? Perhaps.

When something out of the ordinary happens, please don’t jump to the worst conclusion of your imagination — step back, breathe, ask yourself if this kind of stuff is really worth stressing over? No.

If there was a Weather Event, you’d know by now. If there’s a nuclear bomb about to drop over The Perot Museum, there’s no “Duck and Cover” reaction that can save you or your family from becoming flash-seared jerky.

There are things we can control, there are things we can’t control. Worrying is natural and has its place — the here, the now, the people you love and care for day after day — but outside, the open environment? Nah. Grow eyes in the back of your head while trudging forward.

Just be handy with the steel should things change…|||

It’s a nice Bright Moon type night, clear sky. Everything as normal for Spring — do a little mowing, fight off some June Bugs on the patio, make a Miller Lite run in the Celica GT-S and vanquish all…