AMD's newly launched AMD Ryzen microprocessors have brought a number of improvements and better performance to the computing world. However, AMD's latest processor is not perfect and still need some refinement. This week, AMD is making a huge announcement that Ryzen will be receiving some big enhancements.

This week, the Sunnyvale, California-based chipmaker has just announced on their blog post that it has created a new AMD Ryzen-optimized Windows power plan to gain better performance and address power issues, according to Tom's Hardware. However, AMD is still looking for user's feedback before it fully rolled the new AMD Ryzen Balanced power plan into its drivers. This means that the crowd might expect some big changes here.

In the new AMD Balanced Power Plan, according to reports, both the timers and thresholds for frequency and voltage transitions have been reduced. The changes made will allow the company to alter the clock speed much faster, thus providing a much greater degree of control, AMD claimed.

In addition to the new AMD power plan, the Sunnyvale-based company has also made some major changes to the Ryzen Master overclocking/monitoring utility, which provides users with real-time access to CPU clocks, fan speeds and more. AMD's newly released update, Ryzen Master V1.0.1, brings two major additions on board. The first addition major addition will allow Ryzen Master to report junction temperature rather than tCTL, while the second one is about the installer that does not requires HPET anymore if Ryzen Master already installed.

Finally, the AMD update is slated for release this coming April 11, just in time for the big Windows 10 Creators Update launch. For those people that already bought an AMD Ryzen CPU and want to try the new AMD Balance Plan. They can download the zip file from the AMD website.

In other AMD-related news, Microsoft's upcoming next-generation gaming console Xbox Project Scorpio, which 6 teraflops of computing power and support for the 4K gaming experience, won't feature an AMD Ryzen GPU, as widely expected, instead it will make use of an AMD Polaris-based GPU, Computing reported.

The Redmond-based software company has already confirmed reports that the company's upcoming gaming console Xbox Project Scorpio will have a monstrous 6 teraflops of computing, beating Sony PS4 Pro's 4.2 teraflops. And this week, Microsoft is making a huge announcement that the new gaming console won't feature an AMD Ryzen CPU. Instead, Microsoft's Scorpio will feature eight CPU cores that clocked at 2.3 GHz.

According to reports, Microsoft's decision has something to do with the unlocked Jaguar cores that can be found on the Xbox One console. The upcoming Scorpio are said to pack more power and speed that those inside the Microsoft's original Xbox gaming console. Additionally, the report also reveals that Microsoft's custom GPU engine on the upcoming gaming console has been clocked at 1172MHz, beating both the Xbox One's 853MHz and the PS4 Pro's 911MHz GPUs.|||

AMD Announces Ryzen-Optimized Windows Power Plan, Updated Ryzen Master Tool. In the new AMD Balanced Power Plan, according to reports, both the timers and thresholds for frequency and voltage transitions have been reduced