For those of you who may know me, I’m the kind of guy who runs Linux on his computer full-time (except for the occasional music production or video editing session). This means no Windows vulnerability to worry about, no random update that starts while I’m working… and also no Microsoft Office suite. This is important to the story, so keep it in mind.

It all started with a regular old bright orange USB key that was left laying around on a meeting room table.

The key itself wasn’t identified and did not appear to give away any information about its owner, so I thought I would just do my good deed of the day and try to find some sort of file to identify its owner and give it back to them. So I proceeded to boot up my Linux partition (you can never be too cautious!), then plugged in the key.

At first glance, the key contained seemingly important (and sensitive!) information about the company’s assets and strategic planning. I first wondered why anyone would think it safe to carry such valuable documents on a friggin’ unencrypted USB key (and most importantly, forgetting it in a meeting room). Then, in my attempt to identify the owner of the key, I opened a random folder and started browsing through the files.

A few seconds in, two oddidities made me realize that something wasn’t quite right.

First, all the documents on the key had the  extension, which are files known as "Office Word Documents with Macros", basically meaning that they're Word documents with Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) code baked in. In Excel spreadsheets and Access databases especially, VBA Macros allow for improved functionality and useful sequences of actions that can be used to automate otherwise mundane tasks.

The other thing that ticked me off was the Date modified attribute of the files on the key: they were all set to the exact same date. I mean, yes, the files could all have been copied together and their Date modified fields resetted to the same moment, but still. It just didn’t feel right.

The combination of the way the key was left on the table AND the two oddities I found led me to think about a completely different scenario:

This wasn’t a regular old “normal” USB key. Somebody was trying to fool me, and I needed to delve deeper.|||

TL;DR: Never plug USB keys you find laying around in your computer. They may contain malware that silently deploys as you plug it in, stealing sensitive information and downloading viruses in the…