It’s 11 pm – Do You Know Where Your Data Is? I was recently on a business trip out to Wausau, WI. The purpose was to conduct a training session on web application development for a new batch of associates at our onshore development center. When I picked up my rental car at the airport, I was very happy to discover it had built in Bluetooth integration for my phone. I have this feature on both cars at home. I love the convenience of having the car become an accessory for my mobile device. I immediately bound my phone with the car’s Bluetooth. Then something unusual happened. My phone prompted me with a question: ‘Chevy/Malibu would like a... I was recently on a business trip out to Wausau, WI. The purpose was to conduct a training session on web application development for a new batch of associates at our onshore development center. When I picked up my rental car at the airport, I was very happy to discover it had built in Bluetooth integration for my phone. I have this feature on both cars at home. I love the convenience of having the car become an accessory for my mobile device. I immediately bound my phone with the car’s Bluetooth. Then something unusual happened. My phone prompted me with a question: ‘Chevy/Malibu would like a...

SYS-CON Events announced today that EARP Integration will exhibit at SYS-CON's 20th International Cloud Expo®, which will take place on June 6-8, 2017, at the Javits Center in New York City, NY. EARP Integration is a passionate software house. Since its inception in 2009 the company successfully delivers smart solutions for cities and factories that start their digital transformation. EARP provides bespoke solutions like, for example, advanced enterprise portals, business intelligence systems and mobile applications for international enterprises across different sectors such as Energy and Util... SYS-CON Events announced today that EARP Integration will exhibit at SYS-CON's 20th International Cloud Expo®, which will take place on June 6-8, 2017, at the Javits Center in New York City, NY. EARP Integration is a passionate software house. Since its inception in 2009 the company successfully delivers smart solutions for cities and factories that start their digital transformation. EARP provides bespoke solutions like, for example, advanced enterprise portals, business intelligence systems and mobile applications for international enterprises across different sectors such as Energy and Util...

Is Your Cloud Getting Smarter? ‘Power Panel' Automation is enabling enterprises to design, deploy, and manage more complex, hybrid cloud environments. Yet the people who manage these environments must be trained in and understanding these environments better than ever before. A new era of analytics and cognitive computing is adding intelligence, but also more complexity, to these cloud environments. How smart is your cloud? How smart should it be? In this power panel at 20th Cloud Expo, moderated by Conference Chair Roger Strukhoff, panelists will look at the evolving nature of hybrid cloud, how it affects enterprise IT staffing requir... Automation is enabling enterprises to design, deploy, and manage more complex, hybrid cloud environments. Yet the people who manage these environments must be trained in and understanding these environments better than ever before. A new era of analytics and cognitive computing is adding intelligence, but also more complexity, to these cloud environments. How smart is your cloud? How smart should it be? In this power panel at 20th Cloud Expo, moderated by Conference Chair Roger Strukhoff, panelists will look at the evolving nature of hybrid cloud, how it affects enterprise IT staffing requir...

SYS-CON Events announced today that Outlyer, a monitoring service for DevOps and operations teams, has been named “Bronze Sponsor” of SYS-CON's 20th International Cloud Expo®, which will take place on June 6-8, 2017, at the Javits Center in New York City, NY. Outlyer is a monitoring service for DevOps and Operations teams running Cloud, SaaS, Microservices and IoT deployments. Designed for today's dynamic environments that need beyond cloud-scale monitoring, we make monitoring effortless so you can concentrate on running a better service for your users. SYS-CON Events announced today that Outlyer, a monitoring service for DevOps and operations teams, has been named “Bronze Sponsor” of SYS-CON's 20th International Cloud Expo®, which will take place on June 6-8, 2017, at the Javits Center in New York City, NY. Outlyer is a monitoring service for DevOps and Operations teams running Cloud, SaaS, Microservices and IoT deployments. Designed for today's dynamic environments that need beyond cloud-scale monitoring, we make monitoring effortless so you can concentrate on running a better service for your users.

Apache OpenWhisk on IBM Bluemix provides a powerful and flexible environment for deploying cloud-native applications driven by data, message, and API call events. In his session at 20th Cloud Expo, Daniel Krook, Software Architect, IBM Watson and Cloud Platform, and Distinguished IT Specialist, will discuss why serverless architectures are attractive for many emerging cloud workloads and when you should consider OpenWhisk for your next project. Then get started on Bluemix with three sample applications covering how the OpenWhisk programming model enables you both to implement REST APIs and pr... Apache OpenWhisk on IBM Bluemix provides a powerful and flexible environment for deploying cloud-native applications driven by data, message, and API call events. In his session at 20th Cloud Expo, Daniel Krook, Software Architect, IBM Watson and Cloud Platform, and Distinguished IT Specialist, will discuss why serverless architectures are attractive for many emerging cloud workloads and when you should consider OpenWhisk for your next project. Then get started on Bluemix with three sample applications covering how the OpenWhisk programming model enables you both to implement REST APIs and pr...

Five Things Every CEO Should Know About AI Machine learning, AI, cognitive computing, natural language understanding, image recognition, pattern matching, autonomous devices – these are just a few of 2017’s loosely defined catchall phrases. But in practice, they each refer to a significant field of study that is guaranteed to have an impact on the way people live and how business is done. So here are five things that you, as the leader of an organization that is singularly focused on creating shareholder value (however you define it), need to know Machine learning, AI, cognitive computing, natural language understanding, image recognition, pattern matching, autonomous devices – these are just a few of 2017’s loosely defined catchall phrases. But in practice, they each refer to a significant field of study that is guaranteed to have an impact on the way people live and how business is done. So here are five things that you, as the leader of an organization that is singularly focused on creating shareholder value (however you define it), need to know

Essentials for a Top Performing IT Help Desk The help desk forms the backbone of IT operations for many federal, state and local government agencies. In fact, the cross-functional nature of its operation means the help desk directly impacts productivity and is an essential part of what enables an agency to meet its stakeholder needs. However, owing to increasingly complex IT environments, managers struggle to ensure that their help desks are operating at optimum efficiency. This seven-point guide will help IT managers ensure their help desks deliver exceptional service while maximizing productivity. The help desk forms the backbone of IT operations for many federal, state and local government agencies. In fact, the cross-functional nature of its operation means the help desk directly impacts productivity and is an essential part of what enables an agency to meet its stakeholder needs. However, owing to increasingly complex IT environments, managers struggle to ensure that their help desks are operating at optimum efficiency. This seven-point guide will help IT managers ensure their help desks deliver exceptional service while maximizing productivity.

In this modern world of IT, you've probably got some new colleagues in your life-namely, the cloud and SaaS providers who now hold your infrastructure in their hands. These business relationships-yes, they're technology-based, but cloud and SaaS are business models-will become as important to your IT team and your company as the hardware and software you used to install. Once you've adopted SaaS, or inherited SaaS, it's on you to avoid price hikes, licensing issues and app or provider sprawl. Budgeting for these apps, which means understanding their pricing models, is also likely in IT's ha... In this modern world of IT, you've probably got some new colleagues in your life-namely, the cloud and SaaS providers who now hold your infrastructure in their hands. These business relationships-yes, they're technology-based, but cloud and SaaS are business models-will become as important to your IT team and your company as the hardware and software you used to install. Once you've adopted SaaS, or inherited SaaS, it's on you to avoid price hikes, licensing issues and app or provider sprawl. Budgeting for these apps, which means understanding their pricing models, is also likely in IT's ha...

Moore's Law, which states that processing speeds will double every two years as we cram more and more silicon transistors onto chips, has been faltering since the early 2000s when the law started to run up against fundamental limitations presented by the laws of thermodynamics. While the chip industry, with Intel leading the charge, has found ways to sidestep the limitations up until now, many are now saying that despite the industry's best efforts, the stunning gains in processor speeds will not be seen again by the simple application of Moore's Law. In fact, there is evidence to show that we... Moore's Law, which states that processing speeds will double every two years as we cram more and more silicon transistors onto chips, has been faltering since the early 2000s when the law started to run up against fundamental limitations presented by the laws of thermodynamics. While the chip industry, with Intel leading the charge, has found ways to sidestep the limitations up until now, many are now saying that despite the industry's best efforts, the stunning gains in processor speeds will not be seen again by the simple application of Moore's Law. In fact, there is evidence to show that we...

The car you drive, the food you eat, the clothes you wear and the phone calls you make are all touched by an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system. Whether it’s Oracle, SAP or another supplier, the ERP software and processes manage the back-office functions of every major industry. So if you use ERP at the core of your business processing, it’s important to get it right. Now more than ever. In the application economy, almost every business is becoming a software-driven business. Successful organizations need an ERP platform defined to deliver agility, speed to market and innovation. The car you drive, the food you eat, the clothes you wear and the phone calls you make are all touched by an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system. Whether it’s Oracle, SAP or another supplier, the ERP software and processes manage the back-office functions of every major industry. So if you use ERP at the core of your business processing, it’s important to get it right. Now more than ever. In the application economy, almost every business is becoming a software-driven business. Successful organizations need an ERP platform defined to deliver agility, speed to market and innovation.

Digital technology need not fall exclusively in the category of ‘user-facing.’ In fact, any piece of technology, regardless how old it is or where it falls in the enterprise IT environment, is a ‘digital technology’ if it aligns with the customer-centric goal of digital. From mainframes and middleware to cloud computing and the Internet of Things, all enterprise technology might qualify as digital technology. Digital technology need not fall exclusively in the category of ‘user-facing.’ In fact, any piece of technology, regardless how old it is or where it falls in the enterprise IT environment, is a ‘digital technology’ if it aligns with the customer-centric goal of digital. From mainframes and middleware to cloud computing and the Internet of Things, all enterprise technology might qualify as digital technology.

Google's Cloud team this week discussed multicloud integration with their own platform and AWS using Google Cloud Endpoints and AWS' Lambda. The Cloud Endpoints let you develop open APIs, and you can then call those APIs up from Lambda. This may be the way forward for businesses eager to get their multiple public cloud providers integrated. We're interested in the network dependency that's now been introduced as the two providers connect. We'll see what other integration or multicloud management tools come out as this trend grows. Google's Cloud team this week discussed multicloud integration with their own platform and AWS using Google Cloud Endpoints and AWS' Lambda. The Cloud Endpoints let you develop open APIs, and you can then call those APIs up from Lambda. This may be the way forward for businesses eager to get their multiple public cloud providers integrated. We're interested in the network dependency that's now been introduced as the two providers connect. We'll see what other integration or multicloud management tools come out as this trend grows.

The first step to solving a problem is recognizing that it actually exists. And whether you've realized it or not, cloud services are a problem for your IT department. Even if you feel like you have a solid grasp of cloud technology and the nuances of making a cloud purchase, business leaders don't share the same confidence. Nearly 80% feel that IT lacks the skills necessary to help with cloud purchases-and they're looking to cloud brokers for help instead. It's time to admit we have a cloud services problem and start adapting to modern business technology. Part of that is understanding whic... The first step to solving a problem is recognizing that it actually exists. And whether you've realized it or not, cloud services are a problem for your IT department. Even if you feel like you have a solid grasp of cloud technology and the nuances of making a cloud purchase, business leaders don't share the same confidence. Nearly 80% feel that IT lacks the skills necessary to help with cloud purchases-and they're looking to cloud brokers for help instead. It's time to admit we have a cloud services problem and start adapting to modern business technology. Part of that is understanding whic...

According to a recent Gartner study, by 2020, it will be unlikelythat any enterprise will have a “no cloud” policy, and hybrid will be the most common use of the cloud. While the benefits of leveraging public cloud infrastructures are well understood, the desire to keep critical workloads and data on-premise in the private data center still remains. For enterprises, the hybrid cloud provides a best of both worlds solution. However, the leading factor that determines the preference to the hybrid cloud, among other things, is “security.” Moreover, as the growth of the public cloud infrastructure... According to a recent Gartner study, by 2020, it will be unlikelythat any enterprise will have a “no cloud” policy, and hybrid will be the most common use of the cloud. While the benefits of leveraging public cloud infrastructures are well understood, the desire to keep critical workloads and data on-premise in the private data center still remains. For enterprises, the hybrid cloud provides a best of both worlds solution. However, the leading factor that determines the preference to the hybrid cloud, among other things, is “security.” Moreover, as the growth of the public cloud infrastructure...|||

Cloud Computing