Analyze what content performs best for any topic or competitor with BuzzSumo BuzzSumo provides social insights for content marketing and SEO campaigns. Helps you discover what people are sharing the most in your niche and analyze what topics, headlines and content formats work. Get content alerts whenever your brand or a topic is mentioned. Find interesting and trending content to curate and discover guest post and interview opportunities. Analyze your competitors top content and also help you to find the key influencers for any topic or site to promote your content. Kevin William David interviewed Steve Rayson, Director of BuzzSumo to learn more.

Can you tell us about what you are working on ? What is BuzzSumo? Steve: BuzzSumo is a tool to help content marketers create better content through research, amplification and monitoring. Research to understand what content resonates with an audience including the most shared content, trending content today, what is working on Facebook, competitor top content and the content formats & headlines gaining most traction. Understanding who is amplifying content through sharing and linking. Identifying the influencers and top authors for any topic, seeing all the people that share your content or competitors content and building outreach lists. Sophisticated monitoring including alerts (real time and daily digests) when new content on a topic is published, when your brand is mentioned, when competitors publish new content, when someone links to your site or competitor sites. Why are you building this? What problem are you trying to solve? Steve: There is a huge amount of content being published each day, literally tens of millions of posts. We want to help people produce content that works, that resonates with their audience and which gets amplified. It is no longer good enough to publish great content and expect people to find it. Every piece of content needs an amplification strategy. How is BuzzSumo different from what’s already exists in the market? Steve: Our aim from the outset was to build a database of the most shared content published on the internet. We capture how many shares it received by network, who shared it, who amplifies content in that industry, who linked to it, content type, content length etc. The aim is to provide insights for any topic or domain and understand the type of content that will perform the best. We provide our users with tools to analyse the data and to draw out the insights they need. They can track topics or competitors. If you are producing content the worst thing is to spend time producing content that doesn’t resonate, doesn’t get shared and doesn’t convert. We believe we have a unique database of content. There are few competitor products but generally their search technology is less sophisticated. For example, they only return articles with elearning in the title for a search on elearning, whereas we return content about elearning even if the word is not in the title or the article. We provide details on today’s trending content, including content published in the last hour that is already trending. We also provide details on the most interacted with content on Facebook.

Who uses BuzzSumo? Can you tell us a bit about the different customer segments using BuzzSumo? What types of roles do your customers have at their companies (Sales, Marketing, Devops, etc.)? Large publishers such as BuzzFeed, Daily Telegraph, News International etc. How are your customers using BuzzSumo? Could you share a few different use cases? Steve: Customers use the app to: See what content is resonating To understand how content is being amplified through sharing and links To see top influencers for any topic To monitor new links and identify link opportunities To monitor mentions of their brand or topic within any article published on the web To build outreach lists and see what they are publishing each day This is an example of questions gaining interaction about Halloween on facebook. Here is a section of a content analysis report for a domain. Have there been unique use cases for BuzzSumo that you hadn’t thought of or expected? Steve: There have been many, for example, customers identifying mentions of their brand which do not contain links and then seeking a link. We have built features to make this easier e.g. so you can see the domain authority of a site mentioning you and decide if you want to pursue a link. Who are some early/key customers? Steve: Most of our larger customers came on board very quickly and are still with us such as BuzzFeed and Ogilvy. You can find more of our customers on our Siftery page. Were there any early ‘growth hacks’ or tactics that have contributed to your current success? Steve: The key to growth I think has been getting the product fit right and having an app which is easy to use and delivers instant value. I think influencer marketing has helped as we are bootstrapped and have no major investors or money for advertising campaigns. I also think our freemium product has helped spread the word and build goodwill. We have over 300,000 freemium users. What were some of the biggest challenges while building the product early on and how did you solve them? Steve: The biggest challenges are around the sheer scale of the data we are collecting. Every day we add millions of new articles to the database. What have been some of the most interesting integrations you’ve added? Are there any that have been particularly impactful for you? Steve: We don’t really have any complex integrations as such. We do use third party data such as from Moz and Majestic. We also have simple integrations that allow people to share content from within BuzzSumo such as Buffer and Twitter. We do have an API and there are about 20 or so products that have been built using our data. What are the top products that you depend on to run the company & how do you use them? Steve: The main tools we use are: Intercom — We use this for all our customer interaction and support. It has become an essential part of our customer support process. It is easy to allocate conversations and track all activity with a client. Slack — we use Slack for internal communication as we are a remote team spread across three different countries and six cities. It is similar to Intercom in that it is easy to use and chat with our colleagues in different locations. Stripe — We use Stripe for payment processing. It works well though the fees as these mount up over time as you grow and we may review this in the future. Xero — We use Xero for our accounting. It works well for smaller businesses but again this is is something we may review as we grow and manage more multi-currency accounts. Buffer & Agorapulse — We use these for social media management and scheduling. It is hard to stay on top of social media as it is relentless. The Agorapulse inbox is a great app to help make sure you have dealt with everything. Gotowebinar — Not the cheapest webinar software but we use this for our webinars, we love doing webinars as they allow us to gain significant reach. GoToWebinar has features we like such as registrations, management of reminders and feedback. Google apps — We use Google apps for all our documents. Interestingly we write less these days but draft blog posts and ideas are shared here. Satismeter — We use this for tracking customer feedback. It is very simple to use and provides you with a regular pulse check of how you are doing.|||

BuzzSumo provides social insights for content marketing and SEO campaigns. Helps you discover what people are sharing the most in your niche and analyze what topics, headlines and content formats…