Uber has said from the beginning that Google's claims of intellectual-property theft involving self-driving-car technology are "meritless."

On Friday, Uber finally told its side of the story and laid out its argument on why it believes the lawsuit brought by Waymo, a Google spinout from the Alphabet-owned company, is a "misfire."

Uber is trying to stop a judge from halting the development of its self-driving-car program by asserting:

Waymo sued Uber in February, claiming that Levandowski had stolen vital lidar technology shortly before starting his own self-driving-vehicle company (which Uber later acquired).

The trade-secrets case is shaping up to be one of the most significant and closely watched battles in Silicon Valley in years, pitting two of the world's most powerful companies, and former partners, against each other.

Waymo has asked the judge to issue a preliminary injunction to stop Uber from using any technology that may have been built on its proprietary information.

"Waymo's injunction motion is a misfire: There is no evidence that any of the 14,000 files in question ever touched Uber's servers, and Waymo's assertion that our multi-lens lidar is the same as their single-lens lidar is clearly false," Uber's associate general counsel Angela Padilla said in a statement. "If Waymo genuinely thought that Uber was using its secrets, it would not have waited more than five months to seek an injunction. Waymo doesn't meet the high bar for an injunction, which would stifle our independent innovation — probably Waymo's goal in the first place."

The 14,000 files that Waymo says Levandowski downloaded onto a thumb drive and then wiped clean from a computer remain a sticking point in the case.

"To be sure, Uber finds itself in a complicated situation: it is unambiguously developing its own technology independent of Waymo, but its employee Mr. Levandowski is accused of downloading 14,000 files from Waymo before he joined Uber," Uber's lawyers write in their argument. "Uber is blocked at this stage from providing an explanation against that accusation because Mr. Levandowski has asserted his Fifth Amendment constitutional rights."

In its arguments, Uber has repeated that it can't find evidence of any of those files ever making it to Uber, based on searching more than 100 terabytes of data. Uber did allow that it found two files on the personal, non-Uber-owned device of a different employee named in the complaint, but they weren't among the ones Waymo says Levandowski downloaded and were used only during the person's time at Waymo.

Waymo has pushed back against the assertion that the 14,000 files never made it to Uber, however, since Uber hasn't been able to search Levandowski's devices. Levandowski has invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination, and the court is weighing whether to allow it.

"Uber's assertion that they've never touched the 14,000 stolen files is disingenuous at best, given their refusal to look in the most obvious place: the computers and devices owned by the head of their self-driving program," a Waymo representative said. "We're asking the court to step in based on clear evidence that Uber is using, or plans to use, our trade secrets to develop their lidar technology, as seen in both circuit board blueprints and filings in the state of Nevada."

While Waymo claims there is "clear evidence" that Uber is using or plans to use its trade secrets, Uber still believes that Waymo's understanding of its technology is fatally flawed.

At the heart of the argument is a technology called lidar, a laser-based system similar to radar that allows cars to "see" the world around them.

Waymo says Uber is copying its designs and violating its patents based on blueprints it saw thanks to a wrongly sent email and a public-records request in Nevada. Uber says Waymo leaped to certain assumptions based on the two documents that it was building something similar, which the ride-hailing giant said wasn't true.

"Waymo could not be more wrong, and Uber's design could not be more different," Uber said.

Uber says its development of its in-house lidar technology began way before its acquisition of Otto, the company Levandowski and a stable of former Waymo employees founded.

Uber had hired many researchers from Carnegie Mellon University in 2015, when it launched its Advanced Technologies Center, who began working on developing Uber's lidar systems. As part of their research, Uber began developing a system that had four lenses, not the single-lens system that Waymo uses. The project had the codename "Fuji" after Mount Fuji in Japan.

Waymo has said the blueprint in the email it received from its supplier was the proof it needed that Uber was using its proprietary technology.

"This email cannot be the smoking gun Waymo claims it is, because the assumptions Waymo draws from it are false," Uber argues. "For instance, Waymo repeatedly argues that the architecture of the board necessitates a single-lens design, which Uber does not use."

Even though it has been developing an in-house system, Uber is still using only commercially available systems purchased from Velodyne for its cars on the road, the company says.

While Uber is saying Waymo's arguments that it's using the technology are meritless, it acknowledges that the injunction it faces does present a large threat to its business.

So far, US District Judge William Alsup has said Uber won't be able to stop the injunction if all Uber can say is that it can't find the files.

"If all you can show is that you can't find them in your files, there's going to be a preliminary injunction of some sort," Alsup said during a hearing on Wednesday. "It can't be helped. You have got to do more than what you are telling me."

Uber says any injunction could harm its ability to be a "viable" business and even threaten public safety since the company believes self-driving cars are a way to prevent accidents and save lives.

"To hinder Uber's continued progress in its independent development of an in-house lidar that is fundamentally different than Waymo's, when Uber has not used any of Waymo's trade secrets, would impede Uber's efforts to remain a viable business, stifle the talent and ingenuity that are the primary drivers of this emerging industry, and risk delaying the implementation of technology that could prevent car accidents," Uber said. "Ultimately, that would be harmful to the public."

Get the latest Google stock price here.|||

Uber is fighting back against Google's claim that it copied a key component for self-driving cars.