House Republicans on Friday sent a letter to the Federal Communications Commission asking the agency to police internet service providers on privacy issues just days after President Trump signed a bill repealing a set of FCC privacy rules.

The letter, sent to FCC Chairman Ajit Pai and signed by 50 House Republicans, asks Pai to ensure that the FCC can handle privacy issues until it dismantles the net neutrality rules that eliminated the Federal Trade Commission’s (FTC) authority over internet privacy.

“We hope that you will move quickly to ensure that all entities under your jurisdiction are aware of where privacy fits into the FCC’s priorities and how it plans to protect consumer privacy,” the letter reads.

This week, Pai reportedly told a group of broadband industry lobbyists that he intends to move against 2015 net neutrality rules, which require internet service providers to treat all web traffic equally. The rules also reclassified broadband providers as a telecommunications industry, which removed those companies from the FTC’s jurisdiction and placed them under the FCC’s.

That led to the FCC implementing privacy rules in October that would have required service providers to get customers’ permission before using or sharing their data for advertising purposes.

On Monday, Trump signed a bill eliminating those rules. The bill was passed through the House and Senate without any Democratic support, drawing widespread condemnation from privacy and consumer advocates.

Two recent polls The Huffington Post and Priorities USA, a Democratic super PAC, showed that the bill to repeal the rules was opposed by the vast majority of Americans.

Republicans defended their opposition to the rules, saying that they unfairly targeted internet service providers and did not cover web companies like Facebook and Google, which are under the FTC’s jurisdiction.

“The FTC’s time-tested approach to privacy has protected Americans’ since the dawn of the Internet,” the House members wrote in their letter on Friday. “An FCC approach that mirrors the FTC will continue to protect consumers in this tumultuous time.”|||

