According to the IRS, the total number of tax returns received by the agency as of March 31 is down by 4.1% compared to previous year.

One of the possible reasons is refund delays introduced by the Protecting Americans From Tax Hikes Act of 2015 (PATH). While some news reports have speculated that the slack is caused by the misguided expectations of a possible tax relief in the aftermath of the 2017 presidential election, the PATH Act appears to be the most credible explanation for the drop in filings. The Act mandates the IRS to put a hold on refunds claiming the Earned Income Tax Credit or the Additional Child Tax Credit until mid-February. It removes incentives for the early filers to submit the returns as soon as possible. To its credit the PATH act attempts to fight a major loophole that allowed identity fraudsters to submit 5 million fake returns and steal $30 billion from tax payers in 2013 of which only $24 billion was recovered.

However, the PATH Act alone cannot explain the drop in filings in the second half of the season, so another frequently cited reason is the shift in the Tax Day this year to April 18th giving the U.S. tax payers an extra weekend to prepare their taxes.

Such nation-wide calendar changes, even by a few days, are worth a closer look since they affect not just the trivial events such as proverbial lines at USPS offices but have the potential to change travel patterns and even suppress retail traffic around the tax weekend. They certainly make year-on-year comparisons more tricky.

To normalize the year-on-year data reported by IRS we will load the data into Axibase Time Series Database and apply the and functions to calculate the yearly change in both the absolute and percentage terms under three different behavioral scenarios.

Note that the IRS reports reference two dates used for year-on-year comparison, for example:

These dates are Fridays when the metrics were collected and as such they ignore day-of-week and Tax Day changes between the annual periods. In this particular example, 2017-Mar-31 is the 90th day in year whereas 2016-Apr-01 is the 92nd day in year. 2017-Mar-31 is 18 days away from the Tax Day, whereas 2016-Apr-01 is 17 days from the Tax Day. By removing these calendar discrepancies we should be able to get a clearer picture.

Lets build the year-on-year comparisons for the following three scenarios:

In this query example, the function provides a convenient syntax to access columns in the previous row within the current result set.

The clause is used to fill the missing data points and make the series regular.

The function can be conveniently used to perform date- and calendar-based filtering.

By normalizing the raw data collected by IRS we're observing the following percentage changes for the 2017/16 filing season.

These estimates are measurably smaller than 4.1% drop displayed in the latest IRS report. The American taxpayers appear to be not procrastinating - they are reacting to legislative changes in a rational way.

We noticed however that the trends are not uniform across E-filing channels.

Given that a higher percentage (60+%) of early returns is submitted via tax preparers, the PATH Act appears to have had a disproportionate impact on tax professionals.

You can take a closer look at the IRS filing statistics by installing a local Axibase Time Series Database instance and loading the data for interactive analysis with SQL and charts.

The list of available series:

You can also use Chartlab to create, save, and share custom visualizations based on hosted data.|||

atsd-use-cases - Axibase Time Series Database: Usage Examples and Research Articles