In this 2nd part of our last Q&A episode, I answer remaining 5 questions all related to buying gas stations and how to understand the numbers and if the stores are really making money or losing money. I also answer questions about how to grow your business with financing and how to take on a new partnership. I think you may find this episode helpful if you are in the market to buy a business. Here I analyze some sales numbers and see which ones are making money and which ones are not. Stay tuned.

Welcome to Gas station business 101 podcast, I am Shabbir Hossain, and this is episode 60. This is the show where we discuss everything under the sun about gas station and convenience store business, how to buy these businesses, how to operate them and how to grow them to be a million dollar success.

Hope this email finds you and your family well.

I personally want to thank you for writing a book about Gas Station Business. You have explained very well process of how to buy and what to keep in mind before purchasing store.

I am in Gas Station with C-Store business since The year 2005. I have been thru many challenges similar to yours which you have explained in your book. I am currently looking for something to understand how to get finance to expand like big national corporations? Can you explore few points of financial strategies in order to expand in gas station business?

Your help will be highly appreciated.

I will be running a gas station from April 1st. Let me give you the picture; the store owner still has 3.4 million volume of gas volume under contract. He splits his profit, expenses, credit card fees, and maintenance fees with a small oil company.

If I take his contract, I have to split the fuel profit 50/50, but I get 3 cents cheaper than other gas store. If I don’t take his contract, I have to pay 3 cents more than his contract price. Which deal will generate more profit for me? Being a 1st-time business runner, I would appreciate your suggestions.

Thanks for the great article, it helps a lot. One question, though: when a seller say his store sales are 37k, does that figure normally including lotto and scratch off sales?

I am asking because one of the stores I looked at treated lotto, scratch off tickets and prepaid phone cards separate, so inside sales were more than what they were saying.

Thanks and keep it up

Thanks for the great info. I had limited fund like around 100k, and most money making gas stations as I saw on websites are expensive. Do you think it is a good idea to go in partnership with a stranger? I have posted on cl for partnership and got responses, but I am curious about it.

Answer: Check out episode #21 where I spoke in details about how to create effective partnerships.

Andres sent me this question, he is a long time listener and contributor of this show, he asked

Hi Shabbir I hope you are fine. Do you have a good template to control cigarettes in your stores? I would imagine your employee has to count the cigarette boxes when he starts the shift and also at shift end to reconcile the daily sales, right? If not, how do you do it?

Tune in and listen to this episode for all the answers.

If you have any question, feel free to send me an email at shabbir@gasstationbusiness101.com, or you can post it on my Facebook group page by going to shabbirhossain.net

Don’t forget to sign up for my very important newsletter; you can simply sign up for it by going to http://gasstationbusiness101.com/subscribe

In the meantime, if you haven’t subscribed to this podcast, feel free to do so, and if you like this show, I would love to see a review from you on iTunes or where ever you download this episode from.

Here is a link to my podcast page on iTunes, if you follow this link you can give me a review right on that page. Trust me it will make my day and won’t cost you anything other than maybe 30 seconds of your time.

Thank you once again for joining me in this episode; I will see you in the next one.|||

