MENLO PARK, Calif., April 7, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Accel-KKR, a technology-focused private equity firm, today announced that it has completed its sale of its portfolio company Abila to Community Brands.  Accel-KKR acquired Abila in 2013 when the business, which provides software and services to associations, nonprofit organizations and governmental entities, was spun-off from UK-based The Sage Group plc.

Following its initial investment in 2013, Accel-KKR rebranded the company, augmented the management team, and invested to build the infrastructure to position the company for significant organic growth and strategic consolidation.  During the past four years, Abila grew its revenues threefold, successfully integrated three acquisitions to expand its product offerings in the non-profit and association sector, and transformed its revenue base to a primarily subscription-based (SaaS) model.

Dean Jacobson, Managing Director of Accel-KKR, said, "We are extremely proud of the leadership position Abila established under our ownership.  We believed that with the right team, the right products and the right delivery model this business could grow faster and make a bigger impact for its customers. That vision was achieved. We are excited by the possibilities that Abila will have as part of Community Brands."

"Accel-KKR was a true partner to Abila in every phase of our growth.  The team provided guidance and support in a myriad of ways – from the initial carve-out to helping us build a world-class management team and beyond.  We could not have successfully tripled the size of the company, creating opportunity for our employees as well as our customers without Accel-KKR," said Craig Charlton, Abila CEO.

Tom Barnds, Managing Director of Accel-KKR and Chairman of Abila, said, "Our experience with Abila illustrates one key tenet of our approach to investing -- we are very comfortable with complex deal dynamics.  Having completed more than 20 divisional acquisitions in our history, we have the capabilities, patience and expertise to complete complex transactions and then invest to help our companies accelerate their growth through both organic and inorganic means post-acquisition."

Accel-KKR will maintain a small equity ownership position in Community Brands going forward.

About Accel-KKR

Accel-KKR is a technology-focused investment firm with over $4.0 billion in capital commitments. The firm focuses on software and IT-enabled businesses well-positioned for topline and bottom-line growth. At the core of Accel-KKR's investment strategy is a commitment to developing strong partnerships with the management teams of its portfolio companies and a focus on building value through significant resources available through the Accel-KKR network. Accel-KKR focuses on middle-market companies and provides a broad range of capital solutions including buyout capital, minority-growth investments, and credit alternatives.  Accel-KKR also invests across a wide range of transaction types including private company recapitalizations, divisional carve-outs and going-private transactions. Accel-KKR is headquartered in Menlo Park with additional offices in Atlanta and London.  For more information, please visit: www.accel-kkr.com.

About Abila

Abila is the leading provider of software and services to associations and nonprofit organizations that help them improve decision-making, execute with greater precision, increase engagement, and generate more revenue. With Abila solutions association and nonprofit professionals can use data and personal insight to make better financial and strategic decisions, enhance member and donor engagement and value, operate more efficiently and effectively, and increase revenue to better activate their mission. Abila combines decades of industry insight with technology know-how to serve nearly 8,000 customers across North America. For more information, please visit www.abila.com.

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/accel-kkr-completes-sale-of-abila-to-community-brands-300436577.html|||

MENLO PARK, Calif., April 7, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Accel-KKR, a technology-focused private equity firm, today announced that it has completed its sale of its portfolio company Abila to Community Brands.  Accel-KKR acquired Abila in 2013 when the business, which provides software and services to associations