The Department of Labor is chasing Google over claims that there is significant gender pay discrimination within the company. At the moment it's more about access to more information than anything else. But what this is really about is the definition of gender discrimination in pay. That there is a gender pay gap in the United States is obvious--the average woman is paid less than the average man. We can see this as an inequality if we wish to do so, it's certainly unequal. Coming back the other way when we look at the jobs people do, in which sectors, with what levels of training and education, hours worked, the impacts of having and caring for children and so on we end up thinking that there's not in fact a gender pay gap unless it's a very small residual.

Which way you want to think about it is really up to you. I'll not force you down one route or the other, although my own reading of this is that it's people doing things in different ways, different attitudes to life even, rather than direct discrimination by employers any more. But this is really what this argument between the DoL and Google is all about, what actually is the definition of a gender pay gap? Is it if men and women within the company are getting different sized paychecks? That's more to the DoL end of the argument there. Or is it that if people are doing the same job, at the same level, within the same sort of sector of the company, then they're getting equal pay? Which is rather Google's claim. Quite obviously if we've different definitions of what is a pay gap then it's possible for both claims to be true at the same time. Which is about where we are now, at least in the claims being made.

Google has discriminated against its female employees, according to the US Department of Labor (DoL), which said it had evidence of “systemic compensation disparities”. As part of an ongoing DoL investigation, the government has collected information that suggests the internet search giant is violating federal employment laws with its salaries for women, agency officials said. “We found systemic compensation disparities against women pretty much across the entire workforce,” Janette Wipper, a DoL regional director, testified in court in San Francisco on Friday.

Yes, but which type of disparities?

Google is actually rather famed for its own analysis of its own pay practices:

They do seem to be looking at the data and then trying to do something about it at least. So much so that they even offer advice to other companies on how to analyse and then perhaps deal with a gender pay disparity:

And this is where the detail is important:

We have laws about paying people who do the same job different amounts because of their gender. Similarly we don't allow people doing the same job to be differentiated against (or in favour of) according to the melanin content of their skin, their national origin nor whichever expressed gender they prefer to chat up on date night. But all of that is about the same job.

When we move the goalposts a bit and start talking about similar jobs then, well, then it's all different, isn't it? Is an HR manager doing the same job as a programming manager? No, obviously not--but are they doing a similar job? How about a programming manager in some difficult and recondite skill that must be mastered before one can become a manager, as opposed to a programming manager overlooking a Javascript team? Is that the same or similar job? All of which is really where this disagreement is coming from.

Google is using a strict definition of "same job" to find no gender pay gap. The Department of Labor is using a looser definition of "similar job" to find that there is one. Who you think is right here is entirely up to you but that's where the disagreement is.|||

Google is using a strict definition of "same job" to find no gender pay gap. The Department of Labor is using a looser definition of "similar job" to find that there is one. Who you think is right here is entirely up to you but that's where the disagreement is.