Based on the debut, young adult novel by Joy Nicholson, The Tribes of Palos Verdes, delves into the emotional turmoil of a family after moving to an affluent suburb town near Los Angeles. The indie drama mainly centers on the teenage daughter (played by Maika Monroe), who finds escapism through surfing.



In a recent interview with BCNF, the lovely Natalie keeps it short and sweet about her character role in her new movie, her secret to staying in shape, and what she thinks makes a woman sexy.   

 



Bridget Campos News Features: What is your secret to staying in shape?



 

Natalie Loren Kwatinetz: I eat pretty healthy, but of course I have my cheat days. I'm into hiking and wushu martial arts. So I eat what I want, but I exercise. 

 



BCNF: What is considered a guilty pleasure for you?



 

Natalie Loren Kwatinetz: I would say chocolate and ice cream. They are my favorite.

 



BCNF: I see a lot of models get into DJ work when they come to LA, why is that?   

 



Natalie Loren Kwatinetz: I have no idea. Maybe because it's a hot thing to do right now. A lot of girls have gotten into it and I think it is great because it used to be a man's thing.  



 

BCNF: And through your DJ'ing you got to be in a couple 30 Seconds To Mars' videos. Do you plan on being in any more music videos?    



 

Natalie Loren Kwatinetz: Not that I know of, but it would be a cool thing to do.



 



BCNF: Tell us about your new movie.    



 

Natalie Loren Kwatinetz: It's a coming-of-age story that has a very emotional journey. I play Gina, who is one of the ladies from the tennis club.  



 

BCNF: I heard Jennifer Garner is in this film. What was it like to work with her?



 

Natalie Loren Kwatinetz: I did a few scenes with Jennifer and that was awesome. I really like her character in the movie.



 

BCNF: Since you were raised in Liverpool, England you must be a Beatles fan. Are you?     



 

Natalie Loren Kwatinetz: Yes, I am a Beatles fan. I can't say what my favorite songs are in particular, but maybe one of John Lennon's songs. 

 



BCNF: Who is your favorite photographer that you have worked with?

 



Natalie Loren Kwatinetz: One of my favorite shoots that I did was with renowned British photographer Willy Camden for the Elizabeth Arden fragrance ad campaign in New York. I loved that shoot.  



 

BCNF: Being featured in Maxim and Playboy magazine, what's your definition of what makes a woman sexy?

 



Natalie Loren Kwatinetz: I think inner confidence and being strong. I feel being comfortable in your own skin is important and just owning your own body. 

 



BCNF: What qualities do you think make a guy irresistible?

 



Natalie Loren Kwatinetz: I love a guy who is smart and can make me laugh.



 

'The Tribes of Palos Verdes' to set to be released later this year and also stars Elisabeth Röhm, Alicia Silverstone, and Justin Kirk

|||

When the gorgeous Natalie Loren Kwatinetz isn't breaking hearts as a swimsuit model, she's traveling the hottest clubs around the world bringing down the house as a DJ. But in her most recent movie project, 'The Tribes of Palos Verdes', this Londoner is proving that she has some acting chops and is more then just another exotic beauty trying to make it in Hollywood