The Mac Pro isn’t the only device Apple is rethinking for professional users.

According to a new report, the company is also considering significant changes to the MacBook Pro and iPad Pro, one of which could see the fancy new Touch Bar biting the dust.

Apple clearly woke up and realized it isn’t serving pro users like it used to. Its recent upgrades to “pro” machines favored form over function, with a significant clampdown on flexibility due to popular ports disappearing and upgrade options decreasing.

A report from OS News, citing “sources who know their stuff,” claims Apple first started to see the light shortly after showing off the new MacBook Pro with Touch Bar.

Although early sales for the machine proved incredibly strong, the response from pro users unhappy with Cupertino’s decisions supposedly disappointed Apple. The new model also triggered a surprising effect on sales of refurbished MacBook Pros.

Demand for older notebooks reportedly went “through the roof” after Apple made its latest MacBook Pro lineup official, then climbed even higher when the first batch of reviews rolled out.

Combined with problems surrounding the LG UltraFine 5K Display that Apple pushed so vehemently during its MacBook Pro press event, the company decided it was time to “double down on professional users.” And a modular Mac Pro isn’t the only thing in its pipeline.

Apple confirms that a more powerful iMac is also part of its plans, while OS News adds that the company is considering another version of the 15-inch MacBook Pro that will ditch the Touch Bar, presumably in favor of other features that would make it more practical in a pro setting.

In addition, Apple supposedly is developing a new feature for iPad Pro that would allow it to function like a Cintiq drawing tablet when hooked up to a Mac.

Sadly, there’s no word on when any of this stuff might materialize. Apple says the new Mac Pro won’t be ready this year, and sources say it’s unlikely it will be ready next year, either. It’s thought Apple only started development of the machine “a few weeks ago.”

It’s difficult to determine whether there’s any truth behind these claims. They have been reinforced by notable iOS developer Marco Arment, who tweeted to say “this matches up with what I’ve heard as well,” but they’re yet to be backed by bigger news sources.|||

Apple is also considering significant changes to the MacBook Pro and iPad Pro, one of which could see the fancy new Touch Bar biting the dust.