All of this is hearsay and should be treated as such…believe only if you want…

As a second generation Guitarist, there were a couple dozen stories and tales my Dad told me to warn me away from the Music Industry. Mostly he was concerned that when he played in bands in the late 1960s he could make decent money, but for me, he was way ahead. Over and over his insistence was to enjoy Music and Guitar for the love of the Art.

Over the years I’ve participated in Battle of the Bands live contests, online submission things, even some YouTube challenges. Why? I know a lot of people are afraid of tests, of the blank page after a question, but when one comes around I feel suits my time and effort…Why not?

Back in the 1960s, having the right equipment and knowing how to set it up meant the difference between sounding like garbage or good enough to make people want to start dancing. That was the point of bands when my Dad was in it full-steam: Playing tunes people want to hear.

The local Pop Radio Station put on a Battle of the Bands one year and my Dad’s band thought they really had it together. These were guys who treated rehearsal like work, knowing live was a make or break challenge. Not only remember all the old hits, but add in new ones weekly as dictated by the charts. On stage, they would shine and get the floor going.

When the Battle of the Bands show came around and the day was done, it became clear that the Pop Radio Station had rigged the contest. Their favored band of halfway decent good looking dudes— the one Payola to the gills set up — managed to beat at least three professional working bands.

Back then, Dad was part of a local Musician’s Union. They had a meeting space / shared rehearsal venue and that Battle of the Bands became a hot topic of conversation over beers.

Eventually the Musicians decided to get revenge for the next year. Somewhat a secret, several of the top working bands all sent a member to form what we now know as a SUPER GROUP.

For a year, the Musician’s Union plotted and planned. They had a sense of humor and decided on a name. “The Ultimate Hair.”

The whole thing was kind of an open secret among the Musicians Union by the time the next contest came around. With a band of about a dozen, moving all the equipment and setting things up while the Pop Radio Station lackeys watched took a massive effort. Showtime!

Dressed in various costumes from the Sgt. Peppers album cover, nailing every single intro, harmony, and blasting away the Judges, there was no way they could lose in front of the audience compared to the rigged winner.

The Ultimate Hair won, and accepted the accolades and first prize, a brand new Fender Bassman amp — a head unit and a 4x10 cabinet. The victory felt hard won. The band members and team celebrated.

Within a week, somebody broke into the Musicians Union space and went directly to the room for my Dad’s band. They saw all the instruments and equipment, and stole just one thing: The Fender Bassman amp & cab.

The way Dad told me the story, the Moral was about having grudges and seeking revenge and even if you win, well, it can be short lived.|||

As a second generation Guitarist, there were a couple dozen stories and tales my Dad told me to warn me away from the Music Industry. Mostly he was concerned that when he played in bands in the late…