To the limits of my understanding, I do not believe in policies that try to boost economy by tweaking supply side factors. Policies are often implemented to aid suppliers of goods and services like businesses.

The economic slowdown that we are seeing today is not due to a lack of productive labour by individuals or businesses. It is due to a lack of consumer demand relative to the quantity of goods and services that can be created by the sum of suppliers in market. In other words humans as a civilisation, has over the past 1 or 2 centuries, become so efficient at production that the gains from the efficiency of their production have far outweighed the increase in the breadth and depth of their demands.

There is no one single factor that accounts for this super-efficiency. The first two factors that come to mind will be globalisation and digitalisation. There is never before a period in human history where the world is as homogeneous as now. Homogeneous meaning on a global scale we have much more similar beliefs and preferences, likes and dislikes than ever before in history. This allows production at a much larger scale than before because the same exact product can now sell to everyone, which leads to unprecedented economies of scale.

Also in the last century, the different building blocks required for a digital economy had gradually being built up and allowed to mature. Now, here’s the deal — digital technologies not only allow humans to store their intentions and thoughts, it also allows expressions and acting out of human intents in the physical world, by machines. This brings unprecedented efficiency into the way we produce some types of goods or services. If there are 2 ways to the same end, the digital way will usually be the more efficient and cheaper option as it consumes lesser physical land and has a higher production mileage per unit of human labour.

Think about how much income your family earns a month. Think about how much expenses your family spends a month. In all probability, you are spending lesser than the amount you earn. That is a good thing of course, we do not need to buy things that we don’t need, in order to impress people we don’t like (quote from Fight Club). However, imagine what if the average family in the world spends lesser dollars than the amount of dollars they earn? This means the dollar amount going into purchasing of goods and services is lesser than the actual salaries being paid out. It is not hard to see that after a few cycles, the economy will so-call collapse. Lesser spending => lesser sales => lesser jobs and salaries => cycle repeats with GDP crashing. Instinctively, the free money-printing since 1971 is probably helping to hold all things together, but I can’t prove or disprove it.

Why would anyone spend lesser than what he earns? Maybe an easier way is to rephrase the question to why would anyone spend all or more than what he earns? I would spend all or more than what I earn if 1. I know the world is ending tomorrow, or 2. I am dead sure that the future is going to be brighter than today. It is fair to imagine that for many people today, we cannot be 100% certain that tomorrow is going to be brighter than today. Well, for a large part of human history, people are actually pessimistic about the future. Because in general, things just got worse. Then we had the various industrial revolutions which allowed us to enjoy a period of strong economic expansion and along with it unquestioning optimism. For a while, people just know that they are going to earn more tomorrow and it is really ok to splurge anyway since everyone else is doing so.

In summary, rather than channelling resources to aid supply side factors, I believe the money and resources can have better mileage by tackling the demand side of the equation — why consumers are not willing to spend. It is the tougher nut to crack due to so many contributing factors and some uncomfortable truths will enter the spotlight with enough digging, but at least it is better than resources being channelled into areas which have high visibility but even on the theoretical level, is probably not going to help the economy. There is no use upgrading individual workers or giving grants to businesses, in the name of boosting productivity when the consumers are just not there. Suppliers need a market to live, instead of asking why is the market weak and trying to build a market, helping suppliers to live in a weak market will only make suppliers dependent without constructive transformation happening on the fundamental level.

As for what can be done? I don’t know. I’ve just started thinking about these things and it is obvious to me at this point of my consciousness that helping the supply side is not tackling the issue at the roots. Supply-side economics might have worked well at some point in history, but somewhere along the way the tides had tipped. Also, economic growth was never an issue as deeply relevant to humans as the world is today. Somewhere along the way, we had somehow lost the ability to live on our own and be able to take our basic needs like food and shelter freely from the world. In this context, economic depression is bad news for everyone, because large number of families are really going to starve when something breaks in the large-scale complex networks of modern human cooperation.|||

To the limits of my understanding, I do not believe in policies that try to boost economy by tweaking supply side factors. Policies are often implemented to aid suppliers of goods and services like…