The Mantra is simple – make control of LED fixtures easy and intuitive, while still allowing control of moving lights and conventionals.

 

 Mantra Lite, and the Mantra Expansion Wings combine the ease of use of a fader based console, with the power of a touch screen graphical user interface. The software shows the user what to do next, ensuring a very easy learning curve for even the novice user. Power users are also catered for with many advanced features and the ability to record up to 1,000 memories, across 100 cuelists or chases, and playback 10 simultaneously on the console. Each optional wing increases this by 10 playbacks and 100 cuelists. The DMX output is also available as sACN and/or Art-Net via an RJ45 connector on the console. Control of 24 individual fixtures is provided on the Mantra Lite console, each with a physical fader for intensity. The optional expansion wings each provide an additional 12 fixtures, 10 playbacks and a universe of DMX. Connect up to two wings for a total of 48 fixtures, 30 playbacks and 3 universes of DMX. A large 18cm (7.2”) colour capacitive touch screen provides a powerful user interface, similar in operation to modern smartphones, giving the user the feeling of familiarity and comfort. RGB, RGBA, RGBAW and CMY parameters are all controlled via a simple colour picker, Pan and Tilt via a trackpad and other parameters by virtual sliders. This allows the Mantra to control not just colour, but all the parameters of modern moving lights. 

 

 The unique Animate feature provides a simple and intuitive way to quickly create chases and patterns in a single cue – usually within just a few seconds. This feature alone makes the Mantra the most powerful in its class. An Undo command system, context sensitive Help, and Live time controls ensures that Mantra will remain the market leader for years to come.

 

 Fixture library updates and new software features are easily installed via USB stick and show files can be backed up to USB stick for off site storage. ‘Animate’ feature - Create complex FX quickly – the easiest way to add dynamic movement and colour to your stage. Optional USB powered wing provide control of 12 more fixtures, 10 additional playbacks and an extra DMX output. Connect two wings for a total of 48 fixtures, 30 playbacks and 3 universes of DMX. Two models - One with built-in auto ranging power supply (CE certified), the other with external power pack (UL listed). Internal auto voltage mains power supply with IEC connector (not applicable to UL version). DMX out via 5pin XLR and ethernet (Art-Net and/or sACN). Mantra Lite control console with external power supply - UL Model.

 External plug pak supplied suitable for use on 90-265V 50-60Hz mains supply. Expansion wing for Mantra Lite console.

 Provides an additional 12 fixtures, 10 playbacks and 1 x DMX-512A output. USB powered. Sample Show and 3D lighting simulations for Windows and Mac Click on the following images for a larger view.|||

