Is energy-from-waste (EFW) destined to be phased out? Will we still be talking about incineration as a valid option under the waste hierarchy 30 years from now? These are controversial questions to be asking, but 30 years ago, nobody would have considered landfill as a transitional solution to our throwaway culture. Will EFW follow the same trajectory?

For sure, some circular economy purists would love to see this scenario unfold. But it won’t happen anytime soon. One of the biggest debates still circulating within the waste industry is whether the EFW market (both in the UK and Europe) is heading for overcapacity or not. Like the furnaces inside those mighty combustion chambers, it’s a debate that’s been raging for some time.

Yesterday I took to the stage at the UK’s annual Energy From Waste Conference in London (thanks to the Recycling & Waste World team for kindly inviting me) to quiz a top analyst, Mike Brown from Eunomia, on this very issue. Eunomia undertakes regular modelling of residual waste arisings and assesses this feedstock supply against treatment capacity.

Its analysis indicates that both the UK and Europe are at future risk of EFW overcapacity – the exact timeline depends on a number of factors, but as a rough guide, anywhere between five to 15 years from now. Overcapacity doesn’t signal the immediate end of EFW of course, it just changes the supply-demand balance and may make competition for feedstock – like refuse-derived fuels (RDF) – more intense.

I was keen to draw out of the discussion with Mike how EFW operators could mitigate future risks should overcapacity become a pressing issue, and I think we had a good stab at some crystal ball gazing. It would be interesting to revisit our conversation perhaps five years from now, once the dust around Brexit has settled, and more is known about how EU member states (and possibly the UK) are coping with the higher legislative recycling targets that are waiting in the wings.

It’s also fairly safe to assume that those working within the EFW sector don’t see overcapacity as a major concern right now. The UK is currently on a major EFW build programme. Investors who spoke at the event talked about how the bankability of EFW had increased, compared to five years ago. One imminent speaker even suggested some landfills in the UK might have to reopen to cope with the amount of waste the nation is generating (now that was an eye-opener).

That said, there are some warning signals. The costly exit of Air Products, and more recently Interserve from the UK EFW market, should not be overlooked. Personally, I think there will always be a role for large incineration plants, but the location and outputs of these facilities will become increasingly critical. Building EFW into district heating networks for instance is one intelligent, integrated approach.

Ultimately, market realities tend to win out. The next rung up the waste hierarchy is of course, recycling; it remains to be seen if that can compete against EFW in terms of hard economics, in particular end-market demand for material.

Looking to create value-focused, high quality content for your business?

I specialise in environmental communications, helping companies, NGOs and brands tell their story through compelling journalism and insightful content writing. Check out my portfolio of work. If you like what you see, drop me a line: max@greendipped.net|||

