European Euro,Mexican peso,Moroccan dirham,Mozambican metical,Namibian dollar.New Zealand dollar,Norwegian krone,Pakistani rupee,Papua New Guinean kina,Philippine peso,Zimbabwean dollar,Zambian kwacha,Yemeni rial,CFP franc,Vietnamese dong,British pound,UAE dirham,Ukrainian hryvnia,Ugandan shilling,Turkish new lira,Tunisian dinar,Thai baht,New Taiwan dollar,Syrian pound,Swiss franc,Swedish krona,Surinamese dollar,Singapore dollar,São Tomé and Príncipe dobra,Russian ruble,Romanian leu.Polish zloty,Peruvian nuevo sol,Netherlands Antillean gulden,Mongolian tugrik,Moldovan leu,Macedonian denar,Macanese pataca,Lithuanian litas.Libyan dinar,Lebanese lira,Lao kip.Kyrgyzstani som,South Korean won.North Korean won,Kenyan shilling,Kazakhstani tenge,Jordanian dinar.Indian rupee,Indonesian rupiah,Hungarian forint,Honduran lempira,Israeli new sheqel,Haitian gourde.Guyanese dollar,Guatemalan quetzal,East Caribbean dollar,Gibraltar pound,Ghanaian cedi,Georgian lari.Gambian dalasi,Fijian dollar,Falkland Islands pound,Ethiopian birr,Eritrean nakfa,Egyptian pound,Czech koruna,Cuban peso,Burundi franc,Brunei dollar.Brazilian real.Bahamian dollar.Azerbaijani manat,Afghan afghani,Angolan kwanza,

Every year, millions of “fake” notes are passed over retail counters and the majority are not identified as counterfeit until they’re examined by the bank. Most often, retail associates don’t know how to identify legitimate money or they rely on the simplest of all anti-counterfeiting tools; the counterfeit pen and counterfeit detector machines Unfortunately, relying on the pen and counterfeit detector machines alone is not going to catch anyone other than an amateur who is printing money on a laser printer.

 Here we are going to tell you how we do it on how the money will pass on counters without being identified as fake..

Work with us my brother and sister and make it in life. Why do you have to waist your time to go to school before you have a job? this is a better way. Follow us in our journey and you will never forget. Wherever you go and whatever you do, you will be blessed.

WE ARE ALSO SPECIALIZED IN CHEMISTRY FOR ANTI-BREEZE BANK NOTES. WE ALSO DO CHEMICALS MELTING AND RECOVERING OF ALL TYPE OF BAD MONEY FROM BLACK TO WHITE (STAINED MONEY)

We offer Cleaning Solutions For Currency. These cleaning solutions are developed from specially formulated solvent and are capable of cleaning all types of deface currency.For wide industrial consumption, we offer these superior quality cleaning solutions at industry leading prices.

Many people need help paying bills and debt in today’s challenging economy. Families need help People are staving people need to paid their medical bills. Now this is the chance to solve all your problem with Just a little Risk. We are underground group we have decide to chance the world nobody would be poor. Our mission is to reduce global poverty everyone has to be rich so here is your chance to be a millionaire.

 Joint us lets fight it together …..

You are opportunity, and you must knock on the door leading to your destiny.

Today, even though we have plenty of money and several businesses, nothing much has changed. We still need money to continue to build businesses, reinvest in our businesses and invest through those businesses.|||

