The following link shows Millions of Shanghai China files exposed among Japan and Taiwan ( Google Search results shows China and its neighbors forbidden documents exposed)(2017). China's willingness to lend vast sums to the U.S. government has drawn a lot of attention in recent years. The U.S Largest Databrach, which from investigations the 13 DNS root zone servers replicated incorrect permissions however this spreaded to other foreign countries causing a massive glitch and alot of betrayal (U.S Largest Databreach)(Paper.li News)(2017). Since September 2008, the Treasury Department has ranked it as the biggest foreign creditor to the U.S., with the exception of one month in early 2015 and again with its latest update. According to reports, China’s Banks Are Hiding More Than $2 Trillion in Loans, which China's banks are masking loans as investments through an accounting trick to the tune of $2 trillion, however in those Millions of exposed forbidden documents is there a clue on whats being done with the $2 Trillion dollars ? or about 20% of their existing loan portfolio, according to a Wall Street Journal tally. The two trillion dollars worth in lending, miscounted as investments, is a symptom of the plumbing problem. The investment categorization means the banks aren't holding capital against potential losses. Many of the loans are made to property developers. If China's rising property market stalls or reverses, those loans could quickly overwhelm their lenders. It would then be up to the government to decide whether to bail them out. A similar contagion afflicted Western banks during the 2008-2009 financial crisis.

The situation has raised concerns about Beijing's leverage over the United States. President-elect Donald Trump has claimed the opposite, suggesting it gives the United States "a lot of power" over China.

Experts say the reality is more complicated, arguing that the debt relationship binds the world's two largest economies closely together. Trump has suggested he will take a more confrontational stance toward China on trade, threatening to slap tariffs of as much as 45% on Chinese goods.

Beijing has been dumping U.S. government debt to prop up its currency. China uses the dollars it gets from selling U.S. Treasuries to buy the yuan, which has sunk to an 8-year low as the world's second largest economy slows.

China's huge holdings of U.S. debt fell to $1.12 trillion at the end of October, their lowest level in more than six years, according to U.S. Treasury Department data. Japan held $1.13 trillion.

Both countries offloaded Treasuries during the month, but China dumped far more: its holdings dropped by $41.3 billion, while Japan's fell by just $4.5 billion. Will China and other Foreign Nations cut Currency lending to U.S.A because China is the main source to produce goods cutting cost to sell products in U.S.A ?|||

