In one of our recent posts, we talked a little about the checklist to use when changing your domain name. In this post, I’m going to list some points which we used to change our Twitter handle and our support email address with minimum hassle.

In September, we went through a major rebrand from CloudMagic to Newton. At the time, we had over 13K followers. So, it made more sense to change our Twitter handle rather than starting a new Twitter account. So, we started looking for a handle that would be easily associated with us. Our first option was @Newton, which was already taken. So was @newtonHQ, @Newtonmail and @Newtonemail.

Strangely enough, both @newtonmail and @newtonemail haven’t tweeted yet and it appears that they are not active from the time the accounts were created. I could not find a twitter account associated with @newtonhq. Nonetheless, the handle is still not available for us to use. Twitter does not have a clear policy of releasing handles which are not in use anymore. This is a very real problem for brands as it would limit them from using handles which would represent them better. It would be great if Twitter realizes this and comes up with a plan to release handles which are not in use.

After a little discussion, we decided to go with @newtonmailapp which was available. Now, we needed to make sure that this handle will be available at the time we announce our rebranding. The only way to be sure about this was to create a Twitter account with @newtonmailapp handle ourselves.

On the D-day, we had to change our Twitter handle from @CloudMagic to @newtonmailapp. While it is tempting to just delete the account with the handle you have reserved and then updating your existing account handle, Twitter does not allow one to use the handle of an account that is just deleted. You will have to wait at least 30 days.

We used a small trick that most of us have learned when we were learning basics of programming. To swap values of A and B using a temporary variable C. We temporarily changed the handle of our account from @newtonmailapp to a random handle (Lets say @xyz) and immediately changed @CloudMagic to @newtonmailapp. Later, we changed @xyz to @CloudMagic.

This ensured that we changed the Twitter handle without losing or confusing any of our existing followers. In addition to this, we were also able to hold control of our old handle, @CloudMagic.

Changing your support email address was a little more complicated than changing our Twitter handle as it involved some changes which need to be done in the app itself.

Thanks to HelpScout and a little Jugaad, we were able to pull this off without our users never noticing the changes or experiencing any difficulties. As a support engineer, I can also say that the hassle for Support staff was also very minimal.

Our earlier email address was hello@cloudmagic.com and this had to be changed to hello@newtonhq.com to be more in line with our new website. This had a few challenges like not missing any emails from users during the switch. So, we followed the steps mentioned below in that order for a smooth transition:

In addition to above steps, we made sure that:

Once these changes were done, the Support staff was able to continue with their work without any major headaches.

Hope some of the above points will help you when you go through re-branding. If you have gone through a rebranding exercise, do share any tips you find worth mentioning in the comments below.|||

In one of our recent posts, we talked a little about the checklist to use when changing your domain name. In this post, I’m going to list some points which we used to change our Twitter handle and…