Watson recognizes people when they walk in. It listens to the conversation in the room. And it surrounds you with information that educates, informs, and enhances the overall experience.

Here is an , and a link to the . And here are three video blogs on working with Intu, including a piece on , , and .

There were four Watson APIs used in building the cognitive room experience at the Masters. First, the room is trained to recognize certain tour guides the moment they enter. A camera is hidden in the ceiling to accomplish this. And Watson is fed training data to properly identify tour guides. The link to Watson Visual Recognition APIs, SDKs, and documentation is here .

In addition, the tour guide can interact with the room using the spoken word. He or she can ask for some particular part of the experience to run. Or they can even ask questions about the golf tournament in progress, like “Where is Phil Mickelson right now?” to which Watson would respond with detailed information.

To handle these requests, Intu receives the incoming communication and shepherds it through three different Watson services. First it translates the speech into text so that it can by analyzed. Then, Watson discerns the meaning of the text and determines the appropriate response. And finally, that text response is translated back into speech and spoken to the room.

There are three Watson APIs used for this interaction:

The applications of this technology are nearly limitless. For example, you could imagine Watson participating in a board-level discussion of an acquisition or merger, using Tradeoff Analytics to weigh the pros and cons of the transaction. Or offering the latest research to doctors in the process of diagnosing a patient’s symptoms. Or even analyzing statistics and cueing up film during halftime of an NFL game .

Augusta National is a special place. And the Masters is a one-of-a-kind event. So it’s only fitting that IBM would build a first-of-a-kind experience to communicate the uniqueness of the tournament to members and their guests. And in so doing, introducing the power of Watson and cognitive rooms to the world at large.|||

