RESTful APIs(REpresentational State Transfer Application Programming Interfaces ) are web services using REST architecture.  XML, HTML and  JSON are the primary formats used to make request in RESTful APIs, but other formats are also used. RESTful APIs are use largely in building cloud based APIs, and is fast catching in popularity. One of the great things of RESTful APIs is that it can be used along with React. More and more developers are using RESTful APIs to build their systems. Having a working knowledge of how to use and implement RESTful APIs can only help you leverage your career as a developer. This list of the best RESTful API books should get you started to working with and building out your own APIs using REST. Bookmark and check back to stay updated! RESTful Web Clients: Enabling Reuse Through Hypermedia by Mike Amundsen  is a brand new book that has just been released and will teach you how to build great hypermedia-based client applications. Mike Amundsen is an author and lecturer on distributed network architecture and other topics. RESTful Web Clients provides an extensive foundation filled with step by step easy to follow examples to build an excellent client app. The books shows you how to implement JSON APIs and maintain them in your application, as it can be quite the challenge. RESTful Web Clients explores the Hypertext Application Language(HAL) and how to use it with Siren and Collection+JSON clients along with the pros and cons of using them. The book even deals with patterns and API versioning.

RESTful Web Clients is a practical guide that will teach you how to build reusable client apps that are also much more reliable and stable. Hypermedia APIs are the future and are becoming more and more common and useful everyday.  RESTful Web Clients will teach you how to harness the power of Hypermedia and build applications that can work with multiple services.

RESTful Web APIs: Services for a Changing World by Leonard Richardson, Mike Amundsen & Sam Rub is a fantastic look at REST concepts and hypermedia APIs  and how to implement them. Leonard Richardson is the author of several open source libraries, Mike Amundsen is an author and lecturer on distributed network architecture and Sam Ruby is a co-chair of the W3C HTML Working Group.

RESTful Web APIs is a practical guide that teaches you step-by-step how to build hypermedia APIs along with the proper strategies. This book is full of collection patterns, API design strategies,  standardized hypermedia data formats and best practices that can you can instantly use. RESTful Web APIs discusses APIs in-depth, touching on things like  XMDP, ALPS, JSON-LD, etc to make coherent and great APIs. Hypermedia is the name of the game and a particular focus is placed on understanding how it’s standardization and how it ties in together with great APIs.

RESTful Web APIs is very clearly written and accessible, requiring no prior knowledge of RESTful APIs. This is a book filled with solutions that will show you how to build epic Restful APIs. If you are looking to get started, look no further than RESTful Web APIs.

RESTful API Design by Matthias Biehl is a practical and informative guide that walks you through the important decisions you need to decide while designing a RESTful API. Matthias Biehl works as an API management consultant on API design.

RESTful API Design is fully loaded with the best practices and technical details to properly use and design RESTful APIs. This book explains the concepts of REST thoroughly and in detail, with good examples to make it as clear as possible. RESTful API Design shows you how to properly use URIs, HTTP methods and status codes, API description langauges and everything else you may need to design and build APIs.

RESTful API Design is a book filled with information and is a well structured guided that lets you design elegant APIs. This book is a must for anyone trying to build, design or improve their APIs.

REST in Practice: Hypermedia and Systems Architecture by Jim Webber, Savas Parastatidis and Ian Robinson is a book that explains REST in a through and practical way. Jim Webber is a SOA practice lead, Savas Parastatidis is a Developer who works for Microsoft and Ian Robinson is a Principal Consultant.

REST in Practice provides a down to earth and easily digestible explanation of REST principles and how you can use them to build hypermedia applications and systems. You will learn CRUD(Create, Read, Update, Delete) pattern and how to use it along with various other techniques. The book shows you how to make your services secure and introduces you to integration patterns. REST in Practice combines everything it teaches you to show you how to build scalable systems for the enterprise.

REST in Practice explains the true vision of REST in a guided step by step way that makes it simple. This is a book that you should digest in small chunks to get the full value. REST in Practice will teach you the inner intricacies of REST APIs.

RESTful APIs are only going up in popularity and are pretty much becoming the standard. Now is a great time to learn how to use RESTful APIs and leverage your career as a developer.  Your knowledge of ReactJS can be combined with RESTfuls APIs to build out some pretty cool applications and APIs. Irrespective of the fact if you have ever used or even heard of RESTful APIs, these books will get you started on the fast-track to success.

Check out the best JavaScript books, CSS books, ReactJS books and React Native books to further expand your programming knowledge.

Amazon Associates Disclosure: We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites.|||

Best RESTful API books, RESTful Web Clients, RESTful Web APIs, RESTful Web Services Cookbook, RESTful API Design, REST in Practice.