Two articles from Elizabeth Brocknay and Helen Pluckrose addressed separately the postmodernist roots of the alt-right and the alt-left on the Internet, and the rise of a new “Cult of Ignorance” among social network users. To me, the parallel was obvious with Richard Hofstadter famous book from 1963 on anti-intellectualism, and with his essay from 1964 on the Paranoid Style in politics.

The situation is simple. Never have so many people had so much access to so much knowledge and yet have been so resistant to learning anything. Intellectual achievement are not valued for. Experts advice are rejected. Knowledge is seen as an off-the-shelf convenience. Thanks to the Internet, people believe that they have enough information to make decisions on their own. Sure of their beliefs, they don’t look for dialogue.

The global conversation is not a part of the global village.

The online violence of the alt-right and the alt-left is mainly a rejection of rationality, which is one of the foundation of democracy. Their skepticism towards institution and authority is rooted in superstition, and their so-called critical reasoning is a portmanteau for a new form of magical thinking.

The information society of today is not the knowledge society we were promised. It’s no hasard if all of its citizens believe that they are experts on everything. Indeed, they are led to think so as it is a necessary first step to exploit their digital labor and profit from their incessant online activities. But now that they share the same online platforms, that they use the same “likes”, that they produce the same “retweet”, they tend to consider that each person’s opinion about anything must be accepted as equal to anyone else’s.

And why not. Why would Barack Obama’s post on Facebook be more important than your own?

Under such premises, the quality and the intelligence of his message is of no importance. The success of its propagation looks like it’s only a question of social position. As it looks unjust, morality is seen as culturally relative. Empirical evidence has no importance. Reality itself can be put into question.

In her article, Helen Pluckrose is right when she describes a “Lyotardian metanarrative, a Foucauldian system of discursive power, and a Derridean oppressive hierarchy” and that “the far-Right is now using identity politics and epistemic relativism in a very similar way to the postmodern-Left.” She’s also right when she writes that recent elections everywhere else show that “our current crisis is not one of Left versus Right but of consistency, reason, humility and universal liberalism versus inconsistency, irrationalism, zealous certainty and tribal authoritarianism.”

And so, long before the rise of Social Media, Richard Hofstadter was probably the first to describe how anti-intellectualism is a consequence, in part, of the democratization of knowledge. He was also the first to explain how the use of paranoid modes of expression by more or less normal people would develop as a force in politics. And he foresaw how the Internet would provoke the hostile confrontation of irreconcilably opposed interests.

His conclusion was grim: “The situation becomes worse when the representatives of a particular social interest — perhaps because of the very unrealistic and unrealizable nature of its demands — are shut out of the political process. Having no access to political bargaining or the making of decisions, they find their original conception that the world of power is sinister and malicious fully confirmed. They see only the consequences of power — and this through distorting lenses — and have no chance to observe its actual machinery. A distinguished historian has said that one of the most valuable things about history is that it teaches us how things do not happen. It is precisely this kind of awareness that the paranoid fails to develop. He has a special resistance of his own, of course, to developing such awareness, but circumstances often deprive him of exposure to events that might enlighten him — and in any case he resists enlightenment.”

Anti-intellectualism is everywhere on the Internet.

It translates into the concepts of post-truth, alt-right and alt-left. It ruins the public debate. And we have not clear solution for it, except to hope that the next generation of intellectuals will have enough perspicacity to identify and denounce it.|||

Two articles from Elizabeth Brocknay and Helen Pluckrose addressed separately the postmodernist roots of the alt-right and the alt-left on the Internet, and the rise of a new “Cult of Ignorance…