Philips Lighting has launched a chatbot on their local Facebook page, allowing users to purchase the company’s range of consumer products through the Facebook Messenger platform.

What it means is that Facebook users now have access to round-the-clock assistance in making their lighting decision from Philips Lighting. They can do so by interacting with the chatbot, which will respond with product recommendations based on their input. Philips Lighting says users will be able to make their purchase directly from the platform itself.

The launch of its Facebook Messenger chatbot is but one of various initiatives by Philips Lighting’s to capture the local e-commerce market. For instance, the firm has recently partnered with Lazada Singapore to launch a specialty e-store on the e-commerce platform.

Philips Lighting pointed to a joint report by Temasek Holdings and Google that pegged the e-commerce market in Singapore at US$5.4 billion (S$7.4 billion) by 2025, and making up 6.7 per cent of all retail sales in Singapore.

“The partnership with Facebook and Lazada Singapore will serve as an excellent opportunity for Philips Lighting to tap onto the growing e-commerce market segment to unlock new business revenue,” said Alok Ghose, managing director and cluster leader for Philips Lighting in Singapore.

“These platforms will enable us to bring light beyond illumination to Singaporean households, connecting their home lighting systems to the Internet of Things, a viable first step in building homes in a Smart Nation,” he said.

The use of chatbots is slowly but steadily gaining traction, with organizations and brands alike exploring how they can leverage chatbot technology to bring more efficient and productive service to their customers and users, as they seek to exploit the full potential that this technology can offer.

The Philips Lighting chatbot can be found by looking up "Philips Lighting Singapore" in the Messenger contact search.

The state of chatbots in marketing

POSB launches its first AI-driven chatbot on Facebook Messenger|||

Customers can now purchase from Philips Lighting’s range of consumer products through the company’s chatbot on Facebook Messenger.