Whenever I hear this type of question I assume someone has misunderstood how their work fits into the bigger picture of the business.

The business objectives are what the business is aiming for: the end scenario to be achieved. To communicate this objective the business creates some clear goals, plans to reach these goals and performs day-to-day activities according to those plans. Granted, a business objective is – hopefully – to some extent based on an insight about the human state and human behavior.

Individuals rarely adhere to such a structured behavioral plan. Human objectives and organizational objectives are not really on the same level and in my mind not comparable in the way that the question implies. Rather, the “user objectives” is one of several data sources the business uses to make decisions about what to do next. Next steps are then matched against parameters such as feasibility, urgency, clarity, affordability and ROI. It’s obvious that you are not always trying to solve everything that can benefit users. It also goes without saying that business and user objectives will clash – or at least chafe – all the time. The business needs to figure out which of many options, based on insights about users, to focus on; paths that will bring it closer to its own objective.

In fact, user objectives and business objectives are not really phenomenons that meet, they are two very different visions of future states, one for the organization and one for the human. Each drive daily activities for both to be in constant evolvement, hopefully moving them closer to their goals. But I’ve never heard anyone say: “Excellent, the business objectives and user objectives just merged!” It’s not something that happens.

It’s no secret that we can have successful products with really poor experiences. You have to remember that a short-term focus on creating an amazing experience may adversely affect the long-term experience. Time and time again I see projects failing to budget for the upkeep – the running costs and competence required – to maintain a successful product or service. It’s great at launch but two years later it’s a mess. Running a business is complex and if you’re putting money in the wrong places you will in the longer term fail to meet any user needs at all, even if your intentions are good.

Most businesses also do not really have a firm grasp of user objectives, they have hypotheses about what will be of help to people. So what do you do? You keep listening, learning and moving. Preferably in a quick and sensible manner. I’m obviously all for creating the optimal balance between user needs and business needs, when great experiences and business objectives match you are in for a great ride – but you can’t relax. When efforts to comply tip over too much on the side of the user the ability to maintain that level of service will begin to falter. Worst case: there won’t be any experience left to talk about.|||

What happens when business user objectives don't meet? We asked 13.5 UX, CRO, eCommerce and Marketing experts how they balance business and user objectives.