Jio offers 4G internet services with VoLTE for voice calls. It offers unlimited voice calls and SMSes.

It is the only ‘VoLTE-only’ network in the country.

After its launch on 5th September 2016, it provided its service free of cost till December 31 and then offered an extension of the free services till March 31,2017.

Jio Prime membership was introduced, with Rs. 99 as an one-time payable fee for it. It also included its media services worth Rs. 10K.

 The Summer Surprise offer was announced along with it. It offered services for extra two months on recharge of Rs. 303 by Jio Prime members.

 TRAI (Telecom regulatory Authority of India) directed the company to withdraw this offer following which the offer was withdrawn. The Press Release for the withdrawal said that:

“Today, the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) has advised Jio to withdraw the 3 months complimentary benefits of JIO SUMMER SURPRISE. Jio accepts this decision. Jio is in the process of fully complying with the regulator’s advice, and will be withdrawing the 3 months complimentary benefits of JIO SUMMER SURPRISE as soon as operationally feasible, over the next few days. However, all customers who have subscribed to JIO SUMMER SURPRISE offer prior to its discontinuation will remain eligible for the offer.”

According to one of the Press Releases on the company website, there are already more than 72 Million Jio Prime members.

Along with SIMs, they are also providing another product : JioFi.

 Priced at Rs. 1,999, JioFi is a portable device which will provide hight speed internet and HD Voice Calling with connectivity options for up to 32 devices (with the recommended number being 10).

After the rollback of the Jio Summer Surprise offer, there are now plans of updating the tariff structure.

 According to the website, new offers will be introduced soon.|||

Jio is a mobile network operator in India which provides a LTE network. A subsidiary of Reliance Industries, it was launched on 5th September 2016.