Today, we call them Millennials, 10years ago we would have been named them Generation Y, or 20 years ago GenX. And as usual with young people they are smarter, more powerful (since they have all their lives (and dispensable income) ahead of them) and since they have not been exposed to years of brainwashing, have a distinctly different expectation from brands. I’m lovin’ it!

Brands will only find access to these new markets through a more and more stratified media landscape. That is a problem. For marketing your product or service, 30 years ago it would have been TV or Radio ads. Today it is Google or Facebook, Imgur or Instagram, Twitter or PinInterest, Youtube or Twitch.

Therefore companies need to adapt to communicate across the different digital channels. And, they will have to invest time and money in order to provide an outstanding customer experience that “wow”’s to have a competitive edge to their young followers and keep them engaged.

These days, almost all your customers are constantly on-the-go. Good news! Whether they are reading an article on the train or listening to a podcast during commute, from a marketers perspective your customers are as attentive as never before. As an additional benefit, this attention is highly quantifiable, i.e., social ads give you detailed demographic information on views and clicks.

On the other hand, this attention flow adds additional pressure on providing a great experience, since errors break the flow. These new customers expect companies to deliver outstanding, integrated, and seamless customer service across all platforms and access points whichever they are using. Amazon should work the same in the subway as on your work computer during lunch time.

If something does not work as expected it really sticks. For example, the other day, I wanted to make a money transfer on my Japanese Bank account to pay a bill in Japan for my Porsche. Little did I know! You should have seen ‘surprised-me’ when the system informed me that the Bank is currently closed and the transaction will only take place during regular operating hours.

As a German, I don’t believe people should work more than 8 hours per day to remain sane. Companies, and especially smaller ones, can’t afford a shift-based 24/7 customer support. So how can you keep in touch with a global 24/7 market ? This area is where bots on messaging apps can provide a competitive advantage because they provide an automated communication channel to resolve a certain percentage of requests. How large this percentage should depend on you.

Interactive communication is by definition bi-directional. Your new young customers are not spectators as during the age of the television. Having all information readily available at their fingertips and not afraid to use it, they are aware of their power and voice their opinion about almost everything that exists in this world continuously. Social media companies have made the setup of chatbots a simple click and choose.|||

Traditional ways of communications are dead. The fax, dead. The letter, dead. The phone call, dead. Thriving in all this death are new means of communications. Messaging apps like Line, weChat…