I think you’d agree with me when I say: It can be really hard to find the right investor for your startup.

You need to find investors that fit your principles, invest the right amount to lead or be part of the round, and are in a position to invest at this point in time. Those criteria will narrow who you’re looking for, so you need to cast a wide net to start your search.

You’re probably wondering, does it really have to be this hard?

Well, it turns out that there are some amazing resources out there that remove the hassle of finding the perfect investors for your company. You should be familiar with AngelList and CrunchBase. Both are great tools that can be used to find investors. Trouble is, many investors don’t publicly list their information. Not only that, details can be out of date and inaccurate.

So what can you do about this?

I’ve brought together an incredible mega-list of investors for you, so you don’t have to spend hours Googling contact details, leveraging your network or going to endless networking events.

I’ve created a mega investment list from a number of sources. The guys at TechStars, Seedcamp and serialentreprenuers.co have all contributed with their own lists. I brought it together to make a megalist that will be more useful than AngelList, LinkedIn and CrunchBase (but you should use them too). I wanted a definite investor list for Europe and the rest of the world.

I’d love it if you could make comments to the Google doc, so it can become an evolving list that’s useful for the next generation of startups.

Once you’ve found the right investor for your startup, you should try to get an introduction. The best way to do this is by using CrunchBase or AngelList to find who else they’ve invested in. If you know one of the founders of their portfolio, ask them very nicely for an intro. If you don’t know any of those founders, see of ways to get to know them. As a last resort and can’t find an intro, then you can always try cold pitching.|||

I’ve created a mega investment list from a number of sources that is available to download. This is a definite investor list for Europe and the US