The AI Optify data team writes about topics that we think modern software engineers and DevOps engineers will love. AI Optify has affiliate partnerships so we may get a share of the revenue from your purchase.

The industry standard today is to use Virtual Machines (VMs) to run software applications. VMs run applications inside a guest Operating System, which runs on virtual hardware powered by the server’s host OS. Containers take a different approach: by leveraging the low-level mechanics of the host operating system, containers provide most of the isolation of virtual machines at a fraction of the computing power. 



 Top Docker Books - for this post, we have scraped various signals (e.g. reviews sentiments, online ratings, topics covered in the book, author influence in the field, year of publication, social media signals, etc.) from web for more than 30's of docker books. We have combined all signals to compute a score for each book using Machine Learning and rank the top books.

The readers will love our list because it is Data-Driven & Objective. Enjoy the list:

1. The Docker Book: Containerization is the new virtualization 

 $9.67 A new book designed for SysAdmins, Operations staff, Developers and DevOps who are interested in deploying the open source container service Docker. In this book, we will walk you through installing, deploying, managing, and extending Docker. We're going to do that by first introducing you to the basics of Docker and its components. Then we'll start to use Docker to build containers and services to perform a variety of tasks.

Docker is quickly changing the way that organizations are deploying software at scale. But understanding how Linux containers fit into your workflow—and getting the integration details right—are not trivial tasks. With this practical guide, you’ll learn how to use Docker to package your applications with all of their dependencies, and then test, ship, scale, and support your containers in production.

This book is an exploration of how the Docker can be used in a production environment. It is also a continuation of the first part of the book. The book provides you with a guide on how to install the Docker on the various Linux distributions. Most of the Linux distributions explored in this book include Ubuntu, Oracle Linux, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, openSUSE and SUSE Enterprise Linux.

Docker in Action teaches readers how to create, deploy, and manage applications hosted in Docker containers. After starting with a clear explanation of the Docker model, you will learn how to package applications in containers, including techniques for testing and distributing applications. You will also learn how to run programs securely and how to manage shared resources. Using carefully designed examples, the book teaches you how to orchestrate containers and applications from installation to removal.

5. Docker: Everything You Need to Know to Master Docker 

 This book explores the details of Docker in detail. After reading it, you will become an expert in using it. It begins by defining what it is, when it was developed, its origin, and what it is used for. You will also know the environments in which to run the Docker. The book then guides you on how to install the Docker on Mac OS X. Most people think that this is impossible since the Docker is native to Linux OS. The book will also guide you on how to install and run the Docker on Windows OS.

This book is an exploration of the Docker in detail. The book begins by explaining what the Docker is including its origin. Most people do not understand the real uses of the Docker. However, on reading this book, you will get to know these uses. The book has explored the structure of the Docker and the components which make it up. The Docker is a very useful software. Most people confuse it with the virtual box. The two are closely related but they are not the same.

7. Using Docker: Developing and Deploying Software with Containers 

 $26.74 Docker containers offer simpler, faster, and more robust methods for developing, distributing, and running software than previously available. With this hands-on guide, you’ll learn why containers are so important, what you’ll gain by adopting Docker, and how to make it part of your development process. Ideal for developers, operations engineers, and system administrators—especially those keen to embrace a DevOps approach—Using Docker will take you from Docker and container basics to running dozens of containers on a multi-host system with networking and scheduling.

9. Docker: The Ultimate Beginners Guide To Learning The Basics Of Docker 

 $8.95 This information and concise guide to Docker is aimed at the complete beginner. In this guide you will learn about what Docker is and why Docker’s special container software is incredibly useful for application development and overcoming compatibility issues between different computers. You will also learn about how to create containers using images and create your own images using some basic Docker command line instructions.

10. Docker: The Complete Introduction To Using Docker Containers Today 

 $8.95 Welcome to “Docker: The Complete Introduction To Using Docker Containers Today.” This is the best guide for people who want to use Docker as well as implement container-based virtualization. You should not shy away from Docker containers because you lack the knowledge to implement them. All you have to do is completely engage this book. We have divided the book into chapters to make it easier for you to go through.

11. Docker: The Essential User Guide to Mastering Docker In No Time! 

 This eBook “Docker: The Essential User Guide to Master Docker in No Time” is a thorough guide for the people who love to build servers. Basically the best kit for electrical engineers who are expert in coding the software. It is simple and easy guide with proper directions with images in order to get the best results at the end. There are tips which may help you get through some of the basic problems which you may face while downloading, installing or running the server.

Docker Swarm serves as one of the crucial components of the Docker ecosystem and offers a native solution for you to orchestrate containers. It’s turning out to be one of the preferred choices for Docker clustering thanks to its recent improvements. This book covers Swarm, Swarm Mode, and SwarmKit. It gives you a guided tour on how Swarm works and how to work with Swarm. It describes how to set up local test installations and then moves to huge distributed infrastructures. You will be shown how Swarm works internally, what’s new in Swarmkit, how to automate big Swarm deployments, and how to configure and operate a Swarm cluster on the public and private cloud.|||

Top 13 Docker Books