A survey was conducted among the pesticide shop workers, pesticide applicators, and land owners in Vadapalanji Panchayat Union, Madurai district, Tamil Nadu, India (latitude 9.9272, longitude 78.0092; Additional file 1: Figure S1). Details on name, frequency, and volume of insecticides commonly being used were collected. The fungicides, herbicides, bactericides, and mineral supplements were not taken into consideration. In a subsequent study, the people (n = 3080) from villages in Vadapalanji Panchayat Union that incorporates Vadapalanji, Manapatti, Thenpalanji, Sundarajapuram, Nagamalai puthur and Palkalainagar, Vellaparaipatti, and Meenatchipatti villages of Madurai district, Tamil Nadu, India were surveyed for their diabetic status and exposure history to OPs using a questionnaire (Additional file 3). Participants under the age of 35 years and pregnant women were excluded from the study. In addition, sex, age, and familial diabetic history were also collected. The diabetic status of the participants was self-reported by answering “Yes” or “No.” Participants involved in OP spraying, mixing, and field workers in OP-based agriculture were defined as having direct exposure to OPs and those who were not associated with OP-based agricultural works were defined as having indirect exposure to OPs.

Blood plasma samples were extracted by a dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction technique [38] by a modified method. Briefly, 200 μL of plasma sample was spiked with 1 mg/mL of azobenzene as internal standard followed by the addition of 20 μL of 5 N HCl and made up to 1 mL with deionized water. Subsequently, the sample is incubated at 70 °C for 30 min to avoid the interaction of OPs with proteins. After cooling down to room temperature, 150 μL of acetonitrile (dispersive solvent) and 50 μL of chloroform (extraction solvent) mixture was forcibly added to the sample using syringe and sonicated for 3 min followed by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 5 min. The organic phase at the bottom of the tube is carefully collected and dried under a gentle stream of nitrogen gas and dissolved in 20 μL of hexane. Sample preparation and analysis were done in a blinded fashion. Primary stock solutions of each insecticide (1 mg/mL) were prepared in methanol. Working standard solutions of the compounds were prepared by combining the aliquots of each primary solution and diluting with hexane. The stock solutions were stored at −20 °C in the dark when not in use. The standards were run at different concentrations and peak area was observed and subsequently linearity was established. Limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) were determined by standard methods. The recovery efficiencies for each individual insecticide was determined by spiking known concentrations of insecticide and measurement by GC/MS (Clarus 680/ 600C; Perkin Elmer Inc., USA). The GC injector temperature was set at 200 °C. The oven temperature program was optimized to hold at 120 °C for 1 min and then to increase by 10 °C min−1 up to 220 °C [39]. Helium gas was used as carrier gas. The transfer line temperature was adjusted to 280 °C. Mass spectrometry conditions were as follows: electron ionization source set to 70 eV, emission current 500 lA, MS Quad 150 C, MS Source 200 °C. The mass spectrometer was run in full-scan mode and in single ion monitoring mode. The m/z fragments monitored for each insecticide is provided in Additional file 1: Figure S2C.

A total of 200 mg of fecal content from randomly selected mice from different cages were collected and suspended in 5 mL of sterile PBS and vortexed. The mixture was allowed to stand at room temperature for 5 min for separation by gravity and the supernatant was collected. One milliliter of the supernatant was inoculated in 9 mL of Robertson cooked meat medium (composition g/L: beef heart solids 98; proteose peptone 20; dextrose 2; sodium chloride 5. pH 7.2) supplemented with different OPs (MCP, CHL, MAL, and M.PAR) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., USA; 36173, 45395, 36143, 36187) at 0.2 mg/mL concentration and incubated at anaerobic condition at 37 °C for nine days [22, 27]. To maintain logarithmic growth, the culture was subcultured every three days. After nine days of growth, part of the culture was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 min and the supernatant was collected while the remaining pellet was dissolved in same volume of PBS. As mentioned above in the fecal transplantation protocol, the mice were administered with 200 μL of whole culture/suspended cells/supernatant continuously for seven days and finally OGTT was performed. As described above, the mice fed with cultures were maintained in separate, adjacent glass chambers with the same environment of temperature, humidity, water, and feed. Twenty-four hours after OGTT, the mice were sacrificed and the intestine and liver were collected for other assays.

RNA library was constructed using TruSeq kit (Illumina Inc., USA) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA-seq was done at Centre for Cellular & Molecular Platforms (Government of India), Bangalore with paired-end reads in Illumina HiSeq 1000 machine. The sequencing was performed in a blinded way. Raw data were processed using the Solexa software. Low-quality reads were filtered according to the base quality value. The reads were mapped with mouse genome, murine mRNAs, transfer RNAs, and rRNAs by Bowtie 2 [46] and the annotated sequences were removed. We used a reference database of human microbiome to perform functional analysis of the RNA-seq data. This reference included 538 draft and finished bacterial genomes from the human microbiome consortium. High-quality reads were mapped using Bowtie 2 to our reference bacterial database. Subsequently, using the KEGG database, all predicted proteins from the reference genome database were annotated with KEGG orthologous groups (KOs). For query genes with multiple matches, the annotated reference gene with the lowest e value was used. When multiple annotated genes with an identical e value were encountered after a BLAST query, we included all KOs assigned to those genes. The number of transcripts assigned to each gene was then tallied and normalized to RPKM. To account for genes that were not detected owing to limited sequencing depth, a pseudocount of 0.01 was added to all samples. Genes were grouped by taxa, genomes, and KO by calculating the cumulative RPKM for each sample. HUMAnN [47] was used for metabolic reconstruction from metagenomic data followed by LefSe [48] analysis with bootstraping to identify significant biomarkers. The reads were annotated to metacyc enzyme database from the human microbiome consortium using BLASTN. The number of transcripts assigned to each enzyme were then tallied and normalized to RPKM. The enzymes of the same class were summed and expressed as single enzyme.

The tissue processing for metabolomics was carried out in NIH Centre for Metabolomics, University of California, USA as per standard operating procedure [50]. The analysts were blinded of the sample information. A total of 50 mg of caecum tissue cleared of fecal matter was taken in a 25-mL polypropylene centrifuge tube and 2.5 mL of extraction solvent (acetonitrile:isopropanol:water 3:3:2) was added and homogenized for 45 s. In between every homogenization, the homogenizer was cleaned with solutions of methanol, acetone, water, and the extraction solvent. The homogenate was centrifuged at 2500 rpm for 5 min. The supernatant was aliquoted 2 × 500 μL and one of them stored at −20 °C for back up. The other aliquot of 500 μL was evaporated to complete dryness in a centrivap cold trap concentrator. The dried aliquot was resuspended in 500 μL of degassed 50% acetonitrile and centrifuged for 2 min at 14,000 rcf. The supernatant was collected in a fresh tube and evaporated to dryness in a centrivap cold trap concentrator and finally submitted to derivatization.

Fifty milligrams of liver/colon tissue were homogenized in 500 μL of RIPA buffer with protease inhibitors and the final homogenate was collected. Amount of inorganic phosphorus (Pi) released was assayed using Taussky-Shorr method [53]. Briefly, 150 μL of 100 mM Tris buffer (pH: 6.5) was mixed with 100 μL of 200 mM glucose-6 phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., USA; G7879) and incubated at 37 °C for 5 min. Subsequently, 10 μL of tissue homogenate was added, mixed, and incubated again at 37 °C for 5 min. The reaction was terminated by the addition of 90 μL of 10% TCA and incubation at 25 °C for 5 min. Finally, the mixture was centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatant was collected. The amount of Pi released was measured by mixing the supernatant or inorganic Pi solution (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., USA; P3869) with equal volume of Taussky-Shorr color reagent (10% ammonium molybdate prepared in 5 M sulphuric acid 10 mL, ferrous sulfate heptahydrate 5 g in 100 mL of distilled water) and incubated at 25 °C for 6 min. Finally, the absorbance was read at 660 nm. Specific glucose-6 phosphatase (G6Pase) activity was cleared of the contribution of non-specific phosphohydrolase activities by subtracting the activity toward 20 mMβ-glycerophosphate [54] (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., USA; G9422) and finally net G6Pase activity was expressed as μg of Pi released per mg of protein.

A total of 100 mg of feces was weighed and suspended in 2 mL of sterile PBS and vortexed for 1 min. The mixture was centrifuged at 3000 × g for 10 min. Five microliters of the supernatant was diluted 1:100 with sterile PBS. Five microliters of ethyl butyrate (Sigma-Aldrich; 109959) was added as internal standard to a final concentration of 5 mM. Subsequently, 250 μL of concentrated HCl was added followed by the addition of 1 mL of diethyl ether (Merck; LiChrosolv). The mixture was vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged at 3000 × g for 10 min. A total of 750 μL of upper phase was collected and derivatized with 120 μL of N-tert-Butyldimethylsilyl-N-methyltrifluoroacetamide (MTBSTFA) containing 1% tert-butyldimethylchlorosilane (TBDMSCI) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., USA; 375934) by incubating at 80 °C for 20 min. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 48 h to ensure complete derivatization. Gas chromatography was executed as described by Frost et al. [56] by flame ionization detector. The GC injector and detector temperatures were set at 275 °C. The oven temperature program was optimized to hold at 63 °C for 3 min and then to increase by 10 °C min−1 up to 190 °C. Helium gas was used as carrier gas. The transfer line temperature was adjusted to 280 °C. External standards for acetate were prepared at concentrations of 25, 12.5, 6.25, 1.25, and 0.625 mM and ethyl butyric acid was used as the internal standard at a concentration of 100 mM. Reported values were normalized according to the weight of original sample used.

All statistical analyses were performed using the statistical softwares SPSS version 20.0 and GraphPad Prism version 6.01. For association studies in survey, age and sex adjusted ORs and 95% CIs were calculated. For human studies, the non-parametric Mann–Whitney U test was employed. Pearson correlation and linear regression were performed to demonstrate the strength of relationship between two parameters. Plasma OP residues were categorized in quartiles based on the weighted sample distribution. For each OP, we used logistic regression to estimate ORs and CI levels for diabetes by comparing each quartile with the lowest quartile. We included likely or suspected confounders in models based on previously published data. In each analysis, we also evaluated the significance of the differences of the average proportion of diabetics across the four quartiles of the model by a generalized maximum likelihood Wald χ2 test. Our regression models were fitted with appropriate degrees of adjustment. We adjusted for age, sex, familial diabetic history, and BMI. The following statistical analyses were used for animal studies: a two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc analysis was used to compare between groups in different time-points and one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc analysis or unpaired two-sided Student t-test was used to compare either between multiple or between two groups, respectively. The batch difference between replicate/triplicates were studied by a two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc analysis. In all relevant panels, symbols, bars, or horizontal lines represent the mean and error bars represent s.e.m. For mouse experiments, cohort sizes match common practice of the described experiments and are repeated twice or thrice. For human experiments, sample size was chosen to validate statistical analyses. No data points were excluded from analyses in mice or human studies. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant in all analyses. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001.|||

