The International Conference on Urban Transport and the Environment has successfully been reconvened for nearly 25 years, always attracting a wide international spread of delegates. It is well-established as the premier event of its type. The continuing requirement for better urban transport systems and the need for a healthier environment has added to the increasing success of this annual meeting which attracts international delegates from many different countries. Innovative systems, new approaches and original ideas need to be thoroughly tested and critically evaluated before they can be implemented in practice, which highlights the importance of the meeting. Moreover, there is a growing need for integration with telecommunications systems and IT applications in order to improve safety, security and efficiency. The Meeting also addresses the need to solve important pollution problems associated with urban transport in order to achieve a healthier environment. The variety of topics covered by the conference reflects the complex interaction of the urban transport systems with their environment and the need to establish integrated strategies. The aim is to arrive at optimal socio-economic solutions while reducing the negative environmental impacts of current transportation systems. The conference started in Southampton in 1995; continuing in Barcelona (1996); Acquasparta, Italy (1997); Lisbon (1998); Rhodes (1999); Cambridge, UK (2000); Lemnos, Greece (2001); Seville (2002); Crete (2003); Dresden (2004); Algarve (2005); WIT Campus in the New Forest (2006); Coimbra (2007); Malta (2008); Bologna (2009); Limassol (2010); Pisa (2011), A Coruña (2012), Kos (2013), Algarve (2014), Valencia (2015) and Crete (2016). All papers are included in the WIT Transactions and archived in the Wessex Institute’s eLibrary at http://www.witpress.com/elibrary, where they are permanently and easily available to the international community. The following list covers some of the topics to be presented at Urban Transport 2017. Papers on other subjects related to the objectives of the conference are also welcome.

Publication of Papers Papers presented at Urban Transport 2017 are to be published by WIT press in a Volume of WIT Transactions. Selected papers will appear in a special Issue of the International Journal of Transport Development and Integration (ISSN:2058-8305; Digital ISSN:2058-8313). Reviews To ensure the quality of our publications, abstracts and papers are peer reviewed by members of the International Scientific Advisory Committee and other experts, with manuscripts processed through CrossRef Similarity Check. Open Access WIT Press is an advocate of Open Access which offers maximum dissemination of your work.  WIT Transactions and Journal papers can be downloaded for free (www.witpress.com/elibrary).  Indexing and Archiving Papers presented at Wessex Institute conferences are referenced by CrossRef and have appeared in notable reviews and databases. Papers are submitted to various indexing services such as Thomson Reuters Web of Science, Google Scholar*, Scopus and ProQuest. All conference books are listed in the British Library and American Library of Congress. Conference Proceedings Delegates will receive a copy of the papers presented at the Conference on a USB Flash drive. The USB will, in addition, contain papers from previous conferences in this series. Following the Conference, authors will receive an electronic copy of the publication in which their paper has been published. Digital Archive All conference papers are archived online in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com) where they are easily and permanently available to the international scientific community. Networking Participants can present their research and interact with experts from around the world, becoming part of a unique community. Reduced Fee for PhD Students The Wessex Institute believes in the importance of encouraging PhD students to present and publish innovative research at their conferences. As a result, the Institute offers PhD students a much reduced conference fee. 

*Google Scholar Indexation  WIT Press has made all its conference and journal papers open access in an effort to help its dissemination within the scientific and technical community. This means that you are now able to download any paper in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com/elibrary) totally free and without having to pre-register. This major development has the added benefit of allowing the Google Scholar search engines to fully index all WIT papers. Google Scholar is a search engine created specifically for researchers to facilitate the indexation and citation of academic papers free of charge. This service is becoming the most accepted comprehensive benchmark and quality standard. In Google Scholar you will be able to see the number of citations of your articles as well as the ‘h-index’ ranking for both author and publications. The h-index is the largest number h such that at least h articles (by the author or in a publication) were cited at least h times each. The impact of your work is given by the ‘i10 index’ which refers to the number of publications within the last 10 years that have at least 10 citations. You can also easily create within the system an Author’s Profile which helps to highlight your achievements. Google Scholar is becoming the most popular system in the world and its metrics are independent and unbiased. Unlike other ranking systems, it is free.

Papers presented at Urban Transport 2017 are to be published by WIT press in a Volume of WIT Transactions. Selected papers will appear in a special Issue of the International Journal of Transport Development and Integration (ISSN:2058-8305; Digital ISSN:2058-8313). All conference papers are archived online in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com) where they are easily and permanently available to the international scientific community. WIT Transactions have since 1993 been publishing exceptional conference papers which are referenced by CrossRef and have been indexed in international databases. All conference books are catalogued and archived in the British Library and American Library of Congress. WIT strongly believes that removing the barrier to research published online will greatly aid progress in all scientific and technical disciplines, as well as all other spheres of knowledge. Most WIT conference and all journal papers are freely available online.

The Italian capital, Rome, boasts an unrivalled 3,000 year heritage of globally influential art, architecture and culture. The city is home to iconic historic landmarks, including the ancient ruins of the Colosseum and the Roman Forum, and abounds with world-class museums such as the Vatican Museums and Borghese Gallery.  As well as substantial Roman remains, significant Baroque and Renaissance buildings pepper the city centre. Today, Rome is not only a cultural centre, but also a commercial, financial and education hub that has successfully retained its traditional culture and regional cuisine. Rome is served by two international airports: From Rome Fiumicino ‘Leonardo da Vinci’ to the Conference Venue Fiumicino Airport is the main airport serving Rome from a variety of international destinations. Airlines like Air Europa, Air France, Air Berlin, Alitalia, Iberia and EasyJet amongst many others connect Fiumicino Airport with most airports in Europe. It is also possible to find direct flights from outside Europe operated by airlines such us Emirates, Delta, American Airlines, Air Canada and Air China. There are several options to travel from the airport to the conference venue. Rail: You can take the "Leonardo express" with Trenitalia that runs from the airport to the main rail station, Roma Termini, every 30 minutes without any stops. The journey takes 32 minutes and the fare should cost around € 14. From Roma Termini station, it is about 1 km to the conference venue. You can walk to the conference venue which takes about 15 minutes or take the Metro Line B and get off at Cavour or Colosseo stations. Bus: There are various bus services leaving from Fiumicino Airport Terminal 3 to Roma Termini station. The journey takes about 60 minutes and costs around € 5. Taxi: Taxi are available at the exit of the airport terminal. A taxi from the airport to the conference venue costs € 48 (Comune di Roma Fixed Tariff valid for all authorized taxis). Please be aware that unauthorized taxis could be waiting outside the airport terminal and may try to over-charge you.



Car Hire: national and international companies such as Avis, Europcar or Hertz are located outside the airport terminal easily reachable via the pedestrian tunnels which connect the terminal buildings to the Multilevel-Comfort Parking structure. Signs to the rental car area are located in the arrivals area. We recommend that you book your hire car in advance. There are several ways to drive to the conference venue. The shortest trip is to proceed along the Fiumicino-Rome motorway, direction EUR, and continue along Via Cristoforo Colombo, direction CENTRO (Colosseo area). From Rome Ciampino to the Conference Venue Located Southeast of Rome city center, Rome Ciampino is the second largest airport in the city offering mostly European flights, mainly operated by Ryanair and Wizzair. There are several options to travel from the airport to the conference venue. Bus: There are various bus services leaving from Ciampino Airport to Roma Termini station. The journey takes about 45 minutes and costs around € 5. From Roma Termini station, it is about 1 km to the conference venue. You can walk to the conference venue which takes about 15 minutes or take the Metro Line B and get off at Cavour or Colosseo stations. Taxi: Taxi available at the exit of the airport terminal. A taxi from the airport to the conference venue costs € 30 (Comune di Roma Fixed Tariff valid for all authorized taxis). Please be aware that unauthorized taxis could be waiting outside the airport terminal and may try to over-charge you. Car Hire: national international companies such as Avis, Europcar or Hertz are located outside the airport terminal. Signs to the rental car area are located in the arrivals area. We recommend that you book your hire car in advance.

There are several ways to drive to the conference venue. The shortest trip is to proceed along Via Appia Nuova, direction CENTRO (Colosseo area). Rome has three major stations, Roma Termini, Roma Tiburtina and Roma Ostiense, which are connected to the conference venue. Roma Termini is the main terminus for long distance trains from European countries and High Speed services. The closest train station to the conference venue is Roma Termini. From Roma Termini station, it is about 1 km to the conference venue. You can walk to the conference venue which takes about 15 minutes or take the Metro Line B and get off at Cavour or Colosseo stations. It is easy to reach Rome from northern or southern Italy via the A1 motorway (Autostrada del Sole). Once you have arrived in Rome, follow directions to the city centre or Roma Termini station. The University is located 1 km from the station in the Colosseo area. A map of the conference venue area is available at the following link:

https://web.uniroma1.it/cdaingtrasporti/location/location

The conference will take place at the Sapienza University of Rome. Founded in 1303 it is one of the oldest Universities in history. The University has its own museum network (Sapienza Museum Network) which is often open to a general audience. The Alessandrina University Library, built in 1667 by Pope Alexander VII, is the main library housing many important collections. The university has significant research programmes in the fields of engineering, natural sciences, biomedical sciences and humanities.  Special accommodation rates have been negotiated at the MONTI PALACE HOTEL in Rome. This hotel is only a 15 minute walk from the conference venue. To benefit from this rates please fill in the accommodation form which can be found in the link below. Please note that reservations are subject to availability. Please send your completed accommodation form to the hotel who will contact you to confirm or decline your booking. If you wish to make alternative accommodation arrangements, we recommend that you take into consideration the location of your hotel in relation with the conference venue before making your booking. Please note: All delegates are responsible for booking their own accommodation and settling their own accounts.

A Schengen Visa is the document issued for visiting/travelling in and within the Schengen Area. The Schengen Area is comprised of 26 countries that have agreed to allow free movement of their citizens within this area as a single country. Schengen visas are issued by the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and Liechtenstein If you intend to visit one of the Schengen countries for business, as a tourist or for a personal/private visit, you must first obtain a Schengen visa, unless your country is part of the Shengen territory or has a special agreement. You can check which whether citizens of your country require Shengen VISA here: http://www.schengenvisainfo.com/who-needs-schengen-visa/ You should apply to the Embassy or Consulate in your country of residence (unless you are resident in Ireland). If you intend to visit only one Schengen country, apply to the Embassy or Consulate of that country. If you intend to visit several of the Schengen countries, you must apply for a visa at the Embassy or Consulate of the country in which your main destination is situated (longest duration of stay). Processing time: Your application should be lodged at the Embassy or Consulate at least 2 weeks before the proposed journey is undertaken. Requirements for a Schengen visa may vary slightly between the different Schengen countries. Please visit the following link for further information: http://www.schengenvisainfo.com/ Important information: Please notice that although every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the above information, it is your responsibility to check that the visa and travel requirements with the corresponding Embassy in your country. If you require a letter of invitation for your visa application, please submit a request for a letter of invitation to the conference secretariat. Registration fees must be paid in order to be issued an invitation letter. Please make sure you read the cancellation policy stated in the registration form before sending your payment. All letters of invitation will be sent to you by email and regular mail unless otherwise specified.  Please provide the following information in your request: Your full name (Please specify family name and given name) Additional information such as if you are presenting a paper at the Conference We cannot provide visa letters for spouses or guests, however we can include their name on your letter|||

The Wessex Institute (WIT) is a research and advanced training centre with an international reputation for excellence in engineering and physical sciences.  It organises the well established programme of international WIT Conferences published by WIT Press.