Automated driving is increasingly being considered the key technology to address societal problems caused by the proliferation of automobiles around the world. These include traffic congestion, injuries, and fatalities caused by crashes and air quality. The development of automated driving has been ongoing since at least the 1950s. However, it has accelerated in the last decade, enabled by advancements in computational architectures and sensing technology, along with dramatic cost reductions. These advancements, combined with vehicle electrification and ubiquitous connectivity, are enabling automated driving to rapidly become viable.

Automated vehicles are quickly nearing a level of maturity that will enable initial deployments for consumers. A large group of companies are actively developing complete automated driving systems and the components that go into those systems, including automotive OEMs, suppliers, non-automotive technology companies, and startups. Several of these companies entered this market recently but rapidly moved into contention through acquisitions, investments, and strategic hiring of key personnel. Others have been working on automated driving technology for decades.

This Navigant Research Leaderboard Report examines the strategy and execution of 18 leading companies developing automated driving systems. These players are rated on 10 criteria: vision; go-to market strategy; partners; production strategy; technology; sales, marketing, and distribution; product capability; product quality and reliability; product portfolio; and staying power. Using Navigant Research’s proprietary Leaderboard methodology, companies are profiled, rated, and ranked with the goal of providing an objective assessment of their relative strengths and weaknesses in the global market for automated driving systems.

1.2  The Evolution of the Automated Driving Market

5. Acronym and Abbreviation List

 6. Table of Contents

 7. Table of Charts and Figures

 8. Scope of Study, Sources and Methodology, Notes|||

