I have always thought that Google Trends is quite predictive when it comes to elections. Even if it’s being criticized, polls are too, and it has a good history of predicting election results.

In the case of the upcoming French presidential elections, they show a very different result from the polls, especially when you take the two-round system into account.

So, for the last few weeks, I have been following the popularity of French presidential candidates on Google Trends. Based on Google Search, that shows how often a particular search-term is entered relative to the total search-volume across various regions of the world, and in various languages.

I chose to limit the queries to searches located in France, and to the 5 main candidates.

The latest are all very much alike, they give more or less the following results:

Which means, that most French political analysts consider that Marine Le Pen is the only candidate to be certain to enter the second round of the election.

But things are completely different in the alternate reality of Google Trends.

Basically, Marine Le Pen (far-right) is not the favorite anymore. And the second round would be between Jean-Luc Mélenchon (far-left), François Fillon (right) and Emmanuel Macron (center-left/center-right), with an advantage to Jean-Luc Mélenchon and François Fillon.

On 30 days, the results go like this:

So how come Marine Le Pen is so low in Google Trends and so high in the Polls. According to Google Trends, the results would be very different from what the polls predict. We would have a duel between Jean-Luc Mélenchon who’s the latest surprise of the election, and either Emmanuel Macron, the other surprise of the election, and François Fillon, a former Prime Minister standing strong despite numerous scandals during the last few months.

Interestingly, Google Trends results look more logical than polls when looking at the recent development of the campaign where these 3 candidates are all having very good audiences on TV, and achieving record numbers at their rallies.

After all, it would not be the first time that polls are dead wrong in recent elections, in France and elsewhere.

A good explanation could be that the polls predict a participation rate as low as 65% when Google Trends measures nearly the entirety of the French population.

Then, knowing that the participation rate has always been high in the last French presidential elections, everything will depend on how many people go to vote on the day of the election.

Which sounds quite normal after all.|||

I have always thought that Google Trends is quite predictive when it comes to elections. Even if it’s being criticized, polls are too, and it has a good history of predicting election results. In the…