In 2006 I got to participate in what will surely be the pinnacle of my sports “career”; I got to play in a pro-am game put on by Meadowlark Lemon featuring old and new school Harlem Globetrotters, ex-NBA players Robert Parish, AC Green, Billy Thompson, several local semi-pro players and a three local rec league players including myself. We played in the Glendale Arena in front of 30k people. The largest crowd I had ever played in front of before this would number in the tens. It was an experience.

I never played organized basketball until I suddenly grew a few inches in college. I started playing with my engineering friends at Penn State in a few intramural leagues and loved it. I continued after college, really honing my game. I practiced every morning, played every night and worked out specifically to be good at basketball.

I turned into a pretty good player with all those hours. You wouldn’t confuse me for an NCAA basketball player, but in a rec league, I might have been confused for one of the better players.

This game, however, was a different thing entirely. AC Green towered over me. Robert Parish was hitting his hook left and right in warm-ups. Everyone else was windmill dunking or shooting 3’s from 30+ feet with ease. The lights were bright, the arena was huge and the hoop looked oh so small.

I missed the very first shot of the game, a steal leading to a breakaway layup that I just completely missed. Meadowlark Lemon, the clown prince of the Harlem Globetrotters from the 1950s to the 1980s, stopped the game, grabbed a microphone and proceeded to completely roast me in front of 30 thousand people.

“Son, do you know that there’s a hole up there? Here, let me show you.” as he grabs the ball, lays it up and through. “Here, let me get a ladder. Can we get a ladder? I want this boy to see what the hole looks like in case he doesn’t believe me. It seems he might not be familiar with the goal of basketball. ”

Meadow and I went back a bit, so I knew his humor aimed at me was all in good fun. It was part of the show! He and I played in the same morning basketball game in Scottsdale, Arizona at the JCC. He took a liking to me and would stay after the games and give me some pointers and new drills. I was one of three locals to play in this game.

For the rest of the game I became the butt of the jokes. The ball trick, the confetti trick, the pull down the shorts trick. Meadow could always put on a show and the crowd sure got a kick out of it.

And for three quarters, 1,2 and 4, we played a laid back comedic style of basketball. Lots of fun, lots of stoppage for Meadow’s jokes. It was a good time.

But in the third quarter we played for real. I was on the team with some young Globetrotters going against AC Green, Robert Parrish, Billy Thompson and a few young Globetrotters. I was not prepared for the speed and ferocity that came. AC Green dunked on me so incredibly hard I couldn’t help but think he was an alien sent to earth to test the limits of the human ego. I had never been so outmatched.

And, then, it happened. Up to this point in the game I was 1–4 with a three point basket in the second quarter. I had a bunch of rebounds, a few assists and a few steals. But, this was different. We were playing for real.

The shot went up from the left wing, I was pushing on AC, mostly in vain, trying to get some semblance of position for a rebound. It felt like leaning against a steel girder. His muscles and my muscles are made of very different muscles.

The shot missed and I could see the ball bounce off the rim and backboard. It wasn’t far, but with a 9" height difference between AC and I, there didn’t seem to be much hope. A very large human who played basketball professionally for one of the best teams ever, the show-time Lakers, who just happened to be known for his uncanny ability to rebound a basketball, was in between me and the ball.

I don’t know how, but I got the rebound. A bit shocked and, frankly, unnerved that I had the balls in my hands, I landed softly, turned and faded away as I spun for the shot; a 16–17 footer from the left elbow. All I could see was two gigantic outstretched hands and arms. I shot it and, somehow, the ball went it. I never saw it go in. I never even saw the hoop — just a 6'10" NBA all-star and NBA champion bearing down on me. I did hear the familiar snap of the basketball net as the ball went in.

I had officially out rebounded and scored on AC Green.

I don’t remember much after that point. It wasn’t going to get any better for me. I do remember running up the court and thanking AC for allowing me to get the rebound and score. He smiled and said ‘you earned that one kid’ as he pushed me out of the way to get position. AC dunked with ease on that next possession.

When the game started, I wasn’t sure what I was doing in that place, with those players, in that game. I acted like that when I missed the first shot. By the end of the game I had become part of the act, scored on a living basketball legend and officially peaked as a basketball player with a stat line that read 2–5, 5 points, 8 rebounds, 5 assists and 3 steals. Not bad for a 29 year old 6'1" guy from farm country Connecticut who hadn’t played any basketball until he was 20.|||

Note: inspired by the basketball story, I’m only using quotes from Michael Jordan as inspiration. Jordan has a lot to say about failure and rising to the moment. In 2006 I got to participate in what…