ALBANY, N.Y. — New York will become the first state to make tuition at public colleges and universities free for middle-class students.

The tuition initiative is part of a new state budget approved Sunday by the state Senate, a day after the Assembly approved it.

Governor Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, proposed the tuition plan, which will cost an estimated $163 million.

In-state students whose families earn $125,000 or less will be eligible. Cuomo said the idea is to provide new economic opportunities for New Yorkers by making college more affordable.

The $153 billion budget also includes provisions allowing the ride-hailing apps Uber and Lyft to expand upstate, and raises the age of adult criminal responsibility from 16 to 18.

The budget was due by April 1 but passage was delayed by difficulties in negotiations

The tuition plan is to be phased in over three years, with families making $100,000 or less annually eligible in the fall of 2017, with the threshold rising to $125,000 in 2019. About 940,000 families in the state will meet the income criteria when the program is fully implemented.

The budget also has $19 million for a new tuition award program for students at private colleges.

“What we thought of high school 50 years ago is the way you should think of college now,’’ Cuomo said. ‘‘Why do we have free public high school? Because we made the determination as society that you needed high school.’’

“You needed it to succeed, and you needed it as a society,’’ he said. “Well, today, college is what high school was.’’

In-state tuition at community colleges in New York is $4,350, while tuition at State University of New York schools is $6,470 for residents. The City University of New York schools cost about the same as their state counterparts.

Both state and city university systems were granted permission to raise their tuitions by $200 in the budget agreement.

The proposal to raise the age of adult criminal responsibility from 16 to 18 emerged as a top priority for Assembly Speaker Carl Heastie and other Democrats and was one of the greatest sticking points for a budget.

The agreement would raise the age slowly, to 17 in October 2018 and to 18 a year later.|||

The initiative is part of a $153 billion budget approved Sunday by the state Senate.