Just a few days ago, we reviewed a fantastic WordPress CRM plugin that can quickly transform your site into a skillful business machine. So, today, we're keeping things short and on point. At the time, we tested the plugin that was already upgraded with some valuable features like Client Portal. There were many invoicing improvements, changes to dates and formats, new extensions, and much more.

The team now celebrates one year of the powerful WordPress CRM plugin, which actually means a new version of the plugin. And in addition to all the previous improvements we mentioned, Zero BS WordPress CRM now comes with a fully functional API! Developers, rejoice!

If you're quick enough, you can still grab the 50% discount on all bundles. The offer is valid for just a few more days. But don't worry; you can still get 30% off anytime by using the code provided at the end of this article.

The most important thing about the new version is the introduction of API. That means that you (or more probably a developer that you will hire) get a chance to extend the plugin depending on your needs.

The API allows you to connect Zero BS to practically any other service and plugin you want. That may mean connecting the plugin to Zapier so that you connect to hundreds of other services available there. Whether you want to export contacts from Zero BS to another plugin or service, or maybe just add an extra feature, the API allows you to do so. Well, you will just have to know how to build it.

If you're not interested into reading the entire review, we should accentuate again that the core plugin is completely free. You can start your WordPress CRM in a matter of few minutes, but if you want complete control over the contacts and have all the extra features, there are some great extensions available for purchase.

To help you with that, we teamed up with the folks behind Zero BS WordPress CRM and prepared a special coupon which knocks off 30% of your purchase! Enjoy!|||

Zero BS WordPress CRM gets an update. In addition to all the amazing features, now you get to use the API and connect it with practically anything you want.