He isn’t. He’s a software consultant from Fullerton, California. But he shares a first name (with a different spelling), last name and middle initial with a financier of a Pakistani terror group. That man, Mohammad Naushad Alam Khan, is on the Treasury Department’s Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List (SDN). The 1,026-page catalog lists people and organizations that U.S. citizens and residents are barred from doing business with because of their ties to terror cells, drug cartels or rogue states.

Khan later found out that his credit reports from Experian and TransUnion had also been flagged as a potential match. The trouble this caused him was relatively minor ― after he got over the shock of seeing a terrorism flag on his credit report, he spent a few hours navigating customer service lines with the Treasury Department and the two credit bureaus. He got his retirement account set up and his credit reports cleared after providing some personal information to show that he was not the man who had financially supported the 2008 Mumbai attacks. (Neither TransUnion nor Experian answered The Huffington Post’s questions about how they handle such false positive flags.)

Some other people wrongly believed to be on the SDN ― either because they share a name with someone who is or because their name partially matches an alias used by someone on the list (and international criminals often have a lot of aliases) ― are hurt far worse than Khan.

OFAC is a relatively small office compared to other parts the law enforcement and national security apparatus, although the Treasury Department told HuffPost that OFAC has enough staff and that its size is appropriate relative to U.S. sanctions programs. However, OFAC is especially small relative to its mission of blocking thousands of people from the U.S. financial system.

Banks tend to be conservative in their risk management, and cast as wide a net as possible to try to stop anything improper. This is because sanctions are enforced under the legal standard of strict liability, meaning any transaction with anybody on the list is illegal, regardless of intention. Fines are steep, too: either $284,000 per violation, or twice the value of the transaction ― whichever is higher.

A compliance software executive who asked not to be named because it could harm his business told HuffPost that big banks, credit card companies and payment processors can have between 200 and 500 employees who sift through hits and gather information to try to clear false positives from the OFAC list. When a potential client’s name matches one on the list, the financial institution staffers then have to call OFAC to figure out if the person really is on the SDN or if they are dealing with a false positive.

But the government is often hamstrung because it has limited personal information about the people on the list, often because the SDN targets are concealing as much about their lives as possible. The Treasury Department told HuffPost it compiles and releases as much identifying information about the people on the list as it can in order to reduce the number of false positives. The department declined to release data on the number of transactions or transfers halted due to false positives.

It can become a business disadvantage to people whose name just happens to be similar to that of someone actually on the list. Peter Djinis, a former anti-money laundering regulator at the Treasury Department

The complex nature of financial transactions makes this process even more difficult for customers with names that are likely to get wrongly flagged. For instance, a simple money transfer abroad might involve two retail banks and an intermediary bank to facilitate. The transfer can be held up if software run by any of the three banks flags any party involved.

Some financial institutions have tried to fix this by buying more software to help sort through the results ― which is great for the software providers, and could help the people the system has wrongly flagged. “We are going to make so, so much money selling them stuff to fix this,” the software executive said.|||

The Treasury Department essentially has a 1,000-page financial no-fly list.