This was news to me in a few ways; first, there's a new DNS resource record called CAA (Certificate Authority Authorization) and second, Certificate Authorities are now required to check that record before issuing a certificate, to determine if they're allowed to do so.

When in doubt, consult the RFC: RFC 6844,  DNS Certification Authority Authorization (CAA) Resource Record.

In short, it looks like this:

The CAA record is a new resource record, next to the usual A, CNAME, MX, TXT, ... records you might already know.

The syntax is as follows;

In reality, you'll see the configurations mostly as follows;

-> this means that only Let's Encrypt can issue a certificate for the domain "ttias.be". Note this doesn't cover the subdomains, like www.

-> this means both Let's Encrypt and Globalsign can issue certificates for the domain "ttias.be".

-> the issuewild tag indicates that wildcard certificates can be issued for "ttias.be", covering "*.ttias.be", but not "*.mail.ttias.be".

If a certificate authority receives a certificate request for a domain, but the CAA record denies it, the CA can send a notification to the domain owner. This is configured & managed via the iodef tag.

-> this configures it so that if a CA receives a certificate request for "ttias.be", you'll be notified on "m@ttias.be".

-> this configures it so that a HTTPS call will be done to that URL to inform you of this certificate request attempt. It's unclear whether it's a GET or a POST or what the payload is, that might depend on the CA?

Alas, this doesn't work yet in , as you get the A record if you query for a CAA record.

Current versions of don't understand the CAA record yet, so you have to be explicit and query for Resource Record Type 257, the identifier given to CAA.

Notice how the value isn't exactly readable? That's because it's binary encoded and needs to be decoded first, to be human readable.

Update: the version on CentOS 7 works just fine.

Support for CAA records are coming in the next version of DNS Spy, too.

No, just like HSTS, the CAA records are completely optional. You should add them, for increased security though.

As of September 2017, Certificate Authorities are obligated to check for CAA records and honor those preferences. Not having CAA records is essentially the same as saying "everyone can issue a certificate for my domain".|||

The Web, Open Source, PHP, Security, DevOps & Automation.