Since well before the days of snake oil peddlers and modern Western medicine, people have been on the hunt for the next “fountain of youth,” a formula that will either keep us young or extend our lifespans. And, while there have been a number of promising discoveries, there's no pill that you can take to make you live forever (yet). But a recent study published in Nature presents a compelling argument that monounsaturated fatty acids may be the next item on the list of promising discoveries.

Monounsaturated fats are simply fats that contain just one double bond among the links between their carbon atoms. These types of fats naturally occur in several types of food products, including red meat, dairy, nuts, and high-fat plant foods such as olives and avocado. In fact, many plant and nut oils have a high monounsaturated fat content.

Over the last several decades, monounsaturated fats have occasionally been the focus of health and diet studies. For example, the Mediterranean diet, which is thought to promote longevity and cardiovascular health, is high in these fats. Additionally, monounsaturated fats appear to be associated with increases in “healthy” HDL cholesterol and decreases in unhealthy LDL cholesterol.

The most recent study looked at accumulation of monounsaturated fatty acids and their longevity effects in C. elegans worms (the small, transparent C. elegans is commonly used to study genetics and development). The researchers behind it began by looking at a protein—called a histone—that helps package the DNA inside cells. A chemically modified form of this histone helps regulate lifespan in these worms.

The researchers found that when this histone complex was unmodified, the worms lived longer and also accumulated relatively large amounts of monounsaturated fats, primarily in the worms’ intestines. Many worms with this accumulation of monounsaturated fatty acids lived up to 45 percent longer than normal worms, though some strains only lived about 3 percent longer.

The authors found that these worms were especially likely to live longer when they also consumed diets that were high in monounsaturated fatty acids. However, the authors didn’t see this same effect when the worms were fed a diet of polyunsaturated fatty acids (meaning multiple double bonds). This is a bit surprising, because previous studies have shown that polyunsaturated fatty acids are more strongly associated with longevity.

The authors suggest that the monounsaturated fatty acids may be contributing to longevity by getting incorporated into cell membranes, where they would promote membrane fluidity. But they also suggest that these fats might be minimizing oxidative stress, enhancing energy storage, or activating signaling pathways. We just don't have enough data to know.

The authors take pains to specify that the beneficial effects of monounsaturated fatty acids are particularly exciting because these fats are widely available within the normal human diet—you just have to look as far as olives. Additionally, diets high in these fats (like the Mediterranean diet) have already been associated with decreased risk of chronic illnesses, including cardiovascular disease and diabetes.

The authors are hopeful that the conservation of lipid metabolism between humans and less complex animals (such as these worms) suggests that monounsaturated fatty acids could have similarly beneficial effects on lifespans in humans. However, this study is nowhere close to any human application. Humans live in considerably more complex environments, with markedly more complicated diets and exposure histories, which could mean this longevity boost is not nearly as strong in human subjects. So, before you go substituting all your daily vegetables for olives, it’s important to wait and see if similar results are seen in epidemiological studies of humans.|||

No studies in humans yet, but plant-based diets are definitely healthier anyway.