Building a Twitter bot is a great way for you to grow a following for your business, blog,  project, etc. A bot can be used to automatically like, retweet, follow users tweet about things related to your business. Not only does this benefit you by making your twitter page very active and therefore increasing visibility, but also because many of the users your bot interacts with will check out your account which can lead to them visiting your website and turning into possible leads. You can also use a bot to automatically respond to users who mention @yourbrand. There really are an endless number of ways which you can use a twitter bot streamline your twitter presence.

Twitter bots are already easy to build even with programming knowledge, however even if you don't jack about coding, you're in luck! There is a tool that you can easily use to setup your very own bot in under an hour.

1. Create a new Twitter account that will be used as a bot. It is recommended to not use your primary business account yet, as while twitter hasn't prohibited automation, they scrutinize certain type of bot behaviors so it and its best to push the limits of what does and doesn't get you banned with a test account at first.

2. With your new test account go to apps.twitter.com and create a twitter app. Fill out the requested fields and read the terms of service and agree to them.

3. After creating the app, under Application Settings select Modify App Permissions and change the access level to Read, Write, and Accept Direct Messages.

4. In the Keys and Access Tokens tab, click on Create my Access Token. This will generate a token that we will be using later.

1. Go to labnol.org/bots so we can open the Twitter bot application. You will be required to give the bot authorization through Google.

2. Enter the Twitter Consumer Key, Consumer Secret, Access Token, and Access Access Secret that were all created earlier.

3. Now you should set the search phrases for the bot. The bot will scan twitter for matching tweets and perform an action on each one.

4. Select the Create button to finish creation. You are now done and the bots will run in the background automatically.

1. Building a following or raising awareness by interacting with users who have certain interests.

2. Auto-responding when users DM you after business hours, telling them your office hours and when they can expect a response.

3. Set an old twitter account to reply with your new twitter account @handle if someone DM's it.

4. Retweeting relevant trending posts to keep your page interesting to users.

CREDIT: This easy to setup bot is the creation of Amit Agarwal. Twitter: @labnol|||

