High frequency traders are not anymore the cool kids on the block. Margins are shrinking and major players such as Virtu and KCG are now merging to profit from economies of scale. On the other hand, artificial intelligence and quantitative strategies seem to be the new solutions to the alpha generation headache. There has also been lots of news (noise) about DIY (Do It Yourself) hedge funds (Wired, Bloomberg and also FT). More recently, Point72 announced that it handed its first check of c.$10m of the $250m promised to Quantopian.

The AI & Quantitative startup spaces are interesting and have the potential to disrupt a $3.2tn industry. In order to better understand the different actors, I tried to map and to categorise the different players in the market. Please find below a landscape mapping and thereafter the full list of companies as well as some brief comments.

PS: Views are my own. Also, I am sure I forgot many companies and did many mistakes. Do not hesitate if you have any recommendations!

Hiring is the major challenge for quantitative funds. They now compete directly with tech companies offering bean bags and other cool perks as well as high salaries. The fierce competition has forced quant funds to redesign their working environment and also to adopt new hiring strategies including partnering with crowd sourced hedge funds like Quantopian, strengthening their relationships with universities and also launching datathon in order to find the next James Simons.

These funds are some of the most respected ones and use among others quantitative strategies as well as artificial intelligence. However, none of them seem to have adopted a partnership / challenge hiring strategy to attract new talents.

Everyone talks about these guys. So far, Quantopian seems to be the one leading in terms of funding, institutional backing and also Google Trends…

These platforms are like forums on steroids where traders can share tips, reviews and also have access to data and can do backtesting.

These funds represent the next-gen hedge fund category. Their goal is to automatise all the investment research and trade in order to create high returns but with a much lower cost base than legacy hedge funds. Many people like Igor Tulchinsky from WorldQuant think that AI is more a tool to help human traders rather than replacing them. It will be interesting to see the returns of these funds over the next years.

Investors can easily mimic trades from other retail / semi-professional investors. Indeed, all of these traders are not using AI / quant strategies but they were one of the first to try to offer to non institutional investors an access to new strategies in few clicks.

Thank you for reading my article.

Do not hesitate if you have any comments!|||

High frequency traders are not anymore the cool kids on the block. Margins are shrinking and major players such as Virtu and KCG are now merging to profit from economies of scale. On the other hand…