Pity U.S. investors who have put capital into Europe for the past 10 years. Including reinvested dividends, they have almost nothing to show for their European vacation. Have a look at two funds that focus on Europe: Vanguard’s FTSE Europe ETF (VGK) and the SPDR EURO STOXX 50 ETF (FEZ). The big difference between the two is that FEZ doesn't have United Kingdom exposure, while VGK is about 30 percent U.K. stocks. That’s a distinction without a difference. Each of these funds has been going nowhere for a decade. Before reinvesting dividends, VGK is down 27.3 percent through the end of March. Even with dividends reinvested, the returns were less than 1 percent annually (9.8 percent). FEZ did even worse. It's down 34.7 percent over the decade; dividends change that number to a negative 5.5 percent. Ouch! Had you invested in the S&P 500 over the past decade, you would have doubled your money, with a 105 percent return. That’s 7.5 percent per year. The last time there was this big a performance gap between Europe and the U.S. was in the 10 years ended in 2002. (Over the ensuing 10 years, European stocks, measured by the MSCI Europe index, gained 69 percent, significantly outperforming the S&P 500.) But the premium that U.S. stocks have earned has stretched their valuations somewhat. Value investors should hold their noses and buy into the Continent. It may sound like a terrible idea, but that’s a hallmark of a good contrarian concept. It's a particularly good idea for those who succumb to home country bias and are overexposed to the U.S. stock market. Consider how inexpensive Europe is relative to the Shiller CAPE, the cyclically adjusted price/earnings ratio, for U.S. stocks, at about 30. The CAPE of developed Europe is 16.6, and the CAPE of emerging Europe is 8.6. Value investors should note that eight of the 10 cheapest countries in the world are in Europe. Ways to play it with ETFs: Bloomberg Intelligence's ETF analyst, Eric Balchunas, likes both of Ritholtz's picks, the  Vanguard FTSE Europe ETF (VGK; it has a 0.10 percent fee) and the  SPDR EURO STOXX 50 ETF (FEZ; the fee is 0.29 percent) . Performance of last quarter’s ETF plays: The ETFs Balchunas chose to pair with Ritholtz's advice were the Vanguard FTSE Emerging Market ETF (VWO) and the  iShares Core MSCI Emerging Markets ETF (IEMG) . VWO was up 10.8 percent in 2017's first quarter; IEMG rose 10.7 percent.

About six months ago, we discussed how underinvested most Americans are in emerging markets. Since then, we've seen a nice total return in the Vanguard FTSE Emerging Markets ETF (VWO) of 3.5 percent. (The past three months haven't been as kind, as noted in the ETF performance figures below.) But it is not only the emerging markets that Americans tend to be underexposed to, but the developed international markets as well. Blame home country bias. People are more comfortable in the companies and corporate management they are most familiar with. That tends to be the companies of their home country. This leads to significant overexposure to Canada or the United Kingdom or the United States, or wherever. The problem with this is that it’s a big world. The U.S. accounts for about half of the world’s stock market capitalization and about 25 percent of its economic activity. Investing primarily in U.S. stocks dramatically reduces the benefits of diversification. Not only that, but U.S. markets have been outperforming international markets for more than a decade. This outperformance is one of the reasons that stocks in the U.S. have a higher valuation than international or emerging-markets companies. Across five of the broadest metrics—CAPE ratio, price to earnings, price to cash flow, price to sales, and dividend yield—U.S. stocks currently have an average premium of more than 60 percent over European, Asian, and emerging-market stocks. Higher valuations and lower dividend yields means that U.S. stocks should have lower expected future returns than foreign stocks. Note: This is not a “sell America” call. The U.S. economy remains strong; there are no signs of a recession anywhere. If anything, the recent gains in wages and corporate profits suggest that the U.S. expansion still has a ways to go. But that doesn’t mean we can avoid mean reversion forever. Given that the typical portfolio is underexposed internationally, as well as those valuation differences, trimming a few percent off of U.S. equity exposure and rotating into international equities is prudent long-term planning. So cut a little off your U.S. exposure and add a little to overseas. Your grandkids will thank you. Way to play it with ETFs: The Vanguard FTSE Emerging Markets ETF (VWO)  and the iShares Core MSCI Emerging Markets ETF (IEMG)  are two low-cost, popular ways to get emerging-markets exposure. They both charge around 0.15 percent in fees but differ a bit in exposure. IEMG includes South Korea at a 15 percent weight; VWO doesn't. Ritholtz notes that he likes VWO, too, as well as the Vanguard FTSE Developed Markets ETF (VEA)  , which has an expense ratio of 0.09 percent. Performance of last quarter’s ETF plays: The ETFs Balchunas chose to track Ritholtz’s advice were the Vanguard FTSE Emerging Markets ETF (VWO)  and the Vanguard Emerging Markets Stock Index Fund (VEMAX)  . Both lost 4.5 percent for the three months ended Dec 31. Emerging markets experienced a post-election selloff stemming from a quick rise in Treasury yields and concern over President-Elect Trump's ‘America first’ trade policy. They have recovered a bit since that initial selloff.

Three months ago, we looked at where to invest $10,000. My suggestion, assuming your portfolio was already well diversified in low-cost global indices, was to look at inexpensive, underperforming asset classes that were “ripe for a reversion towards their historic average returns.” I suggested two emerging market indices, with the caveat that “ugly duckling investments” like these often need years to blossom. I was way too pessimistic, as these two funds have rallied about 12 percent since then. Rather than cash out, I am going to suggest you stay with this investment for longer. Not just a little longer, but a whole lot longer. Why? There are at least four compelling reasons: First, and most obvious, emerging markets remain the cheapest broad equity markets in the world. The U.S. is fully valued; the developed world ex-U.S. is also pricey. Europe, despite all of its woes, isn’t much cheaper. EM, on the other hand, remains attractively priced. If you want to see how well this thesis is playing out, look at a chart of the ratio between the S&P 500 index (SPY) versus the MSCI Emerging Markets Index (EEM). When the line is rising, U.S. markets are outperforming emerging markets; when it is falling, EM is outperforming U.S. Second, as we noted last time, the U.S. has been outperforming EM for about seven years. These cycles can run anywhere from five to 10 years, and given the valuation differential we could be in the very early innings of a long bull market for emerging economies. Third, emerging markets are affected by the strength of the U.S. dollar and pricing of commodities. Today, the dollar is at multi-year highs while commodities are the cheapest they've been in many years. I have no idea how long this condition will persist, but eventually mean reversion will rear its head. The dollar will weaken, commodities will see price increases, and both of those benefit the EM economies and their stock markets. The same two inexpensive investments—DFA Emerging Markets Core Equity (DFCEX, purchased through advisers) and the Vanguard Emerging Markets Stock Index Fund Admiral Shares (VEMAX)—remain my choices. [DFCEX rose 7.4 percent for the three months ended Sept. 30; VEMAX gained 6.5 percent.] Fourth and last is a trading rule I developed a long time ago: So long as the underlying reasons for owning something are still in place, you hold on to that position. Never make excuses for not selling once your thesis is disproved. Conversely, until your underlying reasons for ownership are no longer valid, don’t sell merely because of a little price appreciation. Cutting your losers and letting your winners run is much better investing strategy. Way to play it with ETFs: The Vanguard FTSE Emerging Markets ETF (VWO)  holds 36,000 emerging-market stocks, with its heaviest weightings in China, Taiwan, and India. VWO is the ETF version of Vanguard Emerging Markets Stock Index Fund (VEMAX) and costs the same. Either will do. Performance of last quarter’s ETF plays: The ETFs Balchunas chose to track Ritholtz’s advice were the iShares Core MSCI Emerging Markets ETF (IEMG)  and the iShares Edge MSCI Minimum Volatility Emerging Markets ETF (EEMV)  . They rose 9 percent and 5 percent, respectively, for the three months ended Sept. 30.

Assuming your portfolio is global, diverse, and mainly in low-cost indexes, we'd look at investment options that have underperformed over the past five years or so and are ripe for a reversion towards their historic average returns. Unlike cheap stocks, inexpensive asset classes have a lower chance of big drawdowns (broad asset classes don’t go to zero) and a higher probability of average or better returns. Over the past five years, the U.S. stock market, using the exchange-traded fund SPY as a proxy, have gained 77 percent. The Emerging Markets Index (EEM), which includes almost 850 companies, is down 21.8 percent. That almost 100 percent spread is only the first part of our calculus. When we look at the longer-term cyclically adjusted price-earnings ratio (CAPE), a broad measure of how expensive or cheap a stock is, the U.S. is the most expensive, with a CAPE of 24.6. You have to go to the emerging markets to find a CAPE of 13.7. Two inexpensive investments are DFA Emerging Markets Core Equity (DFCEX, purchased through advisers) and the Vanguard Emerging Markets Stock Index Fund Admiral Shares (VEMAX). The DFA fund costs 0.62 percentage point of assets invested, about half of the average emerging market fund. Vanguard's fund costs 0.15 percentage point. Over five years, the DFA fund is down 3.7 percent and the Vanguard fund is down 4.2 percent. Over 10 years, the DFA fund is up 4.5 percent and Vanguard's fund is up 3 percent. A caveat: This ugly duckling investment will likely need time—quarters, or even years—to blossom into a beautiful swan. Ways to play it with ETFs: Bloomberg ETF analyst Eric Balchunas points to the iShares Core MSCI Emerging Markets ETF (IEMG)  , which holds 2,000 emerging market stocks and charges 0.16 percent of assets. For an ETF with a smoother ride, he likes the iShares Edge MSCI Minimum Volatility Emerging Markets ETF (EEMV).  It charges 0.25 percent of assets.|||

Five experts reveal the opportunities they see around the world.