Don’t answer your emails immediately. Don’t transform a peaceful and civilized exchange of letters into a frenzy conversation. Don’t try to get to “inbox zero” just because your email software make you think that it would be a good idea.

Take the time to write something nice. Be polite. Procrastinate. Don’t worry if you’re taking too long. Don’t care if you answer other emails first. Don’t care if you don’t answer your emails at all.

Do you really think it’s normal to feel “liberated” once you’ve emptied your mailbox and reached “inbox zero” for a few minutes? Isn’t it the signal that you’re addicted?

In the New Yorker, Susanna Wolf has a good laugh about the social pressure to avoid a “delayed response”. She wrote several fictitious canned email introductions for people who need bad faith explanations of the reason why they took time to answer.

I especially loved this one:

“Oh, my God, so sorry. I’m finally responding to this e-mail that I fully intended to ignore forever because I realized that I need to ask you for a favor and I don’t want you to be holding an e-mail grudge against me.”

It makes you realize how overwhelming is the social pressure to answer your emails quickly and to stay “on top” of your email inbox. It forces you to lie with bad excuses, or to stress yourself for no reason.

Even digitally educated people such as Fred Wilson decided they could sometimes declare “email bankruptcy” and set up their autoresponders to say:

“If you’ve sent me an email (and you aren’t my wife, partner, or colleague), you might want to send it again”.

If it’s important, it will come up again.

But let’s not be radicals.

Let’s say, there are emails you want or you need to answer to.

At least, you can decide when you want them to ship out. Use a scheduler. Outlook and Thunderbird have a function for that. Gmail can use an extension called Boomerang. And Mail for OSX can use another one called Mail Butler.

Picture it. It’s sunday. But even if it’s written, your answer will only leave your computer on Monday at 8am. You’ve done your job but you won’t be harassed during your day off. There, you feel satisfied. You’ve solved two problems instead of one.

Or, it’s Wednesday and it’s 3pm. You answer a message, but you will send it tomorrow also at 8am. Same thing. You feel good.

And if you want to look like you’re working hard and early, you can schedule your emails for 6am.|||

Don’t answer your emails immediately. Don’t transform a peaceful and civilized exchange of letters into a frenzy conversation. Don’t try to get to “inbox zero” just because your email software make…