Apple finally planted a foot in the ‘messaging war’ last September with the launch of iOS 10 and an iMessage-specific app store. The move solidified iMessage as a standalone messaging platform in a battle with Snapchat, Facebook Messenger, WhatsApp and even Instagram for the way we increasingly communicate through visual representations. Namely, emojis and stickers.

With more than 41 billion messages shared a day, it’s a battle for a big pie. In 2016 more than 6 billion emojis or stickers were sent every day on mobile messaging apps.

Since launching the iMessage App Store, Apple has increasingly focused on sticker packs as the driver of it. There are stickers of all types. Some are extensions of apps, and others are standalone stickers that can be created without needing to code anything. Stickers are even the theme of Apple’s new advertising campaign that is aptly titled “Sticker Fight”.

Brands aren’t shying away from participating in the emoji and sticker ‘fight’ either. There was a 609% year-over-year growth of branded campaigns using emojis between June 2015 and June 2016 according to research by AppBoy. During that time over 800 million branded emoji messages were sent.

The team here at Bare Tree Media has created hundreds of branded sticker packs and apps for brands over the last few years. In fact, many of our stickers are featured in Apple’s commercial!

Specifically we’ve helped brands, entertainment properties and sports figures including Star Trek, Saban’s Power Rangers, DreamWorks’ Trolls, Fox’s TV series Empire, the New England Patriots, Garfield and many more with creating branded emojis and stickers.

In addition, our emojiTap platform enables these brands to analyze where their customers are engaging with and sharing these branded emojis. With that as a backdrop, we wanted to take a look at just where users are sharing branded stickers across messaging platforms and social networks.

Is Apple’s emphasis on marketing its iMessage App Store paying off? We analyzed more than 8 million stickers shared over the last six months through Bare Tree Media’s platforms to find out.|||

