Microsoft licensing is confusing, which is probably why you’re here. SQL Server licensing mistakes are common and usually expensive.

So, I put together a quick report for you highlighting the top 5.

These are some of the mistakes I’ve seen repeated over and over again, and not just with SQL Server 2016 but earlier versions too.

Some of these we’ve talked about at Volume Licensing Course before and some we haven’t.

One client I worked with was able to take advantage of this knowledge.

They had a substantial SQL Server environment with an annual spend to match.

Avoiding just one of the mistakes you’ll read about in this report helped them save over $100,000 in a single year and repeat that feat the following year.

Another, much smaller company, actually made one of these mistakes and spent a few thousand dollars on a SQL Server license they were never able to use, because it put them in a non-compliant state.

We noticed the issue before they received an audit and came out clean in short order.

SQL Server licensing mistakes like these can be prevented and that’s part of my aim with this report.

It takes more than a single report to make sure you’re SQL environment is licensed correctly though.

A good license management process paired with staying up to date on Microsoft licensing and agreement rules make a real difference.

If you only ever look at your license deployments and entitlements every few years, you’re probably making these, and other mistakes.

Prevention is the best medicine.

Be proactive in managing your SQL Server licenses, don’t wait until an audit lands in your lap or you realize your renewal is next week.

By putting good license management processes in place you can avoid the mistakes that take up your team’s time and cost money you don’t have in your budget.

In the meantime, enjoy the free report and let me know what you think.|||

SQL Server Licensing Mistakes are common and costly. This free report highlights the top 5 mistakes made by companies year after year. Avoid them and save.