Container technology is rapidly changing the way teams build, package, deliver, and manage applications. Robust and open container orchestration, paired with new application architectures are giving organizations unprecedented flexibility and choice. From the early days of containers through the rise of Kubernetes, Deis has always been focused on building and contributing open source technologies that make life easy for developers and operators to build and run applications.

Today, we are excited to announce that Deis will be joining Microsoft to continue our mission to make container technology easier to use. Microsoft has a storied history of building tools and technologies that work for developers. Paired with their cloud leadership and unambiguous support for open source software, we are impressed by the breadth, depth and reach of Microsoft to help define, shape and build new cloud-native applications. We look forward to making Azure the best place to run containerized workloads.

We are honored to add our experience leading and growing open source projects with large user bases and a diverse set of external contributors. Over the years, we have worked hard to be open, reliable, and dependable open source maintainers. From our new home at Microsoft you should expect nothing less. We will continue our contributions to Workflow, Helm, and Steward and look forward to maintaining our deep engagement with the Kubernetes community. The future of open source infrastructure at Microsoft is very bright.

Our customers, community members, partners, family, and friends all deserve a huge round of thanks and applause. Thank you for your GitHub issues, pull requests, help in our #community Slack channel, bug fixes, and shared experiences. We are pumped for the road ahead.

For more info on this exciting news, read Scott Guthrie’s blog post.|||

Container technology is rapidly changing the way teams build, package, deliver, and manage applications. Robust and open container orchestration, paired with...