To the untrained (like me), wine criticism may seem like an exercise in pretentiousness. It may seem like anybody following a set of basic rules and knowing the proper descriptors can feign sophistication (at least when it comes to wine).

In this post, we will be exploiting the formulaic nature of wine reviews to automatically generate our own reviews that appear (at least to the untrained) to be legitimate.

Markov Chains

 A Markov chain is a system that transitions between states using a random, memoryless process. The transition from one state to another is determined by a single random sample from a (usually discrete) probability distribution. Additionally, the current state wanders aimlessly through the chain according to these random transitions with no regard to its previous states.

A roll-of-the-dice board game can be likened to a Markov chain; the dice determine how many squares you move, and is in no way is influenced by your previous rolls. Scores in basketball games appear to act in this way as well (in spite of the myth of the 'hot hand') and a gambler's earnings almost certainly hold the Markov property (see the Monte Carlo Fallacy)

Many more phenomena can be appropriately modeled by a Markovian process... but language isn't one of them.

Markov Chains and Text Generation

 The image below shows a Markov chain that is built from the following lyrics:





 I am the son

 and the heir

 of a shyness that is criminally vulgar

 I am the son and heir

 of nothing in particular



Here, each word is a state, and the transitions are based on the the number of times a word appears after another one. For example, "I" always precedes "am" in the text, so the transition from "I" to "am" occurs with certainty (p=1). Following the word "the", however, "son" occurs twice and "heir" occurs once, so the probability of the transitions are .66 and .33, respectively.

Text can be generated using this Markov chain by changing state until an "absorbing state" is reached, where there are no longer any transitions possible.

Given "I" as an initial state, two possible text generations are

Very often, the generated text violates basic rules of grammar; after all, the transitions are "dumb" stochastic processes without knowledge of grammar and semantics.

Instead of a memoryless chain, though, we can build a chain where the next state depends on the last n states. This can still satisfy the Markov property if we view each state as holding n words. When using these 'higher order' chains to generate text, something very interesting happens. Since the states are now made up of clauses and phrases (instead of words) the generated text seems to magically follow (some of) the rules of grammar, while still being devoid of semantic sense.

The higher order the chain, more text needs to be fed into the chain to achieve the same level of 'arbitrariness'–but the more the generated text seems to conform to actual correct English. In order to fake our wine reviews, we are going to train an order-two Markov chain on a web-scraped corpus of almost 9,000 wine reviews.

The scraping

 The corpus of wine reviews I chose to use was from www.winespectator.com. If you go to this site, you'll see that there 709 pages of reviews. I used SelectorGadget to determine the XPath selector for the content I wanted and wrote a few python scripts along these lines:



and grabbed/processed it with shell code like this:



This is a sample of what out text file looks like at this point:



The "BEGIN NOW" tokens at the beginning of each line will serve as the initial state of our generative Markov process, and the "END" token will denote a stopping point.

Now comes the construction of the Markov chain which will be represented as a python dictionary. We can get away with not calculating the probabilities of the transitions by just storing the word that occurs after each bi-gram (two words) in a list that can be accessed using the bi-gram key to the chain dictionary. We will then 'pickle' (serialize) the dictionary for use in the script that generates the fake review. The code is very simple and reads thusly:



Finally, the python script to generate the review from the pickled Markov chain dictionary looks like this:



The random.choice() function allows us to skip the calculation of the transition probabilities because it will choose from the list of possible next states in accordance with the frequencies at which they occur.

The results

 Obviously, some generated reviews come out better than others. After playing with the generator for a while, I compiled a list of "greatest hits" and "greatest misses".

Possibilities for improvement

 The results are amazing, but the algorithm needs a little work before it will be able to fool a sommelier.

One major giveaway is the inclusion of contradictory descriptors in the same review. I don't know anything about wine (I drink Pepsi) but even I know that a wine should never be described as both "dry" and "sweet". One possible solution to this would be to use association mining to infer a list of complementary and discordant descriptors.

Another clue that these reviews are nonsense is the indiscriminate chaining of clauses that have nothing to do with each other. I'm not quite sure how to solve this, yet, but I have a few ideas.

An additional hiccup is that there are still grammatically incorrect sentences that creep through. One solution would be to identify and remove them. Unfortunately, this is much easier said than done. In the absence of a formal English grammar, we have to rely on less-than-perfect techniques like context-based identification and simple pattern-matching.

The last obvious problem is that some of the generated reviews are just too long. This increases the likelihood of containing contradictory descriptors and committing grammar errors, as with this review: (which also exemplifies all of the problems stated above)

Luscious, sleek and generous with its gorgeous blueberry, raspberry and blackberry flavors , with hints of herbs, cocoa and graphite. The long, briary edge lingering on the nose and palate. Medium-bodied, with a modest, lightly juicy and brambly flavors of milk chocolate. Full-bodied, with fine focus and its broad, intense and vivid, with a tangy, lip-smacking profile. Light-weight and intense, with a deft balance.

In future posts, I hope to explore some of these avenues of improvement. I also plan to use parts-of-speech tagging to automate an unusual games of wine review mad-libs.

Sooner, though, I'll explain the process I took to set-up the fake wine review twitter bot (@HorseWineReview) that I will use to experiment with different text-generation techniques.|||

