Why do we want to measure our competency? Well… because we want to improve. And we have to! The world is rapidly changing: tools, technologies, paradigms, concepts, processes, competitors, crises. We must run to stay in business. We must deliver the product, maintain the quality, meet the budget… But competency and quality measuring is tough! We don’t have rules to assess them. Joel Spolsky tried to build a simple checklist for a team to rate its quality in his famous The Joel Test, but it was sixteen years ago. So let’s stand on the shoulders of giants, and revise it from just the test to a set of rules that can guide us for the better software engineering competency.

The list of rules is splitted in two parts: Obligations and Merits. Each rule is a Yes/No question. “Yes” answer to an “Obligation” gives you 0 points, “No” answer gives you -1 point. “Yes” answer to a “Merit” rulegives you 1 point, “No” answer gives you 0 points. You’ve got the idea, right? Having merits is good, not fulfilling obligations is bad. The resulting sum of points is your, let’s say, Engineering Competency Score when negative number means that either your competency is questionable or is going to degrade over the time. 0 score means that you follow the professional discipline and capable of producing good quality product. Positive number says that you increase your competency and grow as professional. Let’s go.

Now let’s elaborate a little bit on the items from this list.

No CI - no automated tests - no quality - bad job. You may have tests but without CI they are useless, because sooner or later someone will forget/postpone fixing a broken test, push code without any test coverage, etc. A system that runs the tests regularly, notifies about errors, shows test coverage is a must.

Importance of a simple, robust, and safe deployment process is one of the most underestimated thing in software development. It may looks we can get away with not having automated deployment just for now and do it later. But when the later becomes today we have a mess of ad-hoc scripts, checklists, and notes about things that have to be done manually. This mess causes mistakes, very often, on production. The same is true for building artifacts - those builds should be automatically versinificated and has possibility to be delivered by one step.

We need to track what’s going on on the project and guarantee that defects or tasks won’t be forgotten or overlooked. It doesn’t matter what it is - whiteboard with stickers on it, online tools or something else, but we have to use something to keep things organised and the whole process more transparent for everybody.

Communication is important, keep everybody in the loop but do not bore them with details.

Short process, like weeks or two, keeps team focused on a small and achievable goals.

We don’t know the better way to make sure that code does what it’s supposed to, then to have another code that runs it and check results.

Unit tests is about keeping up code quality, but they do little help with the overall application quality. It doesn’t matter how good is your code if an application doesn’t do what it supposed to do. Creating end-to-end tests in DSL gives at least two advantages: you will be sure that application behaves as expected and DSL will give you a human-friendly documentation about a high-level logic that cover your particular domain. It’s not, actually, necessary to involve a customer and a tester to the process of creating these tests, but it will be much easier to explain application behaviour and limitations to them when you have it.

Job is done, when Man Who Accepts The Job says so. You should have person for that, and it’s not necessary it should be customer or owner in a terms of SCRUM (which is the best option here) - it could be QA or other developer in your team, but not who participated in a particular feature implementation.

Code review is an extremely useful technique for knowledge sharing, team education, and application quality support, if you are doing it right. It’s impossible to keep team code and engineering decisions understandable, organized and with a minimum architecture issues without code review.

The two pizza rule is often credited to Jeff Bezos, founder and CEO of Amazon. The idea is to keep team communication on useful level without the big impact on each team member focus and stress level.

Most meetings are a waste of time, especially if a lot people are involved to it. To keep meetings useful, they should be short and have a secific goal. Which will be impossible, if more than 6-8 people are participated.

Should be one, and only one primary communication channel between team members. In these days we have a lot communication application and chat services, and it’s very easy to create a mess. You can have some kind of “official” channel (mail, for example), or emergency (SMS/calls) but everything should be in the primary communication channel of choice too.

Library does not guaranty that team members will read the books from it, but it should be available if they want to start. When people can talk using the same terminology and with the similar background of knowledge it makes discussion more productive.

Leave things better than you found it - a good advice to keep project healthy. This does not mean you should change everything you touch, but if you see small issue, that can be easily fixed or improved - do it.

If nobody becomes a pain in the ass the laziness will win.|||

Measuring... something that's neither easy nor simple. But let's try!