Redwood City-based tech company Flywheel has been acquired by a taxi industry software company Cabconnect with backing from taxi industry investors, the companies announced Friday.

Cabconnect announced in a statement that the deal would “create a universal app for booking taxis by merging Flywheel’s customers’ and fleet with Cabconnect.”

“There is a tremendous opportunity to bring this technology to our fleet customers to make Flywheel a universal app,” said Izzy Aala, Cabconnect’s president and CEO, in a statement.

Notably, Cabconnect did not acquire Flywheel Taxi of San Francisco, which is formerly DeSoto Cab Co. and operates with the name and colors of the Flywheel mobile phone app in a co-branding partnership.

Neither Cabconnect nor Flywheel revealed the amount of the sale in its release.

On background, however, a source with knowledge of the sale described the amount as in “the millions,” and said it is part of an effort to expand across the United States to modernize taxis under one tech platform to compete with Uber and Lyft.

The Flywheel app operates much like Uber or Lyft, allowing riders to pull up a smartphone app and order a vehicle to their door, offer ratings of drivers and see their progress on a GPS-enabled map. Flywheel summons traditional taxi cabs from different cab companies throughout Los Angeles, Portland, Sacramento, San Diego, Seattle and the San Francisco Bay Area.

Cabconnect was founded in 2002, and provides back-end technology such as electronic payment systems, GPS services, card-swipe programs and other services to ground transportation companies.

Flywheel innovates in the taxi space, as well, and launched what they called the “world’s first smartphone meter” for taxi cabs in 2015.

Flywheel previously raised about $39 million in venture capital funding from investors, according to the tech media site Venture Beat.|||

Redwood City-based tech company Flywheel has been acquired by a taxi industry software company Cabconnect with backing from taxi industry investors, the co