is good, but you don’t need another software to control background processes on your server!

One of the challenges in production is how to

All of them are similar to every long running application on server side, so the Linux community have that kind of tools natively integrated into almost every linux distribution. One of the latest tools for handling and processing long running background tasks/services is called  , which is developed by Linux Foundation and now it became standard for Linux distributions. We will be focusing only on Ubuntu Server because it’s really easy to get started with it.

This means that SystemD is actually developed to manage and execute User Space processes/services. You can schedule a job, start/stop/restart it and collect it using system logs.

Base command to get started with it is which have all sub commands to manage existing services or to add exiting ones.

To make this experiment more realistic, making very basic node.js hello world http listener.

Take a look on the first line of our file, using that line we are just letting know that using current user environment we will run this file with executable.

Saving that file to and making it as an executable

Making file  , this would be the main file as a configuration to SystemD service

After saving this file, we can enable this service, to start using it over SystemD

That’s it! Now you have Node.js service as a background service, it will be restarted when something goes wrong and you can view all output logs using very simple command

After all this setup kind of things now you got very easy way to manage your service

So you actually don’t need modules like for managing Node.js background services, it all could be done using Linux native tools, which are more performant and more reliable! (hope so).

So if you learned something from this, just for letting to learn others too.|||

Forever Module is good, but you don’t need another software to control background processes on your server! All of them are similar to every long running application on server side, so the Linux…