You may or may not read my previous story but for various reasons I challenged myself to build 10 Apps in the upcoming 12 months. Just to reiterate: these apps won’t change the world. They will be just small apps, each of them teaching me something new.

Also something very important: I’m not working alone on this project. Since I suck at design my best friend and very talented designer Gergely Bakos is helping me with all things pretty.

Since I’ve only ever developed for iPhone, in the spirit of challenging myself, it only made sense to develop my first app in the series for Android too. In fact I ended up making it Android first. Usually I would make an MVP first for only one of the platforms, but for the app I had in mind I was sure it will be moderately popular in a certain market, and I was sure I can market the hell out of it for very cheap. So why not go all in?

So what is the product? 

The product is a simple, yet addictive Video Poker app. It is a remake of a classic poker machine that was popular in Hungarian bars up until 5 years ago, when the government decided to ban it, due to the fact, that it basically ruined a bunch of family’s financials. The poker machine was called FruitPoker (well, technically “Gyümölcs Poker”)

Why was this game so addictive? 

In my opinion the key for any slot machine is to make the user win a little bit, but give them further long term goals, so they never cash out. This formula is valid for pretty much any kind of repetitive, incremental game. For example the popular Pokemon Go app is applying it very well. Even tho you caught all the existing Pokemons there are lots of additional challenges (reach the maximum level, fight gyms, collect all medals, etc.)

The FruitPoker game of course is much more simple. The base game is designed to be easy to understand (casinos main targets are not the sharpest pencils):

Again, it is pretty simple. What makes it addictive is some of the additional goals you can work towards:|||

You may or may not read my previous story but for various reasons I challenged myself to build 10 Apps in the upcoming 12 months. Just to reiterate: these apps won’t change the world. They will be…