On the night of January 7, 1610, Galileo Galilei, a resident of Padua, walked onto his balcony and tipped his telescope toward space. He spotted three stars near Jupiter and graphed their positions in a notebook. Six days later, he looked through his telescope again and found the same stars—but their positions had shifted. They were, he realized, moons orbiting Jupiter. Galileo had long believed Copernicus’ theory that the Earth was not the center of the universe. Now he had proof.

Two months later, a publisher in Venice printed Galileo’s findings, in a booklet ten inches tall, seven and a half inches wide, and sixty pages long. As was customary, the sheets were initially left unbound. Galileo called his work the “Sidereus Nuncius,” or “Starry Messenger.” In addition to offering insights on celestial movement, the book rebutted Aristotle, who had maintained that heavenly bodies were smooth and “perfect”; with his telescope, Galileo had also looked extensively at the Earth’s moon, and could see mountains and craters on its surface. To convey this point, Galileo included four copperplate etchings of the moon, each depicting a lunar phase and measuring roughly five and a half inches wide and six inches tall. Five hundred and fifty copies of the “Sidereus Nuncius” were printed in its first run. About a hundred and fifty still exist.

The “Sidereus Nuncius” launched Galileo’s career. According to one historian, the book contained “more discoveries that changed the world than anyone has ever made before or since.” Owen Gingerich, a professor emeritus of astronomy at Harvard, has called Galileo’s account of Jupiter’s moons “the most exciting single manuscript page in the history of science.”

Gingerich, who is eighty-three, is one of the world’s leading authorities on Galileo. In June of 2005, an old friend of his, Richard Lan, visited him at his office, not far from Harvard’s main campus. Lan owns an antiquarian bookshop in Manhattan. Howard Rootenberg, a Los Angeles dealer, recently told me, “Richard is a notch higher than other booksellers, in terms of knowledge and experience.” The universe of rare-book dealers is small, and reputation is paramount. Rootenberg explained, “With certain dealers, you never even question authenticity or title—it’s almost a given. Their word is sacrosanct. Certainly, Richard is one of those people.”

Expertise has its limits, however, and Lan occasionally asked Gingerich to assess books by early astronomers. (Gingerich has examined nearly every extant first- and second-edition copy—six hundred in all—of Copernicus’ “On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres.”) “You can put anything in front of him and learn something,” Lan told me.

That day, Lan arrived with two young Italians, Marino Massimo De Caro and Filippo Rotundo. The Italians were offering to sell Lan a remarkable copy of the “Sidereus Nuncius.” De Caro had provided Lan with documentation indicating that the book’s previous owner belonged to a Masonic organization active in Italy, Malta, and Argentina.

Lan had viewed many copies of the “Sidereus Nuncius” over the years. Although some had been in better condition, none contained the personal flourishes of this one. Galileo’s signature was on the title page. A stamp of a lynx indicated that the book came from the personal library of Federico Cesi, the founder of the Accademia dei Lincei, the scientific fraternity in Rome to which Galileo belonged. Instead of etchings, there were five lovely watercolor illustrations of the moon, presumably painted by Galileo. Lan suspected that the book would sell for millions of dollars, once he had established its provenance and authenticity.

Lan sat beside Gingerich and unwrapped the book’s vellum cover. Gingerich opened the book to the title page, which bore an inscription: “Io Galileo Galilei f.” In Italian, io means “I.” The Italians suggested that the f might be an abbreviated form of fare—“to make”—meaning that the inscription was shorthand for “I, Galileo Galilei, made this.” Galileo typically signed books as “The Author” or “Galileo Galilei Lincei”—a reference to the Accademia dei Lincei—and added the recipient’s name. But Gingerich recalls thinking that the book’s signature “looked O.K.”

On the fifteenth page—B4 recto, in bibliographic terminology—was a rust-hued watercolor of a first-quarter moon. Gingerich felt a shiver of recognition. He told Lan that the image, and the four watercolors that followed, strongly resembled ink-wash illustrations of the moon made by Galileo.

Soon after the meeting, Gingerich wrote to Lan that there was “a firm Galileo connection.” He added, “The drawings had either to be made by Galileo himself or with his supervision.”

Lan, buoyed by Gingerich’s endorsement, bought the book for half a million dollars.

Lan was eager to place the “Sidereus Nuncius” on the market, but he decided to seek other expert opinions. In July, 2005, he sent an e-mail to Horst Bredekamp, a scholar in Berlin who specialized in assessing art made by key figures in European intellectual history. “Ideas come through drawing,” Bredekamp once said. He had published books about Leibniz’s Baroque gardens and Darwin’s diagrams, and was writing one that touched on Galileo’s drawings. In 2009, Art Bulletin declared that Bredekamp had done “as much as anyone to reexamine the relation between art and science across history.”

In the e-mail, Lan attached a scan of the watercolor from B4 recto. When Bredekamp saw it, he later noted, he felt “simultaneously electrified and skeptical.” Lan asked him if he was interested in conducting a thorough study, and Bredekamp said yes. He began by comparing the Io Galileo Galilei f signature with dozens of Galileo letters that are preserved at the national library in Florence. He concluded that the inscription was “definitely authentic.”

That November, Lan brought his “Sidereus Nuncius” to Berlin and left it there for a month. As Bredekamp later wrote, after “a mere glance” at the book he concluded that the splotchy watercolors, with their “mixture of fidgetiness and precision,” were genuine Galileo sketches. This was a major claim, for it threatened the singularity of a famed set of Galileo drawings known as the Florence Sheet. Nearly all Galileo scholars agreed that the astronomer had sketched his first telescope-aided observations of the moon on the sheet, in ink wash. Rick Watson, an American bookseller based in London, called the Florence Sheet the equivalent of the “Declaration of Independence in the history of scientific discovery.” The sheet is considered to be a direct representation of what Galileo saw through his telescope. In contrast, the copperplate etchings that appeared in the first edition of the “Sidereus Nuncius,” which were made by a Venetian artisan, feature craters that are exaggerated for effect, and there are other distortions.

Bredekamp theorized that Lan’s “Sidereus Nuncius” was an embellished proof copy. It was known that the Venetian printer had sent Galileo thirty copies with blank spots indicating where etchings would be placed. As Bredekamp saw it, Galileo must have filled the blank spots in one such copy with the watercolors while observing the moon in subsequent weeks; the artisan who made the etchings then traced the rust-colored watercolors onto copperplates. “This was a big deal,” Watson said. If Bredekamp was right, the Florence Sheet was on its way to becoming a historical afterthought.

In 2007, Bredekamp presented these arguments in a book, “Galilei der Künstler,” or “Galilei the Artist.” A ceremony in Padua marked its publication. One of the speakers, William Shea, who has written five books on Galileo and is based in Zurich, said, “Galileo painted these watercolors, I’m convinced.” Lan called the “Sidereus Nuncius” the “acquisition of a lifetime,” and told Time that he planned to ask at least ten million dollars for it.

In the spring of 2008, Lan mailed the book to Germany for another review. Bredekamp invited experts from fourteen institutions to Berlin. The scholars spent two months analyzing Lan’s book, using such tools as long-wave ultraviolet radiation (to identify inks) and X-ray fluorescence (to determine the paper’s composition). A curator from the Accademia dei Lincei authenticated the lynx stamp, and a conservator from the Staatliche Akademie der Bildenden Künste, in Stuttgart, certified the paper and the binding.

Their inquiry did expose idiosyncrasies—the paper stock of Lan’s copy was slightly darker than it was in other copies, for example. But such anomalies only reinforced Bredekamp’s theory about the book’s “unique status” as a proof copy. Bredekamp declared that he and the other experts had demonstrated a depth of expertise “previously achieved only for the Gutenberg Bible.”

Bredekamp compiled the Berlin research into a two-volume book, “Galileo’s O.” Its publication, in English, was scheduled for October, 2011. That summer, Nick Wilding, a Renaissance historian at Georgia State University, began working on a review of the book for Renaissance Quarterly. Although there were many references to sophisticated tests—and dozens of glossy photographs of paper stains and ink lines, magnified to dermatology-clinic proportions—Wilding found the conclusions nebulous. One of the watercolor moons in Lan’s copy was said to be “atmospherically related” to the Florence Sheet drawings, though the watercolor did “not correspond in detail with any of them.”

I met Wilding recently, at a restaurant in Charlottesville, Virginia, where he was on a weeklong fellowship at the Rare Book School, on the University of Virginia’s campus. He is a lean, stolid Englishman in his early forties, with a receding hairline. Wilding told me that, after he submitted his review, he heard rumors about several dubious library stamps that had surfaced in 2005 and 2006. The stamps, featuring a lynx, matched the one in Lan’s “Sidereus Nuncius.”

Wilding obtained digital samples of unquestionably legitimate stamps from the book collection of Federico Cesi, the Accademia dei Lincei founder, and compared them in high-resolution detail. In each stamp, a lynx appeared at the center, framed by two oval borders, a wrap of Latin text (“From the Library of Federico Cesi, Prince and Marquis of Monticelli”), and a third oval border. Wilding then examined the stamp in Lan’s “Sidereus Nuncius.” In the genuine stamps, there was a gap in the innermost oval border just to the left of the lynx’s mouth. In Lan’s copy, the border was continuous. Wilding also checked the inventory of Cesi’s library, and found no listing of a “Sidereus Nuncius.” Wilding asked Renaissance Quarterly to hold his review.

Wilding searched the Galileo literature, fruitlessly, for an allusion to a watercolor-illustrated copy of the “Sidereus Nuncius.” In the process, he came across a 2009 article, by Owen Gingerich, in the Journal of Galilean Studies. Over time, Gingerich had revised his opinion about Lan’s “Sidereus Nuncius” and come to reject Bredekamp’s “proof copy” argument. According to the historical record, Galileo received proof pages in February, 1610. In Bredekamp’s view, Galileo based the watercolors on direct observations of the moon, but one lunar phase depicted in Lan’s book didn’t recur until February 28th. The “Sidereus Nuncius” appeared on March 13th—an exceedingly narrow window for a watercolor to be converted into an etching before publication.

Gingerich also noted that the watercolor moons in Lan’s book were each eighty-one millimetres in diameter. Four of the etchings in the first edition were the same size, but the fifth was four millimetres smaller. If, as Bredekamp contended, the etchings were based on tracings of the watercolors, then each etching should have been precisely the same size as its watercolor counterpart. The evidence, Gingerich concluded, “strongly” suggested that the watercolors in Lan’s copy were forgeries.

The Journal of Galilean Studies reaches a small audience, and Gingerich was eager to help Wilding make his case to Renaissance Quarterly, which is more widely read. Gingerich pointed him to three suspect copies of Galileo’s “Le Operazioni del Compasso Geometrico e Militare,” a study of the compass, which had appeared on the market around the time that the two Italians sold Lan the “Sidereus Nuncius.” The “Compasso” was published in 1606. Only sixty copies were printed, and perhaps twenty-five still existed. In 2008, Christie’s sold one for half a million dollars.

In late 2005 and early 2006, Gingerich had examined the three copies of the “Compasso,” one of which had been bought by Lan, and noticed several oddities. The text “bit” into the paper too deeply, suggesting an anachronistic printing method, and the watermarks did not quite match those in other verifiable copies. He shared his doubts with Lan, but, at Lan’s request, he did not publicize his views.

Later in 2006, Frank Mowery, the head of conservation at the Folger Shakespeare Library, in Washington, D.C., inspected two of the questionable “Compasso” copies on behalf of an American collector on the East Coast. Mowery went to the Library of Congress and placed the books next to a genuine “Compasso.” In the suspect copies, the typeface was “not quite as sharp and crisp,” he said, and the impressions made by the wire mesh that the pulp dried on were “not as even and smooth.” Mowery also noticed a strange printing error that horizontally bisected two words—dal mio—and caused the top half of the letters to sit awkwardly on the bottom half, like shifted tectonic plates. “That is not possible with letterpress,” Mowery told me. He wondered if someone had made the pages using photopolymer plates, a sort of film negative that hardens into relief when exposed to ultraviolet light. In a confidential report to the East Coast collector, he wrote, “These copies were produced to deceive.” The collector, like Lan, did not wish to go public.

Wilding found the parallels between the “Compasso” copies and Lan’s “Sidereus Nuncius” to be “potentially devastating,” and his suspicions grew when he discovered that they could all be traced to Marino Massimo De Caro—one of the Italians who had visited Gingerich with Lan. Wilding learned that De Caro had entered the rare-book world in the early aughts, built a relationship with Lan, and managed to obtain books that no one else could find. De Caro boasted of having access to obscure collections in South America. Wilding tried to track him down, but he discovered that De Caro had left the trade.

Wilding shared some of his findings with Bredekamp, who seethed at being challenged. “I wonder how often you were able to see the book in the shop of Richard Lan?” Bredekamp wrote to him. “Writing on authenticity without having studied the original carefully is a methodological death-sin.” He argued that “doubting the authenticity” of Lan’s copy of the “Sidereus Nuncius” was “foolish.” If the book was a fake, the “history of science could close its doors.”

Wilding submitted a revised review to Renaissance Quarterly in March, 2012. He wrote that “Galileo’s O” sometimes gave the impression of “a forensic report from a crime scene,” and that one of the contributors, a librarian at Princeton named Paul Needham, “nicely reminds us that many individuals were involved in the making of an early modern book.” Some of them, Wilding added, “may still be active.”

One morning in September, I marched up a gravel driveway that ran through an olive and peach grove outside Verona. I reached an iron gate where there was an intercom box marked “De Caro.”

De Caro was expecting me. We had exchanged letters in the summer, and he had said that, “for the first time,” he would be “happy to disclose” details about his life to “a person that is really interested to go deep in my personality.” I pressed the buzzer, and two German shepherds bounded out of a three-story villa, barking and kicking gravel and lunging at the gate.

De Caro stepped out and silenced the dogs, Paco and Ria. “They are like my babies,” he said. He wore khaki pants and a light-blue monogrammed dress shirt that was untucked and open at the neck, its sleeves rolled up to the elbows. De Caro is tall and husky, and appears weathered beyond his forty years; his hair is gray, his earlobes are large, and his blue eyes are cradled by deep circles.

We shook hands and he led me into the villa, which he shares with his wife, Rossella, a former tango instructor who works for the Italian government. We passed a wine-and-cheese cellar and ascended to the third floor, where we sat in armless linen chairs. Paco and Ria lay by our feet. The space was breezy and bright, with vaulted ceilings, exposed beams, and open windows. The view overlooked the steeples and terra-cotta roofs of Verona. An old telescope stood in a corner, and on the walls were a small portrait of Galileo and a huge oil painting of Pope Urban VIII, who oversaw Galileo’s trial for heresy.

“I really love Galileo, his way of thinking,” De Caro said. His fascination began when he was growing up, in Orvieto. Like most teen-agers, De Caro prized rebelliousness, and he idolized Galileo, an irascible intellect who derided critics as “mental pygmies.” Before he was twenty, De Caro had read all forty-two hundred of the astronomer’s collected letters. (De Caro’s mother, Lucia Motti, told me, “Massimo has always had a great admiration for Galileo, not only as a scientist but as a human being.”) De Caro’s parents were leftists, and he entered politics young, winning a seat on the Orvieto municipal council at the age of twenty-two. “If you just heard his voice, you would have thought he was a sixty-year-old mayor,” Stefano Talamoni, the president of the council at the time, recalls.

De Caro studied law at the University of Siena but dropped out before getting a degree. In December, 1998, he moved to Verona and took a job as a communications director at a government pension office. He hung around a rare-book shop in his spare time, as did a young collector named Antonello Privitera, who taught De Caro some of the intricacies of the trade. De Caro, Privitera says, had “a great social attitude” and had a gift for earning others’ trust. (Several years ago, he sued De Caro, claiming that he owed him money for books. De Caro repaid only part of his debt.)

In 1999, De Caro began travelling to book fairs around Europe, collecting books, old telescopes, and other astronomical arcana. At a fair in Milan, he met Daniel Pastore, an Argentine book dealer. Pastore encouraged De Caro to visit his shop, Imago Mundi, in Buenos Aires, and De Caro soon was spending about a week each month in Argentina. Imago Mundi was a gathering place for collectors. According to De Caro, one day he noticed Cardinal Jorge Mejia browsing the stacks. Mejia, an Argentine, lived in Italy, and presided over the Vatican Library and its secret archives. De Caro befriended Mejia, and they began having long conversations about faith. Mejia eventually gave De Caro access to the Vatican Library’s card catalogue—a rare privilege.

On February 12, 2003, De Caro and Mejia made an unusual exchange. De Caro provided the library with sixteen incunabula—books printed before 1501—and three fifteenth-century manuscripts, worth approximately a hundred thousand dollars. In return, De Caro received six books valued at more than a million dollars, including three Galileo titles that had been owned by relatives of Pope Urban VIII. The Vatican had other copies of the Galileo texts, and had been expanding its collection of incunabula. (De Caro justified the apparent imbalance this way: “If you are in Verona, what is the value of water? One cent. But in the desert you can pay millions of dollars.”) The Pope’s secretary authorized the exchange, but a few people at the library found the trade misguided; one told me that he could find no logic to the transaction. In the spring of 2003, Mejia’s subordinates intervened to halt a second exchange between the library and De Caro.

In 2005, De Caro attended the Milan book fair with Filippo Rotundo, the Italian dealer, and Daniel Pastore, the Argentine. An Italian superintendent of cultural heritage alerted carabinieri that the men were displaying a copy of Francesco Colonna’s “Hypnerotomachia Poliphili,” which was published in 1499 and is renowned for its intricate woodcut illustrations. The copy had once been in a private library in the city, the Trivulziana, and the police told the book dealers that they planned to investigate its provenance. Two days later, the carabinieri returned to the booth. The “Poliphili” was gone. In separate interviews with the police, De Caro, Rotundo, and Pastore each accused the others. The book could not be found, and the case was dropped. (A collector in northern Europe recently told me that he had bought the “Poliphili” from Rotundo, shortly after the fair.)

Despite these incidents, De Caro’s rise in the rare-book market continued largely unimpeded, as he obtained one remarkable book after another. Perhaps his most important client was Richard Lan. De Caro told me, “He was paying a high price for books, and he had the best customers in the world.” In 2004, Lan paid two hundred and forty thousand dollars for two of the Vatican books—first editions of Galileo’s “Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Concerning Two New Sciences” and “The Assayer”—and a 1611 copy of Johannes Kepler’s “Refraction.” Around this time, Lan also paid De Caro five hundred and eighty thousand dollars for a copy of the letter that Christopher Columbus sent to Ferdinand and Isabella in 1493, announcing the discovery of the New World. De Caro was beginning to think that Lan would buy anything from him.

On June 9, 2005, the Olympia Book Fair opened in London. Once again, De Caro was working with Rotundo and Pastore. In their booth, a “Compasso” was displayed in a glass case.

Rick Watson, from London, and Paolo Pampaloni, a dealer from Florence, stopped by to examine it. “It didn’t sound right,” Pampaloni told me. “I turned the pages. Usually, they sing. I have an ear for that. But there was a stiffness in the paper.”

Watson shared Pampaloni’s reservations, but he wasn’t sure what was wrong. While the prospect of forgery hung over every transaction in the art world, fakes had not been much of an issue for antiquarian book dealers. A sensational case occurred in the mid-nineteen-eighties, when a Salt Lake City man forged several handwritten manuscripts and sold them, as “lost” Mormon texts, to the Church of Latter-Day Saints. But instances of fraudulent typesetting were isolated and amateurish. No one, as far as Watson knew, had successfully simulated an entire letterpress book.

To mimic the process of creating a seventeenth-century book, a forger would have to cut “punches”—individual pieces of lead type—for every character and punctuation mark, in addition to carving woodblocks for ornamental capital letters. All these elements would have to match those used by the original publisher. Then, in arranging the type, the forger would have to insure that the spacing between letters precisely followed the original book—for dozens, if not hundreds, of pages. Who would do all that work, with countless opportunities for error, given that the product would likely fetch only a few hundred thousand dollars? A forged painting could sell for millions.

Although Watson knew that there was no precedent for a forged seventeenth-century book, he couldn’t shake his doubts. He feared that De Caro, a relative newcomer to the trade, had been conned. At the book fair, Watson pulled De Caro aside to express his concerns. “His astonishment and surprise seemed genuine,” Watson recalls. But the next day the “Compasso” was sold to a Boston dealer.

Soon after, De Caro and Rotundo flew to New York and met Lan at his shop, in midtown. They had told him that they had important business to discuss. Rotundo, a bespectacled man of forty-one, urged Lan to sit down. De Caro placed the watercolor-adorned copy of the “Sidereus Nuncius” before him. Lan could hardly contain his excitement. He told me that he saw the copy as “potentially a game-changer,” with the power to answer “a lot of questions, a lot of unknowns.”

After the sale of the “Sidereus Nuncius,” De Caro began easing himself out of the book business. In Argentina, he had met an American book collector who worked for a Russian billionaire, Viktor Vekselberg. After securing an introduction to Vekselberg, De Caro was hired to coördinate governmental and public relations for Avelar, an energy company owned by Vekselberg. De Caro’s resourcefulness served him well in the energy sector, and in 2007 he became an executive vice-president at Avelar. Governments jockeyed for his attention: the Democratic Republic of Congo asked him to be an honorary consul, and the Argentine authorities assigned him a bodyguard and a bulletproof car. On one occasion, he attended a meeting with Vekselberg and Vladimir Putin. The job made De Caro wealthy enough to buy a twenty-five-acre ranch outside Buenos Aires. But, in 2009, he was fired, after clashing with one of Vekselberg’s deputies.

Marcello Dell’Utri, an Italian senator who collected rare books, offered to help De Caro find a government job. In May, 2011, De Caro became an adviser to the Ministry of Culture. (Dell’Utri has been convicted of having ties to the Mafia.) One of De Caro’s new duties involved taking stock of historic libraries across Italy.

He soon paid a visit to Montecassino, a sixth-century abbey southeast of Rome, with Viktoria Pavlovsky, his young assistant, and an old friend, Stephane Delsalle. De Caro, who liked to say that he was “always ready to seize the opportunities offered,” had an empty laptop bag slung over his shoulder. De Caro, Pavlovsky, and Delsalle introduced themselves to a priest and asked to inspect the property. As Pavlovsky distracted the priest, De Caro and Delsalle headed to the stacks, tilted ladders against the upper shelves, and removed copies of Dante’s Divine Comedy and Galileo’s “Compasso,” among others. De Caro slipped the books into his bag. He then replaced the “Compasso” with a forgery. He had created the fake with photopolymer plates, establishing a model for other, more sophisticated schemes. Soon after the theft, he sold the Dante for eight thousand euros; he held onto the stolen “Compasso.”

One library especially captivated De Caro: the Girolamini, in Naples. Founded in 1586, it was now disorganized and lacquered with soot, though its original beauty could be glimpsed in its frescoed ceilings, clerestory windows, and imposing columns. In the spring of 2011, De Caro conferred with the priest in charge at the Girolamini—which also encompassed a cathedral and a convent—about renovating the library. That June, De Caro was named the library’s new director. On his second day, he ordered the staff to disable the alarm system at night.

At 9 on March 28, 2012, a professor named Tomaso Montanari knocked on the library’s door. Montanari taught art history at the University of Naples Federico II, and filed an occasional article for Il Fatto Quotidiano, a left-leaning daily. One of his graduate students wanted access to the Girolamini’s archives, and Montanari was escorting him, in part to follow up on a tip that he’d received about malfeasance at the library.

A priest led Montanari and the student inside. In the main salon, they found De Caro, wearing a gray tracksuit, his feet propped on a desk. He apologized for the library’s state of disrepair and for his rumpled appearance. The Girolamini was undergoing renovations, he said, and he had been up late working.

As De Caro talked, Montanari looked around. The library resembled a junk yard. Four-hundred-year-old books were strewn on tables and piled on the floor; empty soda cans littered the bookshelves. A German shepherd was wandering around. “That’s not a common presence in a historical library,” Montanari told me.

After a short conversation, Montanari and his student requested to browse the archives. They ran into a staff librarian, and asked him if all was well. Montanari told me that the librarian looked over both shoulders and whispered, “It’s terrible. The director is a criminal.” The librarian said that, after De Caro became the director, he brought in people he’d known from his days working for the Russians. At night, De Caro’s crew packed books into suitcases and loaded them into vans.

Montanari wrote an article describing the situation at the Girolamini. He did not directly accuse De Caro of theft, but he reported witness accounts of the burglaries and equated De Caro’s hiring to “putting an arsonist in charge of the forest.”

The day the article came out, De Caro called Montanari. “Why do you write such things about me? I am a hero—I am saving the library,” he said, according to Montanari. De Caro threatened legal action, indicating that he and Silvio Berlusconi were represented by the same law firm. He warned Montanari that his career was in danger. “It was very mafioso,” Montanari told me. (De Caro admits placing the call but denies making threats.)

A prosecutor in Naples, Giovanni Melillo, opened an investigation. De Caro’s phone lines were tapped, and Melillo learned that De Caro was stashing looted books in his home, in a storage unit in Verona, and in the basement of an accomplice’s aunt. Other stolen volumes were being fenced through major Italian dealers. Most spectacularly, De Caro planned to launder more than four hundred and fifty books through an auction, on May 9th, in Munich.

At his villa outside Verona, De Caro told me that some of the books sent to Munich were from his personal collection, some were from the main Girolamini library, and some were from the priests’ convent library. Before the books went to Germany, library markings were stripped out. The auction house Zisska & Schauer had paid an emissary of De Caro’s nine hundred thousand euros to acquire the books. De Caro expected to receive a million euros after the bidding.

In early May, Melillo’s men seized nearly two thousand books, in coördinated searches throughout Italy. (De Caro told me that he had meant to steal only the books that went to Munich; the rest had been removed from the Girolamini temporarily, for cleaning.) German authorities halted the sale at Zisska & Schauer, and later arrested the company’s executive director, Herbert Schauer; he was extradited to Italy. The auction house claims that De Caro had presented the books as being a consignment from a private owner in Italy.

Two weeks after the events in Munich, three carloads of Italian police came to De Caro’s villa at 6:30 and placed him in handcuffs. He was taken to Naples and locked in a small jail cell with seven other inmates. For more than two months, De Caro refused to coöperate. According to court documents, he provided “blatantly false and implausible information.” But, in conversations with his parents—particularly his father, who visited frequently—he started to feel remorse. “I read a lot of Dostoyevsky,” he told me. On August 2, 2012, De Caro began confessing his crimes to Melillo. “It was a way to clean my soul,” he told me.

He laid out how he had robbed the Girolamini, and said that he had stolen books from another library in Naples, two in Florence, one in Padua, one in Montecassino, and one in Rome. Melillo told the judge that De Caro’s statements “fit perfectly with the circumstantial evidence” collected by his investigators.

At one point, De Caro admitted to forging five copies of the “Sidereus Nuncius” and five copies of the “Compasso.” (Just before he was arrested, he told me, he had burned two of the fakes in his fireplace, in a frantic attempt to cover his tracks.) But Melillo, apparently satisfied with De Caro’s confessions of thievery, did not press him for details.

Meanwhile, Nick Wilding, the Georgia State scholar, was struggling to prove that Lan’s copy of the “Sidereus Nuncius” was a fake. Anytime he noticed a new idiosyncrasy—such as its use of half-sheets of paper, rather than full sheets, which were used in all the other known copies from 1610—he ran up against the prevailing theory that the book was a proof copy. It was supposed to be one-of-a-kind.

Then Wilding obtained a Sotheby’s catalogue from 2005 that included another copy of the “Sidereus Nuncius”; it, too, came from De Caro. (The book did not sell.) Wilding examined the title page, pictured in the catalogue. “This was my eureka moment,” he said. Instantly, he was certain that both Lan’s copy and the Sotheby’s copy were modern forgeries.

Earlier, Wilding had spotted the word pepiodis on the title page in Lan’s copy. Pepiodis is not a Latin word. Every other copy of the “Sidereus Nuncius” features periodis, which means “phases.” Staring at the image in the catalogue, he saw that the pepiodis typo also appeared in the Sotheby’s copy. Moreover, in both Lan’s copy and the Sotheby’s copy, the second “p” and the first “i” in pepiodis were touching: the letters “p” and “i” never form a ligature.

He shared his revelations with Paul Needham, the Princeton librarian who contributed to “Galileo’s O,” prompting Needham to take a train into Manhattan to examine Lan’s copy once more. Wilding told him to look for a particular detail. In 1610, when a printer was inking his lead type, ink occasionally seeped into crevices along the edges of the type; during printing, this caused splotches and faint lines to appear along the “shoulders” of the page. Such marks lacked the depth of letterpress type. But, if someone used a high-resolution image of the original page to create photopolymer plates, the polymer would make the black marks appear equal in depth to the text.

Needham retrieved the “Sidereus Nuncius” from Lan’s shop and took it to Columbia University, which owned an uncontested copy. Examples of raised shoulder ink in Lan’s copy were immediately apparent. “Once you pulled on the knot, it was just one thing after another,” Needham told me. In Lan’s copy, the letters were “less sharp and blobbier.” The “gutters”—the blank spaces between facing pages—often varied from those in Columbia’s copy. That evening, Needham sent an e-mail to Wilding declaring that Lan’s copy was “entirely a forgery.”

Eleven days later, on June 11, 2012, Wilding announced his discoveries on ExLibris, an online discussion forum used by antiquarian dealers, collectors, and librarians. He warned that “all these texts apparently converge on . . . Marino Massimo De Caro, currently under arrest for massive thefts from the Girolamini Library in Naples.” The next day, Needham went on ExLibris and renounced the conclusions drawn in “Galileo’s O,” posting, “I was wrong.”

Horst Bredekamp, in an e-mail to Wilding, noted that he was “extremely offended” by the claims. He said, “On Monday I talked with Irene Brückle, of Stuttgart, a world-wide known specialist in historic paper. She said that the paper is in certainty old and that the book cannot be forgery.”

I recently spoke to Bredekamp on the phone, and his mood was more reflective. “We built a bridge too far,” he said of his book. He compared his team’s mistake to that of “a surgeon who makes a decisive error.” Watching his research unravel had been an “unending nightmare.”

Last October, Bredekamp reconvened his researchers in Berlin. Using some of the same forensic techniques that they had used previously, they pored over Lan’s “Sidereus Nuncius” again, in an attempt to anatomize the fraud. One participant said that the exercise was exhilarating, adding, “You sort of forget that everything you’re finding is proof that what you said before was wrong.” Another researcher discovered cotton linters in the paper stock, which would have required a ginning capability that didn’t exist until 1793. Bredekamp will publish the team’s analysis next year.

Bredekamp said of De Caro, “To put it in Freudian terms, I think he is somebody who must have been rejected by academics and played a satanic game with them. Good forgers are players, and they have a strange desire to compete with people who know.”

I asked him whether he and his assembly of experts could reverse-engineer the book. Did they know how De Caro pulled it off?

No, he said: “It’s a masterpiece.”

In March, 2013, the Girolamini Library case went to trial. De Caro was convicted, and sentenced to seven years, for embezzlement. He was in jail until early August, when a judge approved his request to serve the remainder of his sentence at home. De Caro’s confessions, which court documents describe as “reliable,” have apparently enabled “the verification of additional crimes that would have been very difficult to uncover in the absence of his statements,” and this assistance had likely informed the judge’s decision. Nonetheless, the judge said that De Caro could be responsible for millions of euros’ worth of damage at the Girolamini. Besides taking at least two thousand books—not all of which have been recovered—he had allegedly left the library’s record-keeping in disarray. The judge ordered a hold on De Caro’s assets: his bank accounts, his two BMWs, and the villa, which he had bought, in 2009, for 1.25 million euros. More recently, he was ordered to relinquish some of his furniture, art, and rare books, which the court assessed to be worth about two hundred thousand euros. When I admired the portrait of Pope Urban VIII, he sighed. “I don’t think of these things as mine anymore,” he said. “It’s like I rent an apartment with all the furniture.”

For the time being, though, De Caro lives in confined splendor. Nothing will be taken away until after a second trial— centering on charges of conspiracy and looting—is over, and after all appeals have been exhausted. The process could take years. The terms of his detention are strict, however: he cannot leave, visitors must be approved in advance, and he is prohibited from making calls or sending e-mails without prior authorization—leaving him no way of sneaking back into the book trade. His parents cannot visit.

I spent three days with De Caro. His wife and his lawyer hovered around on the first day, advising restraint. But then the lawyer left for Milan and, each morning after that, Rossella drove to work, leaving De Caro alone with me.

Vanity is a powerful force. At one point, De Caro compared himself to Nobel laureates. When I asked him how he had forged the “Sidereus Nuncius” and made the watercolors, he replied, “I want to tell you the whole story. Should I trust you?”

“O.K.,” he said, taking a deep breath. “I wanted to create a joke.” De Caro, the college dropout, held an imperious grudge against people who had spent years studying in libraries. He had earned his academic credentials another way. In September, 2004, he donated four Galileo books, and a chunk of a Saharan meteorite that he’d acquired at a mineral show, to the Universidad Abierta Interamericana, a private institution in Buenos Aires. In recognition of his “invaluable contribution,” the university awarded him an honorary professorship. De Caro introduced himself as “professor” from then on.

In 2006, he participated in a panel discussion at Fordham University, “Galileo Galilei: Intuition, Science, Text.” The next year, he self-published a two-volume biography and bibliography of Galileo, “Galileo Galilei: His Ideas, His World, the Collection.” Christie’s added the book to its reference literature, but it was not reviewed by any major journals. William Shea, the Galileo expert in Zurich, said that the biography was a brazen rip-off of previous scholarship. He likened the book to “an extended undergraduate paper with no quotations—the kind of thing an American student would pull off the Internet.”

De Caro, in the bibliographic portion, listed every edition of the “Sidereus Nuncius” printed between 1610 and 1683. He pointedly included the thirty copies of the first edition that the Venetian printer had sent to Galileo without the lunar etchings—the ones with a full page and three half-pages blank—and cited a letter that Galileo wrote to a Medici official, in March, 1610, in which he referred to the partially blank copies.

De Caro decided to embroider on this historical fact and toy with the world’s Galileo experts. “I wanted to use the philosophy of Galileo against them,” he said. In 2003, De Caro said, he came up with the idea of forging the “Sidereus Nuncius.” Over the years, he had visited papermaking facilities around Italy, learning how artisans re-created seventeenth-century watermarks and other vintage elements. He took this knowledge to Buenos Aires, he said, and sought the help of Daniel Pastore, of Imago Mundi. A local artisan was hired to create sheets of paper. De Caro supervised his work, and they ultimately devised paper that looked authentic. Next, he found a printer in the city who worked with photopolymer plates. De Caro provided the printer with digital images of a “Sidereus Nuncius” that he claims to have bought from an Argentine widower and then sold to a French dealer.

With help from Nick Wilding, I located a scanned image of the copy’s title page, which had appeared in the French dealer’s 2005 catalogue. It matched—ink spot for ink spot—the title page of Lan’s copy.

Pressing aged pieces of paper onto a scanner warps the text slightly, and De Caro had to “clean” each page, “letter by letter,” using image-editing software. After the printer made photopolymer plates, he and De Caro inked them, and De Caro misted the paper with a spray bottle to prevent cracked paper and bleeding ink. (“That was one of the secrets,” he said.) They lined up a plate onto a page and applied pressure; after a few seconds, they removed the plate. The process left impressions slightly deeper than those of a seventeenth-century letterpress, but De Caro believed that the effect was accurate enough to pass off onto an unsuspecting client.

De Caro insisted that he could not recall the name or the address of either the papermaker or the printer, providing me only with a diagram of their respective facilities. When I met Pastore, this summer, in Buenos Aires, he denied any involvement in a forgery and accused De Caro of “breaking my balls.” After I told Pastore that De Caro had implicated him while confessing to Melillo, the Italian prosecutor, Pastore replied, “Yeah, right. I killed Kennedy also! J.F.K.? That was me.” Pastore has not been officially accused of any wrongdoing.

De Caro decided to go beyond making a mere forgery. He wanted to add something new to the Galileo canon. Thinking about the thirty copies of the “Sidereus Nuncius” that Galileo had received without the etchings, De Caro set out to create a “forgotten” work: a copy with unique watercolors. “I studied a lot to arrive at this level,” he told me. He struggled to find the right ink: seventeenth-century inks contained high levels of acid. One day, while wandering through an antique shop in Buenos Aires, he noticed several bottles of nineteenth-century India ink for sale. According to De Caro, he and Pastore, who has a degree in pharmacology, gave the ink a litmus test, and found its acidity to be markedly higher than that of contemporary inks. If they could “age” the ink two hundred years, they would have what they needed. (Pastore denied any involvement in this activity, too.)

De Caro delegated the watercolors to a painter in Buenos Aires—a “famous” art restorer, he told me. (He added, in an e-mail, “I promised to him that I would never say to anybody what he did.”) One afternoon, he met with the painter and Pastore at Imago Mundi, which, De Caro said, had a kitchen in the back. De Caro explained that he wanted to incorporate five lunar watercolors, using the Florence Sheet as a guide; he also wanted to add Galileo’s signature, based on the astronomer’s 1633 abjuration document, in which he had written “Io Galileo Galilei Manu Propria,” or “I, Galileo Galilei, have done this in my own hand.” Since Manu Propria involved ornate calligraphy, De Caro decided to limit the chances of a slipup and go with “f,” for feci, or “made this.”

The painter uncorked the India ink and got to work. After De Caro opened a bottle of red wine for them to share—a 1990 Masseto, by his recollection—the painter traced the outline of the moons using the foot of his wineglass. (This may explain Owen Gingerich’s observation that each of the watercolors displayed the same dimensions: eighty-one millimetres.) The wet ink looked black on the page when the illustrations and the signature were done. Then De Caro set the oven in the kitchen to two hundred and fifty degrees Celsius—a little higher than four hundred and eighty degrees Fahrenheit. He placed a Pyrex dish with hydrochloric acid on the bottom rack, and, one by one, half-sheets of paper on the top rack. At that temperature, he said, “twenty minutes is like four hundred years.” Vapors from the hydrochloric acid mimicked the effects of oxidation and transposed the black ink into rusty tones.

Afterward, De Caro said, he flew back to Italy with the pages and took them to Marcello De Stefanis, a bookbinder in Milan. (When approached at his shop recently, De Stefanis declined to comment.) De Stefanis secured the “Sidereus Nuncius” in an authentic seventeenth-century vellum binding and goffered the edges of the pages with a pattern of dots. (De Caro, who has not seen Lan’s copy of the “Sidereus Nuncius” since 2005, recently provided me with a precise description of the pattern.) A week later, once the glue had dried, De Caro picked up the finished book. Then, De Caro said, he and Filippo Rotundo, the Italian book dealer, added a final garnish: the Cesi lynx stamp.

Rotundo denies collaborating with De Caro, and says that De Caro tricked him, much as De Caro tricked Richard Lan. Rotundo, who is coöperating with Italian prosecutors, told me that he had stopped working with De Caro in 2006, after it had become clear to him that De Caro was involved with fake books. Rotundo also insisted that he received no money for the fake “Sidereus Nuncius,” although a “letter of agreement,” from Lan’s shop, indicates that Rotundo and De Caro—the “sellers”—would be paid five hundred thousand dollars in two installments. And Rotundo said that he did not sell the “Hypnerotomachia Poliphili” from the Milan book fair, even though the buyer told me that he had bought it from him. Two months ago, Rotundo, apparently unscathed by the De Caro scandal, opened a gallery in Manhattan, PrPh Books, nine blocks from Lan’s shop. Umberto Eco spoke at a reception on opening night.

On my third day with De Caro, he went into his bedroom and returned holding a white T-shirt. “You want to surprise everyone?” he asked. On the back of the shirt was a large screen print of the Cesi stamp. De Caro pointed to where the oval borderline breaks near the lynx’s mouth, and told me that, when making the “Sidereus Nuncius” forgery, he had connected the line—and inserted the pepiodis typo on the title page. “If I didn’t create this, it would be impossible to say the book was a fake,” he told me. In every forgery, he inserted a minor error or two, which “only a real expert” could recognize. When I told De Caro that Nick Wilding had discovered both anomalies last year, he looked saddened, as if it had just dawned on him that he had lost his monopoly over his own invention.

For the past year, Wilding has been delivering a presentation, “Forging the Moon, or How to Spot a Fake Galileo,” to audiences in Europe and the United States. Collectors now come to him with suspected fakes. Last year, a curator at Brown University told him of a Spanish-language booklet about Galileo that is in the university’s library. Lan had sold the booklet to the library after buying it from De Caro. It had supposedly been printed in 1650, in Lima, Peru. (An unquestioned copy of the text is in Peru’s national library.) With Wilding’s help, the curator confirmed that it was a forgery; Lan has since returned the university’s money. Wilding suspects that De Caro made between three and five copies of each fake: “To do less would not be economically viable, and to do more would flood the market and advertise the fact that you’re forging.”

In August, I visited the university library in Buenos Aires to which De Caro had donated the four Galileo books in exchange for an honorary professorship. Wilding had told me what kinds of irregularity to look for. I spent an hour photographing, from various angles, two of the books: a second-edition “Compasso,” from 1640, and a second edition of the “Sidereus Nuncius,” printed in Frankfurt. Back in my hotel, I e-mailed the images to Wilding. He wrote back two hours later. After seeing a raking shot that exposed clear signs of raised shoulder ink, he told me that the “Sidereus Nuncius” was probably a fake. Another image revealed an inked-over Roman numeral, adjusting the publication date of the “Compasso” from 1649 to 1640. Third-edition copies, from 1649, are much less valuable than second-edition copies. Wilding concluded that the “Compasso” was, “at best, altered.”

De Caro refused to take responsibility for the fakes in the Buenos Aires library, for the forged Galileo title from Peru, or for the “Sidereus Nuncius” that appeared in the 2005 Sotheby’s catalogue. When we first met, he pledged absolute candor, saying, “It makes no sense to lie anymore.” But there were conspicuous hazards in taking a con man at his word. Only one person would know when the game was truly over: De Caro.

Sitting with him, I felt as though I were stuck in a batter’s box, trying to track the spin of one incoming pitch after another. Some evasions were easier to explain than others. I couldn’t understand why he disputed receiving any profit from Lan’s copy of the “Sidereus Nuncius” until I heard him note that forging itself is not illegal, whereas selling or substituting fake items as originals violates the law. His contention that he had planned to bring many stolen books back to the Girolamini, however, struck me as absurd. And why did he take credit for some fakes but not for others? Was he trying to protect his reputation as a highly skilled forger? The Sotheby’s, Buenos Aires, and Peru books were inferior forgeries compared with Lan’s “Sidereus Nuncius.”

“Look, I am not stupid,” he said. “If I really wanted to be bad, I know how to be bad. But I wanted to do something special.”

In the past six months, dealers repeatedly expressed dismay to me about the state of the antiquarian-book trade. Richard Lan said that the Girolamini thefts and the Galileo forgeries had “blindsided the market.” Curators at the Library of Congress told me that they are being especially circumspect when considering Italian books, given that their provenances might well be illegitimate. Vincenzo Ferro, a dealer in Turin, said, “Our field is based on trust. Five years ago, it was impossible for someone to ask me, ‘Where does this book come from?’ It was considered impolite.” Now everyone asks. “It’s a mess,” Ferro said.

Lan still owns the fake “Sidereus Nuncius,” and says that he is planning to sue Filippo Rotundo, in an attempt to get his money back. De Caro’s second trial recently began in Naples. If he is convicted of destroying the Girolamini, he could face an additional twelve years of confinement. During my stay at the villa, he was crafting his defense strategy. “I did something against the law, and I will pay,” he said. “But I only want to pay for what I did.” He contends that the Naples library was a shambles when he started, and that most of the books that he tried to sell were from the priests’ private collection—not from the public library. “The problem is that the environment in Naples is not so kind to me,” De Caro said. “I am like a monster.”

He quoted Oscar Wilde—“It is always with the best intentions that the worst work is done”—and told me that he had robbed the Girolamini in order to earn money for library renovations. “I know it’s a crazy way of doing things, but I’m crazy about books,” he said. “When I stole books, there was always a reason.” He sensed my skepticism, and described an episode from 2003, when he took three volumes from a library in Padua, sold them for thirty-five thousand euros, and used the cash to buy a manuscript collection by Galileo Ferraris, a nineteenth-century scientist, from a local bookshop. Then—after taking no profit, he said—he donated the Ferraris collection to what is now the Galileo Museum, in Florence. We went into his office, and he retrieved a letter from the museum acknowledging the donation. He did not have documentation for the other transactions.

While we were in his office, I noticed a framed copy of a lunar etching from the “Sidereus Nuncius.” There was Spanish handwriting at the bottom—“Luna de Galileo, Scano 2005.” De Caro said that the handwriting was that of a woman, in Buenos Aires, who had duplicated the etchings for some of his “Sidereus Nuncius” fakes.

On another wall hung a signed photograph of Buzz Aldrin walking on the moon. Dozens of books related to the moon sat on a bookshelf. “I’m working now to write a bibliography on the representations of the moon, starting with Galileo, through 1799,” De Caro said. For a man facing prolonged detention, he was full of plans. He told me that Frank Abagnale, the con man depicted in the 2002 film “Catch Me If You Can,” had become a source of inspiration. Abagnale had eventually helped the authorities catch check forgers. “I want to do for books what he did for checks,” De Caro said. He could be the F.B.I.’s “best ally”: “I can find stolen books. I can help them to find the black, offshore accounts of all the booksellers. That’s a big amount of money.” All he wanted in return, he said, was a percentage of the money seized.

On the afternoon of my last day with De Caro, he walked me down the gravel driveway. Paco and Ria ran ahead. I asked De Caro if the judge had ordered him to wear a tracking device.

He shook his head. “I am a person who likes to respect the rules,” he said. “Even if they don’t check me, I don’t go out, I don’t speak on the phone. I respect everything.”

He pressed a button, the gate rolled open, and I began to head down the hill, carrying under my arm De Caro’s hefty study of Galileo, which he had offered me as a memento. The book bore an inscription: “Because the truth cannot be killed! Thanks for spending time with me. The Monster.” He wished me farewell and, with the dogs at his heels, returned to the villa. ♦|||

The mystery surrounding a copy of Galileo’s pivotal treatise.