"Application for internship", "Summer Internship 2017" etc. are some of the regular subjects I find. Internship in which field? I guess "Application for data science internship" makes a lot more sense. If I or my company has an opportunity, I will straight away forward your email and resume else I really don't want to figure out your life story from that silly subject.

So this is the first point of cutting you off. The HR knows he has data science internship opportunities and he will straightaway target you for the interview round.

Time and again, this has been repeated and will be repeated again and again. "punk_developer1902@gmail.com" or "rocky_coder1244@hotmail.com" makes your profile funny and less serious. Please stop using that email as soon as possible. It seems shady. Mentioning your institution's name isn't going to help either. How on earth am I supposed to confirm that?

Emails like "suresh.1992@gmail.com" or "suresh.agr@xitb.nic.in" (official college email) helps a lot knowing about you. Please use college email whenever possible. It works out the best.

I have found them decent enough but look at the recent one : "Respected hiring officials" . So anyone and everyone you mail is a hiring official. Are you kidding me? It is not even a post these days. It is ok to email your seniors too about the opportunity. They might not be hiring officials but they might secure you an internship.

Similarly, "Respected sir/mam" also looks disgusting. It is actually worse. I certainly know you didn't care about who you are emailing. In fact there is a huge chance that you mass emailed everyone you could get hold off. This was done by a so called 'Machine Learning' guy who emailed me for a position. What is the use of ML if you can't use it to sort names by gender and use appropriate salutation.

Write the salutation properly as it shows how serious you are about the person and finally about the company. It also shows you invested time in looking up and probably researched a bit too.

I have seen students doing various stunts on this one. The first one is cc-ing all prospectives. Well it is a mess from there onwards. Next is bcc-ing everyone. I want to announce it loudly  that everyone sees that thing and you are rejected straightaway once they see the bcc. So please avoid that. Take some time and write to everyone separately.

'I am a hard working person' .... and guess what, that was all when it came to experience in a recent application. Hard work could have reflected in github profile, kaggle, stackoverflow, projects, portfolio, college projects, competitions, apps, games and what not. Even participations would have been enough.

'I secured XX% in class 10th, YY% in 12th and 5th sem CGPA is 7.93' . Well it is not a bad idea to mention about your grades but a company really doesn't care. Please keep it confined to the resume and not the cover letter. I need to know more about your skills. Grades are secondary.

It made no addition to your profile. It filled a paragraph but made made 0 contribution. I know you copied these lines because I am neither an expert nor any company calls itself prestigious. So avoid this please.

Also 'National Institute of Technology, Suratkal, Karnataka' is like giving the coordinate to conduct army drill. Keep it to NIT Suratkal. No one is dumb to not make it out of that.

Misspelling name of the HR/Company/Person is the worst blunder you can ever do. Don't do that. But if ever end up doing that mistake, you can immediately apologise for your mistake or forget any reply for the application.

A guy mailed me for internship for the company I previously worked at, which was shutdown magnificently a month ago and has been in news for a while. I certainly knew for sure that he has copied my name and email from someone else and also the data is a year old.

It takes a minute to figure out whether your resume speaks truth or is a made up one with fake projects. A single phone interview and you will be done. If you can get through the lies, very well but then you will be an ultra smart person to pull that off and you deserve that internship.

Common guys like me presented really crappy projects in the experience section (as that was all I could make) but that eventually led me to internship. A blog also does the job.

'I have done certifications on coursera and took blah blah courses in college'. With all due respect, you may have done all these things, but a certain candidate has shown some projects in Django and suit my needs. He has done no courses. I can't rely on certificates and marks.

What company thinks about such profiles is that the person is more research/acad oriented and might not be suitable for work at all. Also online courses just show your interest in the field. You need to show something to prove your point.

It is bad if you have grammatical mistakes in your application, but it is worse if you don't get that proof read from someone else. Trust me, it is no harm to do that. Improper grammar can make your application sound something else.

Using cuss words like ' I like ReactJS (Fuck you angular)' doesn't make it cool. It is a blunder. Similarly, 'hugs', 'cheers', 'love', 'huge opportunity', 'opportunity of lifetime', 'dream internship' etc. make you sound dumb and desperate. Maintain some decorum and be humble.

Mentioning technologies like this - I know HTML, CSS, HTML5, CSS3, JAVASCRIPT, ANGULAR, JQUERY. Right way would be 'HTML5, CSS3 and AngularJS'. There are a lot of things which can be implied or deduced from what you know.

No mention of any projects or past experience, no github link, no portfolio makes it look dull. Looking up the name on internet gives me absolutely nothing. Such applications go straight to archives. So build your online presence. Use proper usernames for each. My own blunder is using _php  in my twitter username. Am I a PHP developer now? Absolutely no.

Keeping these things in mind, now the question could be what constitutes a right application. Here it goes:

Thank you for reading.

Though I am just a developer, I get a ton of applications for summer internships. Getting an internship is particularly hard as you are just in college and are trying to play around your skills or interests. At times the company you apply to recognises your skill and offer you an internship but most of the times they don't and mostly because you make mistakes in your application itself.An email is the first impression about you. While I don't expect freshers or sophomores to write an impeccable application, I find some very common methods used in emails which literally diminishes the chances or gives no insight about them. Forget interview, the email is archived or marked for later (which never comes). So I am going to list the most common mistakes I find in the emails.|||

email mistakes, right email, email for internship,mistakes in application, email mistakes, common email mistakes, internship email blunders, email blunders, how to write internship email