This book contains guided coloring activities that explore scientific climate data and research. Learn, explore, and reflect on issues related to climate change through act of coloring.

Climate change is one of the most significant issues that uniquely affects everyone around the globe. There currently is a significantly large gap between scientific consensus and public perception of climate change. Since public perception influences government and business policies around environmental issues, it is important to ensure enough unbiased and reliable information about the issues are available to the public.

This book is not political, but a celebration of information, learning, and research.

The act of coloring is slow. A coloring book has a meditative quality. A chart or article about climate change may be good at delivering information quickly. But with a coloring book, there is more time to absorb the information and reflect upon on the underlying issues.

This book only uses data and research from authoritative sources, and are heavily cited in the book and through documentation on this website. A sampling of prominent sources in this book:

My processes for using data and research to create the activities in this book are 100% transparent and documented in detail. Furthermore, the code used to generated the art in the book is also freely available to use and extend.

You currently can Pre-order the book now on Kickstarter. This is my preferred way of launching this book because it allows me to interact directly with you, the potential reader/colorer. It also gives me the most control over the printing and distribution process, which I am trying to make as environmentally-friendly as possible.

Keep up-to-date on my public status updates on the Kickstarter page. My timeline is as follows:

Brian Foo is a data artist and computer scientist living and working in NYC. He is interested in the intersections of art, science, and education. He is a data visualization artist at the American Museum of Natural History working on public exhibits related to climate change. This book is entirely his own and not affilliated with the museum.

His recent work, Data-Driven DJ, has been featured on NPR, Information is Beautiful Awards, The Washington Post, and The Atlantic. His data and design work at the New York Public Library Labs has been featured on WNYC, The Washington Post, and The New York Times.

You can contact him at hello@brianfoo.com.|||

A guided coloring activity book for exploring data and scientific research related to climate change