When I meet with founders and investors, they assume at SaaStr we are some sort of content and social marketing geniuses.  Let’s be clear — nothing could be further from the truth.  We have no one on our tiny team with a background in content or social media.  Everything is a hack.  And we have no real idea why some things “perform”, and others don’t.

But 5 years and 50,000,000+ views later, and with a $10m budget for 2018, I’ve learned a few things.

Let’s start with where we’ve gotten to today.  Some things work and some don’t, today:

So perhaps sharing those lessons will help others in some small way think about content marketing.

First, a little history.  The first SaaStr blog post was in 2012: “Everybody Lies: SaaS Revenues in the Inc 5000”.  It was a topic that as a founder I found cathartic — actual quantitative data about how every SaaS start-up overstates its revenues.  This also lead to the first “fav” we got on Twitter — from Aaron Levie.  That at least showed I wasn’t the only SaaS founder that at least found the topic interesting.

Looking back on it, it was a good post because it was an authentic and unique voice.  No other SaaS founders were talking about the truth about scaling, growing, and worrying about B2B businesses in quite such a direct way.

But back then, we only had about 300 followers on Twitter on 0 subscribers to our blog.

The key to growing the blog initially, looking back on it, was a tiny bit of “growth hacking”.  Google+ back then had a feature where you could essentially create a group email list and push content to anyone you’d Gmailed with (this feature is long gone).  I used that to assemble 3 lists of of 100 high-quality industry folks I knew and pushed the blog posts to them through this Google Plus email list.  The audience was small, but engagement was high.

This created a high-quality initial audience for the blog, and fairly high early engagement for something with very few views.

Second, we began answering questions on Quora that were of personal interest.  While for the most part, none of the answers themselves had many views for a long time, as a group, after 24 months, we hit 2,500,000 views on Quora.  But it took 2 years to get there.  From there, it took another 2 years to 20,000,000 views.  So there are some power laws in content marketing, two.

The key to Quora is I did what was easy.  I used Quora questions as a vehicle to stimulate a memory of some mistake I’d made, some learning I’d had.  And I made a rule if I couldn’t get the answer done immediately, I’d move on.  So Quora was very high time ROI.  I didn’t have to think up a topic, and the short format lent itself well to my ability to output content.  In the early days, it would take me 2+ hours to think of write, and edit a blog post (down to 10 minutes today) … but 5 minutes for a Quora answer.  Which really was just a post of a different kind.

Third, we began to do events to bring the community together.  We had a content-free meet up that went well, and then 500 or so folks came to our first Spring Soiree in 2014 with the co-founder of Marketo and my VPS and VPM.  From there, our first all-day SaaStr Annual in February 2015 maxxed out at 800 attendees during the day, and then 1000 or so at the party.  The ’16 Annual grew to about 3,000 on-site and 5,000 nominal attendees, the ’17 Annual grew to 6,000 on site at any time and 10,000 nominal attendees, and the ’18 Annual is running about 2.2x of the ’17 Annual so far.  We also did informal Summer Socials with speakers in London, Los Angeles, and New York that were well attended (300-500 each).

“Interestingly”, we don’t really know why folks come to the SaaStr Annual.  The only source of ticket sales that is material is our newsletter list, but at only 30,000 subs, it’s not really enough on its own to drive the 10,000 attendance in 2017 and certainly not big enough to drive a 20,000 person event in 2018.  Paid marketing doesn’t materially perform, and is expensive.  Twitter does work a bit for promotion — we had a lot of tweets — but still only made up about 5% of ticket sales.  Our podcast worked — it drove several hundred attendees.  But blog posts and the rest did not sell a material number of tickets or sponsorships.  At least, not that we can see via our rudimentary attribution.

OK so what as of today, do we know?  A few thoughts:

Ok so those learnings are a bit of a cautionary tale.  What can I tell you to simply to help?  A few thoughts:

Some thoughts for now.  Will come back later with more learnings.|||

When I meet with founders and investors, they assume at SaaStr we are some sort of content and social marketing geniuses. Let's be clear -- nothing...