A relatively frequent task for me is encrypting a new ADATA HD720 water/dust/shock proof external hard disk for a new project/client. I also keep my USB sticks encrypted.

I recommend using your favorite partition tool to re-partition the drive as follows. This avoids Windows and MacOS prompts offering to “format” and “initialize” the drive every time you insert it.

If you add a minuscule partition at the end of the drive, with a filesystem, all Operating Systems recognize (exFat/FAT32) you will not get prompted.

MacOS comes with the Disk Utility and Windows has Disk Manager. To access it open up File Explorer > right click on This PC > click Manage > and select the Storage tab.

Paragon offers an alternative Windows partitioning tool that is free for personal use. If you plan to use your external drive on both MacOS and Windows, I highly recommend purchasing MacDrive Pro or Paragon NTFS.

Using a journaled filesystem reduces recovery time after a crash (and increases the likelihood of a successful recovery!) Mac OS Extended or Windows NTFS are your options.

VeraCrypt’s User Interface is almost identical. Click on “Create Volume” and select “Create a volume within a partition/drive.”

I prefer standard VeraCrypt volumes. A “hidden” volume could provide me with more plausible deniability. However, do not skip over the fine print!

Next, select the first partition on your external hard disk and continue.

I use the AES(256) encryption algorithm and the SHA-512 hash algorithm. You can benchmark the performance for each encryption option on your hardware.

In the future I will address this in greater detail, for now, please accept that:

The final step will encrypt and format the drive. Depending on the size and speed of your storage media, this may take a few minutes to an entire night.

Once complete, you can mount the encrypted volume by choosing a Slot (on MacOS) or a Drive letter (on Windows).

Next, click the “Select Device” button and pick the encrypted partition of your external drive.

Click the “Mount” button and enter your passphrase / Keyfiles before clicking OK.

If you are using a password manager: Copy and pasting the passphrase only works if “Display password” is checked.

Rename it to something fresh and start saving your files on the encrypted partition of your external storage media. Always “safely eject” your disks to ensure all data is written to disk!|||

Information loss or theft of trade secrets, source code can put your business in an early grave. Protect sensitive data with Full Drive Encryption.