You need to do this as frequently as possible—a minimum of 2 hours every 6 weeks.

Why? This is the only way you and your team are going to experience your users' joys and frustrations first-hand. And it's that visceral experience that will motivate your team to improve your products.

Before you protest that you do meet with customers often, let me clarify a couple of things.

1. Any meeting with a salesperson in the room doesn't count.

Why? Because any meeting with a salesperson in the room is automatically a commercial negotiation, and that leaves no room for a discussion about user needs.

2. Meetings with customers only count if they're also the people actually using your product.

Your customers are the people who buy your product. Outside of consumer software, they tend not to be the people using your product day in, day out. And despite what these customers may claim, they can't accurately reflect the needs of the actual users. If you've ever had the misfortune of using any corporate procurement system ever, you'll understand my point.

Wherever possible, you should observe your users in person. You need to be able to see not just what they're doing with the product, but how they're reacting. Body language tells you a tremendous amount and you miss all that if all you can see is a screencast.

A passable option is to observe your users remotely with multiple cameras, showing their faces and hands as well as their screens. However, unless you have your own usability studio, this can become prohibitively complex and expensive—which would discourage you from your bare minimum of exposure to users for 2 hours every 6 weeks.

It's cheaper and easier to go and observe your users in their usual environment, so this should always be your first option. If you don't meet with your users regularly, you have no hope of keeping their needs at the heart of your product—so get out there!|||

How do you remain user-centric while designing products? We asked 28 product managers for their take on user-centred product management.