A great client experience is essential for a company's success. That's especially true if we are talking about SaaS companies, which are usually subscription and low ticket based. In our last two posts, we talked about what is customer experience and why it's important for a company.

Basically, it's a great way to reduce churn, drive up retention and satisfaction and improving important metrics such as activation rate and recurrency.

For that, we also showed a few ways to improve your customer experience strategy, like aiming for a first-call response rate and cutting scripts - there are more, don't forget!

All of that is part of something bigger, the customer journey you want your clients to go through. But what is it?

As we explain so well in our website, customer journey is the path your leads will take from the first moment of contact, when they are still visitors, until the moment of conversion, and even after that.

Even though it is named customer journey, you'll also be on a journey , to your clients' hearts, much like Indiana Jones seeking for the Crystal Skull.

And to do that, your customer journey need to be remarkable, deliver exactly what the person wants at the right time, and make him or her want to sign a contract.

So, in order for you to be able to do that, we'll teach you how to create a customer journey map and how to properly manage it. Just keep on reading!

A customer journey map is exactly what it sounds: a blueprint of every single step, possibility and outcome a lead can take, and ways to revert it.

Its purpose is to guide your sales and marketing teams, so that everybody knows where they want to take your leads, how to get them there and what to do in the odd case it doesn't work.

That's basic, but when you have a marketing strategy, you will already have decided who you what to sell your product to.

And most important: can you provide a good service to them?

These are a few of the questions you need to answer.

It's time to draw your customer journey map! Here is how you'll do it.

That usually means Social Media or Website. But there is a catch: the first conversion always happens on the last. You can use smart webforms or landing pages for rich content, have a live chat pop-up on your homepage to startup conversation or CTAs offering trials.

For each one, you'll get a certain type of lead (cold lead, MQL or SQL) and can fit him into the perfect automation flow of your customer journey.

The second step in drawing your customer journey map is creating your marketing automation flows. They can be aimed to: nurture, offer and convert, build relationships, avoid churn, upsell (another type of nurturing), feedback, onboarding, etc.

There are so many options of what you can do with an automation platform! And it all, when done correctly, results in improvements and revenue growth.

You don't have to use it, but drag-and-drop makes the job about a million times easier (really). That's because you can actually see the whole process flowing.

Let's create two examples, the first one being a new lead captured via landing page. You'll start like this: "Thanks for the download" email. After two days, you'll send a second email, saying "oh, we saw that you downloaded this and we thought you might be interested in one of these contents".

Here, you want to choose either a content in the same line as the last one or you can give him three options, and start to play around with your automations.

If the person clicks, he can go to next step of the automation, and if he doesn't, you can create a parallel option, to send different pieces of content in so many days. And like that, you can keep building your nurturing flow, until the lead is ready for a sales call.

What if the person never clicks on anything and just stops? In this case, you shouldn't force him through the funnel and offer a product he is not ready to buy, like it happens in so many companies.

Create loops and connect your different automations until you find a subject that interests him, and if you don't, deactivate him - I know your mind kinda blew up right about now.

But think about it! Do you really want a lead that is never going to buy from you, who probably doesn't even have the right fit and will just waste your time? It's always better to keep your contact list clean.

But remember to try everything before this happens. Sometimes, a simple "hey, we see you are not interested and we'll remove you from our lists in 24h. If you want to stay, click here" can force interaction. Believe, people can get really attached to email marketing.

We have a couple contents about this and, not to be repetitive, they will be linked down below.

You can also automate other things: welcome, internal communication, CRM and boards.

When talking about customer journey, metrics are your best friends.

That's how you'll know if you are going well, if your strategy is effective, how much ROI are you getting, etc.

Let's see what are the main customer journey analytics you need to check regularly.

The good news is, we have more information and most of these formulas here, are ready to use. Enjoy and you're welcome!

Once you finished drawing your customer journey map, your work won't be done!

CJ is a living thing, and needs to be always changing and improving. That's the only way to guarantee you are offering the very best to your clients. So follow, analyze, report and adjust!

If you are interested in enjoying the full experience our automation platform can offer you, sign up for a demo below and start using, among other things, our drag-and-drop automation and email campaigns!|||

What you need to consider to provide the perfect customer journey? Here's some analytics and other tips to make you