Netsil Application Operations Center (AOC) is a next-gen observability and analytics tool for modern cloud applications. The Netsil AOC helps SREs and DevOps improve the reliability and performance of API and microservices-driven production applications.

At the heart of the AOC is an auto-discovered service topology map. It visualizes service dependencies and operational metrics so practitioners can work collaboratively across teams.

See the "Gallery" below for some screenshots of Netsil in action!

Installation is done in two parts: Netsil AOC and the Netsil Collectors.

The collectors are installed on your application instances (VMs or containerized environments) and mirror the service interactions & metrics back to Netsil AOC for real-time analysis.

You may install the collectors in a variety of environments, independent of the AOC environment. For instance, you may run the AOC as a standalone docker container, but install the collectors in Kubernetes.

To install the AOC, refer to the subdirectory of this repository that corresponds to your deploy environment.

To install the collectors, refer to the tab within your AOC instance.

The instructions below should be enough to get you started. However, you can browse through our full documentation, which provides API definitions, user guides, and more.

You may also reach this site from the tab within your AOC instance. The documentation within the AOC is more likely to be in-sync with your current version of Netsil.

You will need to allocate an instance with sufficient resources to run Netsil AOC. The requirements are listed below.

Ensure that port 443 and port 80 (optional) are open for web access to Netsil AOC through HTTPS or HTTP.

Additionally, the following ports must be open on the AOC host to receive inbound traffic from the collectors:

Finally, Netsil requires an open channel to a license site for verifying your license key. Thus, ensure that you can reach on port 443 from where you are running Netsil AOC.

For help please join our public slack channel or email support@netsil.com|||

Deploy manifests for Netsil AOC