Freedom of expression has an essential and indispensable role in a society shaped by democratic values. The basic right to free expression is protected under the freedom of communication clause and under the freedoms granted to the press and broadcasters. The right to free expression finds its limits only where the rights and dignity of others are violated. The right to free expression and its restrictions, apply online as well as offline.

 Recently, the permissible scope of freedom of expression has been highly debated due to a number of incidents, which claim that false statements and hate speech often shape public discourse. To cope with this phenomenon, the Federal Cabinet has presented the Network Enforcement Law (NetzDG), which is set for adoption by the German Bundestag in the summer. Against this background, the signatories of this declaration wish to express their support for the following three principles:

The Network Enforcement Law adopted by the Cabinet questions these principles by transferring mainly state tasks of enforcement to private companies. The threat of high fines in connection with short reaction times increases the risk that platform operators will delete or block such contents, which fall in a gray area – to the detriment of free expression. The examination of the illegality of content also requires careful consideration of context and the intent of expression. This task must continue to be carried out by the court system.

We believe that an overall political strategy is necessary to curb the proliferation of hate speech and deliberate fake news on the Internet. We recognise that there is a need for action; however, the draft law does not meet the requirement to adequately protect the freedom of expression. On the contrary – it jeopardises the core principles of free expression. Therefore, we call for a cross-societal approach which intensifies criminal prosecution and law enforcement while also strengthening counter speech, fostering media literacy, and preserving a regulatory framework that respects freedom of expression in the deletion or blocking of unlawful content.|||

