If you like to read, odds are you’ve got a stack of books you’ve been meaning to get to, but haven’t been able to find the time.

If this describes you, you’re far from alone.

There are libraries full of books offering potentially life-changing information, but the reality is there’s no way to read every single one. According to science, though, you can likely get a lot closer than you think.

To help you become a phenomenally fast reader, here are a five scientifically backed strategies and an app that employs a science-based approach to help you to read more in less time.

Instead of giving every word equal weight, concentrate on longer words with more meaning, and your brain will fill in the gaps. Jot down crucial information (digitally or on paper), and realize you don’t need to memorize everything—you simply need to understand it.

Rather than pausing on individual words, picture phrases separated by invisible slashes. By consuming sentences in chunks instead of parsing every word, you’re eyes will grow conditioned to moving forward more quickly and without sacrificing comprehension.

To achieve true mastery of reading, make the most of your peripheral vision. Strengthen this skill by quickly glancing at phrases then attempting to recite them. The indenting method builds off this by suggesting readers aim their eyes on the center of a line of text, without focusing on words within a half inch of either margin.

Subvocalizing, the practice of silently speaking every word you read in your head, seriously slows down the reading process. That’s because the brain is capable of processing 400 words per minute, yet the average person can speak only 150 words during that time. Try humming, chewing gum, or focusing on the space above each line of text to overcome this common impediment.

Use a pen or your finger to snake across and down a page of text, and your eyes will automatically follow your movement while absorbing most of the words. Cover text you’ve already read with your other hand or a piece of paper to train your eyes to refrain from rereading.

These five tips should put you on the path to becoming a speedier reader. Yet if it’s lightning-fast reading rate and instant access to knowledge you seek, an outstanding app called Blinkist can help you read up to and beyond 100 books a month.

Blinkist is a learning app that transforms the world’s best nonfiction books into concentrated takeaways you can read or listen to in around 15 minutes. Whether you wish to learn about stocks and bonds or find out more about the Dalai Lama’s philosophy, Blinkist’s library of 1,800-plus books is certain to quench your curiosity.

What will Blinkist teach you?|||

Is it really possible to read three books a day? Science says it is. Who are you to argue?