You’re now at a decision point. You want to buy a feature flagging management solution, but you are not sure how difficult the switch might be. You either have an existing system in place or you’ve never tried feature flagging before.

The transition process is actually not as daunting as you think. In fact, it’s an opportunity to clean up technical debt, mitigate risk, and start deploying better software, faster. From start to finish, this guide will walk you through the process of successfully integrating LaunchDarkly into your development process.

Your coordinator will take ownership of the transition process.

Scan your application and identify your feature flags.

Remove the feature flags you don’t want anymore

Now that feature flagging will be easy, you should identify components of your application or particular processes that you would like to feature flag.

If you have existing flags, you can use LaunchDarkly’s REST API to import your existing flags.

To organize and document your feature flags, LaunchDarkly lets you add a name, description, and tags to each feature flag.

The coordinator should onboard team members, help set up projects and environments, and ensure that permissions are properly calibrated.

We want to make the transition fast, easy, and productive for you and your entire team. Contact us at support@launchdarkly.com and we will answer all of your questions, provide guidance, and help you get started.

As a designer who can code, Justin can empathize with a developer's workflow and design intuitive interfaces to address extremely complex functionality. He has built dozens of user interfaces for high-traffic applications — winning the Best of California IT Design award in 2012. He frequently contributes feature flag management and design theory articles to DZone, Tech.co, and DesignerHub. He holds degrees from UC Davis and USC, and is finishing an MS in Information Design at Northwestern. When he's not making developer's lives easier, he enjoys tennis, computer games, and writing.|||

A step-by-step guide for integrating LaunchDarkly into your app and adopting feature flagging best practices