I believe that the potted plants, as shown in the picture above, are not a substitute for the two FCC commissioners that are missing from this picture and should be helping to add balance to the lopsided reign of terror currently underway. While three FCC commissioners legally constitutes a quorum, I’d trust the votes of the potted plants, (Dieffenbachia, I believe) over this group.

On April 20th, 2017 the FCC is going to have a meeting and it is going to be a consumer and competitor bloodbath. The FCC has already put forth their proposed rules in multiple areas, including the “IP Transition”, to the hotly contested “Broadband Data Services”. But, the overall plan is to remove all regulations and obligations on the incumbent phone utility companies: AT&T, Verizon and Centurylink. (You didn’t know that they are still ‘utilities’?)

Just to recap, the new FCC Chairman, Ajit Pai, has taken control of the FCC with the help of his other Republican Commissioner, Michael O’Rielly. This has left a vacuum and a guarantee that there will be no serious discussion of any FCC decision because there is one Democrat, Mignon Clyburn, and she is not a lawyer. There was initially some lip service to have a former Dem Commissioner, Jessica Rosenworcel return, but that would have created, well, a stalemate with 2 Dems and 2 Republicans.

This meeting and the votes that are already preordained, should not be allowed until there is a balance to expose and shut down these really embarrassing proposed rulings. The documents and plans proposed show just how America is being abused through bad data, bad analysis and the fat fingers of the corporations to tilt the scales of Liberty in their favor.

The FCC has put together a collection of garbage, which cover multiple topics including something called “The IP Transition’. Instead of a tech change, this is about removing any remaining obligations and rules left on the state utilities that control the wires currently in place – I.e., the plan is to shut off the copper, and remove any pesky rules on any other wires.

The second disaster in the making is based on a hotly contested area over the last few years, known as “Broadband Data Services”. Basically, there is a class of service originally called “Special Access” services, renamed “BDS”. They are not special but are the regular phone wires used for data services, like ATM machines or by competitors offering service, or are the wires to the wireless hot spots or cell sites.

But, due to a manipulation of the accounting, this part of the wired business grew to a very, very profitable $45 billion dollar marketplace with the majority of the services still based on the existing copper wires. However, this entire line of business has been hidden from view, but it, too, is part of the state utility infrastructure.

Note: Over the last two years we did a great deal of work on this topic. AT&T and Verizon were able to block my ability to see the data collected by the FCC, with the help of the previous FCC administration. (I have nothing nice to say about this mess.) But, under the current proposed plan, I think of how bad it could be, then just triple it.

These areas, the IP Transition, the copper retirement, and BDS services overlap because a) they are part of the state-based utility, b) they use the exact same wiring c) most of the wiring is still copper and was never properly replaced or maintained and d) the data about these networks have been severely manipulated.

But most important – these wires are all Title II, common carrier services, including the copper network as well as the fiber optic networks that are used for FIOS or for the wires to the cell sites. And because these other fiber networks use Title II as the investment, the capital expenditures came out of the state utility budgets and was charged to local phone customers, especially harming low income families and rural customers.

This excerpt is from the Verizon Massachusetts’ December 2016 filing with the City of Boston, MA for their supposed FiOS build out. Verizon states that the networks are Title II and part of the existing state utility. In fact, when the City of Boston asked Verizon for a map of the services, Verizon said it did not have to provide this because this build out is nothing more than an enhancement of the existing state-based utility.|||

I believe that the potted plants, as shown in the picture above, are not a substitute for the two FCC commissioners that are missing from this picture an...