Why did you attend PgConf US? Our company is exploring the use of PostgreSQL as an additional DBMS choice to support Vertex Enterprise, our tax technology platform. Attending the conference offered me an opportunity to immerse myself into a variety of topics around PostgreSQL, as well as the chance to interact with other users to tap into their experiences. Tell us a little bit about your project or how you use PostgreSQL: Vertex Enterprise is a global tax management end-to-end solution that integrates all tax processes with Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) and business intelligence (BI) systems on a single platform using a tax performance engine. The solution is a blend of technologies that surround a Java based processing and calculation engine. This includes rich UI's, import, export, business intelligence / reporting, and big data integration. The foundation of our database leverages a multi-dimensional database structure, as well as other structures whose design varies based upon the needs of a particular function so that we can optimize performance. (ie. import/export/reporting). The official brochure provides a high level overview of the capabilities and interfaces that our DBMS must support.

Why did you chose PostgreSQL for your project? PostgreSQL checks many of the boxes that we are looking for in our consideration of an additional DBMS option. * Performance * Lower cost * Multi-tenancy support * Suitable for deployment on premise, in a hosted environment, and in the cloud * Industry acceptance * Ease of administration on locally administered instances * Features characteristic of an enterprise strength database (auditing, partitioning, replication, procedural language support) This was your first PGConf US, was it a last minute decision? Do you think it was worth it? If so, why? The conference was on our radar since the beginning of the year, and it exceeded expectations. Listening to and interacting with actual contributors to the product is not something you have the opportunity to do at many conferences. The sessions covered a variety of topics around PostgreSQL that were of interest (performance, tuning, feature discussion, lessons learned, cloud deployment options, optimization, etc). Would you attend PgConf US again? Are you interested in contributing to the community and if so, in what fashion? My "day job" keeps me pretty busy, but as far as sharing our experience with PostgreSQL, I am willing to contribute in that way :) .|||

