Let’s look at a story I tell myself sometimes, from Theodore Zeldin’s A Intimate History of Humanity:

Pretty convincing, yea? Part of me still believes it.

Zeldin warns against this self-storytelling. If we believe happiness is an impossibility — a long-dead artifact of ancient times — why search for it at all?

Humans have always been unhappy at times. And, in each age, they have found a way to fight back.

For another perspective on this matter, let’s dig into the personal notebooks of Samuel Butler, written over 100 years ago:

How to be happy, says Butler, is not something they teach in school:

In school, they taught us math. They taught us science. But, in my experience, nobody taught us how to live.

It’s not my goal to argue whether happiness is worth chasing — that’s for you to decide. But if you do want to be happy, then it makes no sense to wait for it to come to you.

There are reasons other than self-storytelling that make people unhappy. Butler shares one of them:

I’ve seen it happen. When people make effort to change themselves, they do. In the past, I would look down on those who didn’t change, calling them “lazy” or “stupid.”

Lately, I realize it’s not the case.

People aren’t lazy, they’re just stuck, stuck in a whirlwind of habit and false belief. Without outside help, sometimes they’ll never get out.

Some things that might cause this:

You, the reader, are lucky. If you’re here reading this, it means you have the power, the agency, to direct change in your life.

But how do we direct change?

Butler has some ideas on that too…

In his notebooks, Butler goes on to explain how to take control:

Sorry folks, no magic powder here. You can’t buy happiness for three easy payments of $99.99.

With that said, the process is simple (it’s the doing that’s hard). Learning how to be happy is not much different from, say, learning how to juggle.

First, Butler says to doubt your beliefs:

Get in the habit of looking at what you (and the people around you) believe to be true. Ask: “Does this really make me happy? How do I know?”

Sometimes, no amount of armchair philosophy will get you to the right answer.

In times like that, Butler recommends a test drive:

I thought AcroYoga was the silliest thing ever, a perversion of an ancient art. But when I tried it, it was really fun. I made up reasons not to like it, and none of them were true.

Never marry someone a week after meeting them. The more serious the decision, the more you should in invest in getting it right.

If you think about it, what Butler is telling us is something we all knew already.

Sounds familiar? We learned it science class all those years ago. It’s the scientific method.

So here’s the big takeaway for me.

The how-to of life is not a science. But this does NOT mean we shouldn’t apply methods of science to our lives. And, of course, no easy answers does not mean there are no answers at all.

Maybe that stuff they taught us in school wasn’t so useless after all.|||

Let’s look at a story I tell myself sometimes, from Theodore Zeldin’s A Intimate History of Humanity: Zeldin warns against this self-storytelling. If we believe happiness is an impossibility — a long…