I’ve been writing code professionally for over 20 years and now I’m ready to do something drastically different — I’m ready to do my own thing. Leaving the security of a monthly paycheck is a daunting thought, so I want to clear my head a bit and explain why I believe this is the right thing to do.

For those of you who are on the fence about starting something new, I hope this post will serve you well.

I’m never more happy than when I’m writing code. It’s my creative outlet. I may not be able to draw a picture or write a song but I can use my creative skills to solve difficult problems with elegant code. Programming is my form of art, my way of creating things that didn’t exist before. Coding is my job and my hobby; there’s no greater gift in life than to wake up in the morning and being truly happy to go to work, doing what you love. I felt that joy for over 20 years.

Unfortunately — or perhaps quite fortunately — my current job stopped providing that wonderful feeling. Without it, work became a dreadful experience. Without that joy, I no longer felt able to express my creativity like I did before. I wanted that feeling back.

I had two choices: either find another job or try starting my own project. I had to ask myself which one would bring the most joy back into my daily professional life.

I spent a few weeks reflecting on my career as a software developer. I wanted to explore the moments that brought me not only the most joy but also a sense of accomplishment, a feeling of doing the right thing. Almost all of those moments had the same thing in common: they were times where I taught other people the beauty of programming, many of whom work a developers today. I’ve also coached junior developers in several of my previous jobs, which I always enjoyed doing. Recently I even wrote a book about the basics of programming titled Foundational Programming, which has been selling well and getting positive reviews.

Basically, my passion is not only in building software but also in teaching others how to do it. This is something I was able to do in previous jobs, but to a limited extent. If I want to get the most joy out of my work, it needs to combine those two passions into a single project. That’s not something I can expect if I were to look for another day job.

I had to choose between a steady paycheck and an uncertain yet personally fulfilling goal. Despite my fears and reservations — or perhaps to thwart them — I decided to try building my own thing, something that would make me happy, help others, and hopefully pay well enough to keep the lights on.

My plan is to build a video-based learning course teaching full-stack web development, from the bare basics of HTML and CSS to advanced Python, Django, JavaScript and even skills for finding a job and being successful in a new career as a junior developer. My goal is to help people become employable web developers, even if they have absolutely no programming knowledge or experience.|||

I’ve been writing code professionally for over 20 years and now I’m ready to do something drastically different — I’m ready to do my own thing. Leaving the security of a monthly paycheck is a…