Emails Sent: 214

Pitch Decks Emailed: 17

Wireless Plan Overage (GB): 11

Miles of Sand Hill Road Walked In The Rain: ~3

It took us from late January until March to get our pitch deck shaped up, our pitch honed to perfection, our prototype built, and our line up of potential investors ready for introductions.

At this point we sorted our investors by pitch maturity and then by expected value (EV), choosing to pitch to the growing/low EV investors first. We wanted to get feedback early and often and iterate quickly, but at the same time be ready to wow during our highest EV pitch.

After we had the order we wanted, we reached out to the investors and then ended with a totally different order. When reaching out, always include a suggested time and date; say something like “could we meet at Philz on 4th and Berry at 1pm on Tuesday the 21st?” That way you anchor a time, date and place, and the follow up reply will address those specifics explicitly.

We tried to get as many meetings in as short as time as possible, figuring that we’d never be better at pitching then we were during those few weeks. We ended up booking the majority of our meetings for a two week period and then had maybe 4 or 5 meetings that had to be later due to people traveling and so on.

So, it’s early March, and we have a lot of meetings lined up. Before each meeting, we did research on the firm, checked out their investment thesis (again), did some research on the person we were meeting with, researched the portfolio companies of the firm, and so on. We’d update the deck to use any of the VC firm’s portfolio companies as example customers we could help, and we’d discuss how to pitch to the person given that person’s background (e.g., are they technical or not? Did they give any talks recently we should watch? And so on).

We made a mistake here with one firm--we didn’t see that they had potential competitors in their portfolio until the last minute, and we decided to cancel the meeting on short notice. Don’t do this. Instead, do your research ahead of time and work all that out beforehand. You should know what potential competitors the firms is invested in and have discussed that before your meeting.

Some VCs did this work for us and sent us notes saying “we’re invested in X which sounds a bit like what you do, is it a conflict?”. Such notes were great for both parties (and thank you to the investors who did so--it meant a lot), but you as a founder should do this work. Don’t presume that the VC will do it for you.

AppleTVs Connected To: 4

HDMI Connections: 7

Chromecasts Connected To: 2

Times We Gave Up And Used Our Laptop: 4

Our entire March was spent talking to VCs. Our pitches were done in coffee shops, bars, very fancy offices, somewhat fancy offices, hotel lobbies, our “office”, over video conference--basically everywhere.

A typical meeting went like as follows:

As I said at the top everyone was very nice to us. We got strong feedback, but all of it was constructive. By the end of our first week we had a good understanding of whether the result of a meeting would be a yes or no; you’ll develop a sense for the result as well.

Don’t argue with the investor. This mantra sounds obvious, but you’d be surprised how much it can feel like someone is criticizing you when they are talking about your pitch deck content (this could just be me). Try to avoid getting defensive--someone is considering risking a bunch of money on you and your idea, so it’s only fair that they ask hard questions. There are a few kinds of questions we got:

Sometimes a question falls into many of these categories and it becomes unclear what sort of answer the questioner is seeking. If your answer falls short the first time, consider these question categories as a guide.

One thing we quickly noticed is that we only ever got advice or feedback on one of three topics in our pitch: the team, market, or product--“The 3 Risks of VC” (special thanks to Francisco Gimenez at 8VC for this seemingly simple yet incredibly valuable conceptual framework). No investor ever questioned more than one of these, and we got so that we could predict what it would be before a meeting based on the investing thesis of the VC we were pitching too. For example, if the VC was in hard technology like ML, they’d have lots of questions about the mobile market, while if they were in mobile, they’d have questions about our ML technology. If you think about it, it makes senses--the VC is trying to understand the area of least expertise (for them) since that represents the most risk.|||

