Using CloudFlare allows us to do what we do, while you retain 100% control over your domain:

When you point your nameservers at CloudFlare, we can easily proceed with all other sign-ups and configurations using your domain name. However, you can withdraw your permission for us to "work" with your domain by pointing your nameservers at another provider. You retain full control of your domain at all times!

CloudFlare is used to manage the DNS of your domain. It will be required to set up an email address with your domain, to set up deliverability records, register the website with Google and others. Also CloudFlare makes it very easy to enable free SSL for your website.





 It's a very decent hosted mail provider with a very generous free tier. The service has a very good web interface, mobile app 

 and allows the use of your favorite email client.

Easy website hosting and building service with a generous free tier. It is perfect for a starter website and includes popular elements such as contact forms, blogs with comments and professional mobile friendly templates.



We will need to set up a Google account for you, to be able to access various Google services (see below).



We will register your website with Google Webmaster to ensure that Google crawls the website and displays it in its search results.



This is a handy tool for you to be able to track user activity on your website.



You will be able to use this to monitor and track enhanced website and user analytics.



Inspectlet is a service that captures videos of how users use your website. We found that it is the only service of this type that has a free tier. This will come in super handy once you start cracking down on that sales funnel!



We will integrate Zoho Sales IQ with your website template. It has a live web chat feature that allows you to chat and receive real time feedback from visitors on your site website.

We will create a Stripe account which you can use to accept your user's payments. (You will need to confirm your bank details before accepting payments though.)

Facebook and Twitter are most commonly needed to ensure some degree of social media presence. We will also integrate these

accounts into your website template and it's blog.|||

