The centralized WeWork data & analytics organization drives efficient decision-making and optimization via data-driven insights and recommendations. We are a closely-knit group composed of four subteams:

We are seeking a data engineer to grow the team. You will collaborate closely with our engineering team, external vendors and services, the rest of the data org, and stakeholders across the organization, to provide accurate and timely data and efficient and impactful tooling. By developing and maintaining the foundational data layer, you will have a direct, visible, and profound effect upon a large, global, and data-driven organization.

WeWork is the community of creators. We provide the space, community and services for over tens of thousands of members to do what they love and create their life's work. WeWork’s mission is to build a world where people work to make a life, not just a living. Our own team members are central to this mission.

The WeWork team is a group of entrepreneurial, grateful individuals who deeply believe in what we are creating and in the power of “we”. We challenge convention and achieve amazing things through dedication and collaboration.

WeWork transforms buildings into beautiful, collaborative work spaces and provides infrastructure, services, events and technology so our members can focus on doing what they love. Our team members value the WeWork concept and there is a contagious energy in our offices as we work towards accomplishing our goals.

Our hunger for building great spaces, empowering small businesses and connecting interesting people hasn't yet begun to be satisfied. We are just getting started, and our journey gets increasingly more exciting as team members join our mission!



 Our values guide who we are and everything that we do.

We do what we love and are connected to something greater than ourselves.

We are creators, leaders and self-starters.  We try new things; we challenge convention; and we’re not afraid to fail.

We are genuine to our brand, mission and values.  We’re not perfect and we don’t pretend to be.  We are, though, always honest and as transparent as we can be.

We never settle.  We get sh*t done and we get it done well.  Be persistent and knock down walls – literally if you have to.  You have our permission.

We are grateful for each other, our members, and to be part of this movement.  We don’t take success for granted.  We’re happy to be alive.

We are in this together.  This is a team effort.  We always look out for one another. We value empathy; we know we’re all human, and know we can’t do any of this alone.|||

