How did you begin your career in the industry?

I graduated from California Institute of Technology in 2003 with a degree in Computer Science, then I spent about ten years as a software engineer, first in then newly-launched LinkedIn where I did back-end development for LinkedIn Jobs and LinkedIn Groups. Then, in 2005, all my friends were saying, “Go to Google”, because Google was kind of an engineer’s paradise at that time. I applied, got in, and spent about three and a half years there, mostly working on payment fraud detection. In 2009, I missed the startup world, so I went back and joined the location data platform Factual in Los Angeles and lasted there for four years working deep on data cleaning and normalization issues.

When I left Factual in 2012, I was actually thinking of starting a company, but I wanted to learn more about really early-stage startups at the time, and wasn’t really sure how to do that. Then just a week later, one of my friends came up to me and said, “Hey, I’m starting a seed fund with some people. We have some people with business experience who want some of your technical experience.” And my friend asked me if I wanted to try being the technical partner.

It seemed like a really interesting opportunity, so I thought I’d try it for six months or a year, and then I’d go and start a company. I ended up really loving it. So that’s almost four and a half years in, and I think being a venture capitalist is going to be my career now, full time, forever.

What was so different about Susa Ventures?

Personally,  it felt like an opportunity I was very unlikely to get any time in the future. Also, the partners in the fund were people I really like. It was a chance to be almost like a quarter-founder where we definitely think about the fund as a startup – how do we build a brand, how do we differentiate, what kind of products should we have for our portfolio, and so on.

Our focus also appealed to me. In the first years we had companies that use data as a competitive advantage – something that all the partners had seen in their careers. In my case, when I worked at Google, I was one of the algorithms and infrastructure guys with a mindset that better algorithms would be the thing that defined the team’s success, while the rest of the team was just getting more data for the system. But then, I quickly found out that algorithms almost didn’t matter; more data did.

In the last 10-15 years, a lot of stuff has become commoditized. There’s more open-sourced software, AWS, but data was hard to commoditize. So we decided to focus on companies that have interesting, unique data sets that they could lay machine learning on top of, and build interesting products that were the kind of companies we want to invest in.

In building the data moats, machine learning is a current trend. What’s the coolest thing you’ve seen in the last year in machine learning as far as an application?

It kind of pains me to say this, because as an engineer I want the technology to be the really differentiating thing, but I think usually the most interesting things I see in terms of machine learning pitches are companies where machine learning’s kind of the means to the end, rather than the core selling point.

But there are really interesting machine learning companies right now, and one of them is Clarke.AI. They have a program that can be dialed in during a telephone conference and it listens, transcribes the conversation, and picks out the most interesting actionable parts of the call, then afterwards sends it via email. There’s also Mashgin, a self-checkout machine based on computer vision and deep learning system. The company developed a little kiosk with built-in cameras where instead of having to scan barcodes in a grocery store, you just have to put an item under the camera. It creates an almost futuristic, magical, checkout process, which I think is really compelling as a consumer.

What do you think is something that machine learning companies have to focus more on?

For me, it’s all about data collection. Most companies say “Here’s the problem I’m trying to solve. I’ll use machine learning to solve it, and that’s my pitch.” What these companies miss is that yes, machine learning can solve the problem, but first you need a lot of training data. You get this kind of chicken-and-egg problem where it’s hard to get a customer to buy your product before it does anything, but then you’re not going to get data to build your product until customers buy it, so that can be a tough problem to navigate.

Do you think that machine learning is a competitive differentiator in terms of building out a moat, or is it more of a piece of the competitive moat at large?

I think it’s a piece, and the real moat comes from having good machine learning on top of a lot ofdata that’s hopefully proprietary and unique.. The data ends up as being very important because most startups aren’t doing cutting edge machine learning research–with a few exceptions like autonomous vehicle startups. In general, machine learning is not where innovation happens. It’s more about the data aggregation and trying to get as many good sources of heterogeneous or orthogonal data as you can.

Thinking about it from a competitive standpoint, I think it’s very hard to develop an algorithm that nobody else can copy, especially machine learning giants like Google and Facebook. But I think your edge is in having a data set that nobody else has, and once you have it, it wouldn’t matter how good your competitors’ machine learning algorithms are because they’re not going to be able to compete with you.

Do you have any exciting announcements from one of your portfolio companies that we can look forward to?

I’m really excited about the freshly-launched Outlier.ai, a company my friend Sean Byrnes started about a year and a half ago. They’re all about business analysis automation, trying to figure out outliers and patterns the way data analysts or data scientists do it. While his previous company, Flurry, provided customers with so much data to work on, Outlier.ai provides the tool to automate these data with more in-depth analysis. I think it’s the future of business analysis.

They also have a newsletter that might be of interest to your readers called “Data Driven Daily”. They cover a lot of the basics of data analysis with a focus business use cases, like cohort analysis, retention analysis, measuring churn, and so on.

What’s the most memorable thing that’s happened the last four years since you’ve become a VC looking at data companies and machine learning?

I’ve been really impressed with how much the field of machine learning has moved in the last three or four years. In the earlier pitches I heard, a couple of companies boasted random forest as a service, touting it as the “best generalist machine learning algorithm”. Then shortly after that declaration came in deep learning, and now there’s great tools out there like Tensorflow. Machine Learning research is progressing very quickly and is more accessible than ever, and I’m really excited at how democratized it is to the point that a good software engineer only needs to access public code and public libraries in order to start out in machine learning.

Is there anything you want to share with our readers if they want to get deeper into machine learning?

I have three tips for those doing business in machine learning.

First off, you have to really focus on the business side and not the technology behind it.

Secondly, keep in mind that a lot of machine learning applications actually start with basic technology, and that there’s no need to be afraid of using low-tech solutions in your early days. It’s better to find product market fit with a weak algorithm than to have a  great algorithm and a product customers don’t care about.

My last tip would be to figure out how to get training data as early as possible.

For the startup employees, VCs can point you in the right direction of finding a job you like. The reason for this is a lot of VCs will work with 20 to 50 companies, especially at seed stage, and they know what kind of problems those companies are working on and what kind of technologies they might use. So if you tell them, “I really want to work at a 20 person company

 with 1 or 2 senior data scientists I can learn from,” they know where to direct you.

If you want to reach out to Leo Polovets, he can be found on twitter @lpolovets and you can read his blog posts at CodingVC, his blog.|||

