We’ve been hinting at big things for a while now at The Campfire Union, and we’re super excited to finally unveil the first part of those things. Flipside has been our semi-stealth mode project since early last year, and we’re now ready to start opening it up to a wider audience.

Today, we are making Flipside Studio available to a select group of content creators. We need your feedback to shape it into the best product it can be, and it’s time to see what you guys come up with. If you are a content creator and are interested in participating, please sign up here:

Flipside Studio transforms your standard PC-based VR setup into a complete virtual TV studio, where you can create live-acted animated shows in real time. Your headset and controllers are the motion capture system as you embody characters on your own virtual sets.

Shows are recorded for both 2D screens as well as VR and AR playback. 2D shows can be viewed on any of today’s screens, and can even be streamed live to Facebook, Twitch, or YouTube.

Today we’re also proud to share the first show made in Flipside Studio, created in collaboration with Winnipeg-based improv comedy duo Bucko Comedy. Super Secret Science Island is an improv comedy show about two failed science experiments, 2B and Genefur, who are stranded on a deserted island. Follow their antics as they look for a way off the island and to find their missing creator, Dr. Whoosh.

As if one show wasn’t enough, we’re also launching with a weekly alien news update about what’s happening down here on Earth. The alien newscaster, named Zeeblow Gonzoar, is written and performed by San Francisco-based comedian Jordan Cerminara.

We will be sharing lots more info about the making of Super Secret Science Island and Earth From Up Here, including advice and tips on acting in VR courtesy of Lauren and Aaron of Bucko Comedy, in the weeks to come.

If you are a content creator, streamer, writer, actor, producer, or director and would like early access to Flipside Studio for a show of your own, enter your email below to be added to our early access list:

Stay tuned for more Flipside productions in the weeks to come! We’ve only just begun to discover what’s possible in terms of finding new ways of interacting with audiences, and of bringing the impossible to life.|||

