Almost anybody who thinks that they have an excellent service whose basic structure depends on selling their slots — time, place, or commodity.

Keeping in mind the market dynamics, requirements and ensuring pleasant customer experience, CedCommerce has come with Marketplace Booking and Reservation System which enables alike businesses and individuals come up on the same platform and offer their services.

With the increase in prosperity, there has been an unprecedented increase in the number of Globe-Trotters and Event Goers. Not only this with technological solutions at their behest, experts can now utilize their resources effectively i.e. booking appointment slots.

CedCommerce removes all the hassle of putting efforts of hiring expert developers, designers and maintenance guys and the long hours invested in the development of your end-product.

Setting up a robust and feature rich booking or reservation marketplace just requires click and downloading the extension. It is amongst the most cost-competitive and robust turnkey Marketplace Booking and Reservation Solutions which is extremely customizable and mobile ready.

The admin is the end-to-end controller of the Marketplace and all the power lies within him.

He has all the authority to approve or disapprove the requests of vendors wanting to be associated with his platform.

It is up to the admin to decide that he wants to charge a uniform commission rate from their vendors or apply variable commission rates.

Admin can set minimum numbers of amenities required to be listed at his platform like Hotel marketplace can standardize that each property getting listed on its website must have a Television, Refrigerator, Wi-Fi and other amenities.

Also, admin gets the easy-to-use and understand and interactive dashboard facilitating the management of vendors and other aspects of their marketplace.

Furthermore, Admin can set all the acceptable payment methods that he wants for his marketplace.

Being the Backbone of any marketplace, vendors deserve extremely flexible functionalities that make it uber-easy for them to sell on any platform.

The hassle free management of the service offered by them remains incomplete without a dedicated and easy-to-use Dashboard. Therefore, all the vendors get their dedicated dashboard.

Vendors get the Separate Pages to represent their services as they wish. They can enter the content, images, and videos to stand out from others.

In the age of globalization, it becomes critical for businesses to have multi-payment acceptance mechanism. Therefore, vendors get the multi-payment method.

Since all the money is deposited with the admin, a seamless transaction system for admin to transfer money to their vendors or, vice versa.

Reviews and Rating work as a word of mouth publicity for any service, product or business entity. They are a great source of getting feedback.

For seamless selling experience, the uninterrupted communication channel with admin is critically important and with this extension, vendors do have it.

Developers are also the party to the successful running of any marketplace, therefore for them.

1. All Booking-Types: Admin and vendors can book all types of bookable products — hourly/Daily/Weekly

2. Videos: Both admin and vendors can upload high-quality videos making their services appealing.

3. Smart Search & Filters: It enables your customers to reach you immediately.

4. One Step Checkout: To minimize the card abandonment, there is a one step checkout service available.

5. SEO Friendly: To maximize your visibility in the Search Engine Rankings.

6. Payment Gateways: All type of Payment gateways to ensure hassle free payment.

7. Free Extensions: Being based on Magento, there are lots of FREE extensions available for the platform.

The Marketplace Booking and Reservation System comes with great services:

Multiple add-ons, developed by CedCommerce, that further enhances the functionalities of the Marketplace.

If an affordable, robust, mobile ready, SEO friendly Online Booking and Reservation Marketplace solution which can be instantly set up and operated is what you’re looking for, your search ends with Marketplace Booking and Reservation System.|||

With the increase in prosperity, there has been an unprecedented increase in the number of Globe-Trotters and Event Goers. Not only this with technological solutions at their behest, experts can now…