Le Studio is hiring! Check out the positions we have available

In France and many other countries right now it is generally agreed that there are currently more development positions available than there are qualified people to fill them (this doesn’t necessarily mean there aren’t a lot of people out there applying to them!). This has led to a blossoming of programming bootcamps and non-traditional schools that try, with varying success, to fill this gap in the jobs market.

So we thought it might be interesting to get a general picture of what kind of skills these jobs are looking for (outside of the usual ‘team player,’ an individual ‘motivated to succeed’ but who also ‘knows how to fail’ and the plethora of other buzzwords and business jargon that 100% of people will ascribe to themselves regardless of their background).

To do this I very scientifically went to Indeed, typed the name of various programming languages in the bar and found the top 10 most sought-after in France. So let’s get started and see what exactly employers are looking for today in France:

Java comes in at number one with 11,500 positions available right now. It should come as little shock to anyone that the language that bills itself as ‘write once, run anywhere’ has continued to dominated lists like this for years. The demand for Java developers has been described as being at an all time high as far back as 16 years ago and yet here it is at the top of the list.

Java, due to the way it is run, is used across a bewilderingly broad range of industries and devices. It is not only heavily utilized in Enterprise applications but is also the language used for build Android applications.

Structured Query Language comes in a close second with 10,900 jobs currently posted on Indeed wherein SQL is one of the required skills. SQL is a family of languages that allow for database manipulation and use. Among the most popular are Microsoft SQL, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Sybase. As practically all development positions are going to require dealing with data in some capacity, it should come as no surprise that SQL is so high on this list.

Be aware that, because of the way that Indeed works, included in ‘SQL’ are some jobs that are looking for SQL’s non-relational cousin NoSQL (MongoDB, etc).

Coming in third with 8,500 jobs currently available is Javascript. Confusingly unrelated to Java, Javascript is a scripting language that runs entirely in the user’s browser in the form of small (or large) scripts. The language is essentially ubiquitous on the internet at this point and this fact explains the preponderance of positions available for Javascript developers. Unless you use a browser like Lynx or have the no-script addon installed on your browser, Javascript scripts are being run on your computer practically every time you go to a new webpage.

As this is one of the core technologies that makes the web run as smoothly, cleanly, and, well, prettily as it does, it is naturally in very high demand. And considering the sheer number of frameworks and libraries (Vue, React, Angular, etc) that are available for it, there are a lot of complicated tasks that can be accomplished in an extremely short period of time by a skilled developer.

Coming in fourth with 6,500 positions is the confusingly named PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor. Used in 82% of websites, PHP is one of the most utilized web development tools ever.

With the first version having been released in 1994, PHP isn’t the youngest and the coolest language around but that doesn’t take away from it’s utility in the slightest (as evidenced by it’s position on this chart and the sheer number of sites that already use it). PHP is currently on it’s 7th version (PHP7) but PHP5 continues to be the most deployed variant of the languages as it stands today.

Python is one of the most popular general use programming languages in existence today. Used for everything from website back-ends (e.g. Google), desktop development, mobile apps, prototyping, statistics, etc. Python plays a pretty broad and varied role.

Python, kind of like PHP, currently has two versions out right now, 2 and 3, and various industries are in various stages of moving from the former to the latter. The transition has been taking some time (ok, a really long time) because of the sheer number of libraries that are available for Python2.7x.

Regardless, Python’s position high up on this list has been consistent and is not likely to change (in a downward direction) any time soon.

Now in it’s 7th version, C# was originally developed to run exclusively within Microsoft’s .NET framework. However, in line with Microsoft’s increasingly open stance, C# can now be run on non-Windows machines with the new .NET open framework.

C# is frequently used for developing Windows applications and, with ASP, is often used to develop Web applications and forms.

The ‘improved’ version of one of the oldest programming languages in existence, C, C++ dominates fields such as game engine development and other high performance tasks. Among C++’s uses one finds: operating development, networking, embedded devices, drivers, physics, etc.

Seeing as it has so many applications in so many different and diverse industries, and considering it has existed since 1983, C++ is likely to remain on this list for a long, long time

Invented in 1987 Perl is yet another old standby that has stood the test of time. A general purpose interpreted programming language Perl has found a number of niches to fill over the last thirty years, and is looking to hold onto it’s position as Perl 6 finally gets going…

PowerShell is a lot different than most of the other technologies listed in this article. PowerShell is a shell developed on the .NET platform and includes both a command line environment and a scripting language.

Where as most of the technologies here are of interest primarily to developers (whatever their focus may be), PowerShell is primarily used by system and network administrators. Specifically, those that manage Microsoft server environments.

Ruby is a readable, object-oriented, dynamic programming language that has found a fertile niche in web development with scaling and rapid deployment being the attributes that have attracted droves of programmers and managers to use it in their projects.

Ruby is perhaps best known nowadays for having been used to developed Ruby on Rails, a web application framework that has be used and deployed all over the web as the foundation of many of today’s most successful applications.

The iOS family (this one is not actually a language, so it doesn’t fit perfectly in this list) is a range of tools used to develop for… iOS, the operating system and environment found on the iPad and iPhone devices. iOS is one of the co-regents of the mobile world right now, sharing the throne with Android. And considering the fact that there are over one billion active Apple devices in the world today, this seems like a technology that will have some staying power. And it is rather in demand with 2200 positions available.

For a much more in depth look at exactly what technologies are in demand today, check out the 2017 developer survey at StackExchange.

Le Studio VC is a Paris-based startup studio. Providing seed capital, expertise, and guidance, Le Studio acts as a launchpad for startups. By both investing and participating in the initial stages of development, success is more likely and more rapid.

If you are interested in starting your own company or working with us — let us know at Le Studio|||

In France and many other countries right now it is generally agreed that there are currently more development positions available than there are qualified people to fill them (this doesn’t…