One thing that we see again and again in smart home solutions is that they have a hard time reacting to your needs when you are not in the home. For example, anticipating your arrival. Very few of them have the ability to understand the full context of our behaviors, especially outside the home, and how they influence our needs in the home. The SetSDK is the first developer tool that lets you embed context intelligence into your apps and services so that you can solve these needs.

The SDK’s battery efficient, always on capabilities can help make your smart home solution more complete. In a previous post we highlighted the getDestination API, today I wanted to talk about two simple but incredibly useful APIs, getArrival and getDeparture.

These two APIs allow app developers to receive in-app notifications when a user arrives to or departs from a location. Set does this in a few unique ways that many developers can benefit from. First, Set will geofence everything. Unlike other geofencing solutions, Set doesn’t require the developer to pre-define the fences, instead Set learns them for each use in real-time. Second, Set does this all on the device, allowing the app to learn new places and trigger subscriptions to those places in real-time, all the time (even offline).

We have had a number of conversations with smart-device applications looking for efficient ways of knowing a user’s behavior around their home or office. That’s a core component of what our SDK makes possible through the Arrival and Departure APIs today. There are a few ways to use the APIs, including subscribing to all arrivals or all departures, or subscribing to named places (e.g. home). So, let’s take a look at one example of code a developer would use to subscribe to departures from home,

It’s just a few lines of code! Set took care of learning where home is for the user, and then anytime a user departs from that place, Set will fire off the completion block! Pretty simple!

The Arrival and Departure APIs are used by Set internally to learn the network of important places for a user and understand how the user interacts with those places over time. It helps us paint a bigger picture of the user’s universe so we can start to predict the decisions they will make. We needed to do this in a way that was great for the battery, still captured rich data, and required zero starting information about the user. We’ve found these simple APIs to be very powerful, so hope you get a lot out of them too!

Are you building a smart home solution that would be better if it could learn when the users come and go, get in touch! We’d love to hear from you.|||

One thing that we see again and again in smart home solutions is that they have a hard time reacting to your needs when you are not in the home. For example, anticipating your arrival. Very few of…