You can tell immediately that Jeff Wilson, the 42-year old founder of Kasita, an Austin-based micro-housing start-up, has been courting venture capital. He has his sales pitch nailed—which is pretty impressive for a former university dean and professor who used to live in a dumpster.

When I ask Wilson what fundamental problem his company is solving he tells me without flinching: “Kasita is on the verge of disrupting the urban housing market in ways not seen in real estate and development in 150 years.” Wilson’s confidence may just be spot on. And perfectly timed.

Over the past decade my wife and I have asked each other countless times why everything else we own is completely mobile with the glaring exception of real estate. It’s not an unreasonably philosophical question. Every current aspect of our personal and business lives—from banking and corporate communications to reading the news or planning a vacation—now runs entirely off of five mobile devices and a wireless hotspot. So why do we still sleep in a house every night with two-foot thick brick walls that hasn’t moved an inch in 128 years?

Seeing a massive, mobility-starved void in the dead center of one of the largest segments of the US economy (while living in a dumpster), Wilson is betting that his tech-stuffed, 320-square foot, portable living capsule (a.k.a. casita, or “small home”) is poised to transform the fundamental concept of what real estate means to a new generation of Millennials, empty nesters, and upwardly mobile creative types (e.g., us) who are looking to trade-in their 30-year mortgage for mobility, simplicity, and financial independence.

Broadly speaking, Wilson’s Kasita falls into the architectural category of prefabricated micro housing, sharing common themes with the tiny house movement like surgically efficient use of interior space and small-scale affordability. Conceptually, Kasita is what you’d end up with if you crossbred a chic, modern Airstream with a container house and nested it inside of an automated parking garage.

In terms of mobility specifically, Kasita is a first of its kind. Wilson’s Model One prototype, which was recently unveiled at South By Southwest, is a sleek, simplistic glass-and-steel box that can get up and go when life says it’s time for a change. Each Kasita slides into an engineered steel exo-skeleton that can be built in under a week on any open lot in any city up to ten stories high (for now). If you need—or want—to move, your Kasita comes with you. Just power up you app, schedule your move from Austin to Chicago, and grab your duffle bag. A crane and a flatbed truck scheduled by Wilson’s team will take care of the rest. Packing? Forget about it.

Wilson’s vision to provide “attainable”, mobile housing for people moving back downtown and revitalizing many American urban cores has come a long way in the 18 months since it started in a dumpster.

“I literally tripped out of a dumpster onto the idea for Kasita,” Wilson recalls. “I was an product manager back in the dot com years of the late 1990s and I decided to walk out into the California desert, bury my , and find something more meaningful to do with my life. I ended up becoming a professor and eventually moving into a dumpster”.

In early 2014, Wilson was an environmental studies professor and dean at Huston-Tillotson University in Austin when he decided to move into a 33-square foot dumpster for a year in an exercise in urban minimalism. While still teaching full-time, Wilson’s goal was to demonstrate that living small wasn’t “un-American”; it was precisely the opposite. Wilson’s decision to sell almost everything and downsize was more liberating than he ever could have imagined. Most importantly, it freed his mind to think.

“Most nights I’d just stare at the dumpster ceiling,” Wilson recalls, “And one night I had the first of two ‘a-ha’ moments. The first was realizing that smaller spaces could mean better lives. My stuff didn’t own me anymore. I had more income. I could pick up and move my dumpster to another great part of town any time I wanted.”

Wilson’s second a-ha moment was realizing that there were existing stigmas surrounding “micro housing”. When you say the word “pre-manufactured” most people think of a mobile home, not a tech-stacked, high-design living pod. If you tell my wife a loft has a “Murphy bed” the answer will simply be “no”—because no one, especially my wife, wants to spend ten minutes manually erecting a bed when they just want to go to sleep. “I realized that whatever Kasita was going to be,” Wilson recalls, “It couldn’t be a dumpster. It had to be beautiful. It had to be iconic. It had to turn the concept of a home into a brand like a car or a watch.”

When Wilson climbed out of his dumpster in early 2015, the first person he met with was a former patent attorney, who told Wilson to surround himself with people who knew more than him. As a result, one of Wilson’s first partners was an industrial designer, because he knew that he couldn’t reinvent real estate through architecture alone.

"I told him, ‘I want you to design an iPhone that I can live in that’s like a Tesla to drive’", Wilson remembers of their first meeting. "I want you to throw out everything you know about housing—and he didn't know much—and make something truly iconic."

The result is 320 square feet of smart-home technology and voice-controlled systems (with 10' ceilings) that can fine tune your interior temperature or dim the “dynamic” glass at night for privacy on command. The robotic kitchen module transforms into a sleek, comfortable queen bed over a mobile app while you’re on your way home

“We didn’t want to just make Kasita ‘smart’”, Wilson explains, “We wanted people to just talk to the walls.”

Wilson’s other goal with Kasita was to build something that could be infinitely scalable for cities and developers that are struggling to provide attainable housing. The obvious targets are cities like San Francisco and Manhattan, where the whole concept of “reasonable housing” is a laughable economic oxymoron. Other markets include providing seasonal housing in ski towns, corporate campus housing for employees or interns (think ), and housing for school districts who can’t attract new teachers due to high local rents. Wilson has already met with over two dozen mayors and Kasita “communities” are now in the works with developers in over a dozen US cities including Chicago, Houston, Brooklyn, San Francisco, San Diego, and Atlanta.

“It you really think about it,” Wilson says, recalling another one of his nights in the dumpster, “There’s been no disruption to the way we build or how we live for the last 150 years. There’s a zeitgeist now happening in how people look at this, and it’s tapping into other disruptive parts of the sharing economy like Uber and Lyft as well as companies like AirBNB. The kind of model that Kasita represents hasn’t even begun to tap into the changes occurring in the real estate and development space.”

So what’s it cost to buy your own Kasita? Wilson is still keeping that under wraps until this fall when the first buyers can start putting down deposits.

“Let’s just put it this way,” Wilson tells me, “It’s somewhere between a nice and a very nice Tesla.” But remember we’re talking about your house here.

Follow me on Twitter and Instagram|||

You can tell immediately that Jeff Wilson, the 42-year old founder of Kasita, an Austin-based micro-housing start-up, has been courting venture capital. He has his sales pitch nailed—which is pretty impressive for a former university dean and professor who used to live in a dumpster. When I ask Wilson what fundamental [...]