A Sundial displaying the time inside its shadow, with actual digits ! There is a tiny bit of magic inside...

And it's an invention by Mojoptix.



No batteries, no motor, no electronics... It's all just a really super-fancy shadow show. The shape of the sundial has been mathematically designed to only let through the right sunrays at the right time/angle. This allows to display the actual time with sunlit digits inside the sundial's shadow.



The sundial displays time (with actual digits !!) from 10:00 until 16:00, updating every 20 minutes.

You can precisely adjust the displayed time simply by rotating the gnomon (the magic box that displays time). So you can even adjust for Daylight Saving Time.





Content of the DIY kit:

The kit comprises four 3D-printed elements, a small jar and four nuts and bolts to assemble the sundial.

Don't forget to choose the plastic color, and the part of the planet where you'd like to use the sundial:

-- Northen Hemishpere: choose "NORD // Northen"

-- Southern Hemishpere: choose "SUD // Southern"





Made by the Maker:

This can only be done with a 3D printer... and a lot of patience (it takes almost 35 hours to print everything).

So you'll most likely never see this sundial massproduced and sold in a supermarket: it can only be crafted slowly, one at a time.

To ensure the best quality, I print the gnomon (the magical box that display the time) with 0.1mm layers, and the other elements with 0.2mm layers. Everything is printed with ABS plastic (the plastic used by LEGO), on my own 3D printers (a couple of Ultimaker 2).





For more details on this invention:

An episode of the video podcast Mojoptix describes the invention, the design and the crafting of this sundial. There is even a timelapse showing the digital sundial during a full day.



The Video Podcast: www.mojoptix.com

The twitter: @mojoptix|||

A Sundial displaying the time inside its shadow, with actual digits ! There is a tiny bit of magic inside... And its an invention by Mojoptix.  No batteries, no motor, no electronics... Its all just a really super-fancy shadow show. The shape of the sundial has been mathematically designed to only let through the right sunrays at the right time/angle. This allows to display the actual time with sunlit digits inside the sundials shadow.  The sundial displays time (with actual digits !!) from 10:00 until 16:00, updating every 20 minutes. You can precisely adjust the displayed time simply by rotating the gnomon (the magic box that displays time). So you can even adjust for Daylight Saving Time.   Content of the DIY kit: The kit comprises four 3D-printed elements, a small jar and four nuts and bolts to assemble the sundial. Dont forget to choose the plastic color, and the part of the planet where youd like to use the sundial: -- Northen Hemishpere: choose NORD // Northen -- Southern Hemishpere: choose SUD // Southern   Made by the Maker: This can only be done with a 3D printer... and a lot of patience (it takes almost 35 hours to print everything). So youll most likely never see this sundial massproduced and sold in a supermarket: it can only be crafted slowly, one at a time. To ensure the best quality, I print the gnomon (the magical box that display the time) with 0.1mm layers, and the other elements with 0.2mm layers. Everything is printed with ABS plastic (the plastic used by LEGO), on my own 3D printers (a couple of Ultimaker 2).   For more details on this invention: An episode of the video podcast Mojoptix describes the invention, the design and the crafting of this sundial. There is even a timelapse showing the digital sundial during a full day.  The Video Podcast: www.mojoptix.com The twitter: @mojoptix