Could someone steal a jet fighter? Sure. But as mentioned above there are a few obstacles to doing this.

First you're going to have to get to a jet fighter which means you're going to need access to the flight line of a secure military facility and have to pass a number of sentries and obstacles guarded by big mean men with guns who are authorized, if necessary, to shoot trespassers; you can't just walk off the street and onto a flight line without garnering attention and apprehension by the authorities.

If somehow you could get through the defenses of such an installation and get access to a jet, you're going to have to suit up in the proper life support equipment or there's a risk the jet itself could kill you during operations, vis a vis hypoxia, G induced loss of consciousness followed by CFIT, etc. It also has on-board equipment like pyrotechnic charges for canopy jettison and rocket powered ejection seats which can kill if mishandled by a neophyte. You're going to have to have a good understanding of this equipment, how to connect and use it in the jet and how to handle various emergencies involving it.

After that, you're going to have to make your way onto a line with jets which are properly maintained in a flight ready condition, pre-flighted, and fueled. The latter is rarely done unless the aircraft is scheduled for a flight. Failure to properly pre-flight the aircraft will probably result in mechanical failure and departure from controlled flight. An armed jet with ordnance on the wing/weapons bay stations or ammunition in the gun magazine is even rarer. Such jets do exist but are usually kept in even more sterile and secure places places e.g. HAS, etc.

You will also have to know how to operate the thing. As mentioned above, high speed flight in a high performance aircraft would probably saturate and overwhelm the average Joe of Jane on the street, leading to a catastrophic accident. Sometimes jets require external start equipment and additional personnel to power up, so this might not be a one man job. Ironically combat aircraft are fairly easy to start - if you know what you're doing and what you're looking for.

And starting up a jet will attract a lot of negative attention; again the big mean men with the M-16s aren't going to casually sit back and let you taxi the jet from the parking apron to a runway.

And even if you did get the thing airborne, where are you going to go? You only have a finite amount of fuel on board and that jet goes through it pretty quickly. You have, at best, about 1000 NM of range before you run out of gas and into the arms of the law on some very serious charges. You're also likely to be intercepted by armed jet fighters flown by trained and experienced fighter pilots who will either motivate you to return the aircraft or shoot you down if they or their commanders feel you pose an immediate threat.

As mentioned above, aircraft theft of that nature usually is an inside job such as an existing military officer and appropriately rated pilot stealing a jet in order to defect to another country. There have been a few unauthorized appropriations of a military jet in the past such as this USAF mechanic taking an F-86 on an inadvertent solo flight after a botched high speed taxi test. Fortunately most thieves have been dumber than a bag of rocks and totally ignorant to operations of an aircraft, so their attempts usually don't go far as this car thief's attempt to steal a life flight helicopter from a hospital went.|||

