Compared with the legions of less charming birds, penguins occupy an outsize place in the public imagination. As Apsley Cherry-Garrard, of the ill-fated Scott expedition, wrote in 1922, “They are extraordinarily like children, these little people of the Antarctic world, either like children, or like old men, full of their own importance.” Their farcical waddle is oddly counterbalanced by their elegant attire. They’ve been conscripted as both buffoons and villains in comics and movies, used to sell cigarettes and paperbacks, and appropriated by the National Hockey League. But their evolutionary roots run surprisingly deep; their history is a saga of survival and versatility that demands respect. These are some tough old birds.

Penguins seem to have diverged from other Aves in the warm world of the early Cenozoic, soon after the extinction of the dinosaurs. The present-day distribution of the eighteen living species, in Antarctica, Australia, New Zealand, South America, and southernmost Africa, is a product of the breakup of the supercontinent Gondwanaland, the southern part of Pangaea. Although penguins came from a lineage of flying birds, they soon made the commitment, through natural selection, to swimming. While many seabirds—auks, guillemots, gannets, cormorants—can both fly and dive, the anatomical criteria for efficient wing-propelled swimming are at odds with those for flying. So, at some point, penguins gave up flight entirely. Before modern seals evolved and became competitors for food, being bigger was an advantage; some prehistoric penguin species had the stature of hockey players.

Although we consider penguins uniquely suited (as it were) to the icy shores of Antarctica, the oldest members of the family appear to have emerged at lower latitudes, probably on the South Island of New Zealand. Even today, there are equatorial penguins in the Galápagos that have never seen snow. But in spite of their adaptability as a taxonomic group, modern penguin species are not immune to change. In the Antarctic Peninsula, which extends farther north than other parts of the continent and is thus more susceptible to global warming, the relatively diminutive Adélie penguins, Cherry-Garrard’s subjects, have been in decline. At the same time, though, gentoo penguins, the third-tallest extant species, have been holding their own. The reasons for this discrepancy are unclear. One possibility is that the whaling and sealing trades of the twentieth century led to a krill surplus, which, thanks to better marine-mammal conservation, has now ended, depleting the Adélies’ larder. But what is the secret to the gentoos’ success?

A study published in this week’s issue of the journal Nature Communications seeks to answer that question using an unintentional chronicle of one colony’s history—specifically, penguin droppings in Antarctic lake sediments. Like other animals, penguins excrete certain elements (copper, zinc, strontium, selenium) in proportions much higher than what is found in the surrounding environment. As a result, their guano, even if it is quite old, remains identifiably bird-made. The new study centers on Ardley Island, part of the South Shetland chain, which is home to a gentoo colony that, for millennia, has been contributing its guano to the local lake. Like a trove of dusty old letters stashed in an attic, the mucky detritus, known by the Swedish word gyttja (pronounced “yittya”), represents a rich archive of daily life in the past. By combining chemical analyses of this sediment with an estimate of the average gentoo’s guano “productivity,” the researchers were able to determine Ardley Island’s historic penguin occupancy with censuslike precision. Next, they compared the gyttja with ice and sea-sediment cores from adjacent areas—some of the most reliable records of climate change. The results were surprising: the size of the gentoo colony showed almost no correlation with ancient temperatures, though the penguins seemed to do slightly better at times of less sea-ice cover. Given the rapid pace of melting near Earth’s poles, gentoos may soon be in the catbird seat.

Ardley Island’s penguin population did, however, correspond closely to one component in the cores: volcanic ash. In the eighty-five hundred years recorded in the gyttja, a volcano on Deception Island—seventy miles away as the albatross flies—erupted explosively seven times. Each time, the gentoo colony suffered severe losses, from which it took many generations (centuries, in fact) to recover. Precisely what killed the penguins is unknown; it might have been respiratory failure, the burial of nesting sites, or indirect effects on the marine food chain. In such an austere environment, though, anything that makes life even a little harder can be deadly. Some gentoos did survive each eruption, rising like a phoenix from the ashy devastation, but not because they had special genes that made them volcano-proof—merely because they were lucky. Natural selection has made the species resilient in the face of normal environmental variations but cannot protect the birds from so-called black-swan events.

While the Nature Communications study presents its results with scientific detachment, the original text of the Ardley Island lake sediments reads like the Book of Job—an almost heartbreaking tale of endurance in the face of recurrent affliction. Lacking sacred texts or oral histories, later generations of penguins were at least spared the harrowing ancestral memory of the earlier disasters. But there is a flip side to the anthropomorphization of penguins; we may in fact be more like them than we care to admit. Toddling through our lives nicely dressed, we are quick to forget the past, and blithely unaware that tomorrow the sky may fall.|||

Marcia Bjornerud examines a new study of a gentoo penguin colony on Ardley Island, Antarctica, that has been periodically obliterated by volcanic eruptions.