They also try to lock you into the platform, hold your data hostage, and generally try to make it hard for you to switch.

One of the main advantages of XMPP—often still referred to with its old name, Jabber—is that it is completely federated. This means that you only care about servers which you currently interact with. So, if one of your friends‘ servers is down, you can still communicate with all the friends which are on other servers.

Besides availability, this also improves privacy: Your server only shares information with those servers where you have friends whom you granted access rights. Hacking into any server only gives the intruders minimal information about other users, making the network safer.

What I like best, however, is that the protocol is open and extensible. So by definition, it is hard to create a lock-in. You can chose your client to connect with and you remain the owner of your data: you can extract and move your data at any time, and with ease.

If the provider of your email address also supports XMPP, you can use your email address also as an XMPP address, known as JID (short for „Jabber ID“).

Movim is based on XMPP technology, including federations, HTTP upload, and the builtin publish/subscribe mechanisms. This gives complete freedom of where you store your data or what Movim pod you use to access the system, while still looking as if it were a single network.

Besides, you can also create a Blog from your posts and structure your posts with titles, lists, or formatted code, to name just a few (for techies: full Markdown power!). This reduces the media breaks that we are currently experiencing all over the social network territory.

There are several public Movim pods out there, such as it.movim.eu, nl.movim.eu, (both operated in Europe by the Movim developers), or chat.chinwag.im (in Australia). There, you can directly register for a movim.eu or chinwag.im address.

The first thing you might want to do is to add some of your friends to your roster (your contact list). Select „Contacts“ from the menu on the left, then click the orange circle on the bottom right.

Movim uses a responsive design: Only on very wide screens, all of the three panes are visible in all their beauty simultaneously. On small screens, the black menu bar on the left may only show the icons (hovering shows a tooltip). On very small screens, you only have a „hamburger menu“ (≡) icon in the top left.

Clicking on the chat bubble, when a contact has been selected, directly opens a chat window and switches to the chat screen, where you stay afloat of all your chat sessions.

…is almost as important: The „Groups“ menu item shows you which publish/subscribe (aka pubsub) data streams you are subscribed to. The pubsub servers which have been recently used on your Movim pod are listed on the right. You can pick any of the servers and will get a list of streams, which you can then subscribe to.

Subscription is controlled by the flag icon at the top right. Once you have subscribed to data streams, they will be shown in your Groups and News feeds. If your Movim pod does not give any hints for where to start, try (newspapers etc.), (comics), or (everything else). Information about Movim itself can be found at .

Online Social Networks are not only about consuming, but also about sharing with your friends or the public. In the „News“ menu item, select the „pen“ tab and start a new post with the orange button.

Markdown is a simple, yet powerful text markup language. To learn the ropes, click on the „?“ icon at the top right; the eye gives you a preview of what the post looks like.

One of the things I like about Markdown: You do not have to care about the actual item numbering. Write any number, but the list will be numbered correctly (compare with the previous picture).

I probably should also mention that Movim not only runs in the browser, it also comes as an app for many popular platforms. And the chat functions can be run on any XMPP client.

There are many cool things beyond what I just described here. Programmers will like the open interface and API, so they can automate processes, such as automatically creating posts.|||

