Visitors to the U.S. could be forced to provide cellphone contacts and social-media passwords and answer questions about their ideology, according to Trump administration officials, measures that could intrude into the lives of millions of foreigners.

The changes being considered could apply to visitors from America’s closest allies as well as other nations and include subjecting more visa applicants to intense security reviews. Together, they would amount to the “extreme vetting” President Donald Trump promised as a candidate to guard against possible terror attacks.

A review under way of vetting procedures, described by administration officials, aims to replace what the Trump administration sees as a presumption toward letting people into the country with a more skeptical outlook.

“If there is any doubt about a person’s intentions coming to the United States, they should have to overcome—really and truly prove to our satisfaction—that they are coming for legitimate reasons,” said Gene Hamilton, senior counselor to the Department of Homeland Security.

Their full scope has yet to be publicly discussed and would be sure to generate significant controversy, both at home, from civil libertarians and others who see the questions as infringing on privacy rights, and abroad, as other nations could impose retaliatory requirements on Americans seeking visas.

The subject will likely be aired on Capitol Hill on Wednesday when Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly appears before a Senate committee. A spokesman for Sen. Claire McCaskill of Missouri, the top Democrat on the panel, said she planned to raise the issue.

“Sen. McCaskill is deeply concerned about the vetting procedures and how they might be applied,” he said.

The review was called for in an executive order Mr. Trump signed last month banning travel from six majority-Muslim countries, which he said was needed to guard against terrorism. The order also directed security officials to implement a vetting program that allows for a “rigorous evaluation” of whether applicants support terrorism or present a risk of causing harm.

While much of the order was put on hold by a federal judge in Hawaii, the work to enhance vetting procedures was allowed to proceed.

It was unclear when the review would be completed or translated into policy. Former Obama administration officials say the changes could be implemented using executive authority, though it is unclear whether formal rule-making would be needed or even desired. Either way, they could be challenged in court or by lawmakers in Congress.

A coalition of about 50 civil liberties and other groups issued a statement after Mr. Kelly testified at a congressional hearing in February about requiring passwords, saying it amounts to “a direct assault on fundamental rights,” including freedom of expression.

They also complained that the policy could be mirrored by foreign governments demanding passwords from Americans.

Homeland Security officials say the agency is planning to significantly increase demands for information from all visa applicants, including visitors and others seeking to immigrate. That might also include asking for financial information, as well as telephone contacts, one senior DHS official said.

The changes might even apply to visitors from the 38 countries that participate in the Visa Waiver Program, which requires adherence to strict U.S. standards in data sharing, passport control and other factors, one senior official said. That includes some longstanding U.S. allies, such as the U.K., Japan and Australia.

The biggest change to U.S. policy would be asking applicants to hand over their cellphones so that officials could examine their stored contacts and perhaps other information. Visitors have had their phones examined at ports of entry, but a phone review isn’t routinely requested during the application stage.

The goal is to “figure out who you are communicating with,” the senior DHS official said. “What you can get on the average person’s phone can be invaluable.”

A second change would ask applicants for their social-media handles and passwords so that officials could see information posted privately in addition to public posts. Homeland Security has already experimented with asking for people’s handles so they can read public posts, but not those restricted to friends.

“We want to say for instance, ‘What sites do you visit? And give us your passwords,’ so that we can see what they do on the internet,” Mr. Kelly said at the February hearing. “If they don’t want to give us that information then they don’t come.”

Former department officials who worked on security vetting during former President Barack Obama’s administration said that the information gleaned from telephones and social media could be helpful in assessing threats posed by applicants, but they said there are downsides, too. The effort would be time-consuming, they said, and it could drive people with bad intentions to change their practices.

“The real bad guys will get rid of their phones,” said Leon Rodriguez, who until January headed the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, a DHS agency, and was deeply involved in refugee screening. “They’ll show up with a clean phone.”

Still, one former Obama administration official said, telephone contacts could be particularly helpful in identifying terrorist ties, as their phone numbers could be run against various U.S. databases.

Already, the State Department has taken small steps toward tighter vetting, according to cables sent from Secretary of State Rex Tillerson to embassies and consulates.

In them, he orders officials to identify “applicant populations” that warrant additional scrutiny, according to documents posted by Reuters in March. The department hasn’t disputed their contents. He also directs offices to limit the number of interviews scheduled each day to ensure each application is properly scrutinized.

Mr. Tillerson instructed officials to ask visa applicants additional questions, such as listing all email addresses and social-media handles used in the past five years, as well as the applicant’s travel history, employers and addresses over the past 15 years. But after the federal court put the travel ban on hold, Mr. Tillerson said in another message that to be cautious, those instructions should be put on hold as well.

The administration is also working to implement an idea first raised by Mr. Trump as a presidential candidate last August for an “ideological test” for people coming to the U.S., the senior DHS official working on the review said. Such tests have been used before—for instance, to screen out anarchists, or members of the Communist Party.

“Those who do not believe in our Constitution, or who support bigotry and hatred, will not be admitted for immigration into the country,” Mr. Trump said in an August speech.

The DHS official said the types of questions under consideration now include how visa applicants view the treatment of women in society, whether they value the “sanctity of human life” and who they view as a legitimate target in a military operation.

The goal, he said, isn’t to filter out people with contrary thoughts but people who might act on them. That notion draws criticism from civil libertarians.

“Our views and beliefs and opinions are protected,” said Hugh Handeyside, a staff attorney with the American Civil Liberties’s national security project. “Those same principles should drive our decisions about whether people would be permitted to visit the United States.”

Appeared in the Apr. 05, 2017, print edition as 'U.S. Crafts ExtremeVetting Methods.'|||

Foreigners who want to visit the U.S. could be forced to disclose contacts on their mobile phones, social-media passwords and financial records, and to answer probing questions about their ideology, according to Trump administration officials.