VectorWorks 2017 comes loaded with great new features for 2D and 3D design professionals. With more than half a million users worldwide, BIM software is transforming the world.Vectorworks offers a uniquely developed suite of tools that prepare you to create a building information model for documentation and cooperation without inhibiting the preferred design process. The 2017 functions support the future of BIM workflows with IFC4 support, direct import of Revit, and the ability to share projects that let you work simultaneously on a single file with the entire project team.It offers support for most popular design data file formats such as DXF, DWG, DWF, EPSF, PDF, PICT, Shapefile, Whorksheet, 3DS, IGES, SAT, SPET, Rhino, Parasolid X_T, or SketchUp. In this way, you can import projects from other applications and alter the design through the use of VectorWorks capabilities.

VectorWorks 2017 SP3

 VectorWorks is able to examine site conditions and run simulations to examine the effect of sun movement on its construction. In addition to this, in designing entertainment events, you can simulate the effect of different lighting devices and create lighting plots.VectorWorks 2017 SP3 for Mac is the comprehensive design solution featuring a myriad of powerful tools and an optimized workflow. This is the new version 2017:

What’s New

 Vectorworks 2017 offers a powerful set of capabilities that will streamline the process, streamline your workflows, and assist you in exploring BIM possibilities and more.Facilitate the process: Intelligent design with intuitive software capabilities designed to work for.

 Resource Manager: Vectorworks Software Resource Manager puts the ability to create, edit, and apply the desired resources to your designs at your fingertips. Simple to locate what you need with powerful search and filtering, attach keyword tags, and access your resources directly from Vectorworks parametric software tools.

 Thrive on your workflows: Customize and facilitate workflows with built-in tools.

 Irrigation of the tool: Planning for the irrigation of a place involves considerations and calculations related both to its physical peculiarities and the availability of resources. Vectorworks meets each and every one of these needs with refresher irrigation design tools.

 Regulate with your project team: First-class tools and customizable workflows that go beyond exploration and development.

 Share Your Vision: Communicate through the design process, sharing your ideas and inspiration with your co-workers, service clients, and considerably more.

 Virtual Reality and Webview: Simple to share your designs with current and cooperative service clients using Vectorworks web view immersion and virtual reality quirks. Produce a link that leaves anyone, anywhere, to see their model in 3D on any device.

 Inspire your customers: Create stunning, photo-realistic representations that showcase your design and make your business thrive.

 Integrated rendering: Each and every package of Vectorworks software includes Renderworks, the best in its recycling industry set of quirks based on the award-winning Cinema 4D render engine. Renderworks gives you the precise tools to visualize your work throughout the design process, while producing clear and accurate illustrations.

System Requirements

 Processor: 64-bit Intel Core i5 (or equivalent AMD) or better.

 RAM: 4 GB minimum (8 GB recommended).

 Graphics card compatible with OpenGL 2.1.

 VRAM: 1GB (minimum), 2GB-4GB (recommended).

 Windows:

For those looking for VectorWorks 2017 for Windows, at the moment they will have to wait. Keep up with our publications.|||

VectorWorks 2017 comes loaded with great new features for 2D and 3D design professionals. With more than half a million users worldwide, BIM software is transforming the world