IMechE are running a tour of the restoration yards at the Cosford museum next month, and I just got my place confirmation. I'll be spending pretty much the entire day there - is there anything that people would like me to get pictures of?



Obviously, I'll make sure to get some good ones from the Cold War exhibit, where Victor, Vulcan and Valiant are in the same hangar for the first time. Also rest assured that there will be some nice ones of the TSR-2, seeing as it's one of my favourite aircraft of all time. What else would #d like to see?

It would've been 607 with 598 as backup, but flying out from Waddington they had a fuel fault or something with 607. The pilot decided to switch planes and have 598 as the primary aircraft and 607 as the backup.



Cause once airborne on the actual raid window seal on 598 failed and so they had to abort which led to 607 carrying out the raid instead.



Second Black Buck raid he finally got to fly over Port Stanley.

One last reminder: the Cosford trip is this Friday. Is there anything in particular that you guys want me to seek out and photograph while there?





 

6-pdr anti-tank, as fitted to later-model DeHavilland Mosquitos (although I'm pretty sure the one in the background was unarmed; sharp-eyed viewers will notice the target-towing assembly on its tail).



 

Bolton Paul turret (Mk.4, IIRC) as fitted to various bombers (this particular example was off an Avro Lincoln whose wing is in the top of the photo).



 

From top to bottom:

Browning .303 as used in early Spitfires

Browning .50 as used in later Spitfires

Two Hispano 20mm cannon as used in later Spitfires (top one partly dissected)



 

A pair of Rheinmetall-Borsig Mk.108 30mm cannon as fitted to Me163 and Me262 (this particular pair were from the Me163 just out of shot to the left of this table)



 

Not technically a gun, but a nice diagram of the Martin Baker Flat Feed mechanism. Apparently Martin Baker reinvented the wheel a few times because he didn't feel that some things were good enough for 'his' aircraft. In this case, he redesigned the feed mechanism to be flat, so as to fit in an aircraft wing without the need for a bulge. It also turned out that this mechanism almost never jammed.



BTW, I have full-size (3072 x 2304) versions of all these; they seem to get resized on uploading. I'll leave them small so as not to break page and kill people's browsers, but if you want a full-size version of any of them, let me know and I'll PM you a link. A few guns for Amastol:6-pdr anti-tank, as fitted to later-model DeHavilland Mosquitos (although I'm pretty sure the one in the background was unarmed; sharp-eyed viewers will notice the target-towing assembly on its tail).Bolton Paul turret (Mk.4, IIRC) as fitted to various bombers (this particular example was off an Avro Lincoln whose wing is in the top of the photo).From top to bottom:Browning .303 as used in early SpitfiresBrowning .50 as used in later SpitfiresTwo Hispano 20mm cannon as used in later Spitfires (top one partly dissected)A pair of Rheinmetall-Borsig Mk.108 30mm cannon as fitted to Me163 and Me262 (this particular pair were from the Me163 just out of shot to the left of this table)Not technically a gun, but a nice diagram of the Martin Baker Flat Feed mechanism. Apparently Martin Baker reinvented the wheel a few times because he didn't feel that some things were good enough for 'his' aircraft. In this case, he redesigned the feed mechanism to be flat, so as to fit in an aircraft wing without the need for a bulge. It also turned out that this mechanism almost never jammed.BTW, I have full-size (3072 x 2304) versions of all these; they seem to get resized on uploading. I'll leave them small so as not to break page and kill people's browsers, but if you want a full-size version of any of them, let me know and I'll PM you a link.





 

The only remaining Valiant in the world. A Valiant dropped Britain's first nuclear bomb, so this is a rather important aircraft.



 

A Yellow Sun, Britain's first thermonuclear device (minus the explodey part, obviously).



 

XR-220, one of two surviving TSR2 prototypes, and one of my top ten favourite aircraft of all time.



 

A little model TSR2 they had because the real thing is so huge. I had to restrain myself from stealing this to have in my room.



 

The Tornado; the aircraft that eventually filled the role that the TSR2 was designed for. Notice how much smaller it is... but the TSR2 is still way more awesome. And now, the rest of the museum, starting with some of the stars of the show:The only remaining Valiant in the world. A Valiant dropped Britain's first nuclear bomb, so this is a rather important aircraft.A Yellow Sun, Britain's first thermonuclear device (minus the explodey part, obviously).XR-220, one of two surviving TSR2 prototypes, and one of my top ten favourite aircraft of all time.A little model TSR2 they had because the real thing is so huge. I had to restrain myself from stealing this to have in my room.The Tornado; the aircraft thatfilled the role that the TSR2 was designed for. Notice how much smaller it is... but the TSR2 is still way more awesome.



The obligatory P-51 Mustang. This one is a P-51D, obviously, and was actually rebuilt after a crash that killed its pilot, and donated to the museum by the squadron it belonged to.



 

The DeHavilland Mosquito, dubbed 'Wooden Wonder' due to it being made mostly from wood, having no gun armament at all but being fast enough to outrun most danger.



 

The Gloster Meteor, Britain's first jet fighter, and the first service jet aircraft in the world.



This post was brought to you by the letter M. The obligatory P-51 Mustang. This one is a P-51D, obviously, and was actually rebuilt after a crash that killed its pilot, and donated to the museum by the squadron it belonged to.The DeHavilland Mosquito, dubbed 'Wooden Wonder' due to it being made mostly from wood, having no gun armament at all but being fast enough to outrun most danger.The Gloster Meteor, Britain's first jet fighter, and the first service jet aircraft in the world.This post was brought to you by the letter M.



The Hawker Hunter parked outside...



 

...and another one suspended inside. This one is actually a trainer version; notice the side-by-side seats - an unusual arrangement for a fighter trainer.



 

The PBY Catalina seaplane, looking good in its nice bright paint scheme.



 

The Catalina's landing gear, which I always thought was clever, and a nice view of the blisters on the tail, where guns were commonly mounted.



 

The Japanese 'Cherry Blossom' suicide aircraft. Basically a winged bomb with a cockpit and rocket engine; that sight isn't for aiming guns, it's for aiming where the aircraft crashes into its target (usually a ship). A rare one, this, seeing as a successful flight would result in destruction of the aircraft. The Hawker Hunter parked outside......and another one suspended inside. This one is actually a trainer version; notice the side-by-side seats - an unusual arrangement for a fighter trainer.The PBY Catalina seaplane, looking good in its nice bright paint scheme.The Catalina's landing gear, which I always thought was clever, and a nice view of the blisters on the tail, where guns were commonly mounted.The Japanese 'Cherry Blossom' suicide aircraft. Basically a winged bomb with a cockpit and rocket engine; that sight isn't for aiming guns, it's for aiming where the aircraft crashes into its target (usually a ship). A rare one, this, seeing as a successful flight would result in destruction of the aircraft.



The Messerschmitt Me163 Komet. One of Germany's more desperate attempts to gain air superiority - a tiny rocket-propelled fighter with a nasty sting provided by the twin 30mm cannon we saw earlier. To save weight, it had no landing wheels - the wheels you see here were bolted on by the museum so they could move it around. It used a wheeled trolley to take off, and landed on that tiny ski, often leading to a very bumpy landing - not good when the fuel was highly corrosive and stored in a breakable vessel...



 

The Gloster Javelin all-weather fighter. A pretty little aircraft.



 

A Pucará, the Argentinian twin-turboprop fighter. Not bad for strafing rebels and the like, but they got badly beat up in the Falklands, outclassed by the British Harriers. One Pucará managed to down a British helicopter... shortly before crashing.



 

The Fieseler Storch - a remarkable little STOL aircraft that flew in every theatre of WWII. The Messerschmitt Me163 Komet. One of Germany's more desperate attempts to gain air superiority - a tiny rocket-propelled fighter with a nasty sting provided by the twin 30mm cannon we saw earlier. To save weight, it had no landing wheels - the wheels you see here were bolted on by the museum so they could move it around. It used a wheeled trolley to take off, and landed on that tiny ski, often leading to a very bumpy landing - not good when the fuel was highly corrosive and stored in a breakable vessel...The Gloster Javelin all-weather fighter. A pretty little aircraft.A Pucará, the Argentinian twin-turboprop fighter. Not bad for strafing rebels and the like, but they got badly beat up in the Falklands, outclassed by the British Harriers. One Pucará managed to down a British helicopter... shortly before crashing.The Fieseler Storch - a remarkable little STOL aircraft that flew intheatre of WWII.





 

The English Electric Lightning, Britain's main fighter for much of the Cold War. It had a good number of speed records under its belt, some of which have only recently been beaten. Was famously capable of power-climbing straight up, using only its enormous thrust.



 

A nice planform view of the Lightning.



 

One interesting feature of the Lightning was the chin mounts. A little impractical, and a smaller weight allowance than more conventional locations, but dammit, it looked cool.



 

When designing the Lightning, the Short SB5 was built to test variations on the wing and tail design (mainly wing sweep and tailplane position). This is an interesting alternative that was considered for the tail, to get the horizontal part out of the wing downwash. It was deemed unnecessary. Cosford have the SB5 (that's it at the right of this picture), with both tails, and one of the Lightning P.1 prototypes. LIGHTNING POST!The English Electric Lightning, Britain's main fighter for much of the Cold War. It had a good number of speed records under its belt, some of which have only recently been beaten. Was famously capable of power-climbing straight up, using only its enormous thrust.A nice planform view of the Lightning.One interesting feature of the Lightning was the chin mounts. A little impractical, and a smaller weight allowance than more conventional locations, but dammit, it looked cool.When designing the Lightning, the Short SB5 was built to test variations on the wing and tail design (mainly wing sweep and tailplane position). This is an interesting alternative that was considered for the tail, to get the horizontal part out of the wing downwash. It was deemed unnecessary. Cosford have the SB5 (that's it at the right of this picture), with both tails, and one of the Lightning P.1 prototypes.

The de Havilland Mosquito did have guns in its later versions!



Gloster Meteor was the first operational allied jet fighter, but the Me 262 was the first operational jet fighter in the entire world.



The Me 163's wheels is just the original trolley permanently attached, note the ski. 



The Pucara was a ground-attack/COIN aircraft, is it described as a "fighter" in the museum? The fighters used in the conflict were Mirage IIIAs and IAI Neshers (Daggers).



/nerdrage



very nice pics !







The de Havilland Mosquito did have guns in its later versions! Er... I said that... The one in the picture was unarmed, though, because it was a target-towing aircraft.



 

Gloster Meteor was the first operational allied jet fighter, but the Me 262 was the first operational jet fighter in the entire world.

 I was pretty sure that the Germans had the first jet to fly, but the British had the first jet to enter combat...



 

The Me 163's wheels is just the original trolley permanently attached, note the ski.  

 Nah, that's not the original trolley - it's similar, but the museum made it and bolted it to the original trolley mounting points. (I met the guy who runs the conservation centre, and therefore was responsible for making the trolley.)



 

The Pucara was a ground-attack/COIN aircraft, is it described as a "fighter" in the museum? The fighters used in the conflict were Mirage IIIAs and IAI Neshers (Daggers).

 The museum calls it a ground attack aircraft; my bad on the 'fighter' term - my brain just calls anything of that size and configuration a 'fighter'. Pucarás were used in the Falklands though, I have several sources on that, including the plaque in front of this very aircraft, and also this

[QUOTE=Pontinia,Oct 24 2009, 02:20 PM] Er... I said that... The one in the picture was unarmed, though, because it was a target-towing aircraft. [/QUOTE]

Oh okay, misunderstood.





[QUOTE]I was pretty sure that the Germans had the first jet to fly, but the British had the first jet to enter combat...[/QUOTE]



No, the Heinkel 178 was the first jet plane to fly, and the Me 262 was the first jet plane to undergo combat operations. 



[QUOTE]but the museum made it and bolted it to the original trolley mounting points./QUOTE]



Gotcha. 



[QUOTE]Pucarás were used in the Falklands though, [/QUOTE]



I named the fighters used in the South Atlantic Conflict. Attack aircraft included the Mirages/Neshers, the Skyhwaks, the Pucaras and the Macchis.





 

The Fairey Delta high-speed research aircraft. I like this one; it looks retro-futuristic, like something out of a 1950's comic book. Look at that intake!



 

The Bristol Type 188, another high-speed research aircraft. I was struck by how similar it looks to the Blackbird from some angles, especially across the wings and intakes. It also has some rather funky perforated airbrakes down towards the tail.



 

The FA-330 Bachstelze; one of the wackier and more obscure of Germany's WWII aircraft. It's basically a recon 'kite' - assembled in about three minutes by a U-boat crew and launched from the platform on the conning tower, it would hover for a bit to search the horizon for ships before the pilot jumped out and parachuted into the sea, and he and the aircraft were then recovered separately. Its name means 'Wagtail'.



 

A heavily modified Meteor F8 used to test the feasibility of a prone pilot position to allow higher g-forces. The conclusion of this experiment was that it could work but was so complicated that it should only be used when absolutely necessary. Subsequent developments in g-suits meant that it was never deemed necessary. You didn't think that was all, did you?The Fairey Delta high-speed research aircraft. I like this one; it looks retro-futuristic, like something out of a 1950's comic book. Look at that intake!The Bristol Type 188, another high-speed research aircraft. I was struck by how similar it looks to the Blackbird from some angles, especially across the wings and intakes. It also has some rather funky perforated airbrakes down towards the tail.The FA-330 Bachstelze; one of the wackier and more obscure of Germany's WWII aircraft. It's basically a recon 'kite' - assembled in about three minutes by a U-boat crew and launched from the platform on the conning tower, it would hover for a bit to search the horizon for ships before the pilot jumped out and parachuted into the sea, and he and the aircraft were then recovered separately. Its name means 'Wagtail'.A heavily modified Meteor F8 used to test the feasibility of a prone pilot position to allow higher g-forces. The conclusion of this experiment was that it could work but was so complicated that it should only be used when absolutely necessary. Subsequent developments in g-suits meant that it was never deemed necessary.





 

Cosford's F111 - and this angle shows quite well why they call it the 



 

A MiG-21 'Fishbed', which I was pleased to see because I rather like this aircraft. It's an early version too - no large inboard wing fences.



 

The Canberra was hard to get good photos of because it was suspended above the gap between the Victor and the Valiant, so the only clear shot was from almost directly below. Also, the wingspan is really large. This is my best photo of it, showing the camera ports.



 

A pair of inert WE.177 tactical nuclear bombs. Britain's last air-delivered nuclear weapon. YET MOAR PICTURES!Cosford's F111 - and this angle shows quite well why they call it the Aardvark A MiG-21 'Fishbed', which I was pleased to see because I rather like this aircraft. It's an early version too - no large inboard wing fences.The Canberra was hard to get good photos of because it was suspended above the gap between the Victor and the Valiant, so the only clear shot was from almost directly below. Also, the wingspan is really large. This is my best photo of it, showing the camera ports.A pair of inert WE.177 tactical nuclear bombs. Britain's last air-delivered nuclear weapon.





 

A Fairey Battle partway through reassembly after having the engine mount rebuilt. Slight corrosion inside the tubes combined with failure to follow correct procedure when mounting its Rolls-Royce Merlin engine caused one of the tubes to shear off, so they've all had titanium pins cunningly hidden inside. The wing is propped up to stop the aircraft tipping over because the other wing has been removed to deal with some corrosion between the skin panels.



 

A pair of Daimler-Benz DB 605B V-12 engines from a Messershmitt BF 110 that the museum has recently had recovered. Believe it or not, this level of damage and oxidation is repairable. The guy said that he's had engines in this condition before, and although maybe a fifth of the small parts will have to be replaced with replicas, they can be restored to their original shiny condition. There's even one engine they've taken from this condition and repaired sufficiently for it to run, although not as smoothly as it once would have.



 

The side of a Handley-Page Hampden. 1430 of these were made, and only five remain, all wrecked. There are two examples undergoing restoration, both incomplete. This is the most complete one - the nose is on loan to a museum in Scotland and most of the starboard wing is gone, thanks to the original crash and the Russian bog it crashed into, but most of the rest is in various boxes around this workshop.



 

The tail of that same Hampden.



 

The plan is to restore the port side to its former glory, but leave the starboard side as it is, crash-damaged (rather than make an entire new wing) as a sort of before/after. Here you can see the repair work in progress. The guy leaning on the workbench there runs the conservation centre. Some shots from the conservation workshop:A Fairey Battle partway through reassembly after having the engine mount rebuilt. Slight corrosion inside the tubes combined with failure to follow correct procedure when mounting its Rolls-Royce Merlin engine caused one of the tubes to shear off, so they've all had titanium pins cunningly hidden inside. The wing is propped up to stop the aircraft tipping over because the other wing has been removed to deal with some corrosion between the skin panels.A pair of Daimler-Benz DB 605B V-12 engines from a Messershmitt BF 110 that the museum has recently had recovered. Believe it or not, this level of damage and oxidation is repairable. The guy said that he's had engines in this condition before, and although maybe a fifth of the small parts will have to be replaced with replicas, they can be restored to their original shiny condition. There's even one engine they've taken from this condition and repaired sufficiently for it to run, although not as smoothly as it once would have.The side of a Handley-Page Hampden. 1430 of these were made, and only five remain, all wrecked. There are two examples undergoing restoration, both incomplete. This is the most complete one - the nose is on loan to a museum in Scotland and most of the starboard wing is gone, thanks to the original crash and the Russian bog it crashed into, but most of the rest is in various boxes around this workshop.The tail of that same Hampden.The plan is to restore the port side to its former glory, but leave the starboard side as it is, crash-damaged (rather than make an entire new wing) as a sort of before/after. Here you can see the repair work in progress. The guy leaning on the workbench there runs the conservation centre.

Focke-Wulf fucked up that Hampden pretty bad it looks like. Beautiful pics, I especially liked the Valiant (beautiful plane), Hawker Hunters and Catalina. Have you by any chance been to the Duxford Air Museum? My uncle went there when he was in the UK last and showed me some pics. Seems like a cool place.





By the way, on that Hampden:



 

The red circles mark damage from bullet impact (the far right one is where the radio mount was punched through the fuselage from the inside) green circles mark pickaxe damage, which is how they discovered the wreck, and yellow is the less certain ones, possibly more round impacts.



Also, an interesting find:

 

This panel comes from the side of the Hampden, where the replacement is being held on by all the yellow rivet pins in an earlier photo. When they rubbed off the burnt paint, they found writing on it, which you can kinda see here. It's actually a message to the crew, painted on when this aircraft was converted to a torpedo-bomber for convoy escort duty. The message reminds the crew that a load of torpedoes move the aircraft's centre of gravity, and that the centre of gravity will move back to its usual position when the torpedoes are released, so that on landing, all available weight (ie. the crew) will have to be moved as far back as possible to avoid a very tricky landing.



 

This is the original wind-tunnel model of the Hampden, which has been loaned to the museum. Yeah, I love Duxford. They have the half-size Concorde prototype, which I've actually been inside.By the way, on that Hampden:The red circles mark damage from bullet impact (the far right one is where the radio mount was punched through the fuselage from the inside) green circles mark pickaxe damage, which is how they discovered the wreck, and yellow is the less certain ones, possibly more round impacts.Also, an interesting find:This panel comes from the side of the Hampden, where the replacement is being held on by all the yellow rivet pins in an earlier photo. When they rubbed off the burnt paint, they found writing on it, which you can kinda see here. It's actually a message to the crew, painted on when this aircraft was converted to a torpedo-bomber for convoy escort duty. The message reminds the crew that a load of torpedoes move the aircraft's centre of gravity, and that the centre of gravity will move back to its usual position when the torpedoes are released, so that on landing, all available weight (ie. the crew) will have to be moved as far back as possible to avoid a very tricky landing.This is the original wind-tunnel model of the Hampden, which has been loaned to the museum.|||

