On April 10, IEX kicked off a publicity launch for a branding exercise they seem to call. The launchrelates to their new crumbling quote indicator, or auto-fader, they're brandingThat is, this update concerns yet another update to theformulae. I've written aboutformulae previously with: IEX Discretionary Peg (DPEG) calculation and patent ; and, IEX innovation killing innovation You're best advised to spend your time on more productive pursuits than reading this. I have little new to meander around that doesn't rhyme, even if it is not exactly a verbatim self-flagellating repetition of thoughts I've previously covered.As part of the IEX 2.0 launch, IEX released a whitepaper on their slightly sketchy - sans sanity - Signal, "" It isn't going to win any awards for academic rigour, but it doesn't have to. IEX is all about marketing, not reality.On the same marketing front, IEX issued a blog post , which contained the "" sub-header, and a press release as part of their newly offensive new offensive. Be careful though, "" may make you too feel a little like throwing up. A generous interpretation: IEX now acknowledge that their innovation, designed to stop your innovation, was flawed. Now, with this new newly flawed innovation, they hope to continue the stifling of your innovation and further deteriorate the role of public price discovery with more parasitic behaviour, both literally and figuratively.Oh, please :-|  What wrath has the SEC wrought? Lewis' fictional "" and other IEX marketing is the. The IEX exchange approval process was the. It seems IEX is hoping their parasitically dark capture and subversion of the role of public markets with their hall of mirrors will become their. Good common sense is suffering from acuteBack on March 10 IEX put forward yet another revision to their crumbling quote calculation:On March 13, the SEC approved, amongst other things, the use of non-displayed quote fading via the crumbling quote indicator for the Primary Peg order type on IEX:On March 29, IEX corrected some typographical errors to their presented formulae from the March 10 filing:On April 10, as mentioned and linked to above, IEX launched the promotion of these initiatives culminating to this newIn the "" continuing quest to simplify ordering types (), the quote instability factor, or, has been added to the Primary Peg () as well as being updated for the Discretionary Peg ().The Primary Peg will be an HFT order type of choice at IEX. Its judicious use will best enable the capturing of the spread. The PP's automatic non-displayed quote fade, enabled by the QIF, will assist in stopping market makers being traded through. However, PP will leave those poor dumb bunnies using IEX's displayed quotes to be hit. Suckers. That is, the naive passive participants at best who have chosen to use displayed quotes will be unable to move out of the way in time. Displayed quotes don't have the time cheat enabled by dark orders at IEX.IEX's speed-bump's poor QIF innovation disables external innovation, quashing the ability of market participants, whether they be funds, brokers, or traders, to improve their service to their own constituents. Buggy whips for everyone. It's just weird.It is sad that the SEC appears to have been so influenced by the pressure and marketing around IEX that they couldn't see the obvious flaws. The saving grace is that being a dark and expensive market impedes IEX's trade growth and potential tape revenue. Not many people should think they will be fulfilling their customers' best execution obligations by sending an order to IEX. If they do think that, then either they don't understand the obligation, or they don't quite understand IEX's real market structure. Regretfully the odour of the Order Protection Rule may force them to route to IEX despite it not being in their best ex interest.Anyway, here is the new newly stupid IEX QIF formulae which will now go by the schmarketing pseudonym of IEX Signal:Crumbling quote `if QIF>{(0.39, if spread <= $0.01), (0.45, if $0.01 < spread <= $0.02), (0.51, if $0.02 < spread <= $0.03), (0.39, if $0.03 < spread) :}`The variable definitions below are quoted from pages 33 & 34 of Exhibit 5 to the March 10 IEX SEC filing . Note that in this filing instead of including all the markets in the number of protected quotations IEX has chosen to incorporate only eight exchanges (XNYS, ARCX, XNGS, XBOS, BATS, BATY, EDGX, EDGA), thusandmay range from 1 to 8. Three exchanges (XNGS, EDGX, BATS) still get a special mention, as per the last formulae's iteration, in thedefinition.From the whitepaper [p28] here is a description of IEX's results with this new false positive machine,Interpret that how you will.The IEX QIF remains a weak adverse selection criteria that tries to shoehorn in one set of formulae for all stocks. Many market participants could do much better if left to their own devices but they are prevented from innovating by the perversion that allows IEX to use future data in this way.I do feel we should all refuse to use the name IEX Signal and rather prefer IEX quote fading factor or justfor short. If NYSE, BATS, or Nasdaq would like to send their data over, I'd be happy to provide them with a better performing quote fading factor. It's not too hard to do a lot better. Just sayin'...No news. Just more of the same. Enjoy your false positives and happy trading,--Matt.|||

