Post Trump, there is a ton of energy in the tech scene to build tools to support political change. Dozens of groups have emerged, from new startups to hackathons to clusters of volunteers.

However, many developers don’t come into the space with direct experience as activists, so they have to speculate about what kinds of products people who want to achieve political change really need — and that’s a potential problem.

Venture capital pioneer Paul Graham highlights the perils of such speculation in How to Get Startup Ideas. In the essay (which you should read!) he strongly recommends building for problems you yourself face, since then you know you’re not just making up a problem you happen to have a neat solution for (or even worse, a neat-sounding solution!)

I do activism full-time at Fight for the Future (and now A-Teams) so I’m constantly facing tough activism problems on campaigns and with others I work with. I also have a bit more tech and product experience than most activists, since I co-founded a nonprofit software startup and managed software projects for several years. (I’m finally learning to code too.)

A hackathon just asked our organization to contribute some ideas for tech products we need, and the three projects I offered address problems that we face constantly as activists. If you’re looking for something you can build to support political change, I’d start here.

Most pages we create for activism campaigns are very temporary and ephemeral. We only have sufficient traffic to A/B test for brief moments, but we also want our pages to work the best in those moments.

Most pages just have one simple goal: take action. We want to be able to come up with some ideas for different bits of text in the page, and use traffic to figure out which ones best achieve the goal, and begin using the best ones as soon as we suspect they’re the best, while continuing to test others to some degree until we’re sure. We should be able to see who won and add more tests, but we often don’t care. We just want the winner to win and get used. Optimizely forced us to babysit experiments and go back and code the winner. That’s really bad for our use case.

The technical problem here is called the “Multi-armed Bandit” problem, there’s a lot of research on it, and there’s enough node modules for it that I bet somebody has solved this.

The system should work with a variety of CMS’s and page creation systems. Anybody should be able to use it.

We’re focused on text for starters since it’s the easiest to change. Adding and eliminating elements in a page is a great thing to be able to test too. Text in buttons also matters a lot.

The web is the most direct and democratic medium we have for politics, but if the government does something ludicrous it’s very difficult to launch a quality response on the web fast enough to catch the first news cycle (as little as 1–2 hours, and no more than 4 hours).

When launching a site, there are lots of tiny details that can take all day, at which point we’ve missed our window. To get some insight into this challenge, try to launch a simple but complete site about a political problem, and see what slows you down. Then build a way to do it fast.

A tool for this should:

It would be nice if the tool also:

Being able to quickly organize protests everywhere is a superpower.

Lots of people doing something (anything) is newsworthy, especially on an interesting issue, and this creates political pressure. It also energizes participants. A distributed protest (literally a giant spreadsheet full of Facebook events, linked to a map showing lists of cities and links to events) let Europe’s internet freedom movement win a surprise victory against ACTA in 2012 by bringing hundreds of thousands of people into the streets in dozens of countries at once. In the US, Fight for the Future used protests around the country to win the public debate around the iPhone/FBI issue. Local network news covered the protests in many cities, and eventually it got on Good Morning America. Post-Trump this is an even bigger deal. The trick is building something that anyone can use, even groups without any kind of technical capability. Think Thunderclap.it or Indiegogo but for real life protests instead of tweets or crowdfunding.

This tool should include these features:

It would be nice if the tool also included these features:|||

Post Trump, there is a ton of energy in the tech scene to build tools to support political change. Dozens of groups have emerged, from new startups to hackathons to clusters of volunteers. However…