Regarding our legals, we have a standard Terms of Service , a very private Privacy Policy (it's not in our interest to share your data). Everything else is © 500 Limited, our parent company name. (except for the above Seinfeld clip who's copyrights belong to their respective owners and is used under Fair Use.) Simple right? If you need help, then check out our API Documentation , visit our 24/7 support site , or feel free to email us directly .

Encoder farm was born out of spite. Wait, what!? Let us rephrase that… Encoder Farm was born out of an emotional rollercoaster where we woke up one morning to the joy of being featured on TechCrunch, only to receive a $28,000 video encoding bill (no one had a feeling of Zen that morning). We were caught with our pants down and it hurt big time. We paid the bill, then got to work on creating a video encoding platform that scaled to the size of a budget we controlled, without sending us bankrupt. The result was our users had to wait a few minutes in a queue (just like Google Drive, YouTube and Vimeo) but our costs were fixed, our expenses were 10x lower and our investors were happy again. That was way back in 2012. We've moved on from that startup, but it turns out the industry is still ripping off startups large and small with per minute pricing and and additional charges for things like bandwidth or (heaven forbid) HD video! So we decided to create a brand new video encoding service using today’s technology that's 100% dedicated to startups large and small. It's infinitely scalable but at your terms, not someone else’s.

Although most changes are likely to be minor, Encoder Farm may change its Privacy Policy from time to time, and in Encoder Farm’s sole discretion. Encoder Farm encourages visitors to frequently check this page for any changes to its Privacy Policy. Your continued use of this site after any change in this Privacy Policy will constitute your acceptance of such change.

A cookie is a string of information that a website stores on a visitor’s computer, and that the visitor’s browser provides to the website each time the visitor returns. Encoder Farm uses cookies to help Encoder Farm identify and track visitors, their usage of Encoder Farm website, and their website access preferences. Encoder Farm visitors who do not wish to have cookies placed on their computers should set their browsers to refuse cookies before using Encoder Farm’s websites, with the drawback that certain features of Encoder Farm’s websites may not function properly without the aid of cookies.

Encoder Farm discloses potentially personally-identifying and personally-identifying information only to those of its employees, contractors and affiliated organizations that (i) need to know that information in order to process it on Encoder Farm’s behalf or to provide services available at Encoder Farm’s websites, and (ii) that have agreed not to disclose it to others. Some of those employees, contractors and affiliated organizations may be located outside of your home country; by using Encoder Farm’s services, you consent to the transfer of such information to them. Encoder Farm will not rent or sell potentially personally-identifying and personally-identifying information to anyone. Other than to its employees, contractors and affiliated organizations, as described above, Encoder Farm discloses potentially personally-identifying and personally-identifying information only in response to a subpoena, court order or other governmental request, or when Encoder Farm believes in good faith that disclosure is reasonably necessary to protect the property or rights of Encoder Farm, third parties or the public at large. If you are a registered user of an Encoder Farm service and have supplied your email address, Encoder Farm may occasionally send you an email to tell you about new features, solicit your feedback, or just keep you up to date with what’s going on with Encoder Farm and our products. We expect to keep this type of email to a minimum. If you send us a request (for example via a support email or via one of our feedback mechanisms), we reserve the right to publish it in order to help us clarify or respond to your request or to help us support other users. Encoder Farm takes all measures reasonably necessary to protect against the unauthorized access, use, alteration or destruction of potentially personally-identifying and personally-identifying information.

Encoder Farm may collect statistics about the behavior of visitors to its websites or users of its services. Encoder Farm may display this information publicly or provide it to others. However, Encoder Farm does not disclose personally-identifying information other than as described below.

Certain users of Encoder Farm’s services choose to interact with Encoder Farm in ways that require Encoder Farm to gather personally-identifying information. The amount and type of information that Encoder Farm gathers depends on the nature of the interaction. For example, we ask visitors who sign up for an account at encoderfarm.com to provide an and email address. Those who engage in transactions with Encoder Farm – by subscribing to our service, for example – are asked to provide additional information, including as necessary the personal and financial information required to process those transactions. In each case, Encoder Farm collects such information only insofar as is necessary or appropriate to fulfil the purpose of the visitor’s interaction with Encoder Farm. Encoder Farm does not disclose personally-identifying information other than as described below. And visitors can always refuse to supply personally-identifying information, with the caveat that it may prevent them from engaging in certain service-related activities.

Like most website and online service operators, Encoder Farm collects non-personally-identifying information of the sort that web browsers and servers typically make available, such as the browser type, language preference, referring site, and the date and time of each visitor request. Encoder Farm’s purpose in collecting non-personally identifying information is to better understand how Encoder Farm’s visitors use its service. From time to time, Encoder Farm may release non-personally-identifying information in the aggregate, e.g., by publishing a report on trends in the usage of its service.

Below is our privacy policy, which incorporates these goals. (Note: this privacy policy is available under a Creative Commons ShareAlike license, which means you’re more than welcome to steal it and repurpose it for your own use. It was generously crafted under the Creative Commons ShareAlike license by Automattic , those terribly good looking privacy conscious creators of WordPress. If you have questions about deleting or correcting your personal data please contact our support team .

This website is operated by 500 Limited ("Company"). Throughout the site, the terms "Company", "we", "us" and "our" refer to 500 Limited. 500 Limited offers this website, including all information, tools and services available from this site to you, the user, conditioned upon your acceptance of all terms, conditions, policies and notices stated here.

By visiting our site and/ or purchasing something from us, you ("Customer") engage in our "Service" and agree to be bound by the following terms and conditions ("Terms of Service", "Terms"), including those additional terms and conditions and policies referenced herein. These Terms of Service apply to all users of the site, including without limitation users who are browsers, vendors, customers, merchants, and/ or contributors of content.

Please read these Terms of Service carefully before accessing or using our website. By accessing or using any part of the site, you agree to be bound by these Terms of Service. If you do not agree to all the terms and conditions of this agreement, then you may not access the website or use any services. If these Terms of Service are considered an offer, acceptance is expressly limited to these Terms of Service.

Any new features or tools which are added to the current store shall also be subject to the Terms of Service. You can review the most current version of the Terms of Service at any time on this page. We reserve the right to update, change or replace any part of these Terms of Service by posting updates and/or changes to our website. It is your responsibility to check this page periodically for changes. Your continued use of or access to the website following the posting of any changes constitutes acceptance of those changes.

Subject to the terms of this Agreement, Company will use commercially reasonable efforts to provide Customer the Services. As part of the registration process, Customer will identify an administrative user name and password for Customer’s Company account. Company reserves the right to refuse registration of, or cancel passwords it deems insecure or inappropriate.

Subject to the terms hereof, Company will provide Customer with reasonable technical support services in accordance with Company’s standard practice.

Customer will not, directly or indirectly: reverse engineer, decompile, disassemble or otherwise attempt to discover the source code, object code or underlying structure, ideas, know-how or algorithms relevant to the Services or any software, documentation or data related to the Services ("Software"); modify, translate, or create derivative works based on the Services or any Software (except to the extent expressly permitted by Company or authorized within the Services); use the Services or any Software for timesharing or service bureau purposes or otherwise for the benefit of a third.

Customer represents, covenants, and warrants that Customer will use the Services only in compliance with Company’s standard published policies then in effect (the "Policy") and all applicable laws and regulations. [Customer hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless Company against any damages, losses, liabilities, settlements and expenses (including without limitation costs and attorneys’ fees) in connection with any claim or action that arises from an alleged violation of the foregoing or otherwise from Customer’s use of Services.] Although Company has no obligation to monitor Customer’s use of the Services, Company may do so and may prohibit any use of the Services it believes may be (or alleged to be) in violation of the foregoing.

Customer shall be responsible for obtaining and maintaining any equipment and ancillary services needed to connect to, access or otherwise use the Services, including, without limitation, modems, hardware, servers, software, operating systems, networking, web servers and the like (collectively, "Equipment"). Customer shall also be responsible for maintaining the security of the Equipment, Customer account, passwords (including but not limited to administrative and user passwords) and files, and for all uses of Customer account or the Equipment with or without Customer’s knowledge or consent.

Each party (the "Receiving Party") understands that the other party (the "Disclosing Party") has disclosed or may disclose business, technical or financial information relating to the Disclosing Party’s business (hereinafter referred to as "Proprietary Information" of the Disclosing Party). Proprietary Information of Company includes non-public information regarding features, functionality and performance of the Service. Proprietary Information of Customer includes non-public data provided by Customer to Company to enable the provision of the Services ("Customer Data"). The Receiving Party agrees: (i) to take reasonable precautions to protect such Proprietary Information, and (ii) not to use (except in performance of the Services or as otherwise permitted herein) or divulge to any third person any such Proprietary Information. The Disclosing Party agrees that the foregoing shall not apply with respect to any information after five (5) years following the disclosure thereof or any information that the Receiving Party can document (a) is or becomes generally available to the public, or (b) was in its possession or known by it prior to receipt from the Disclosing Party, or (c) was rightfully disclosed to it without restriction by a third party, or (d) was independently developed without use of any Proprietary Information of the Disclosing Party or (e) is required to be disclosed by law.

Customer shall own all right, title and interest in and to the Customer Data. Company shall own and retain all right, title and interest in and to (a) the Services and Software, all improvements, enhancements or modifications thereto, (b) any software, applications, inventions or other technology developed in connection with Implementation Services or support, and (c) all intellectual property rights related to any of the foregoing.

Company shall have the right collect and analyze data and other information relating to the provision, use and performance of various aspects of the Services and related systems and technologies (including, without limitation, information concerning Customer Data and data derived therefrom), and Company will be free (during and after the term hereof) to (i) use such information and data to improve and enhance the Services and for other development, diagnostic and corrective purposes in connection with the Services and other Company offerings, and (ii) disclose such data solely in aggregate or other de-identified form in connection with its business. No rights or licenses are granted except as expressly set forth herein.

Customer will pay Company the then applicable fees described on the site for the Services in accordance with the terms therein (the "Pricing"). Company reserves the right to change the Fees or applicable charges and to institute new charges and Fees at the end of the Initial Service Term or thencurrent renewal term, upon thirty (30) days prior notice to Customer (which may be sent by email). If Customer believes that Company has billed Customer incorrectly, Customer must contact Company no later than 60 days after the closing date on the first billing statement in which the error or problem appeared, in order to receive an adjustment or credit. Inquiries should be directed to Company’s customer support department.

Either party may also terminate this Agreement with immediate notice (or without notice in the case of nonpayment), if the other party materially breaches any of the terms or conditions of this Agreement. Customer will pay in full for the Services up to and including the last day on which the Services are provided. All sections of this Agreement which by their nature should survive termination will survive termination, including, without limitation, accrued rights to payment, confidentiality obligations, warranty disclaimers, and limitations of liability.

Company shall use reasonable efforts consistent with prevailing industry standards to maintain the Services in a manner which minimizes errors and interruptions in the Services and shall perform the Implementation Services in a professional and workmanlike manner. Services may be temporarily unavailable for scheduled maintenance or for unscheduled emergency maintenance, either by Company or by third-party providers, or because of other causes beyond Company’s reasonable control, but Company shall use reasonable efforts to provide advance notice in writing or by e-mail of any scheduled service disruption. However, Company does not warrant that the Services will be uninterrupted or error free; nor does it make any warranty as to the results that may be obtained from use of the Services. EXCEPT AS EXPRESSLY SET FORTH IN THIS SECTION, THE SERVICES AND IMPLEMENTATION SERVICES ARE PROVIDED "AS IS" AND COMPANY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT.

Company shall hold Customer harmless from liability to third parties resulting from infringement by the Service of any patent or any copyright or misappropriation of any trade secret, provided Company is promptly notified of any and all threats, claims and proceedings related thereto and given reasonable assistance and the opportunity to assume sole control over defence and settlement; Company will not be responsible for any settlement it does not approve in writing. The foregoing obligations do not apply with respect to portions or components of the Service (i) not supplied by Company, (ii) made in whole or in part in accordance with Customer specifications, (iii) that are modified after delivery by Company, (iv) combined with other products, processes or materials where the alleged infringement relates to such combination, (v) where Customer continues allegedly infringing activity after being notified thereof or after being informed of modifications that would have avoided the alleged infringement, or (vi) where Customer’s use of the Service is not strictly in accordance with this Agreement. If, due to a claim of infringement, the Services are held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be or are believed by Company to be infringing, Company may, at its option and expense (a) replace or modify the Service to be non-infringing provided that such modification or replacement contains substantially similar features and functionality, (b) obtain for Customer a license to continue using the Service, or (c) if neither of the foregoing is commercially practicable, terminate this Agreement and Customer’s rights hereunder and provide Customer a refund of any prepaid, unused fees for the Service.

NOTWITHSTANDING ANYTHING TO THE CONTRARY, EXCEPT FOR BODILY INJURY OF A PERSON, COMPANY AND ITS SUPPLIERS (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ALL EQUIPMENT AND TECHNOLOGY SUPPLIERS), OFFICERS, AFFILIATES, REPRESENTATIVES, CONTRACTORS AND EMPLOYEES SHALL NOT BE RESPONSIBLE OR LIABLE WITH RESPECT TO ANY SUBJECT MATTER OF THIS AGREEMENT OR TERMS AND CONDITIONS RELATED THERETO UNDER ANY CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY OR OTHER THEORY: (A) FOR ERROR OR INTERRUPTION OF USE OR FOR LOSS OR INACCURACY OR CORRUPTION OF DATA OR COST OF PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS, SERVICES OR TECHNOLOGY OR LOSS OF BUSINESS; (B) FOR ANY INDIRECT, EXEMPLARY, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES; (C) FOR ANY MATTER BEYOND COMPANY’S REASONABLE CONTROL; OR (D) FOR ANY AMOUNTS THAT, TOGETHER WITH AMOUNTS ASSOCIATED WITH ALL OTHER CLAIMS, EXCEED THE FEES PAID BY CUSTOMER TO COMPANY FOR THE SERVICES UNDER THIS AGREEMENT IN THE 12 MONTHS PRIOR TO THE ACT THAT GAVE RISE TO THE LIABILITY, IN EACH CASE, WHETHER OR NOT COMPANY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If any provision of this Agreement is found to be unenforceable or invalid, that provision will be limited or eliminated to the minimum extent necessary so that this Agreement will otherwise remain in full force and effect and enforceable. This Agreement is not assignable, transferable or sublicensable by Customer except with Company’s prior written consent. Company may transfer and assign any of its rights and obligations under this Agreement without consent. This Agreement is the complete and exclusive statement of the mutual understanding of the parties and supersedes and cancels all previous written and oral agreements, communications and other understandings relating to the subject matter of this Agreement, and that all waivers and modifications must be in a writing signed by both parties, except as otherwise provided herein. No agency, partnership, joint venture, or employment is created as a result of this Agreement and Customer does not have any authority of any kind to bind Company in any respect whatsoever. In any action or proceeding to enforce rights under this Agreement, the prevailing party will be entitled to recover costs and attorneys’ fees. All notices under this Agreement will be in writing and will be deemed to have been duly given when received, if personally delivered; when receipt is electronically confirmed, if transmitted by facsimile or e-mail; the day after it is sent, if sent for next day delivery by recognized overnight delivery service; and upon receipt, if sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of Hong Kong without regard to its conflict of laws provisions. The parties shall work together in good faith to issue at least one mutually agreed upon press release within 90 days of the Effective Date, and Customer otherwise agrees to reasonably cooperate with Company to serve as a reference account upon request.|||

Cut Your Video Encoding Costs By 90% - Eliminate startup bill anxiety with no hidden fees, bandwidth charges or per minute costs.