My name is Vitaly Laptenok, I’m the CEO and co-founder of Genesis Media. About a year ago we’ve come to a conclusion that one of the most important issues of the IT industry in Ukraine is that the large product companies lack adequate presentation and tell little about their business processes.

We are quite large, even by global standards — Genesis Media has 400 employees in 6 countries, as well as 75 million unique visitors, who bring 500 million visits to our projects per month totalling over 1.5 billion pages browsed. And that’s really a lot — for reference, below is the list of the world’s largest media companies by total reach from a presentation by Business Insider.

We have one of the strongest teams in the media world — be it analytics, content, product or development.

A few pictures from our office in Kiev, which is where most of our development and content management is controlled from.

Genesis Media history dates back to 2009, when we launched our first “web portal” in Central Asia. We no longer use the obsolete term, and from 2012 we shifted our focus to the news, entertainment, viral content, and apps.

Our business was growing steadily, and in 2012 we’ve made a decision to take our market expertise and run a media project in Nigeria. You may ask — why Nigeria? It happens to be one of the largest countries in Africa in terms of population and economy, as well as one of the fastest growing countries in the world. When we entered the market, the largest newspaper website in Nigeria updated 2 times a day — at 12 a.m. and at 12 p.m. When a few months after the launch of our website our daily incoming traffic exceeded 100,000 people, the competitor’s websites have started to refresh more frequently. But we knew that the ship has sailed and our success in the market wouldn’t be so easy to achieve by other companies.

Swiss Ringier (a huge media holding with about $1 billion in revenue) entered the Nigerian market at the same time, as well as the South African Naspers, a company behind OLX, News24, and many other media headings. But their success in the Nigerian market is still incomparable to ours. And we take pride in that fact — very few Ukrainian businesses can compete with world leaders in the export markets. Top 30 apps rankings in Google Play Nigeria always have 3 of our applications (in comparison, Ukraine’s Top 30 has no media apps at all).

When our Nigerian business has grown to quite a significant size, we decided to expand to other African countries, like Kenya, Ghana, and South Africa.

Our major difference from most media companies is that we depend more on numbers than on subjective feelings. In fact, our typical editor is involved in analytics a bit, and should realize clearly what actions lead to positive results. Editors should conduct A/B-tests for headers and article bodies, analyze the results, use the tools for analytics, while managers should accumulate this information and make it available for the rest of the team.

The learning process for this skill has an extreme curve, given the number of our editors and different levels of their education. But in this we see the social role of our work, and the opportunity to improve the overall staff level in the markets where we operate.

For editorial analysts we use the product developed by onthe.io (it’s like Google Analytics for media, and these guys are based in Ukraine too and their product is used by many European media companies) and a large number of our own solutions. Due to this we know (although, rather still continue to discover and learn) which words positively affect CTR and which help making our news articles viral.

An important part of the editorial board work is finding the content which is not yet viral, but has a potential for that. To do just that, we use both our own and third-party tools to monitor social media and websites and capture the most powerful stories (even not the freshest ones, sometimes with the date of publication dating back several years).

We actively promote our mobile applications, and we have developed a rather complex analytics system within our company, that now allows us to estimate the results of the first day of use compared to the attracted users and if the entire ordeal will pay off in the end. We know that not that many projects in the world have this kind of analytics depth — when we participate in major media conferences, we can clearly see that a “major European media company” is 5–7 years behind us in development.

Our development is divided into three almost independent parts:

Each team has its own KPI’s. The development actively influences how the end product looks like and we try not to limit the development in any way to achieve the business objectives. We have many challenging issues due to a relatively high workload (in a single day we can have up to 300 000 users online, and sometimes the load can grow more than 10 times per hour when the important news are posted).

We are working closely with both Facebook and Google, allowing us to use all the new tools that are launched for media, for instance, Instant Articles/AMP/Internet.org. All our projects were among the first 300 sites in the world that began working with Instant Articles in Facebook, we were among the first to use Google Firebase and so on. It allows us to work with the world’s most advanced technologies and constantly learn new things.

We have a very large amount of data for predictions and personalization, and this is the main point where we’re going to invest our efforts for the next few years. I am convinced that in the future, all news will be deeply personalized and algorithms of their selection will be based on machine learning. We are now making our first steps in this direction, but for the first half of the next year we’ve already scheduled our first experiments in applying the neural networks for news selections for each user.

As for the product — all our applications have ratings higher than 4.2* (usually 4.5–4.7*) in the Android Market, and we have certainly the best news in each of the markets we operate.

In addition, we are considering venture capital investments in media projects and projects for media analytics (especially the ones targeted in the global market). Over the course of the past year we have made two investments like that. In both cases, our portfolio investments have increased by 7–10 times a year and are still controlled by the founders. We are looking for other similar opportunities and you can contact me directly regarding the projects like that.

I hope this was insightful. I will be glad to answer any of your questions in the comments.|||

My name is Vitaly Laptenok, I’m the CEO and co-founder of Genesis Media. About a year ago we’ve come to a conclusion that one of the most important issues of the IT industry in Ukraine is that the…