This is the text version of a talk I gave on October 1, 2015, at the Strata+Hadoop World conference in New York City. The video version is here (20 mins).

In preparing this talk I decided to check out the data landscape, since I hadn't seen it for a while. The terminology around Big Data is surprisingly bucolic. Data flows through streams into the data lake, or else it's captured in logs. A data silo stands down by the old data warehouse, where granddaddy used to sling bits. And high above it all floats the Cloud. Then this stuff presumably flows into the digital ocean.

Your fitness tracker might reveal that you're having an affair on your lunch hour. More and more devices are location-aware, or talk to devices that are location-aware. This lets you recreate people's movements decades after the fact, something we've never been able to do before. If you have a predictive search engine, it stores all kinds of things that people paste into their text fields by accident, including passwords. And you probably don’t know this. The whole point of having a data lake is so you can just chuck things in there and go fishing for patterns later.

Information is power. Just like we could never separate the peaceful uses of atomic energy from the bad, there's no way to have different kinds of mass surveillance. Our friend from the CIA* told us this morning that government is eager to adopt our worst practices. We teach them how to spy on us. When they want the data badly enough, they just come and take it. And the fact that we do all this data collection, and that we so promiscuously share it, gives governments cover to do the same. They would never dare do it on this scale if we weren't doing the same thing. *This refers to a keynote by Douglas Wolfe, Chief Information Officer of the CIA, who spoke earlier that morning. His talk included the line "the truth will set you free."

You can't just set up an elaborate surveillance infrastructure and then decide to ignore it. These data pipelines take on an institutional life of their own, and it doesn't help that people speak of the "data driven organization" with the same religious fervor as a "Christ-centered life". The data mindset is good for some questions, but completely inadequate for others. But try arguing that with someone who insists on seeing the numbers. The promise is that enough data will give you insight. Retain data indefinitely, maybe waterboard it a little, and it will spill all its secrets.

There's a little bit of a con going on here. On the data side, they tell you to collect all the data you can, because they have magic algorithms to help you make sense of it. On the algorithms side, where I live, they tell us not to worry too much about our models, because they have magical data. We can train on it without caring how the process works. The data collectors put their faith in the algorithms, and the programmers put their faith in the data. At no point in this process is there any understanding, or wisdom. There’s not even domain knowledge. Data science is the universal answer, no matter the question.

A chain-smoking chemist injecting random things into mice is provably a better research investment than a genomics data center. You might think of some reasons why this is happening. Maybe all the easy drugs were found first, or the regulatory environment is much stricter than it used to be. But these excuses don't hold up to scrutiny. In the worst case, they might have blunted the impact of the breakthroughs, slowed the rate of improvement. But how did things get eighty times worse?

This has been a bitter pill to swallow for the pharmacological industry. They bought in to the idea of big data very early on. The growing fear is that the data-driven approach is inherently a poor fit for life science. In the world of computers, we learn to avoid certain kinds of complexity, because they make our systems impossible to reason about. But Nature is full of self-modifying, interlocking systems, with interdependent variables you can't isolate. In these vast data spaces, directed iterative search performs better than any amount of data mining. My contention is that many of you doing data analysis on the real world will run into similar obstacles, hopefully not at the same cost as pharmacology.

The ultimate self-modifying, adaptive system is any system that involves people. In other words, the kind of thing most of you are trying to model. Once you’re dealing with human behavior, models go out the window, because people will react to what you do. In Soviet times, there was the old anecdote about a nail factory. In the first year of the Five-Year Plan, they were evaluated by how many nails they could produce, so they made hundreds of millions of uselessly tiny nails.

A more recent and less fictitious example is electronic logging devices on trucks. These are intended to limit the hours people drive, but what do you do if you're caught ten miles from a motel? The device logs only once a minute, so if you accelerate to 45 mph, and then make sure to slow down under the 10 mph threshold right at the minute mark, you can go as far as you want. So we have these tired truckers staring at their phones, bunny-hopping down the freeway late at night. Of course there's an obvious technical countermeasure. You can start measuring once a second. Notice what you're doing, though. Now you're in an adversarial arms race with another human being that has nothing to do with measurement. It's become an issue of control, agency and power. You thought observing the driver’s behavior would get you closer to reality, but instead you've put another layer between you and what's really going on. These kinds of arms races are a symptom of data disease. We've seen them reach the point of absurdity in the online advertising industry, which unfortunately is also the economic cornerstone of the web. Advertisers have built a huge surveillance apparatus in the dream of perfect knowledge, only to find themselves in a hall of mirrors, where they can't tell who is real and who is fake.

We haven't broken ground on a new nuclear plant in the United States since 1973. Even now that we have safe reactor designs that can't melt down, and are desperately in need energy sources that don't put carbon in the atmosphere, none of this matters, because people got spooked. They were lied to by boosters of the technology, and then they saw men in bunny suits walking along a Pennsylvania island, and it was all over.

You're thinking, okay Maciej, your twelve minutes of sophistry and labored analogies have convinced me that my entire professional life is a lie. What should I do about it? I hope to make you believe data collection is a trade-off. It hurts the people whose data you collect, but it also hurts your ability to think clearly. Make sure that it's worth it! I'm not claiming that the sponsors of this conference are selling you a bill of goods. I'm just heavily implying it. Here's what I want you do specifically:

If you can get away with it, just don't collect it! Just like you don't worry about getting mugged if you don't have any money, your problems with data disappear if you stop collecting it. Switch from the hoarder's mentality of 'keep everything in case it comes in handy' to a minimalist approach of collecting only what you need. Your marketing team will love you. They can go tell your users you care about privacy!

If you have to collect it, don't store it! Instead of stocks and data mining, think in terms of sampling and flows. "Sampling and flows" even sounds cooler. It sounds like hip-hop! You can get a lot of mileage out of ephemeral data. There's an added benefit that people will be willing to share things with you they wouldn't otherwise share, as long as they can believe you won't store it. All kinds of interesting applications come into play.

Finally, don't be surprised. The current model of total surveillance and permanent storage is not tenable. If we keep it up, we'll have our own version of Three Mile Island, some widely-publicized failure that galvanizes popular opinion against the technology. At that point people who are angry, mistrustful, and may not understand a thing about computers will regulate your industry into the ground. You'll be left like those poor saps who work in the nuclear plants, who have to fill out a form in triplicate anytime they want to sharpen a pencil. You don't want that. Even I don't want that. We can have that radiant future but it will require self-control, circumspection, and much more concern for safety that we've been willing to show. It's time for us all to take a deep breath and pull off those radium underpants.|||

