The first rail freight service from Britain to China departed today - laden with whisky, soft drinks, vitamins and baby products.

Thirty containers filled with UK-produced goods have set off on the 7,500-mile journey from Stanford-le-Hope in Essex which will take 18 days.

Pharmaceuticals are also among the items being exported on the DB Cargo locomotive which left the DP World London Gateway rail terminal this morning.

After passing through the Channel Tunnel into France and on to Belgium, the train will call in Duisburg, Germany.

InterRail will then pull the cargo through Poland, Belarus, Russia, Kazahkstan and arrive at Yiwu in eastern China on April 27.

Three months ago the first freight service from China to the UK arrived in Barking, East London. The journey is cheaper than air freight and faster than sea freight.

The service is part of China's One Belt, One Road programme of reviving the ancient Silk Road trading routes with the West, initially created more than 2,000 years ago.

DP World chief executive Sultan Ahmed Bin Sulayem said the first freight service from the UK to China is a 'significant trade occasion'.

The Silk Road was an ancient network of trade routes that ran through central Asia connecting China to the Mediterranean Sea. It was initially named after the lucrative trade in Chinese silk under the Han Dynasty in around 202BC. But quickly other precious items such as jade, gold, silver, bronze and spice were also transported initially between China and Egypt, then later to ancient Greece and Rome and eventually to Medieval Europe. While many sea route were opened up by sailors to transport goods, merchants crossing overland were thought to have travelled by northern and southern routes that bypassed the Takliamakan Desert in north west China. The northern route took several paths through Kazakhstan, Afghanistan and Uzbekistan. The southern route ran through the Karakoram mountains that sit on the border of Pakistan, India and China. They merged again near Merv in Turkmenistan before continuing west to the south of the Caspian Sea.

He went on: 'DP World London Gateway, one of the UK's largest logistics hubs, is designed and developed to ensure products can be both imported and exported from the UK via ship or train in a faster, safer and more reliable way than ever before.

'We look forward to enabling and facilitating more trade between the UK, China and the whole world.'

International trade minister Greg Hands said: 'This new rail link with China is another boost for global Britain, following the ancient Silk Road trade route to carry British products around the world.

'It shows the huge global demand for quality UK goods and is a great step for DP World's £1.5billion London Gateway port as it also welcomes its first regular container ships from Asia.'

Run by Yiwu Timex Industrial Investment, the Yiwu-London freight service makes London the 15th European city to have a direct rail link with China after the 2013 unveiling of the 'One Belt, One Road' initiative by Chinese President Xi Jinping.

'This is the first export train and just the start of a regular direct service between the UK and China,' Xubin Feng, chairman of Yiwu Timex Industrial Investment Company, said.

'We have great faith in the UK as an export nation and rail provides an excellent alternative for moving large volumes of goods over long distances faster.'|||

Pharmaceuticals and baby products are among the items being exported on the DB Cargo locomotive which will leave Stanford-le-Hope in Essex today and arrive at Yiwu in China on April 27.