As we all are aware of iPhone and iPads but when it comes to reading your favorite content then Kindle Oasis is the leader.

When Amazon first launched the Kindle Oasis, many people were surprised at how different it was from all earlier Kindles. Amazon not only slimmed down this e-reader in terms of weight and size, it drastically redesigned the Oasis to be the fine one-handed e-reader. 

 The Oasis has most of its weight on the side with page flipping buttons, and that makes it far facile to hold than any version of the iPad, counting the iPad mini. It’s even finer than the earlier Kindle (The Voyage).

The lighter weight and ergonomic design of the Kindle Oasis make it totally perfect for one-handed reading. There is no other device that you have used is as fine for one-handed use. 

 For example, the Kindle Oasis without its cover it only holds the weight of 131 grams. Compare that iPhone 6s Plus which holds the weight of 192 grams with no case, and you can see there’s a remarkable difference when it comes to one-handed reading. If you’re already using this amazing device then you can visit www Kindle com Support for any technical support.

One of the other causes we prefer reading on the Kindle Oasis is that we have found its front-lit e-link screen to be much simpler on the eyes for lengthy reading sessions. The back-lit LCD screens in iPad Pro and iPhone work brilliant to get a few pages here out there, but can be a bit tough on the eyes for reading for an hour or more.

We also stare at my iMac’s screen for quite a few hours each day, so when I want to read a book the last thing I want to see is another LCD screen. It's just too much to curl up with an iPad or iPhone after functioning on a PC all day. If you want to grab any Kindle Help then you can get in touch with professionals.

The e-ink screen on Kindle Oasis supports provides a welcome rest from all of the back-lit screens we gaze at each day.

Another way that the Kindle Oasis defeats the iPad and iPhone for reading is that it has buttons to press to turn pages. Making a press on the button instead of swiping might not seem like a huge deal until you begin reading a lengthy book.

We don’t mind swiping on the screen of iPhone if we are just reading a few pages here and there. But it is quite frustrating to have to do so when we wish to read constantly for long periods of time. 

 The page turning buttons on the Kindle Oasis are placed accurately for most user’s hands. You never have to efface your fingers from where you hold the Oasis, and you never have to touch the display on the Oasis to flip the page.

Once you get used to making a press on the buttons on the Oasis, it’s just downright frustrating to have to swipe the iPad or iPhone’s screen to flip a page in your newest book.

Some people might think it’s overkill to have a different device for reading if they already own an iPhone and iPad. After all the Kindle Oasis will cost your around $289 for the Wi-Fi version and for $359 for the 3G version. In terms of e-readers, the Oasis is not reflected reasonable.

But if you are some who likes to read and who spends an important amount of time reading, then the Oasis is worth every cent. Oh sure, you can read on your iPhone and iPad but it’s not nearly as amazing an experience compared to the Kindle device. Rest for any Kindle update or useful information you can make a call on Amazon Kindle Support number.|||

As we all are aware of iPhone and iPads but when it comes to reading your favorite content then Kindle Oasis is the leader. The Kindle Oasis is more ergonomi...