The latest buzzword making the rounds is "intuitive software", but what does the term really mean? 

Intuitive software has been found to boost work productivity.

Simply put, intuitive software has an user friendly interface and is easy to use. However, how is this differentiated from well designed software, and those that users are familiar with, but with inherent bad features?

The development team at Ploiter deconstructed the term "intuitive software", studied it and incorporated the principles into Ploiter on the bases of this list :

We think "intuitive software" should only list the most common features, and not multiple rigid hierarchies of menus, which only makes sense to the programmer who coded the software, and not the users.

No More Steep Learning Curve For Users

We like believe that Ploiter can be used by someone immediately who has never worked with a similar program before. Major vendors have set bad examples in the past and have made users think that popular software is hard to learn only because they did not have designers involved with the passion to design "intuitive" user interfaces. We believe using great software should be down right simple.

We believe to only have a handful of functions, that users use all the time, should be displayed, and not buried in sub-menus that the user needs to memorise.

We don't want users to be gun-shy. If users make a mistake, Ploiter either corrects the user, or or they can edit and undo it.

More useful icons and colors gives the user an idea of what to expect when clicking on a icon or button.

To us at Ploiter, we believe that software must be intuitive when a user can understand how to operate it, without assistance or special training, use of reason, or experimentation.

I have written an article on this topic because I am subject matter expert, a experienced business owner and the co-founder of Ploiter Business Software System. All of the phases above are applied in one cloud based system on the Ploiter system.https://www.ploiter.com Ploiter started as an system for my import and distribution company, I'm glad to share it as a product with other businesses.|||

