Technology is ever changing and if you don’t keep up with it…you’re going to get left behind. That holds true…even in prison. Stick around and I will tell you about some prisoners…who come a long way from making shivs and shanks.



Welcome back guys and thanks for sticking around. So staff at the Marion Correctional Facility in Columbus Ohio, discovered two working computers that were hidden in a ceiling. The staff at the facility discovered the computers hidden in the ceiling above a training room closet. 



These inmates were able to get the parts to build these computers, get the parts through security to hide them, and even run connections to be able to connect these computers to the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction's network. Now 5 inmates were identified as being part of this elaborate scheme, and no one knows how long these computers were being used, but at some point the computer network support team got an alert that a computer "exceeded a daily internet usage threshold. And when they looked into it, they discovered an employee's credentials were being used on days he wasn't scheduled to work. 



Now if that wasn’t bad enough, the Ohio Inspector General says investigators found that an inmate used one of the computers to steal the identity of another inmate, and submit credit card applications, and commit tax fraud. Also they found inmates used the computers to create security clearance passes that gave them access to restricted areas. 

 

Amazing…here we have inmates building computers from spare parts and Im just finding out what chips and salsa, potatoes, and pitas are…don’t laugh because I bet you don’t know either. Well that’s all I have on this story, please take a minute and comment and tell me what you think about this story. And if you found this story mildly interesting, please give it a thumbs up, and…you see this button right here go ahead and tap it and be sworn in as an official Cops Court and Coffee subscriber.



JOIN ME ON MY JOURNEY TO 1 MILLION SUBSCRIBERS!!!

SUBSCRIBE, COMMENT AND SHARE ON FACEBOOK AND TWITTER!!!



Support The Cops Court and Coffee Channel:

https://shop.spreadshirt.com/copscour...



Subscribe To Cops Court and Coffee:

https://www.youtube.com/copscourtandc...



Like Us On Facebook:

https://www.facebook.com/copscourtand...



Follow Us On Twitter:

https://twitter.com/Copscourtcoffee



Check Out The Blog:

https://www.copscourtandcoffee.com



Inmates Build and Hide Computers In The Ceiling | Marion Correctional|||

Technology is ever changing and if you don’t keep up with it…you’re going to get left behind. That holds true…even in prison. Stick around and I will tell yo...