You know that the Arduino is one of the most popular open-source microcontrollers. Computers, robots, home automation systems, textiles, drones, Internet of Things (IoT), and so many other fields are using this open source hardware – Arduino. There are millions of Arduino devices and projects are in daily use and make our life easier and better. But, we do not forget that with such a great service of Arduino boards and Arduino starter kits, there are some top-class Arduino alternatives available in the market which can give same or better performance than Arduino at the same or cheap price. Today, we will look at some of the best microcontrollers which can be listed as the great Arduino alternatives. Go through the list below and get your suitable microcontroller for your DIY project.

Particle Photon is a web development kit which will help to make your IoT (Internet of Things) projects and designs easy. It comes with an integrated WiFi and is one of the top Arduino alternatives till the date. If you want to build a prototype product, DIY home project, scaling any of your device, or anything related to robotics and computing, the Particle Photon will help you to done your project easily and quickly.

The ESP8266 is a WiFi capable microprocessor which is gaining popularity among the electronic enthusiasts. It is available at a cheaper price than Arduino and has the capability of programming with the Arduino IDE. With a cheap microcontroller price, this Arduino alternative is tough to compete, but one thing you should remember that it operates on 3.3V, not 5V.

The Teensy microcontroller is one of the top-rated Arduino alternatives which helps you to build almost all types of DIY electronic devices and projects. It is a breadboard-friendly development board which comes with a bootloader to allow you program it using the USB connection.

The ARM Cortex-V8 processor with 700MHz frequency and 256MB DDR2 RAM with 4GB onboard flash storage make the BeagleBone Black a great competitor to the Arduino board. This single core development board is easy to use for your DIY projects.

The MSP430 is a great cheap Arduino alternative which comes with three Ti support; CCS Cloud, Code Composer Studio, and Energia IDE. The visual design is much like an Arduino board, and it comes with different booster pack to make it a perfect Launchpad.

STM32 is a 32-bit low-cost microcontroller from STMicroelectronics which is one of the top Arduino alternatives today. It is a quick start evaluation board which delivers an IDE support from either Keil, Atollic, and IAR with the help of ST-LINK programmer or debugger.

Arduino is a cross-platform DIY hardware which is compatible with almost all types of Operating Systems including Windows, Linux, and Mac. And all the Arduino alternatives listed here are not less featured than it. They will be definitely useful for your DIY projects and circuits. These top 6 Arduino alternatives offer a friendly programming environment to provide an integrated system with software and hardware support. If we have missed any other well competitive board to Arduino, then please mention it below in the comments with your thoughts on it.|||

