Traditional marketing used to be about reaching out to a lot of people to try and get a few to buy your product.

The investment was very high. Remember that TV show Mad Men? That was pretty much how it worked, but it usually paid off.

But now, in a world where media is so unfocused, products are more and more specific and the competition for the customer is everything but violent, it doesn't work anymore.

Things needed to change, and they did, to a more customer-centric approach. The expression relationship marketing arose and different ways to acquire, interact and retain customers have emerged.

Relationship marketing is about relationships, of course.

Its main focus is building and nurturing long-term relations to increase customer loyalty.

Just think about it: SaaS companies are based on subscription revenue models. This means that a great percentage of the business profit will come from existing customers. So, if you keep customers happy, they will keep buying from your company.

The main difference between traditional marketing and relationship marketing is that instead of trying to make a sale at any cost, the second worries about creating a meaningful connection with the customers to ensure that they keep wanting to buy from you.

This is why relationship marketing is a game changer

The good thing about relationship marketing is that it can help you in different stages of the customer journey.

From acquisition to retention, it can reduce costs and improve ROI, not to mention boosting conversions and engagement.

Remember our customer experience blog post, where we talked about the importance of creating emotional connections with customers and even using emotions to advertise?

Well, customer experience has everything to do with a customer relationship strategy. If you nail the prospects and conquer the customers' hearts, then you're halfway there.

You need to know your target to create appealing strategies. By knowing your customers' likes and dislikes, you can create messages that resonate with your audience even if they're not your customers yet.

Customers are motivated to purchase from brands that they can relate to, especially when it comes to values and beliefs. So stay true to your beliefs: if your brand practices its core values and they're appealing to the public, you will easily get more clients.

Once you have the clients you want knocking at your door, you need to properly communicate with them. Constantly and personally.

By regularly interacting with customers, you will be able to identify their concerns. This information can be used to adjust your messaging and brand values to best meet their expectations.

Listening to customer feedback also helps you better understand what features or services to retain and remove, without mentioning it's the core of a relationship strategy. With it, you'll have satisfied customers that won't look elsewhere to get the services they need.

Regardless of the dozens of different strategies for effective consumer relations out there today, word of mouth is still the most powerful. After all, once your prospect becomes a client, is happy with the service provided and satisfied with the relationship shared with the company, the next logical step is to refer the business to a friend.

Retention is another great benefit of relationship marketing. When you work on building relationships with your customers, and not just selling to them, you begin to develop loyalty, which means they’re more likely to stick with your brand for the long haul.

As you can see, if you invest in building credibility and a trustworthy relationship with your customer, you are already one step ahead in the game. It gives you a competitive advantage. But, in case you don't know where to start, we're going to give you some valuable tips.

In the age of consumerism, where clients not only find an increased availability of information but also a huge amount of choices, companies found themselves in a customer-centric world.

The customer is empowered like never before and this forces businesses to put the customer’s experience at the center of every department and ensure that they're delighted at every opportunity. If not, there's always the risk of churn.

Fostering a relationship to the benefit of the consumer can make you stand out from competitors. And the platforms and technology available enable you to do that in a variety of ways.

Here are some tips to master relationship marketing:

Are your answering your customer's demands?

Remember that your customers are your main stakeholders. You need to treat them as better as possible, understand their needs and exceed expectations. Be there whenever they need you and always put them in the first place.

If you offer good customer service, chances are you're providing a good customer experience.

Deliver just what your client wants and make them happy to use your product or service. All the customer journey should be pleasant and delightful, from beginning to end.

Social media is one of the greatest channels to build a relationship strategy. It offers an informal environment and gives you the possibility to answer customer's questions, ask for feedback and so on.

Gather information about your customers using the right feature for that and personalize messages, from emails to in-app messages. Create personal approaches to talk with your customers in the most natural way and improve your relationships.

Good content will help you build trust and credibility.

By giving the customer the information that he's looking for, you keep him attached - and even addicted - to your company.

You should always ask for your reader's feedback so you can write customized content and increase the time they spend reading it.

Special discounts or benefits are always a good way to retain customers.

These rewards usually offer some extra services that add more value to your product.

Always, always listen to what your customers have to say.

Have an ear for them and then do something about it. Part of showing that you care about a relationship is taking action to improve things. This as an opportunity to enhance your product or service, and I'm sure you'll see how happy your customers will be.

As you can see, there are many possibilities to keep in touch with your customers and strengthen the bond with them. If you want to establish strategies for effective consumer relations, you need to listen, respond and prepare gifts for special occasions.

Don't ever forget to celebrate every little success. From successful user onboarding to maximizing product usage and wins, if the customer is happy, that's all that matters.

When building your relationship marketing strategy, the main goal is to create brand advocates. If your customer service delights on social media, people will hear about it. If your content marketing is a useful resource, it will reach even more people.

That's how this strategy will help you win new customers in addition to retaining existing ones.

Now you know the main benefits of relationship marketing and what you need to do in order to create a meaningful strategy to build strong relationships.

The 7 tips I gave you are just the beginning of a great journey to master relationship marketing. If you want to be an ever-growing company, you must always be ready to communicate with your leads and customers, whenever and wherever they are.

I believe it's time to learn how to put these ideas into action and actually use relationship marketing to acquire, convert and retain users. Although, fear not: our next content talks exactly about this :)|||

Small tips and tricks to build a great relationship marketing strategy and win your customer's hearts at first sigh