Defaults are the values or settings that come out of the box. They might not seem like much, but defaults (and their designers) hold immense power — they make decisions for users.

In this article, we’ll discuss how to use pre-populated input fields and default settings in apps for better user experience.

Filling out a long form can sometimes be enough reason for the user to go somewhere else, where the process is easier. By providing good default values, you save the user from the hassle of selecting all the relevant choices.

Pre-populate fields with the value if you can determine it in advance, but be sure that a large portion of your user’s (e.g. 95%) will select that value. People scan forms quickly online so don’t assume they will take the time to parse through all the choices. They simply may blithely skip by something that already has a value.

Typing has high interaction cost; it is error-prone and time-consuming even with a full keyboard (and even more so on a touch screen). Try to minimize typing and prevent users from making errors — use smart defaults. Here are a few examples of how smart defaults can help users both reduce mistakes and increase productivity:

Do not use defaults for anything that requires user thought (e.g. signing up for newsletters or accepting terms of use).

Even if you make a good well-researched default, there is always a possibility that users want something else. Thus, it should be possible to change the default relatively easily.

You should strive to make you app work perfectly for the user out of the box. Use default settings when it is possible for the app to make qualified guesses regarding what the user might choose.

Statistically speaking, users will rarely change the default settings in apps, even if customization options are available. Jared Spool in his article Do users change their settings? says that according to his observations:

Another study Analyzing Facebook Privacy Settings: User Expectations vs. Reality found that Facebook users are confused about the privacy settings and usually assume they have more privacy by default than they really do. This means that:

Considering these two factors, you should make your app the most welcoming and useful with the default settings:

You can use the default settings to instigate the actions you want the user to follow. Slack provides a good example of how to make users aware of the default settings and how to update them.

People tend to stick to the defaults. Defaults are incredibly powerful tools for guiding users, speeding up system usage, and influencing responses with the power of suggestion.|||

Defaults are the values or settings that come out of the box. They might not seem like much, but defaults (and their designers) hold immense power — they make decisions for users. In this article, we…