After having tried to sell it, the Shadow Brokers group unveiled the password that made the NSA's hacking tools public.

Anything related to the NSA and spying on Internet users seems to have a high interest in recent times. This curiosity makes sense, after all the things that has come to the public.

After they tried to sell, without access, the information they allegedly stole from the NSA, the Shadow Brokers group unveiled the password that made NSA's hacking tools public.

The outlines of this story are strange and reveal part of the posture of this group of hackers. After they had tried to sell for several million bitcoins, unsuccessfully, the information they stole from the NSA, the Shadow Brokers group decided to donate the information and make it public.

For this to happen they revealed the password that protected the information and that prevented it from being known by all. In this package, which is now being analyzed, various attack information was discovered and also some tools that the NSA used in these attacks.

The reasons for this change are unknown, but it all came out in a Medium article where they revealed that everything was based on a protest against Donald Trump, against his policies and against his change of position against what he promised during the election campaign.

There are several tools found in the 300MB of data, some with suggestive names such as BLASTING, BUZZDIRECTION or PITCHIMPAIR, and that demonstrate their purpose. There are also descriptions of attacks against countries with Japan, Russia, China and others in Asia. There is also attack information on servers, which were then used to propagate malware that served the purposes of the NSA.

Several entities are analyzing the data and most agree with its truthfulness. WikiLeaks itself looked at the files and validated their veracity. Finally, and as final confirmation, Edward Snowden himself checked the documents and, in his words, they are very real. Snowden cautioned, however, that this is only a small part of the tools the NSA has available.

Thus, some of the tools that the NSA uses to remotely control and spy on Internet users are made public, so that you can then use it to your advantage.|||

After having tried to sell it, the Shadow Brokers group unveiled the password that made the NSA's hacking tools public.