We need to amplify the efficiency of the human experts using Internet of Things with Machine-to-Machine and Machine-to-Human Networks to create intelligent context-aware systems for solving the following three grand challenge problems: N=1 Personalization What if we present information and enable actions relevant to the context (location, role, social circumstance, access level) of the users? What if we can detect user intent and direct the user along personally and commercially valuable paths of action? Can we provide adaptive security to learn from daily behaviors, and detect the unusual through novel signals? Can we minimize loss and optimize usage by predicting when certain patterns are needed? Zero Down Time,  Zero Intrusion, Zero Loss Can we provide highly reliable temporally relevant information in people's work context on their mobile devices today? What if we can prevent equipment failure and down-time by predicting maintenance or replacement needs? Can we enable predictive maintenance in mines, factories and optimize equipment usage through stream data analytics and prediction? What if we can give pre-summarized predictions and recommendation with seamless data provenance to technicians? What if we can predict risk for a fire by connecting the condition of a boiler, simulating it with the ambient? Zero Waste, Zero Delay Can sensors in the supply chain prevent food waste, Rx/Dx misuse, detect counterfeiting? Can we predict manufacturing requirements and changes from orders placed and cancelled online? Can we propagate the requirements up the supply chain all the way to suppliers? We will describe how to build smart digital workspaces that know [the context] all the while observing, recording this context of work in episodic memory and generalizations in semantic memory. What am I doing?[Activity Structure, Context, Goals] How am I doing it? [Best Methods] What resources am I using? [Allocation, Discovery] When and where am I doing it? [Time and Place] Who am I, what is my role? [Responsibility, Profile] Who are my collaborators? [Social Network] What is the device doing? Current Action in Business Process, Goals Is it Down or Active? How efficient or inefficient is it? What is the condition of the device? State (Past, Present, Future) Temperature, Pressure, Vibration, Dust, Humidity, Leaks, Fatigue/Stress How does it compare to normal operating ranges? What resources does the device depend on? Device and Human Dependencies Where is it located? When is it needed? Place, Motion What is the function of the device in the business process? Is the current activity expected according to the business process? What is the full downstream cost impact of the device going down (criticality)? What devices are its neighbors? Edge Intelligence The smart workspace will: Let devices solve routine problems automatically depending on risk using edge intelligence Anytime, Anywhere, On the Edge Selected problems that can be automated with very high confidence Let us seamlessly know device states and predictions by presenting information about operational inefficiency, risk of failure, cost of replacement, opportunity costs of switching devices, in-context of our roles To quickly find directly related information and answers to questions based on what we mean, in the context we need it, with access to the source, quality and how the information was derived, connecting us to insights of experts within the organization and beyond Context Semantics Driven Guidance Proactively show us steps others have taken in meaningfully similar situations before, helping us reason and decide faster, with greater confidence. Social Collaboration and Decision Support|||

AI With The Best Global Online Conference for developers. Join AI experts for exclusive live coding sessions and 1-to-1 mentoring from the comfort of your home.