Microsoft, through Skype and its other translation services, is making it even easier for people to share information across the globe. They recently added Japanese to the list of ten languages its software can translate in real-time.

With the advent of the internet, there are fewer barriers to communication than ever before. Distance has basically become negligible in terms of talking to each other. Ongoing developments have continued to make it even easier. Now, in many cases, language is no longer a barrier.

Microsoft and Skype have added another language to it real-time translation service. The software giant announced last week that it is adding Japanese as its tenth language. The other languages are English, Spanish, Brazilian Portuguese, French, German, Italian, Mandarin Chinese, Arabic, and Russian. The services are available on Skype as well as all Microsoft Translation services, such as Microsoft Translator Live.

Other services offered by Skype allow for similar communications barrier-busting. It also offers text translation of more than 60 languages.

These innovations are not just useful for social or business purposes. More scientists are collaborating across the globe to further our understanding of the world around us and the universe beyond us.  Increased functionality from services such as those provided by Microsoft and Skype will allow such collaboration to be even more widely, and readily, available.

The spirit of international collaboration is one of the defining features of the International Space Station. Multiple nations are working together to study space in hopes of unlocking all of its mysteries.cc

Technology has a trend of democratizing the field in which they are applied. For example, SpaceX’s recent launch of the first refurbished rockets is going to play an immense part in widening the field in terms of who will be able to launch people and technology into space.

Blockchain technology also has the potential of being a revolutionary step toward breaking down all international barriers. The tech could help to completely root out corruption and allow the world to work together safely, reliably, and with unprecedented transparency.

So whether its direct language translation, cheaper spaceflight, or revolutionary record keeping, technology is one of the greatest tools humanity has to unite us all.|||

Microsoft, through Skype and its other translation services, is making it even easier for people to share information across the globe. They recently added Japanese to the list of ten languages its software can translate in real-time.