In this blog I will show you how to pick up an existing codebase and curtail it into your own, beautiful React Universal Blog application for publishing content and easy updates.

This React Universal Website runs on React v15.0! The React Universal Blog is both a single-page app and a server-rendered website which is fast and can be indexed by search engines.

If you haven’t already, get started by Signing Up for Cosmic JS. Helpful resources are provided below to streamline your development operations.

Your bucket’s name is the name of your website, project, client or web application that you are building.

Once you’ve signed up and named your bucket, you’ll be prompted to start from scratch or “see some apps”. For this blog I simply clicked the right button to “see some apps” so that I could begin the installation process for the React Universal Blog.

Cosmic JS gives you the ability to filter between programming languages such as Node.js, PHP, React, AngularJS and more. Simply click “Install” underneath the React Universal Blog icon to get started, or visit the Cosmic JS Apps Page.

I clicked “Deploy to Web”. I can then start editing my Global Objects, Object Types and Pages while my web application is deploying. You will receive an email confirming the deployment of your web application. If you encounter any issues during deployment, you may be routed to the Cosmic JS Troubleshooting Page.

I’m drawing from a repo, my branch is clarified and I have a deployed location that matches my slug / bucket name that I made in Step 1.

Editing is a dream come true in the Cosmic JS Dashboard. To read more about Cosmic JS user roles and permissions, read Managing Users Who Manage Content.

It’s as easy as sign up, create new bucket, install web application, edit content and deploy! I get my confirmation email to access my web application and also see my options for bucket upgrades like custom domains, one-click SSL, webhooks and localization. See more Cosmic JS Features.

Cosmic JS is an API-first cloud-based content management platform that makes it easy to manage applications and content. If you have questions about the Cosmic JS API, please reach out to the founders on Twitter or Slack.

This post was originally published by the author here. This version has been edited for clarity and may appear different from the original post.|||

In this blog, I will show you how to pick up an existing codebase and curtail it into your own, beautiful React Universal Blog application for publishing content and easy updates.