Sometimes a short wait, a little chit chat and a thorough browsing of the menu is just how you want to start your lunch or dinner gathering. But, sometimes you just want to cut to the first bite.

That's where Allset comes in. The San Francisco-based restaurant reservation and pre-ordering app launched in Austin today. On the app, you can reserve a table, pre-order and pre-pay. Then, when you show up at your set time, your food is ready to serve and you've already taken care of the paperwork. You can also invite friends, and they have the option to pay separately inside of a group reservation.

Allset partners with local restaurants to coordinate its service. In Austin, Allset is starting with Aster’s, Coriander, Draft Pick, Gino’s East, Gourdough's Public House (Downtown), Il Forte, Madras Pavilion, Mai Thai, Maiko Sushi Lounge, Ola Poke, Papadom, Searsucker, Star of India, Taj Palace and Zax Restaurant & Bar.

"We have more restaurants committed that will be trained and added to the app later after the launch," Allset founder and CEO Stas Matviyenko wrote in an email. "We expect to have a total of 50 Austin restaurants live after the first month."

Allset has already launched in San Francisco, New York City, Chicago and Boston. The company says it handles about 14,000 orders per month and has partnered with more than 380 restaurants. It enters a highly-competitive market for food options in Austin, which ranges from the order-anything-on-demand app Favor to the pay-anytime at restaurants and bars app TabbedOut.

Allset has raised about $3.3 million from Metamorphic Ventures, Andreessen Horowitz, FJ Labs, SMRK VC Fund and private investor and entrepreneur Alexandr Chernyak.

“Our biggest challenge right now is to meet the growing user demand for more restaurants to be added to Allset," Matviyenko waid in a prepared statement. "Eventually, when we grow up to thousands of participating restaurants per city, we believe Allset can do to in-restaurant dining what Uber did to transportation and Airbnb did to hospitality.”|||

Sometimes a short wait, a little chit chat and a thorough browsing of the menu is just how you want to start your...