The current insurance marketplace is extremely dynamic, consumers are not satisfied with packaged policies anymore. Customized offerings that address an individual’s personal insurance needs is increasingly becoming the order of the day. Generalized insurance marketing campaigns are passé. Insurance companies are running from pillar to post trying to figure out how to get more customers into their fold. Enter Predictive Analytics.

According to Predictive Analytics Today, Predictive analytics is that branch of advanced analytics which is used to make predictions about unknown future events. Predictive analytics uses many techniques from data mining, statistics, modeling, machine learning, and artificial intelligence to analyze current data to make predictions about future.

In the vast domain that is the Insurance industry, the insuring entity sells the insurance to the insured for a premium, the ‘premium’ being the amount of money charged to cover the insurance. With a large number of insurers vying for customers in the marketplace nowadays, marketers are nonplussed about how to get more customers and sell their policies. Additionally, insurance providers nowadays are facing continuing challenges such as customer churn and fraudulent claims that can lead to losses for insurance providers. With Predictive Analytics, the insuring entities can now customize their policies to appeal to specific customer segments and address their unique needs, reduce customer churn and identify and avoid fraudulent claims. As a consequence of all these solutions, the work of marketing, legal and sales teams becomes that much easier and efficient as they are able to highly personalize their offerings as per an individual’s needs as also minimize losses. Insights generated from predictive analytics may also be integrated into insurance product configurator applications. With this integration, newer product offerings may be created, tested, and customized; all based on the vast amounts and continuous streams of customer data received by insurers.

Predictive analytics in the insurance industry is used in appraising and controlling risk in:

There needs to be a separate section here to address this hugely rampant plague across the insurance industry in modern times. The spiralling costs of claims management and risk combined with the need to enhance profitability are some of the overwhelming obstacles faced by the insurance industry. With limited resources for both underwriting and investigation, insurance companies are increasingly finding it difficult to analyze, review, assess and pay claims against property, casualty, health and benefits. The industry also faces pressure from the competition to penetrate newer markets, retain current customers, onboard new ones and also meet overall customer satisfaction requirements.

By leveraging on the vast streams of customer data in their various transactional and operational systems, combined with predictive analytics, insurance companies can now place themselves on the high end, cutting edge platform of insurance technology and address key business issues.

Gamooga provides an omni-channel customer engagement platform backed by a powerful predictive analytics engine to help improve the conversion rates of e­‐commerce businesses by helping them deliver highly personalized content to their visitors based on their behavior on their website/mobile apps through multiple touch points like Email, SMS, On-Site Notifications, Mobile Push Notifications and Live Chat.

We are the market leader in providing real-time intelligent digital engagement solutions to our customers. We help brands understand their site visitors’ intent and value, enabling them to meaningfully connect through personalized messaging across all channels and devices and improve digital customer journey and increase brand value.

From the largest enterprises to one-person businesses, our customers trust us to deliver increased sales conversions, higher order values and lower support costs. Whatever your business or organization, large or small, Gamooga online engagement solutions have been developed to foster productive interaction with your website visitors, and achieve and exceed your business objectives.|||

The current insurance marketplace is extremely dynamic, consumers are not satisfied with packaged policies anymore. Customized offerings that address an individual’s personal insurance needs is…