Many of us have dreamed of creating our own games. Most of us lack the skills to create anything from scratch. Even with some of the best Swift learning resources at your side 10 Books All Budding iOS App Developers Need 10 Books All Budding iOS App Developers Need Diving into iOS development? These books will help, whether you're an absolute beginner or a seasoned expert. Read More , you might not have the spare time to learn a new language.

So, when MakeUseOf’s Creative Director Azamat Bohed announced he’d created and published a simple iOS game without any coding skills, we decided we had to learn more.

Go ahead and download Space ShootR for free from the App Store. Then, let’s explore how Azamat made it from scratch.

There’s nothing particularly original about Azamat’s first iOS project: “You are in space. You have a simple spaceship. All you have to do is travel as much as you can and collect ‘diamonds’ to unlock other ships, which are more durable and have different handling levels.”

What is most interesting is that he completed the project without crafting a single line of code. Last year we covered an app called Buildbox How to Make a Video Game in a Week Using Buildbox How to Make a Video Game in a Week Using Buildbox There is a program that makes game development incredibly easy for even those with absolutely no experience in designing video games. It's called Buildbox. Here's why you should try it. Read More  and Azamat joined the review team to put the software through its paces. Enticed by the prospect of creating a game without hitting the books, Space ShootR was born.

Azamat creates most of the featured images you see at the top of articles on MakeUseOf, but his programming experience is limited. Many of us can relate to this level of working knowledge 5 Steps To Understanding Basic HTML Code 5 Steps To Understanding Basic HTML Code Read More . He confessed, “I can tweak HTML/PHP code to my needs (with the help of Google) and that’s pretty much it.”

“But then Buildbox came in, claiming there’s no need for coding at all,” and Azamat seized the opportunity. “We finished the review and guys from Buildbox gave us the software for free. As a gamer, I always had this little dream of creating my own.”

The project went largely unplanned, and even the decision to create a shoot-em-up was a random one. Azamat set about creating “a simple, one-finger control scrolling game with bullets and enemies. It’s just so common that everyone who plays it understands.”

He put his design skills to use Here's Where to Learn Digital Design and Art Theory for Free Here's Where to Learn Digital Design and Art Theory for Free You can learn a lot about digital design and art theory with little more than a browser and an Internet connection. These websites will help you get started. Read More and created the visuals from scratch using Photoshop. The whole process took around three months, including procrastination and experimenting with Buildbox to see what was possible: “At the beginning of this year, something clicked in my head and I started working on it more seriously.”

It didn’t take long for Azamat to learn the ropes. “After I became more familiar with the building process in Buildbox, I was just improving and improving everything. Test on a device, change, tweak, save, test on a device again. Drink some coffee, tweak, save, export…”

As consumers, it’s almost too easy to dismiss projects like Space ShootR, but to first time developers like Azamat, they’re much more meaningful. He told me, “Every step towards publishing the game was something new, and now that my game is live on the App Store, I know the whole process.”

It’s not only the technical aspects of creating a game that can be hard to get right. There’s a lot of theory behind crafting something that’s pleasant to use What Is Design Thinking & How Does It Make You More Creative? What Is Design Thinking & How Does It Make You More Creative? Design thinking isn't new in the business world -- Apple, Coca-Cola, and Nike all use some version of it to build their brands. Unfortunately, many people are not taught what it is or how to... Read More , and fit the audience it’s aimed at. Azamat thought ahead: “I tried to make a game which I would like to play myself.”

“I don’t like playing hard games on my smartphone, since I only play when I have a couple of minutes, like when I’m waiting for a bus. I tried to keep it simple. It seems like people are so busy that they don’t want to flip their smartphones to landscape or use two hands at all. So I made it vertical. One finger control.”

Many hobbyists are turning to solutions like Buildbox to accelerate app development Build A Mobile App With No Programming Knowledge With Codeless Apps Build A Mobile App With No Programming Knowledge With Codeless Apps It's totally possible to build a basic mobile app by using a number of drag-and-drop tools, so what's the catch? Read More , especially those working alone like Azamat. “By doing everything on my own, I’ve learned how to use Buildbox’s more advanced tools and techniques, how to export for iOS and Android, how to use Xcode to test my game on an actual device, and then how to upload it to iTunes.”

He also has one “codeless” grand tip: “It’s obvious that without coding, this software is limited, but there’s always a workaround! The Buildbox community is really helpful, and there’s a forum willing to help you out.”

Though there are ample opportunities in the tech world for the code-illiterate Coding Isn't For Everyone: 7 Tech Jobs You Can Get Without It Coding Isn't For Everyone: 7 Tech Jobs You Can Get Without It Don't be discouraged if you want to be a part of the tech field -- there are plenty of jobs for people who don't know how to code! Read More , even low-level programming abilities are highly sought after in the current job market. That doesn’t mean that “code-free” solutions can’t be successful or profitable.

Azamat cites the recent success of iOS freebie Color Switch which surpassed 150 million downloads worldwide at the start of April. “Yeah it was made with Buildbox. I wouldn’t be surprised if he’s a millionaire already,” he joked.

But even if your game isn’t a runaway success, there’s something to be said about achieving your own personal goals. “At the very beginning I didn’t even think of releasing an actual fully-functional mobile game, but now I am already releasing my first update.”

Azamat has plans to carry on developing games using Buildbox. He’s already excited about upcoming multiplayer and 3D support in the next version. For him it’s clear that the process has been a rewarding one, both in a literal and figurative sense.

“Sometimes, when working on a project, you feel burned, like ‘Enough, I don’t wanna do it anymore!’ I had those moments and I’ve found a simple solution: just force yourself to start working on it just for a minute, and you won’t stop.”

“This is how I actually accomplished the game. When I didn’t want to even look at it, I forced myself to open Buildbox, click on ‘shootr.bbdoc’ and work for hours.”

Codeless solutions like Buildbox aren’t for everyone. But there are plenty of courses that teach the basics of Swift Master iOS 10 Programming With 5 Swift Classes Master iOS 10 Programming With 5 Swift Classes Are you thinking of getting get into app development? Maybe, you are still undecided between Android or iOS? Take these Udemy classes to understand the potential of iOS 10 programming. Read More to wannabe app developers. Check out our list of beginner Swift projects So You Want To Make iPhone Apps? 10 Projects For Beginners So You Want To Make iPhone Apps? 10 Projects For Beginners Want to create iPhone and iPad apps? Start by learning the basics of Swift. Read More  to learn all about Apple’s open source programming language.

You should also look at our Buildbox review How to Make a Video Game in a Week Using Buildbox How to Make a Video Game in a Week Using Buildbox There is a program that makes game development incredibly easy for even those with absolutely no experience in designing video games. It's called Buildbox. Here's why you should try it. Read More if this article has struck a chord for you. It’s perfect for dipping your toes into app development. It removes the barriers to entry for those who simply don’t consider themselves programmers.

Would you create a codeless app using something like Buildbox? Don’t forget to download Space ShootR for yourself if you haven’t already.|||

Dream of creating your own games, despite lacking the skills to create anything from scratch? Don't write yourself off just yet.