Lord of the Rings, Harry Potter and all other epic fantasies in the beginning of the 21st century (and also the late 20th century), followed a central theme commonly accepted and enjoyed by the masses — utopia. Not necessarily complete and perfect, but in these worlds, the good does trump the evil. While this might be true in certain circumstances, it’s definitely not always the case. You guessed it wrong, this post is not about dystopia.

Game of thrones, a game changing saga is an example of the general theme for modern day epic fantasy. It’s not very common yet, but I believe modern day drama that can suitably justify it’s usage will greatly benefit from dystopia. After all, it seems real. It seems relatable. Being able to relate to the story, or a character is central to getting the audience involved. And in this scenario, dystopia will definitely have a one up on utopia, at least for millennials who experience a lower quality of life than their parents or grandparents.

But I’m afraid people will overuse it, and will ruin the genre too. It will get less and less exciting as we mature, read more, and experience more. If it’s not utopia, and it’s not dystopia, then what is it? What will drive the future of art? The answer is not simple, neither is there a single answer to this.

My brain tends to think that one genre that has definitely been under explored until now is that of mystery. Though people have successfully used it in films like The Prestige, I have not come across enough epic art that has demonstrated use of this very powerful tool. Open ended art, that is open to interpretation, and that successfully drives different sets of people to chalk out different storylines, is something that excites me. This does not mean everyone have their own interpretation. But rather, have a good mass of people agree to a certain set of hypothesis about certain plot points, and have different view points from different clusters of people for certain other plot points. This will make for very exciting tales.

A small example of this could be plots wherein the causes of certain events are not really known to the character. In such cases the author also should not hold concrete beliefs about the causes of these events. His should be a hypothesis too, and there should be enough room for the reader to come up with a hypothesis fulfilling the fundamental set of constraints to be acceptable. I keep imagining tales like these these days. They seem to make me grin. The pass the litmus test for me. The grin. Another test is the goose bump test, but let’s talk about tests some other time|||

Lord of the Rings, Harry Potter and all other epic fantasies in the beginning of the 21st century (and also the late 20th century), followed a central theme commonly accepted and enjoyed by the…