Digit, a popular app that automates savings for its users, will soon begin charging a monthly fee in what will amount to a major test of its Millennial fan base.

The app, which monitors the activity in your bank account and diverts small amounts into savings, has decided to start charging $2.99 a month. There will be a 100-day free trial that will give users a chance to decide if the app is worth paying for or not. The clock starts ticking for existing users on April 11.

"This is the year that Digit is growing up," said CEO Ethan Bloch in a phone interview. "We're going to continue to prove we can do more for the customer and continue to prove that we can build a long-term sustainable business."

Digit was launched in 2015 and has since squirreled away more than $500 million in savings for its users. (That figure includes money that has been yanked back by users.) It's most commonly used by Millennials to sock away money for emergency funds, travel and paying off debt. The average user saves between $80 and $170 a month with Digit.

Digit isn't introducing any new features in conjunction with the monthly fee but said it will bump up its "savings bonus," which is a reward for keeping money stored in the app that is paid out every three months. It will be raised to an annual rate of 1%, up from 0.2%, of the user's average balance. With the new monthly fee, a user will need to keep $3,600 in their account to break even.

The San Francisco-based start-up, which has raised $36 million from investors including Google Ventures, Ribbit Capital and General Catalyst, doesn't currently generate revenue beyond the meager interest it earns on deposits.

When asked by Forbes last year how it planned to make money in the long run, the company didn't have an answer. "To be totally candid, that's something we still need to figure out," said Bloch at the time. He noted that because the company had raised venture capital money it had the luxury of taking "a long-term mentality around monetizing."

Digit had been throwing around ideas, however, and ultimately settled on the monthly fee through a process of elimination. It didn't want to sell customer data. It didn't want to use customer data to recommend credit cards and other products like Credit Karma and Mint. It didn't want to bombard its users with advertisements. "We went through this huge exercise and a lot of it was in philosophical debates," says Bloch.

Financial technology companies, which have largely sought to set themselves apart from banks and their bad reputation, have struggled to come up with business models that do right by the consumer and also allow them to gain a following and ultimately earn a profit.

Many companies settle on offering their service for free, pouring their energy into gaining traction and figuring out how to make money from it later. (Classic example: Venmo.) They may start charging for special features a la the "freemium" model. Other times they get employers, advertisers or other partners to subsidize the service so that it remains free for consumers.

"This is probably the biggest single issue that founders are talking about and working on," says Ryan Falvey, managing director of the Financial Solutions Lab at the Center for Financial Services Innovation, which was an early investor in Digit. "It's very difficult to do, which is the reason you see a variety of business models and approaches."

The monthly fee will undoubtedly cause some users to bail on Digit, especially without any major changes to the app to justify the new cost. "The challenge is that once people get used to getting something for free they expect that to continue," says Falvey.

Bloch doesn't seem too concerned. "There are some people today who use Digit as a 'nice to have' and those are the people who might not pay for it," he says. "And that's okay I think. They'll decide if it's worth it for them or not."

Digit, which would like to become more of a financial destination for users, plans to use the revenue generated from the monthly fee to build features and start marketing to new users. "If anything, I think growth will probably increase," says Bloch, who declines to say how many users Digit has.

Digit competes with other savings apps like Qapital and Acorns, which have 190,000 users and 1.7 million users, respectively. Qapital is free and more hands-on, allowing users to set up savings "triggers" for various things, like taking an Uber or failing to walk 10,000 steps in a day. Acorns charges users $1 a month and invests the money. The fee jumps to 0.25% of assets for Acorns users with over $5,000 in their accounts.

"We definitely designed Digit with the really strong opinion that finance should disappear into the background," says Bloch, who was a product manager at TurboTax and Mint parent Intuit before he left to start Digit in 2012. "You should be off spending time with friends and family."

As evidence that its competitors will seek to poach Digit users who are upset about the new fee, Qapital said Tuesday afternoon that it will be offering former Digit users $2.99 a month for the first three months if they make the switch. Chime, an online bank, encouraged users to "say goodbye to Digit and say hello to automatic savings with no monthly fees."

Meanwhile, Digit users reported a loss in connectivity in the app starting on Tuesday afternoon that lasted for several hours and rendered it so that users couldn't make withdrawals. The company attributed the issues to a spike in traffic.

Digit experimented with how much to charge users by selecting guinea pigs from its user ranks at random. These users will be refunded, says Bloch, in addition to receiving an email from him with an explanation.

In the fine print, Digit notes that it can change the amount of the monthly fee, in addition to its frequency and the date it's charged, at any time. Bloch says he doesn't have plans to raise the monthly fee anytime soon but noted that as the service changes it could be warranted. (Like Netflix, he says.)

Ultimately, Digit is making a bold bet that users like the app enough to start paying for it. Whether they're right or not could determine if other financial technology start-ups dare to follow suit.|||

The popular savings app will now cost $2.99 a month.