This week my guest is Shubho Sengupta, Research Scientist at Baidu. I had the pleasure of meeting Shubho at the Rework Deep Learning Summit earlier this year, where he delivered a presentation on Systems Challenges for Deep Learning. We dig into this topic in the interview, and discuss a variety of issues including network architecture, productionalization, operationalization and hardware.

Shubho has tons of insights to share into how to do deep learning at scale, and even if you’re not operating at the scale of Baidu, I think you’ll learn a lot from our conversation about architecting, productionalizing and operationalizing deep learning systems. We also spent some time discussing the role of GPUs and hardware in building scalable machine learning systems, an area that he has a lot to say about as the author of the CuDPP, the CUDA Data Parallel Primitives Library, which was the first parallel programming library for GPUs.

Congratulations to Evan Wright, who will be receiving a bronze pass to O’Reilly Strata+Hadood World conference compliments of TWiML & O’Reilly! Evan is a principal data scientist at security startup Anomoli, and I’m looking forward to meeting up with him at the event. Thanks to all who participated, and be on the lookout for more contests in the near future. Thanks also to O’Reilly who made the giveaway possible!

Speaking of events, last week I announced one that I’m organizing, and I hope you’ll check it out. It’s called the Future of Data Summit, and it’ll be taking place in Las Vegas in May at the Interop ITX conference. To give you a taste of the great content I’m pulling together for you at the event, last week’s podcast featured James McCaffrey of Microsoft Research who is just one of the 15 great speakers you’ll hear from at the Summit. We’ll be covering a bunch of really exciting topics including of course, ML & AI, but also IoT and edge computing, AR/VR, blockchain, algorithmic IT operations, data security and more. You can learn more about the Summit at twimlai.com/futureofdata.

We’re continuing to create new ways for you to engage with us and listen to the show. Please support us by taking a moment to Like our Facebook page and also Subscribe to our new Youtube channel. We want to hear from you, so whether you reach out via Twitter (the show’s [@twimlai](https://twitter.com/twimlai and I’m @samcharrington, Facebook, Youtube, Soundcloud or good old email (sam@ works), please share your thoughts and suggestions for the show!|||

