So far, we have heard a flurry of leaks related to the upcoming Motorola smartphones, and now, a clear idea about these devices have been leaked. Previously there were reports, about an alleged Moto smartphone, but at the same time they weren’t sure, whether it would be named as Moto C or Moto E4. Finally it turned out to be the Moto C.

Moto C wouldn’t arrive lonely, because the device will come together with its sibling, the Moto C Plus; thanks to the famed leakster, Evan Blass for this info.

The things that will make the Moto C a beast among-st its class are; it will avowedly come with a 5-inch touchscreen (854 x 480 px resolution) and a 5MP rear camera along with LED flash. The device is also expected to come with a 2MP selfie camera with a flash and 1GB of RAM. It will be backed by a 2,350mAh battery.

Surprisingly, the Moto C will have two versions, where the 3G version will come, including a 32-bit 1.3 GHz Quad-Core MediaTek processor. It will possibly come with an 8GB of expandable storage and a fixed-focus primary camera. The 4G model will have a 64-bit 1.1 GHz Quad-Core MediaTek processor, 16 GB of expandable storage, and an auto focus rear camera.

Coming to the Moto C Plus: It would feature a 5-inch display with 720p resolution, a 1.3 GHz 64-bit Quad-Core MediaTek CPU. The device is further rumored to pack either a 1GB or 2GB of RAM (market specific) and will come with a 16 GB of expandable storage. It will be powered by a 4,000mAh battery. For the cameras, the smartphone is said to sport an 8 MP main camera, and the same 2 MP selfie camera.

The new case renders also hints that the Moto C and C Plus will be available in a several color options such as White, Black, Gold, and Red.  As of now, there are no clear information about the release date of these two devices, however we hope they will hit the shelves soon.|||

Motorola's Low-End Moto C and C Plus Specs and Render images leaked by Evan Blass. It will come with 5-inch display, 2GB RAM and 4,000mAh battery.