Many organizations have already broken down the existing walls between Business and IT, replacing them with agile, integrated processes and constant feedback.

We live in interesting times, especially for those who work in IT. Many organizations have begun to break down the existing walls between business and IT and even barriers between technical departments, replacing them with more agile, integrated processes and constant feedback.

Historically, we have seen several small waves of innovation that have shaken the IT industry. Typically, these waves focus on the Infrastructure; Application Architecture or Processes/Methods. What we begin to see now, and what is radically different, is the appearance of a wave that encompasses all these areas at the same time. This is the real reason why the buzzwords "Digital Transformation" and "Digital Disruption in Business" are in order nowadays.

DevOps is an acronym for Development and Operations and it names an IT work culture that fosters close collaboration between practitioners in both areas to deliver faster, and more consistent business value delivery based on the principles of Continuous Delivery and Continuous Integration.

Traditionally, the Development and Exploration and Operations areas have had different objectives, which resulted in an inefficient delivery of value to the business as an ICT department.

Appearing in 2008 and quickly adopted by leading technology companies, the DevOps application has demonstrated reductions of up to 50 times in software delivery times, as well as 30 times more frequent implementations and 60 times greater success rate in change management Than in a traditional organization. Organizations like Netflix, Spotify and Facebook are revolutionizing the IT world by successfully implementing DevOps principles.

To summarize, DevOps is a breakthrough in the traditional organization of an IT department and requires a special focus on people/users because its principles come from Scrum and Lean IT®.

Experts are convinced that DevOps will become the model for the entire IT development very soon. Not only is there already evidence of this, but the DevOps methodology will also extend to other industries as a way to design and develop new products and services. These are the main reasons:

How many times have we asked ourselves "but who programmed this software?" Or stated "no one will use this software/functionality...". Of course, DevOps involves end users in the decisions from the very first moment, defining the product in their core.

We can no longer expect programmers to know everything and solve everything

There is a problem inherent in software development: it can only be done by programmers. However, often programmers are not the end user, nor can they dominate the area where the software will be applied. The same thing applies to multidisciplinary IT projects and DevOps has solved this problem, saving many hours and headaches for programmers and organizations.

Increases levels of success for the organization

For all of the above reasons, DevOps results in projects that work better than ever. There are many catastrophic stories of solutions that have never been adopted and have been a failure, causing business losses. DevOps is not just a new way of working, it's an evolution in an industry that realized that many of the mistakes made in the past were due to the lack of proximity between professionals and end users and the sooner we approach them, the better for all of us.|||

Many organizations have already broken down the existing walls between Business and IT, replacing them with agile, integrated processes and constant feedback.