Bloc offers immersive courses available in 12, 18, and 36 week tracks in full-stack, front-end web, iOS, android development and UX design. With a focus on students building actual applications, Bloc has a refreshing online learning approach that doesn't involve a series of video tutorials. 1-1 mentor weekly meetings with an invested mentor, Bloc, allows for accountability in an online learning format. (View In-Depth Report) I had a great experience working with Mike Dekker. Mike always tried to answer my questions and sometimes took extra time to go over them with me. I am glad that I could be introduced to the field of UX/UI Design through working with Mike.

The Flatiron School offers both part-time and full-time courses in both web and mobile development. The immersive courses are 12 weeks, full-time, and train people for careers in software development. They've also partnered with New York City to launch the NYC Web Development Fellowship and provide free training to underrepresented groups without college degrees in the tech community. (View In-Depth Report) I just recently graduated from the Web Development Immersive course and will start searching for jobs soon. Overall attending Flatiron School was one of the best decisions I've made, based on: 1. Top notch curriculum, and labs that help you learn the material 2. Classmates are all great people who challenge you to bring your A-game every day 3. Career Services pros who know what they are doing ...

Designation offers a diverse 16 week course that focuses on UX/UI design and front end development. 4 out of the 16 weeks consists of well planned virtual prep work, which includes weekly check ins, virtual coaching and online peer collaboration. For those who have trouble learning online, this is a great introduction! With all the support to keep students accountable, Designation equips you with skills on self learning leading up to an immersive in person learning environment. By the end of... (View In-Depth Report) I quit my job and moved across the country to attend DESIGNATION. I didn't know what to expect, but luckily the gamble paid off. Brushing up on old skills and learning new ones was only a fraction of what I gained. The best part about DESIGNATION was the motivation that comes from being around people who are extremely passionate about what they do. I was blown away by the knowledge and ...

Fullstack Academy offers two routes. A mix of part-time weekend and nights, Flex Immersive is a JavaScript-driven 24 week program designed for working professionals. The in person course is only 13 weeks. Students will learn the latest web technologies such as Node.js, Angular.jr and MongoDB. In addition to learning new technologies, students have the opportunity to learn lean startup principles, agile project management, the UX design process, and open source development. If you are an... (View In-Depth Report) A year ago, I was laid off from my previous job not under the best circumstances and now I am working as a Software Engineer at a promising startup making more than twice the amount I did at my previous job. I would say that qualifies as having a pretty good year and a lot of it is due to Fullstack Academy. After my layoff, I knew that I wanted to get into tech and learn coding so I tried to ...

V School is a coding bootcamp in Salt Lake City, Utah, with online and in-person 12-week programs in JavaScript, jQuery, AngularJS, HTML and CSS. The school’s mission is to improve the human experience by modernizing education, accelerating career readiness, and increasing community engagement. They want to do this through providing platforms, training, and tools to foster innovation and create economic opportunities around the globe. V School reports a current job fulfillment ratio of 100%... (View In-Depth Report) This has truly been one of the best experiences of my life. They are well structured, hard working, supportive, and make sure you get what you pay for. I wish I could be around these people longer than the 12 week course. They truly make you feel valued and accepted.

Makers Academy is a highly selective, 12 week, full-time course (with a 4 week part-time pre-course) in web development based in London. They regularly invite industry experts to give talks to their students. Software development companies have also sent their developers to pair with students. Part of the value of joining Makers Academy is their large network of companies, to name a few, Google, Paypal, and Github. (View In-Depth Report) Ruby, JavaScript, Ruby on Rails, HTML, CSS, jQuery, SQL, PostgreSQL, Git and Heroku, Softwire Design, Agile and Lean An incredible experience if you're serious about a career change. Makers provide a vibrant and stimulating environment to learn important real-world programming skills (test-driven development, best practices, git flow) that will make you stand out against traditional computer science graduates in the right kind of companies. Take this from someone who did a conversion masters in Computer ...

Metis' classes focus on real-world problems; work is hands-on, team-driven, and led by digital experts and industry leaders. Their web development courses (Ruby on Rails and UX/Front End Development ) are designed by an impressive software studio called "Thoughtbot." Additionally their Data Science course is designed by Datascope Analytics, a data driven consulting company with a team of passionate data scientists, entrepreneurs, and designers. Placement programs are available to all... (View In-Depth Report) Data Visualization with D3.js , Introduction to Data Science , Statistical Foundations for Data Science & Machine Learning, Data Science Bootcamp, Machine Learning: Algorithms & Applications, Explore Data Science: Online Training, Big Data Processing with Apache Spark, Deep Learning with TensorFLow... View All Courses I don't believe i will ever have a similar experience again. So intense, so productive and at the same time so much fun.. I did a lot of research, connected alumni's from different bootcamps and ended up at Metis. I spent 3 months and it was the most efficient 3 months of my life. All the professional staff from instructors to program managers were amazing and so supportive. It is more than ...

Software Craftsmanship Guild offers a 12 week learning program in both .NET and Java. They target a 1:12 teacher to student ratio. A low cost $10,000 tuition rate with over 60 hiring network partners, 24/7 access to the lab, lifelong membership to learning, community events, and mentorship, Software Craftsmanship Guild gives you quite the bang for the buck. With such a competitive tuition rate, you might be willing to relocate to Ohio just for the program. They have a limited number of... (View In-Depth Report) This is my review of the Software Craftsmanship Guild's January ’15 .NET cohort, as we enter our final week. Background I had spent the last 15 years working as a graphic designer at a Milwaukee area commercial printer, while doing freelance website design on the side. All of my website work was focussed on the front end, using HTML, CSS and some Javascript. For a long time I had an interest ... Read All The Software Guild Reviews on SwitchUp.

There are many bootcamps teaching Ruby on Rails, but not that many which focus on Javascript. Hack Reactor is one of them and has the best student reviews on SwitchUp.Org. Almost 30 five-star reviews have solidified them as the best coding bootcamps in the country. (View In-Depth Report) My backstory for reference: -Electrical Engineer (CU Boulder) -Some coding background -very technical -Light web development up until HR (Hack Reactor) My experience at HR was pretty amazing. It was a lot more than I expected. I knew I wanted to get into web development since the market is/was so big, but I was very unsure about what this program, or any coding school, was all about. It was a ...

Thinkful is one of the few online bootcamps that have made it onto the list. They combine all of the best educational resources -- great teaching, great curriculum, and engaged learners -- to teach students how to code online. The course curriculum is entirely online and is estimated to take about three months assuming that you can commit to 10 to 15 hours per week in order to complete the coursework. You choose your own pace and can attend office hours, one to one mentorship sessions, as... (View In-Depth Report) Data Science in Python, Backend Development in Node.js, Intro to Python & Web Development, Intermediate Frontend in AngularJS, User Experience Design, Flexible Data Science Bootcamp: Washington D.C., Frontend Web Development, Web Development in Ruby on Rails, iOS Programming in Swift, Flexible Data Science Bootcamp: Atlanta, Flexible Data Science Bootcamp: Los Angeles, Flexible Web Development...... View All Courses There were often times in my previous attempts of learning to program that I would hit a wall. Without having any support to help me understand those concepts I would just give up thinking, 'I’m just not good at programming.' By being able to meet with my mentor three times a week, whenever those walls come up I’m able to break through before the thought of giving up even crosses my mind.

Located in 14 places around the world, General Assembly is a well known brand with a vast global community. They offer both in-person classes and online courses in a variety of skills from web development and user experience design, to business fundamentals, to data science, to product management and digital marketing. In addition to long form classes, they host many one-time low cost workshops. Large companies like American Express and Pepsico have sought out their corporate digital training... (View In-Depth Report) I really enjoyed my UX design course w GA. I would really love to have a class so I could build out my portfolio. I have a hard time carving out time outside of my regular 40+ hour work week to really polish and concentrate. I left the class w 1.5 pieces and to apply to jobs 3 is minimum. It would be great to have a workshop w some feedback from a professional.|||

Reviews and comparison of the best Online coding bootcamps