Download Windows 10, 8.1 or 7 for free is one of the most searches performed by users on the net, and is not for less. Because Microsoft Windows is the most used operating system in the world. Here we will be able to download the editions of Windows 7, 8.1 and the latest Windows 10, using some tools that will give us access to all the official downloads of the Original ISOs of Microsoft.

Windows is undoubtedly the most used OS in the world due to the great popularity it has, its easy handling and because it supports most applications and games for computer, especially the latter, which makes gamers prefer Windows over any other SO to play. And is that apart from coming pre-installed on desktop computers and laptops, Windows is practically a monopoly that monopolizes the entire computer market, being its only major competition, the company of the block.

On the other hand, it is the fact that it is the most pirated operating OS on the network, something impossible to do with Operating Systems such as OS X, or Linux distributions that are free. However, in recent years Microsoft has wanted to curb this by offering downloads and updates of Windows for free, – even coming to almost oblige the user to install windows 10 with their warnings, with a trial period that once completed, we must Pay for the license. The problem? That the price turns out to be quite high for the vast majority of users, who do not have the economic means to In this post we are going to know some methods with which we can make with an original copy of the .isos of some editions of Windows, especially of Windows 10, downloading them directly from the servers of Microsoft, even when the links are hidden.

The easiest way to download Windows 10 officially and for free is to use the media creation tool provided by Microsoft to download your latest operating system. This tool allows us to download the ISO of Windows 10, Windows 10 Home Single Language and Windows 10 N for architectures of 32 bits, 64 bits or for both, in the different languages supported.

When starting the application, we have two options: The first allows us to directly update our PC to Windows 10; And the second (which we will choose), download the .iso of Windows 10 to install it from a USB or DVD. If we choose the second option, we must select the language, architecture and editing of Windows.After selecting the download options, we can directly record the .iso to a USB drive or save it as a .ISO image file. The size of this depends on the option we chose in the previous step.

If you are looking to download Windows 10, the media creation tool is ideal. You can download it from here.

This is the Microsoft update program named Tech Bench, a website from which we can download the editions of Windows 10, the same as with the media creation tool described above. However, being a website, we can run some scripts from the browser command line to make some modifications and enable all available downloads.

To be able to download Windows we must go to the web of Tech Bench, here we must move to the section Select Edition. If we deploy the list we will only see that we can download Windows 10, but not other versions. This is where the script comes into play.To do this, once on the web, and depending on the browser that we are using, press F12 to open the tool for developers, we located in the Console tab, copy this script, and press Enter or Ctrl + Enter in Edge.Now when we click on the drop down list, we will see that most versions of Windows are available, in addition to some versions of Office.After selecting one of these versions, we must choose the language of our preference, and finally the architecture: 32 or 64 bits, or both (depending on the version of Windows or Office chosen).It should be noted that the links have a duration of 24 hours from the moment we give the button download, so after this time, generated link will stop working. If we want to download again, we must repeat the process.

Although the above method works perfectly, it can be a bit tedious to have to run the script every time we want to download from Tench Bench. Therefore, with this option we will automate the previous process.The first thing to do is install the Tampermonkey extension available for Chrome, Firefox and Opera.

Once installed, we must go to its configuration. To do this, from our browser we go to configuration – extensions, look for Tampermonkey and select settings or options depending on the browser. If we use Chrome we can go to the plugin configuration from here: chrome-extension: //dhdgffkkebhmkfjojejmpbldmpobfkfo/options.html#nav=settings Now that we are in the configuration of the plugin, we select the tab Utilities and in the section URL we copy the link where the script is hosted: http://rg-adguard.net/dl/script/MS-unlock.js Click on import.Remember that this will be the only time we do this process, since from now whenever we enter the Tench Bench website, the hidden links will always be visible to download Windows because the script will always run on this website.

It is the method that is working right now. It is an interactive website that has the database TechBench and from which we can download the final version and Insider of Windows, as well as the different editions of Office and other Microsoft products.For this we must access this website and select the version, edition, language, and architecture of the Microsoft product.

Universal Windows Downloader is a tool that facilitates the task of downloading the editions of Windows 10, windows 8.1 and windows 7. Basically, what it does is to get the links from Tech Bench, so that the downloads are made from Microsoft servers, That is, what we downloaded with this tool are the original ISOS of Windows and Office.With this program, in addition to downloading Windows, we can also download the editions of Office 2007, 2010 and the version of Office 2011 for Mac. The program allows us to select the ISO of Windows or Office to download, language and architecture (x86 and X64).

The tool seems to have stopped working, try using the following application.

What this tool does is to simulate the TechBench web (of methods 1 and 2), and allow to download Windows 10 and other versions in their latest versions. The file we download is a .ISO file in any of the architectures we choose (x86 or x64) and in any of the available languages.The application has an insignificant size and does not require installation, just run and select some of the versions of Windows or Office from the side to start the download process.

You can download Windows ISO Downloader from here.

Download Windows 10

 Windows 10 is the latest version of Microsoft OS that is constantly updated with new features and bug fixes. In this blog we have published several of the editions of this operating system, such as Education, Professional and Enterprise. The same ones that we could download by torrent or direct download with its corresponding activator.

If you are looking to download the final version of Windows 10, you can do it from the links below:

Windows 8.1 is the Windows 8 update that corrected the major errors of this OS that completely changed the interface we all knew Windows, removing the much-loved, start menu. This new OS brought new changes such as multiple windows, live tiles, lock screen, synchronized settings and many more customization options. The interface Modern UI and metro applications are the most resulting features of this version.

Windows 7 is one of the most stable Microsoft Operating Systems. Many users who did not like Windows 8 were reluctant to abandon this OS because it was a real change in the system interface. But Microsoft terminated Windows 7 technical support on January 13, 2015, so many had to migrate.

If you need the Windows 10 installation keys (Product Keys) you can use these generic serials for each version:|||

Download Windows 10, 8.1 or 7 for free is one of the most searches performed by users on the net, and is not for less. Because Microsoft Windows is the most used operating system in the world