“Success is simple. Do what’s right, the right way, at the right time.”– Arnold H. Glasgow

What are you doing in a bid to become a successful entrepreneur?

Truly, success doesn’t come easily. If you must be successful, you must be willing to get out of your comfort zone and take on a riskier but rewarding challenge. However, doing it at the right time can be even more rewarding.

Successful people are simply people that use their time effectively. Notice that everyone have the same amount of time each day? It’s important you maximize your time and the very little resources available to you for optimal success.

You must change the way you think about wealth. Stop thinking like a mediocre and adopt new habits.

Here is what Jerome Hines has to say about your habits:

However, here are 5 things you can start doing right now to help you accelerate your success rate and help you in your journey to becoming rich in 2017.

Really want to be successful?

Then you must position your mindset to always see yourself achieving your goal. Wait a second, do you have a clear goal? Yes, I mean a SMART (Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic and Time-based) goal.

It’s important that your goals are specific — you can easily focus your energy on them and see significant results. Yes, it must be measurable — you must be able to measure your success and know when you get there. Of course, it must be realistic and have a timeline.

Having this in place, your goal can serve as a guideline to help you become successful and rich in 2017. However, you have to believe in yourself and be courageous. Ensure you carry out one task each day that contributes to your success according to your set goals.

As I mentioned earlier, if you want to be successful, you must avoid mediocrity. You must stop doing what everyone is doing and go beyond boundaries.

Mediocrity won’t improve your life. It seeks a comfortable and complacent existence, it wants to avoid the pain in working hard consistently.

There is nothing wrong with that but remember, you won’t become a millionaire being too comfortable. See what Arnold Schwarzenegger has to say:

“Just remember, you can’t climb the ladder of success with your hands in your pockets.”

It’s important you build up your psychological and physical endurance to help you move on faster even when it’s tough — do you allocate 8 hours for your sleep time? Then sleep less instead and work more.

To be successful, you need to work really hard.

“Too many people spend money they earned … to buy things they don’t want … to impress people that they don’t like.” –Will Rogers

Start watching your spending habits. Are you buying things you don’t really need? Are they things you should stop spending your money on completely?

Record your spending habits for the next 30 days and analyze it. Ensure you cut your excesses and spend for only things that you need and when you need them.

Start by finding out the things you pay for that you rarely use — the cable bills for the channels you rarely watch. Stop these ongoing expenses and resolve to spend on things you need only.

What is your attitude towards investing?

Robert Kiyosaki says “It’s not how much money you make, but how much money you keep, how hard it works for you, and how many generations you keep it for.”

You might not be able to get rich on your own very quickly, but investments can push you up a great deal. Investing at least 20% of your revenue is not a bad Idea.

You don’t need to be rich to start investing, you can start by making regular contributions to an investment account and gradually grow it.

You can also start investing in index funds — index funds provide stable long-term capital growth that follows the direction of the markets.

It’s wise to consult index fund investing giants like Spartan, Fidelity, and Vanguard before venturing into index funds to get expert advice on the best index fund platform to invest in. Index funds are low-risk investments and are relatively cheap to start.

However, you should be on the lookout for the best investment opportunities and invest. It’s important to even help you grow faster and to become rich, even at retirement.

“If you have the skill, then you can move as you age”. – Joe Morton

Learning a new skill is important for your self-development as an entrepreneur. To become successful, you must have a great wealth of knowledge as well as be well-rounded.

It’s important you devote your time every day to learn something new.

According to Josh Kaufman, in his book “The first 20 hours: how to learn anything fast”, it’s possible to learn anything fast by following these patterns — Deconstruct the skill, self-correct, remove barriers to learning and practice for at least 20 hours

Just like Benjamin franklin said, “If you lie down with dogs, you get up with fleas.”

The people you interact and associate with has a huge impact on you. It’s important you associate yourself with the right people that will help you become successful — they can even help you create your success.

Success is contagious, the more you associate with successful people the more you begin to see yourself succeeding.

There is a reason successful people form a clique with even richer people as they understand that spending more time with successful people can create a synergy that will take their business to the next level.

Make no mistakes, to be successful you must surround yourself with the right people.

Success doesn’t come on a bed of roses, you must work really hard to achieve it. If you can act on these few tips, you’re more likely to experience significant improvement.

Let me know your thought on this. Do you have a tip to share? Kindly share via the comments section.|||

What are you doing in a bid to become a successful entrepreneur and businessperson? Do you want to get rich in 2017? Check this out.