1. TunnelBear. A Canadian service. The design and the attitude are almost irresistible, the bear is literally everywhere. Who would mind owning a personal bear protecting your privacy? There are clients for Windows, Mac, Android, iPhone and iPad, and VIPole works perfectly with them. Settings are easily scalable. There are both free and paid solutions. The provider does not keep logs, and the privacy policy is tight. You can access VPN server locations in 20+ countries. There is a 500MB limitation for browsing per month if you use the free service, and you can upgrade to Giant and Grizzly to get more.

2. SurfEasy. The VPN works with all kinds of devices in all networks and ensures blocking ad trackers. The app is handy and provides security without making the speed slower. The starting plan offers a 500MB limitation for secure traffic per month. The paid plan provides more opportunities.

3. CyberGhost. With the user-friendly interface, CyberGhost is a good option even for not tech-savvy VPN users that allows to surf and torrent anonymously, protecting the connection. Another advantage — no bandwidth limitations. However, if you choose the free solution, you get advertisements and only a limited range of server locations. To use it on several devices, you will need to purchase one of the premium subscriptions.

4. VPNGate. A free open source project created by Japan’s University of Tsukuba run on the relay of volunteer computers. Security is well protected, but there are a couple of drawbacks though: torrents are illegal here, and sometimes there may be speed issues. Also, this VPN keeps logs. The main purpose of this service is to allow the people in the countries where the internet is censored to access prohibited websites and read the unbiased news.

5. Hotspot Shield. A free VPN provider with advanced versions named Elite and Business. It facilitates secure WiFi connection, anonymous browsing and unblocking websites on Windows, Mac, Android and iPhone. The paid versions allow to use multiple devices and have a broader range of VPN servers worldwide to choose.

Bonus. Tor. Open source project with multilayered encryption running on volunteer relays. Technically, it is not a VPN, but in some aspects it works even better, protecting all your traces online and excluding the possibility of profiling you in any way. VIPole users often have Tor to additionally protect their connections and activities, and all VIPole services are available, including the encrypted calls and secure group chats. To work in VIPole with Tor, you need to use the SOCKS5 proxy, which allows to transmit the UDP traffic. Data is transmitted at least through three nodes, encrypted every time. Sadly, this process inevitably makes the connection speed slower.

1. Hide My Ass The provider has servers in more than 190 countries, allowing to use the internet like a local regardless of your location. HMA can be used on multiple devices at the same time, including mobile phones, tablets and games consoles. Importantly, this VPN does not reduce the speed of your connection.

2. TigerVPN The company has offices in Slovakia and Romania. TigerVPN utilizes AES-256-CBC encryption with the OpenVPN protocol. Installing the app is easy, and the interface is user-friendly, turning the VPN on takes one click. Note, that there are 15 global nodes available, which is slightly less than many other providers offer.

3. Private Internet Access The provider is on the market since 2010, specializing in encrypted VPN tunnels with several layers of privacy and security. The service is backed by multiple gateways worldwide with VPN tunnel access in more than 25 countries. PIA doesn’t collect logs and guarantees anonymity. You can connect up to five devices with one account.

4. NordVPN The provider is under the jurisdiction of Panama. All user data is protected with 2048-bit SSL encryption, which even a supercomputer can’t crack. NordVPN offers unrestricted internet, safe Wi-Fi and complete privacy. The company does not log user activities. It’s somehow funny that NordVPN website shows your IP address with the image identifying your country and claims that your connection is insecure, even if you are already using a VPN service.

5. Buffered VPN Buffered in on a mission of making the internet secure and open, and it offers users to avoid any kinds of government or workplace censorship. Like other VPNs, Buffered ensures security when you use public Wi-Fi, which keeps passwords and credit card details safe. The provider has servers in 37 countries around the globe and adds new ones regularly.|||

VPNs allow you to surf the internet safely by hiding your IP address and encrypting the traffic. Using a VPN is essential to keep your anonymity, prevent interceptions and hacks.