Local and national newspapers’ share of the UK’s £20bn-a-year advertising market has fallen from around half to a tenth in ten years

Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

GOOGLE and Facebook will take 70 per cent of all money spent on digital advertising by 2020.

The shock finding has prompted the launch of a campaign to curb the power of the two web giants, which critics are saying are becoming a duopoly.

Press Gazette, the trade website for newspapers and magazines, said: “Imagine if two news publishers dominated digital media in the way that Facebook and Google do.

“The Government would not allow such a duopoly to stand. Campaigners would call for them to be broken up in the name of media plurality.”

By 2020 Google and Facebook are expected to take 71 per cent of all the money spent in the UK on digital advertising, according to a report by analysts OC&C.

The UK advertising market was worth around £20billion in 2015.

In the last ten years the share of that going to newspaper – local, regional and national – has gone from half to about a tenth.

Press Gazette said: “This is money which had been spent on journalists holding those in power to account has been transferred to two US-owned digital platforms which exist purely to exploit content rather than create it.

“News publishers are reaching more people than ever before both directly, via their websites, and indirectly, via social media.

"But they are getting an ever shrinking slice of the advertising pie. This has a direct impact on the number of journalists they are able to employ.”

“The effect of this can already be seen and is devastating for both the news industry and for society in general.

“That’s why Press Gazette is today launching its Duopoly campaign which aims to stop Facebook and Google destroying any more of the UK journalism industry.

“There is no simple solution, but broadly we are seeking a fairer deal between news publishers and the digital giants – one which fairly rewards the creators of the content on which these platforms rely.”|||

Local and national newspapers’ share of the UK’s £20bn-a-year advertising market has fallen from around half to a tenth in ten years