No textbook can teach you Javascript better than this one. It starts with the basics and reaches the inner depths. The best method is to code while reading and experiment enough. This book has been referred by most people in the industry. This book is known for its relevance in interviews as well. So So if you are looking for a job or internship , keep this book in one hand all the time. It will not only teach you but prepare you for all those tricky Javascript questions.

I have read this book personally and will always recommend it for beginners.

Famous for its weird senseless covers and lengthy illustrations, it is usually meant to be read without taking too much pressure. Just like the previous book, this too covers all aspects. But I find it mostly for learning purpose.

You can certainly learn a lot but mostly in parts. You will need to write more code on your own to figure out how Javascript works.

Javascript is not about learning jQuery or AngularJS. It is more about understanding its execution, design patterns and methodology. You can be a very good Java developer but it doesn't imply you equally understand Javascript.

Stylish blog covering detailed aspect of UX, Design and UI. I usually look it for animations, visual effects and hacks. Recently, it has started to publish posts about extensions, web-servers, plugins, themes etc.

Slightly experienced developers with some knowledge of Javascript and looking to tackle a specific problem can probably look into it.



 This was one of the first websites to write about HTML5 and its APIs. Though slightly old, this website the best website to discover features and explore. This website is for all geeks who start with the documentation and well, end with it too. Once you understand the execution, read this website to understand the internal workflow. You will be amazed to see how Javascript functions. 

 If you are applying for Javascript Developer, it is better to have a look at this book. Though no use in production, certain questions are specifically asked by interviewers and it is important to know about them.

With everything is a single basket, Javascript is the hottest technology. Be it a server or the browser, Javascript has served the purpose with tons of libraries supporting it. Once dreaded among the Java developers for its structure, Javascript has been embraced by the young developers and has been modified enough to build anything you want to.Though there are a ton of resources which proclaim to teach Javascript, I would like mentioning few of the outstanding ones.|||

top resources to learn javascript, best javascript resources, interview preparation, javascript interviews, javascript tutorial