So you have a great startup idea and you’ve made some progress. You’ve built a nice (partially functional) product. You’ve got some beta users. Maybe even paying customers. You start wandering around looking for investors. You meet many investors and get all sorts of tips and advice.

So what is wrong here?

Their interests are not aligned with yours. And their tips may not be relevant to your product. While it is difficult to see how your valuation can become >$1B with a $5–$10 or free product, it is possible and has been done (e.g. Evernote, Slack, Snapchat, Twitter). The investors want to see either large deals closing before they invest, or great traction. So they always push you to launch, to close deals. But it does not always work that way.

So why do investors always prefer larger deals and going upmarket?

It’s less risky. So unless you’ve made a $100M exit or IPO’ed your last company, the investors would prefer to invest in an enterprise software company that closes large, recurring, persistent, expectable deals. It’s just less risky for them. And if you’ve already closed a bunch of those — it’s even better.

What if your idea is not for a business that will close large enterprise deals?

Well then, it means that your idea is obviously more risky for the investors. It may take longer to raise money, if you succeed at all at doing it. But should you pursue it or not? It may be a great idea nevertheless! But how can you get the right feedback? First, expect to get harsh criticism from investors if your idea is not of that kind, because it’s just less attractive and less likely to provide the monetary returns expected by the investors. It does not mean it’s not a great idea!

Should you find another idea that will cater to the needs of the investors?

To truly find a new concept for an enterprise software that will allow you to sell it on the spot for large sums of money, one must have internal knowledge in the relevant industry. You must be in touch with the relevant stakeholders in large companies that may be interested in your solution. And not everybody has these kinds of connections, and even if you do, it’s not easy to find those specific unmet needs that are worth a lot of money.

To truly succeed, you must go against the odds and disregard all criticism from investors. Listen just to your customers.

So unless you’re a well-funded startup due to your past credentials (e.g. Slack), you must build the right team yourself, take a leap of hope, and build a product for your customers. Of course you must not disregard your customers, but on the contrary, make efforts to charge them as early as possible. Release a clunky product at first. Iterate. Be super-lean. Only after you’ve gathered the metrics to prove your idea is worthwhile, you may raise more money from investors. But don’t try to listen to advice that does not follow your vision for the product. If you build a product for the investors, nobody will buy it. Build for customers.|||

So you have a great startup idea and you’ve made some progress. You’ve built a nice (partially functional) product. You’ve got some beta users. Maybe even paying customers. You start wandering around…