Google Espresso, AWS, Akamai’s Enterprise Services and Cisco Umbrella are revolutionary innovations of the current era. However, they are built on a house of cards that is crumbling. BGP came into being almost 30 years ago. The BGP Ecosystem (AS, DNS, IP Addresses) and networking in general have no place in the future of communication and networking. All will cease to exist in a few years because they are hindering progress. Some current business models will die and others will emerge. The replacement is i-MLRP.

i-MLRP is the future that will usher a new era of communication. The networking problem goes deeper than just BGP. The problem is the packet. The basic unit of networking is the packet. Therefore, the packet in its existing form will die. It will be replaced by a new structure that incorporates intelligence, security and machine learning. In fact, the new structure will incorporate a security ecosystem that ends DDoS attacks and others once and for all. MPLS, VPN services and many others will cease to exist. The use of multiple ports will cease to exist. All communication will take place over 1 port. And there will be no more network congestion, even when there are trillions of devices out there communicating.

The entire global networking ecosystem has reached its fundamental limit. Today’s communications and internet infrastructure must be ripped out and built from scratch. The development of the next generation internet protocol is not about technical competence and intelligence, because there is plenty of that, but it is about imagination, creativity and craziness, pushing the boundaries of the human mind. i-MLRP is the future that will usher a new era of human progress that supports a world dominated by IoT devices, drones, hovercrafts, quantum computing, and technologies not invented yet.

All this futuristic stuff is hard to digest for some. Therefore, we’ve created a new site called i-MLRP, which we refer to as “The i-MLRP Project.”  Our team will publish updates on i-MLRP regularly, so if you are interested in this stuff, sign up for the newsletter on that site.|||

The Internet Machine Learning Routing Protocol will change the world of communication. BGP has reached its fundamental limit.