Ionic Box is a ready-to-go hybrid development environment for building mobile apps with Ionic, Cordova, and Android. Ionic Box was built to make it easier for developers to build Android versions of their app, and especially for Windows users to get a complete dev environment set up without all the headaches.

For iOS developers, Ionic Box won't do much for you right now unless you are having trouble installing the Android SDK, and Ionic Box cannot be used for iOS development for a variety of legal reasons (however, the command in beta will soon fix that).

To install, download and install Vagrant for your platform, then download and install VirtualBox.

Once Vagrant and VirtualBox are installed, you can download the latest release of this GitHub repo, and unzip it. into the unzipped folder and run:

The username for vagrant is and the password is .

This will download and install the image, and then go through the dependencies and install them one by one. will connect you to the image and give you a bash prompt. Once everything completes, you'll have a working box to build your apps on Android.

It exposes ionic-projects folder to root of this directory on HOST machine and /home/vagrant/ionic-projects on vagrant

The image also has support for connected USB Android devices. To test whether devices are connected, you can run (from the box):

If that does not work, or shows , then run:

You can connect genymotion by running

If you get the error as

This sometimes happens because Genymotion while booting up connects the Virtual Device to the HOST's ADB in that case.

It will fix the error and will appear as, and is ready for go.

You can change the following defaults in vagrantfile

android-sdk and nodejs directories are chown'ed by vagrant so sudo is not required, when runnning commands.

If you encounter slow network(internet download) speed on vagrant uncomment the following lines in Vagrantfile.|||

ionic-box - Ionic Box(x64): The easiest way to get your hybrid development environment up and running. A Vagrant install for Android, Cordova, and Ionic.