Design exercises can be divided into mostly two types: one as take-home exercise and one as live. Interestingly, I have never gone on site to any of the companies I interviewed. So I apologize if I cannot give you more insights about that.

If the company recommends to spend 3–4 hours on the exercise, spending 6–8 hours and sometimes more is quite typical. Usually a company is flexible with the format of your deliverable for the design exercise. I will recommend using a draft Medium post if you might get cut without presenting your solution. If a call to discuss your design exercise is guaranteed, you have more flexibility. I use a PDF with a inVision link.

The prompt is often vague and it is your job to break it down so you can start designing. Therefore, defining your problem statements is the most important part of this whole process. Do what it takes to help you get there. You might have to conduct some user interviews, or do a competitive analysis, draw an experience map etc. The process is usually different for each exercise but once you have the problem statements, you can jump into idea generation without losing focus.

You want to make sure you dedicate a certain amount of time just sketching a lot of ideas. The problem statements usually help you generate ideas. There are of course other ways to help facilitate that such as mind mapping, storyboarding or attribute listing.

Then you need to compare different options and focus on one direction to further explore. The way I tackle it is to filter out the high level ideas from my sketches. Then I will compare the benefits and tradeoffs of each idea and make a decision from there. This is the another important moment of the process. The interviewer wants to know why you pick idea A over idea B.

Depending on the requirements, you might or might not flesh out a screen or two to high fidelity just to showcase your visual skill.

Similar to how you present in a portfolio review, you want to talk about the “why”s throughout your process and connect the dots in the end. And if you care about the offer from this company, make sure you practice presenting your design solution to a friend.

Live design exercise is a lot harder than take-home design exercises because you are forced to complete the task in a certain amount of time. The advantage is that you get to ask questions.

The process is similar to the take-home ones except that you are mostly working on whiteboard or paper. I guess the biggest warning I can give to people is do not assume visual does not matter because it is just a sketch. I actually get rejected from a company because I overcomplicate hierarchy and visual design in a sketch.|||

A step to step guide to help you tackle the product design interview process with some simple tricks and big tips.