Embattled internet company Yahoo faces new legal challenges over a case it agreed to settle a decade ago. In a lawsuit filed Tuesday in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, a group of plaintiffs including suspected Chinese dissidents sued Yahoo for allegedly mismanaging millions of dollars set aside in 2007 as part of a humanitarian aid fund for imprisoned political activists and their families.

Yahoo had agreed to pay $17.3 million to settle a case after turning over information to the Chinese government about a local journalist who was being investigated and was eventually arrested. Now, a group of eight Chinese citizens is accusing Yahoo of turning a blind eye to the spending of more than $13 million from the fund on "expenditures having nothing to do with providing humanitarian assistance to imprisoned Chinese dissidents," according to their complaint. The group alleges that the bulk of that money went to the man responsible for overseeing it, among other things, and that only $700,000 -- or about 4 percent of the fund -- was spent on direct humanitarian aid.

“In standing idly by while it knew the Yahoo Human Rights Trust was being squandered, Yahoo abandoned its responsibilities to Trust beneficiaries, who have risked their lives by speaking out for political reform in China,” Times Wang, an attorney for the plaintiffs, said in a written statement. “We hope this lawsuit creates an opportunity for Yahoo to replenish the fund and make good on its commitment to support basic freedoms as a responsible corporate citizen.”

It's unclear if the nonprofit set up to manage the money, the Laogai Human Rights Organization, still exists. Harry Wu, the Chinese human rights activist tasked with overseeing the money, died last year. He left behind a complicated legacy and a void in the leadership of the museum he established to preserve a record of China's extensive human rights abuses. Publicly available details of how the money was spent are sparse, with limited information disclosed in tax documents filed by the sister organization established to disburse Yahoo's money.

The money was set aside following intense Congressional scrutiny of Yahoo's work with foreign governments. At one point a California Democratic congressman said of Yahoo cofounder and then CEO Jerry Yang, "While technologically and financially you are giants, morally you are pygmies."

A Yahoo spokeswoman declined to comment about the lawsuit, or whether the claim that only 4 percent of the fund had gone to imprisoned dissidents was accurate. The case is the latest headache for Yahoo, which is expected to complete a roughly $4.8 billion sale to Verizon later this year. The deal, reached last July, marked a low point for Yahoo, once a $125 billion tech behemoth as big Google or Facebook are today.

Should the plaintiffs in the case win, it's unclear where any money awarded to them would come from. The complaint suggests that discovery could yield the answer. "What really needs to be done," Wang said, "is the books need to opened up." Wang stressed that the plaintiffs, as well as others, have contacted Yahoo since the 2007 settlement to discuss "proper management of the fund" and request detailed information about how the money was spent. "[Yahoo] has never really said anything substantive" in response, Wang said. "For our clients, they felt this lawsuit was really their last option."

Got a story tip? Click here for details on how to send Matt documents anonymously via SecureDrop. He can also be reached via Signal or WhatsApp. Email him at mdrange[at]forbes.com.|||

Yahoo faces new questions over the allocation of millions of dollars the company agreed to set aside for humanitarian aid in China as part of a 2007 settlement. The case comes as Yahoo works to finalize a nearly $5 billion sale to Verizon.