5 Ways to drive traffic to your new website today

If your site is new, you might not expect enough traffic from search engines until your site is at least a year old. But you will have to use other method to promote your site before search engines can rank you.

So take advantage of these five methods to promote your site:

Create a facebook group for your site as facebook group makes it easy for you to share contents with your group members. Make a lot of friends on facebook and add them to your group. If your friends reach 5,000, facebook will stop you from making more friends. So you need to open another account. And do not forget to beg your group members to add their friends to your group.

As twitter is about all that is happening, it is a great website to share your site contents. To get much traffic and followers from twitter, your need to complete your profile very well. Add a short bio to your profile and dont forget to include your site url in your bio. Add and verify your phone number. let your twitter username represent your website name.

3- Take advantage of google plus:

Open an account with google plus and look for communities  that are related to site niche and start sharing your posts there.

Open an account with linkedin and complete your profile with useful information. Make a lot of connections, join groups and start sharing your posts with them.

Many people don't know how to drive a lot of traffic from reddit without being banned.

Open an account with reddit at www.reddit.com and verify your email address. Submit 2 different links from 2 different websites apart from your own. That sounds very stupid but it is true.Reddit will ban you for submitting your own link at first time. So after submitting those links, leave your account for at least 10 days do not rush be patient. Then after 10 days come back and submit your own link. Choose a suitable subreddit for your links. Do not submit more than 2 of your own links per day. Mix it with links from authority website like yahoo, msn, bbc and cnn. Do not forget to submit interesting links so that you get upvotes.

I've been using this trick to drive 7000 traffic too my entertainment news site everyday.|||

5 Ways to drive traffic to your new website today, If your site is new, you might not expect enough traffic from search engines