SEO optimisation is important to ensure you are driving traffic to your site via search engines. It required on page optimizations, targetted content and a backlinking strategy to improve performance.

If your are looking for a way to boost your search engine optimization, you have come to the right place. in this article i m gonna teach you how to optimize you site for seo and drive traffic or make sales.

So let's go straight to the point without wasting time:

When you are choosing your site title, make sure it is seo friendly. e.g: if your site is about entertainment news, make sure the keyword entertainment news appear in you website title. And let your site title be relivent to your site content.

When your are writting a site description, make sure it is seo friendly. I gave an example that if your site is about entertainment news, let the keyword entertainment news appear in your site title.

The word entertainment news should also appear in your site description.

Image alt text is very important to search engines as they can not read image. so when your are posting make sure you fill the alt text with some few words. A let your keyword also appear in the image alt text.

Example of how to fill alt text in wordpress:

In blogger , after inserting the image, just click on the image and select property.

When writting an article, make sure it has a subtitle after the main title. Make sure your post targets a keyword, if you are writting an article about marketing for example, let the word marketing appear in your post title, in your subtitle and in your image alt text.

Link building is when your are getting traffic from other website to your own apart from search engines.

- Comment on other people's blog relateted to your niche and do not forget to drop your site link when commenting.

Share your posts often to facebook, twitter, linkedin, pinterest, reddit.com and many more.

Adding a share button to your site makes it easy for your sit visitors to easily share your content with their friends. And it they do, it will bring back traffic to your site.|||

SEO optimisation is important to ensure you are driving traffic to your site via search engines. It required on page optimizations