We're forever thankful to Silicon Valley for giving us the iPhone, omnipotent search engines, and swipe-simple hookups. But now that America's most vaunted industry has also become its most self-satisfied, Silicon Valley is veering toward fall-of-Rome territory. Which is why it needs to blow up these seven myths about itself before it's too late

We live in an era of technical ability that would have nauseated our ancestors with wonder, and so much of it comes from one very small place in California. But all these unimpeachable humanoid upgrades—the smartphones, the Google-gifted knowledge—are increasingly the exception, rather than the rule, of Silicon Valley’s output. What was once a land of upstarts and rebels is now being led by the money-hungry and the unspirited. Which is why we have a start-up that mails your dog curated treats and an app that says "Yo." The brightest minds in tech just lately seem more concerned with silly business ideas and innocuous "disruption," all for the shot at an immense payday. And when our country’s smartest people are working on the dumbest things, we all lose out.

Myth #1: Silicon Valley Is the Universe’s Only True Meritocracy

Everyone in Silicon Valley has convinced himself he’s helped create a free-market paradise, the software successor to Jefferson’s brotherhood of noble yeomen. "Silicon Valley has this way of finding greatness and supporting it," said a member of Greylock Partners, a major venture-capital firm with over $2 billion under management. "It values meritocracy more than anyplace else." After complaints of the start-up economy’s profound whiteness reached mainstream discussion just last year, companies like Apple, Facebook, and Twitter reluctantly released internal diversity reports. The results were as homogenized as expected: At Twitter, 79 percent of the leadership is male and 72 percent of it is white. At Facebook, senior positions are 77 percent male and 74 percent white. Twitter—a company whose early success can be directly attributed to the pioneering downloads of black smartphone users—hosts an entirely white board of directors. It’s a pounding indictment of Silicon Valley’s corporate psyche that Mark Zuckerberg—a bourgeois white kid from suburban New York who attended Harvard—is considered the Horatio Alger 2.0 paragon. When Paul Graham, the then head of the massive start-up incubator Y Combinator, told The New York Times that he could "be tricked by anyone who looks like Mark Zuckerberg," he wasn’t just talking about Zuck’s youth.

Myth #2: Silicon Valley Is Bringing Us Closer Together

Myth #3: Younger Is Smarter, Safer, and Inarguably Better

Painful as it is to watch a corporate car crash with a baby at the wheel, these disasters might be the only way the industry will learn; that, and watching actual adults succeed. Zuckerberg, to his credit, was pretty quick to cede big-boy managerial duties to business-savvy adults and stick to his strength as the social-media prophet-in-chief. But what would be more useful than studying a wave of cautionary tales is to pay attention to grand-slam exceptions—success stories worth emulating, like that of Jan Koum and Brian Acton, who flipped their instant-messaging company WhatsApp to Facebook for almost $20 billion. The duo are 39 and 43, respectively, almost octogenarian by founder standards, yet responsible for one of the greatest software successes (and investor returns) in Silicon Valley’s history. And there’s a reason most people had never heard their names before their gigantic fortune: All along they’d acted like grown-ups.

Myth #4: School Is for Suckers, Just Drop Out

And for what? There’s no evidence that avoiding a conventional education today grants business success tomorrow. The gifted few who end up dropping out and changing tech history would have probably changed tech history anyway—you can’t learn start-up greatness by refusing to learn in a college classroom. And given that most start-ups fail, do we want an appreciable segment of bright young people gambling so heavily on being the next Zuck? More important, do we want an economy of CEOs who never had to learn to get along with their dorm-mates? Who never had the opportunity to grow up and figure out how to be a human being functioning in society? Who went straight from a bedroom in their parents’ house to an incubator that paid for their meals? It’s no wonder tech has an antisocial rep.

Myth #5: Coding Is the Key to the Kingdom

Myth #6: San Francisco Is the (Moral, Cultural, Financial) Center of the Universe|||

The tech capital of America is smug, overhyped, and kidding itself