Until recently, marketers depended on direct face-to-face interactions in order to create meaningful customer engagement. From sponsoring rock-shows to handing out free samples at supermarkets, they used every trick in the book to try and woo the customer. While this worked well at times, it impacted only a small section of the overall consumer base.

Now, it is a different ball game altogether. With an alarming increase in competitiveness, marketing departments are expected to generate enhanced response rates. In such an economic environment, effective personalization, such as one-to-one marketing, offers a proven method for improved response rates and loyal customer relationships. Businesses today have enhanced their customer messaging technology and are now offering superior online experiences to their users. With sophisticated marketing automation capable of intense personalization with omni-channel capabilities, the marketer is now considerably more empowered.

According to a study conducted by k3 retail:

Technologically progressive brands nowadays, can combine a user’s purchase history with social data, collected, say, from his recent social mention about the brand’s products, to eventually create a meaningful interaction. These contextually relevant, data-driven and personalized experiences are now possible, and what’s more, customers are beginning to expect them too.

One of the most popular examples of personalized messaging is to deploy push-notifications. A push notification is a message that pops up on a mobile device. App publishers can send them at any time; users don’t have to be in the app or using their devices to receive them. So the next time your phone vibrates with a push notification, take a good look at the message. While it may look like a simple advert — a few characters and most likely, a call to action, the reality is far removed. What many do not realize is that there is a lot of logic and intelligence that goes behind this simple message. Based on the information that the sender has about you, this message is highly tailored to meet your preferences. While it is impossible to customize messages for a big brand’s individual customers manually, you’d need the technology to execute personalized campaigns to scale.

While creating effective push notifications, marketers rely on the following types of data:

Combining these two types of data enables brands to better engage with consumers, and create experiences that are highly personalized.

To implement a personalized engagement strategy, push notifications are an absolute must. Research shows that app publishers are able to engage (and retain) almost three times more push-enabled users than users who don’t opt in to receiving push. However, a sender has reason to be extra careful while sending push notifications because repetitive or annoying messages are the number one reason consumers will uninstall an app.

With Gamooga’s enhanced push notification enabling capabilities, your business can:

· Bring latent or less engaged users back into your app with powerful push messaging by running triggered push notifications based on the lifecycle events of the user or schedule batch push campaigns.

· Tailor the push message to the right audience group, and encourage them to visit your website. Create segments based on any custom user behavior or profile data or predictive intelligence or combine multiple parameters. Here, demography, geo-targeting and event based segments help create meaningful user buckets. Engage with your users on a personal level. Address them by their names, include offers on their favorite products and give out unique coupon codes.

· Use your product feed to deliver personalized recommendations. Show Bestsellers, Similar Products, etc. With a simple Push Notification, deliver the same personalized experience to the user that he had while browsing your site.

So what are you waiting for? Get the right technology for your marketing efforts and stay rewarded for life!|||

Until recently, marketers depended on direct face-to-face interactions in order to create meaningful customer engagement. From sponsoring rock-shows to handing out free samples at supermarkets, they…