Rails provides a lot of methods to make our lives easier. Possibly one of the most love/hate relationships (at least for programmers that have touched any other language than Ruby) is with .

These dynamic finders are essentially a shorthand for something like: that are defined based on the columns that exist in your database. If you’re using , you get these for free.

And methods like this make your life much easier. For example, when using these methods you probably don’t have to think much about issues like SQL injection (although always have that thought in your mind). You’ll be automatically using a prepared statement which means even in the case of something like this:

On the downside, along with the niceties that Rails provides, it also provides a lot of abstractions automatically that you may not know exist or may not know are coming into play.

By default, for example can be sent as . You might think that’s a whatever situation but that means that I can pass other structures to an endpoint where most Rails developers will assume that params contains a flat Hash of strings. Consider instead of:

Now I’ve successfully passed an instead of a . Eek! Most of the time this results in confusing s which are pretty harmless, but imagine that I did this instead:

Now I’ve passed an array somewhere the application is expecting a string. In the case of a bare call to a dynamic finder, what happens?

Uh oh! Also on the surface seems pretty benign - BUT, I can (without being affected by normal rate limits) perform:

You may be saying: “I use !” While good (keep it up!), most developers are using where protecting fields that will be used to update a model, and not sanitizing fields in controller actions. Most rails apps include things like which does not run through .

Okay, one more:

The same dynamic finder run against the above will take a in when the application is expecting a . What does rails do in that case? You might be surprised!

Now we’ve done it. While we haven’t broken out of the prepared statement world and can’t perform a real injection here - this should be pretty concerning for two edge cases.

My point isn’t as much that these would happen, as that this is something you wouldn’t expect or know about. It relies on the fact that Rails is being cutesy with multi-use methods.

This last issue has actually been brought up on the Google group before as an advisory, but it was stated that:

I’d love to look more into why that’s the case - but assuming it is, everyone should know that these issues are present even in modern Rails. So how do we avoid them?

The most straightforward protection you can offer yourself is to ensure that your params are of the type that you expect them to be. For the most part, that means as they come in.

In conclusion, we get a lot from Rails and frameworks of this type (and I’m really, really thankful for that as I’ve pretty much built my career on these things), but sometimes abstractions that are too overloaded can be unintentionally dangerous.

Watch out for these issues, know what’s happening underneath you, and good luck out there!|||

A development blog by John Crepezzi