Janne Petrie, from The Colour Designers, explains: “In situations where the roof is a dominant feature of the home, it is important to ensure that the colour does not over shadow the entire aesthetic of the building so it’s best to opt for a mid tone colour. In these cases, roofing made from COLORBOND® steel in the more neutral colours of Surfmist®, Woodland Grey®, Dune® or Ironstone® are ideal choices.”

With its crisp, clean lines, roofing made from COLORBOND® steel can create an attractive roof that works well with most home designs including traditional styles, contemporary designs and everything in between.

The second consideration when choosing the colour of the roof is the location of the home and its surrounding natural and built environments. With a range of 20 designer colours, finding the right colour is easy with COLORBOND® steel whether it be for a rural, coastal, city or suburban location.

Janne Petrie advises: “If the home is located in a rural area that is surrounded by a bush or green landscape then muted tones are the best colour choices. Roofing made COLORBOND® steel in colours such as the muted greens of Bushland®, Wilderness®, Pale Eucalypt® or the subdued brown of Jasper® are most suitable.

For inner city areas where heritage buildings are the norm, more traditional roof colours are required such as Manor Red® or Headland® which are part of COLORBOND® steel’s 20 designers colours.

If the home is situated in a more modern suburban area then a more striking roof colour may be the best option with roofing made from COLORBOND® steel in the colour Monument® or Loft® creating a prominent yet appealing feature.”

Once the roof colour has been chosen a simple tip to ensure that it works effectively with the rest of the home is to repeat the same colour in smaller amounts around the property in up to three different locations. This includes using the same colour for the mailbox, garden shed or even the fence.

 By triangulating the colour, particularly at the front of the property, it will give the home a balanced feel.

Roofing made from COLORBOND® steel is backed by a BlueScope Steel warranty of up to 30 years from the date of installation for a roof made from COLORBOND® steel*.

*Warranty terms and conditions apply. Warranties are not available for all products and applications.|||

