The sexiest social sharing buttons on the market. With a uniform yet accurate aesthetic they look and feel legit.



Built with performance in mind, these are the fastest loading social buttons available. They will never slow down your site.



Easily match the buttons to your websites branding. Customize the look with over 5,000 potential style combinations.



Unlock the power of Pinterest and skyrocket your content's success by uploading a Pinterest-specific image and description!



Customize the tweets that are populated when a visitor clicks your Twitter button (you can even add images if you like)!



Create in-post tweetable quotes that make it super easy for people to share. (Also known as a Click-to-Tweet.)



Display rich, large image summary cards in your tweets with option to include "via @[username]" automatically.



Display social share counts prominently (even Twitter tweet counts). This is a powerful psychological tool to encourage more shares.



Add a custom widget that will display your most popular blog posts by the number of social shares it has recieved.



Display the share buttons with share counts hidden until a minimum number of shares (or social proof) have been reached.



No matter what size screen your website is viewed on, these share buttons will always fit perfectly and look great.



Allows for third party developers to build upon and extend the functionality as needed in the form of plugin add-ons.



Place share buttons anywhere with a simple shortcode or PHP snippet. You can even point them to specific pages!



Includes our Frame Buster plugin that prevents people from adding their own calls-to-action over top of yours.



Automatically adds UTM tracking to every shared link so you can track how your social shares are performing via Analytics.



Allows the recovery of social share counts when switching permalink structures or going from HTTP to HTTPS protocol.

|||

Stop blending in with the rest of the crowd and start dominating the world's social networks. This is the only social sharing WordPress plugin you need.