COLLISON: I remember you commented in an interview a couple of years ago that you discard a lot of books. Are we all making a huge mistake by finishing so many books?

COWEN: If you finish them. I’m not convinced you all do.

COWEN: So there’s data from Kindle on this.

COWEN: And whether it’s cheery or depressing, you can debate. Now, you might be more willing to finish a physical book because it has an embodiment, maybe it’s more vivid, or maybe by buying it, you made a greater commitment, as opposed to having 400 unread things on your Kindle.

But serious readers probably finish too many books and sit through too many movies. It’s a biological intuition. Be loyal to things, which is a good intuition. But if you can selectively discard it for parts of your intellectual life without discarding it for your personal life, great.

COLLISON: Does this Kindle data about our median inability to finish books, does this suggest anything deficient in the artifact of the book itself? Should it be otherwise?

COWEN: There are probably too many books. It depends what your goal is. If your goal is simply to learn something, so often, reading a blog post is better than reading a book. Even if the book is, of course, much longer. Books embody knowledge, they store knowledge, they certify knowledge. Those are important, I’m not anti-book. But as a means of communicating knowledge, once you’ve read a certain number of key, earthquake, worldview-shattering books, books are way overrated. They’re actually a pretty weak, impotent way of learning new things.

COLLISON: Is there something between blogs and books that you think ought to exist that does not?

COWEN: PDF? I don’t know. [laughs] I’m so often disappointed in those.

Books that really change your mind are the best way to learn. But there’s only so many of those. There’s depletion of the stock, and you age. And after that, travel, and then meeting clusters of people. You talk to them, and you learn areas by meeting them, and toss in some books. And you should read more and more in clusters, pick an area from a time in history and read in that, rather than reading a book.

COLLISON: Do you have any heuristics for getting better at more quickly finding, identifying books that are likely to change our minds?

Or read Marginal Revolution. I can’t have a better heuristic than what I say in other contexts.

COLLISON: But how do you do it? You can’t email yourself. Well, you can email yourself, but I’m not sure how effective it is.

COWEN: I sometimes say my business model is, I respond or at least try to respond to every email I receive. I don’t quite hit 100 percent.

COLLISON: Well, that sounds very dangerous if you ever do email yourself.

COWEN: I email myself names of restaurants, but I don’t respond to those. That’s why it’s not 100 percent.

But I feel if my responses show the right temperament, that people will tell me everything I need to know. And I think that’s worked pretty well. So email’s underrated, in my worldview.

COLLISON: Well, on that note, I wanted to ask you about a couple of things and whether they are in fact over- or underrated.

COLLISON: Starting out with something that obviously has a lot of popularity here: effective altruism.

COWEN: It’s overrated by the people who know what it is. It’s underrated by the entire rest of the world.

COLLISON: Can you expand on the former?

COWEN: A lot of giving is not very rational. Whether that’s good or bad, it’s a fact. And if you try to make it too rational in a particular way, a very culturally specific way, you’ll simply end up with less giving. And then also, a lot of the particular targets of effective altruism, I’m not sure, are bad ideas. So somewhere like Harvard, it has a huge endowment, it’s super non- or even anti-egalitarian. But it’s nonetheless a self-replicating cluster of creativity. And if you’re a rich person, Harvard was your alma mater, and you give them a million dollars, is that a bad idea? I don’t know, but effective altruists tend to be quite sure it’s a bad idea.

I think there’s too much pretense of knowledge in the movement as it is. But that said, relative to the people just making mistakes, it’s way, way, way underrated. So I’m actually a big fan of it, in a public sense.

COWEN: Flying cars, I think, will be dangerous for a long time. And I don’t know why you need to fly and then drive. So you can fly and then Uber or taxi, and you separate the flight and the car. Until I hear a good reason why the integration is so important, you can carry your iPad from one to the other and have a pretty integrated experience. So I’d much rather have the 140 characters. [laughs]

COLLISON: Well, that was going to be my next question: 140 characters, over- or underrated?

COWEN: You mean, Twitter itself? Or the characters?

COWEN: I don’t think they should relax the rule as they’ve done in a number of ways. Tweets are too long. There are too many photos. There ought to be like a Pigouvian tax on putting photos and subtweets in your tweets and threads. I favor a nonzero amount, not like the old rules, but it definitely should be limited and taxed with micropayments. And I think that would make Twitter better and quicker.

COWEN: But mostly, I’m a Twitter fan, and rules really matter for their own sake. So, yes, 140 characters plus.

COLLISON: And Twitter itself, over- or underrated?

COWEN: Underrated, and I think Trump has shown how powerful it is. Again, you don’t have to agree with his tweets, but it’s woken the world up that Twitter is not just some inferior Facebook that never was going to turn out to be anything. It’s extraordinarily powerful. People in Iran have known this for a long time. It will stay important and powerful. I think it’s still very, very underrated, actually. As a commercial venture, I couldn’t say, but it’s a force for shaping society.

COLLISON: You use Twitter but not Facebook. Why is that?

COWEN: Partly my time is limited, but the Facebook page, to me, is too confusing. It’s like William James’s “buzzing, blooming confusion.” And they always change it, and I get a headache. It’s like trying to work a very complicated microwave oven.

COWEN: And I can’t really work a simple microwave that well. I’m sensitive to the complexity of the visual field. But that said, if you have broadcasts to larger numbers, would you prefer the smaller number, the closed-gated thing that’s not searchable? I don’t see why I would.

And I worry, at the social level, Facebook is subsidizing sociability too much. A function, say, that used to be served by music when you’re in the seventh grade — “This is the band I like” — it’s now served by social media. It’s pulling away a lot of hidden, deep, implied subsidies to culture, and our culture is in some ways weaker because we’re happier and more sociable. I don’t like that.

COLLISON: Is Facebook net good or bad for the world?

COWEN: We don’t know yet. If you’re a utilitarian focused on happiness, it’s very likely good. But if you’re a [John Maynard] Keynes-like person, who cares about the aesthetic worth of the most significant contributions, and you want to see another Led Zeppelin come to pass, then it’s probably bad. And I have a bit of that in me.

COWEN: What Silicon Valley means, I’ve become confused by. If you say “the Bay Area,” I think it’s been overrated up until quite recently. A lot of it was just better leisure, and now, it’s really starting to be integrated with the physical structure of things, and it’s probably quite a bit underrated. The diversity of business is possible here, I think, it’s just getting going. I would say definitely underrated, looking forward.

COLLISON: Why does the term confuse you?

COWEN: Well, you’re not in Silicon Valley, are you?

COLLISON: Do you mean geographically?

COWEN: If you say “Bay Area,” I feel more comfortable with my answer.

COWEN: As a city to live in, it’s underrated. I think its weather is underrated. As an intellectual and media capital, it’s one of the most stimulating places to be. It’s still highly livable. We live half an hour outside of Washington when there’s no traffic, ha-ha, and still have deer and fox on our lawn every morning at 6:30 a.m. That’s amazing. There’s great ethnic food and no major downside, except for the fact you’re not in Silicon Valley.

COLLISON: What about the broader phenomenon of DC?

COWEN: The work ethic there is pretty strong. The level of talent, it’s very much a monoculture. It’s the ultimate company town, but I think those are creative. I think it’s a creative city, typically, in destructive ways. I have highly mixed feelings about that. I don’t think the surrounding counties should be as wealthy as they are. On net, I’d rather see government be much smaller and civil liberties be more respected.

So I have a love-hate relationship with Washington. I’d never want to live in the city. I’ve always lived in suburbs. Northern Virginia, I love much more than DC. And I go to Washington, it feels like a strange, bizarre place, but still acutely aware of its connection to the ancient world, which hardly anywhere else in America has, and that’s really important. It’s done something nowhere else in the world has, and it’s still the single most important place in what is an improving world.

COWEN: Stability is underrated, but there’s also status quo bias, so this is tricky. I think the Western world takes stability for granted because we’ve had so much of it for so long. And our basic model, as in macroeconomics, you overweight your last 20 or 30 years.

Since, let’s say — the election of Ronald Reagan, end of the Cold War, fall of the Berlin Wall — so many good things have happened. It’s mostly been stable, and the worst predictions haven’t come true. I think that’s exactly what makes this a dangerous point in time — that we’re not geared toward the kind of risk taking, imaginative thinking we need to stop this from being the next 1910.

COLLISON: Can you say more on that?

COWEN: I see a creeping deterioration of the belief in individual liberty as an important idea, rule of law, cosmopolitanism, just general respect and decency, even in some very good, nice countries. And this is one of them. I see that as getting weaker. I think it’s maybe a smaller move than a lot of the worriers are saying. But still, even when the trend is in that direction at all, it could have a self-fulfilling momentum. And that’s much more dangerous than a lot of people realize.

Brexit, I’m not sure will be a big deal, economically speaking, but it’s a strong negative from a cultural point of view. That Turkey has fallen apart the way it has, that some of the Middle East is still up in flames, that Russia and China are much less free than some number of years ago. Those, to me, are major, major negatives at a cultural level, not tangible, that we’re underrating its importance.

COWEN: They’re terrible. We should allow much more building. Much more of this country should be like Houston and parts of Texas. But that said, I’ve become a slight contrarian on this lately. I wonder if the Bay Area isn’t the one place in the world where building restrictions might make some sense because most of you want the restrictions. Even if not you in the room, you out there in this area. So removing the restrictions would be a tax. It would be great for the people who moved in.

But if you’re all producing these amazing global public goods, and the federal government is going to raise taxes on you anyway, I promise this. I don’t care who wins the next five elections, your taxes are going up. State, city, local, whatever. And then we put this new tax on you and you all are the Atlases out there. I don’t know if loosening building here would tax your productivity or increase it. But I’d at least consider the notion. This is the one place in the world where we shouldn’t loosen building restrictions.

COLLISON: Can you apply that argument in reverse? Do you think Silicon Valley would be better off if it had half the population?

COWEN: I don’t live here. I don’t know how bad the traffic is, and I suspect the people who are the most productive have workarounds. They can afford to live where they want, for instance.

COLLISON: I think a lot of us spend a lot of time in traffic.

COWEN: But it seems to me, it’s a pretty finely honed structure. It’s evolved the way it has and to cut it in half or shrink it, it’s probably a big mistake.

COLLISON: Just to make sure I understand, you’re saying the tax would be the other people around us? Our personal experiences of the area would somehow be diminished?

COWEN: The general culture would change; it would be less intense. It would be like taking Florentine Renaissance and injecting into it 50,000 people from Naples. Nothing against Naples. I love Naples, in fact, more than Florence. But I suspect that would have been a mistake back then. So I worry, if you have too many people move into this uniquely weird, diverse monoculture, you could wreck it. Just a cautionary note, I’m agnostic, but I’ve started having this worry lately.

COLLISON: Do you generally believe in the idea of increasing returns to scale of knowledge clusters?

COWEN: Yes, absolutely. But again, you need funny kinds of insulation, too. It’s having both that makes a place special. So you don’t want a completely open system. You want a rhetoric that, “Oh, it’s all so open and incredibly fantastic . . .”

COWEN: But that it absolutely isn’t at the same time.

COWEN: And I feel that every time I come here. It’s great.

COLLISON: Are we still in the Great Stagnation?

COWEN: Probably, but the last year, I’ve seen a lot of signs — partial signs — we’re getting out of it. The last year, wage growth was pretty strong, and I hadn’t been expecting that. I wouldn’t change my mind based on one year of data, but one year is a lot more than nothing.

What I see on the ground in terms of integrating, better manipulation of information with actual real world processes. And I’ve seen, again — not last year but I think four out of the last five years — healthcare costs have behaved in a somewhat sane manner. That’s been a big driver of living-standard and productivity problems. I’m not sure that we’ll stay on the right track, but I’ve seen four or five pretty encouraging signs. So I now hold the view, there’s a 30 percent chance we’re on the verge, right now, of climbing out of the Great Stagnation.

COLLISON: Can you say more on the second point you mentioned there? The particular kinds of technological change that you’re seeing?

COWEN: If all tech is, is spinning information more rapidly, it’s wonderful for the infovores: academics, journalists, tech people. But a lot of people are actually just as happy watching network TV with three channels and Mary Tyler Moore. Maybe they like Facebook a bit more, but the real advantage is when you can ease how molecules impact your body.

If driverless cars really scale, as I think they will, many commutes will be much better. That’s a lot less frustration for people. Right there, I would say, “Great Stagnation is over.” It’s not a slam dunk. I think there are more obstacles to them than you read about it in the popular press, but I think it’s highly likely we get it within the next 20 years in some manner.

COLLISON: Uber and self-driving cars and Airbnb and a bunch of these technology companies that are doing things in the real world, or some of these new biotech companies and so forth, they were all around two or three years ago, so why weren’t you more optimistic back then?

COWEN: AI, in the broad sense of that term, seems to have developed more quickly than people thought. And even in 2011, I wrote a book saying, “AI will develop more quickly than we think.” My book, Average Is Over. And since then, it’s developed more quickly than I thought.

COWEN: And how many different problems you can apply that to? We still don’t know. But each time, we seem to be positively surprised, and we’re still on that positive surprise curve.

COLLISON: What are you watching to tell whether or not we have in fact exited the Great Stagnation?

COWEN: I think the best way would be not to view any media at all. And write down on a given day, “What molecules impacted my body?” People, they’re upset about Trump. Obviously, there are risks, things that are bad, but it’s also a healthy exercise. Write down each day, “The Trump molecules, did they impact my body today?” And in some ways, they will. But it’s a very different perspective. So if you stop reading about tech and AI and whatever, and just write down a bit on this. Keep a molecules diary. That’s when you’ll know — when your molecules diary gets really exciting.

COLLISON: [laughs] I’ll, for the moment, leave it at that. Do you want to take maybe three or four questions from the audience here? We have a microphone over here.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi, Tyler. My question was, a lot of us look at issues or read about issues and then think, “Oh, what would Tyler Cowen think about this?” and go to your blog and try to pass off your views as our own.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: I was wondering, who is that person for you, a sort of economist’s economist, if you will?

COWEN: I think the important thing about the contemporary world is how you manipulate your networks in your clusters. I don’t think any one person is very good on Twitter, no matter how smart or clever they may be. And I don’t think any one blogger is very good at all. So there’s a kind of embedded algorithm in blogs, Twitter, other social media.

If you’re really good at reading the system, that’s when you learn things. That’s extremely powerful. And every day, I try to train, retrain myself in reading the system. And I feel that’s a skill I’ve become pretty good at. But I’m always working on it every single day. That’s the one thing, I’m always, “How can I improve this?” obsessively. I guess that would be my advice, to downgrade the individuals and try to understand properties of these systems better.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hi. I grew up in the Rust Belt, and I’ve watched a lot of large companies, tech companies, come in and try to build hubs — technology hubs — in those areas. And invariably, they move in and then five years later, they close down. If they can’t be tech clusters, what can they be? Or maybe they can be tech clusters and they’re just doing it wrong. What should they do?

COWEN: I think the final number of tech clusters will be quite small: the Bay Area and several parts of China, Israel being a much smaller but still potent one. I think it will shock people how few tech clusters develop. Because it’s a fragile ecosystem. It’s about project evaluation, its closeness to the number of major financial centers, and there are relatively few of those.

Now you’re asking, “What will those areas become?” Well, empty, I hope. But I understand the transitional problems, and I think one thing you’ll see from the Trump administration is a big redistribution of income back to those regions. And it will actually solve some problems.

In the longer run, I’m not sure how that will work out. When you want to neglect a region and have it empty, and when you want to try to keep it going, that’s a tough call. But I think we’re going to see big changes, like with Medicaid. There’ll be block grants, perhaps, given out on a formula that rewards Rust Belt states.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: I wanted to connect two points that came up tonight. First, you are the original, or the pinnacle, of an infovore. I estimate that you process about a kilo of books a year, and at the same time, you also have a great social circle. So, how would you say friendship adds something besides the information feed of talking to people like Robin Hanson? What’s the friendship better than, say, reading literature about Robin Hanson?

COWEN: It’s very important to keep yourself engaged and motivated. And for me, a good rule of friends is to really try to be myself and be willing to be weird, if it’s even weird, and let people self-select around that, to some extent. And that’s worked well for me, more than trying to make friends.

Friends tell you when you’re completely off the mark. It’s companionship, common sense of purpose. It’s really, really important to be working with people at least you have friendly ties with. Even if they don’t feel like you’re friends with a capital F, in the sense that a Russian would use that word.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Hey. I was talking with a friend of mine about possible next start-ups that we could start, and we’re thinking about starting a religion. Something maybe vaguely Taoist, compatible with modern science, but hopefully something that gives people a sense of purpose, religious community, hopefully increases happiness. I loved hearing your thoughts earlier. Do you have any tips or any ideas?

COWEN: I think you need to stop smiling if you’re going to start a religion.

COWEN: There’s a severity to it, some of which might be feigned. It’s quite difficult to pull off in the contemporary world. So I think my advice — I don’t give that much advice — but maybe my advice is not to do it.

COWEN: The entry barriers are high. And the religions we have are quite rich and well developed. And what you would have to be to succeed, I suspect, is someone who wouldn’t be at this talk.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: What’s the next great political party that doesn’t exist yet?

COWEN: I think America will have its current two-party system for a very long time to come. The barriers to a third party are very high. The Trump experience shows how flexible parties are, whether one likes that or not. I think the Democrats will do their own version of this, in exactly what direction, I’m not sure. But my prediction is no major new or third party here for the foreseeable future. How long was our last new party? My goodness, you’re going back into the 19th century.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: My question’s two-folded, so it stays as one question. [laughs]

AUDIENCE MEMBER: At the beginning, you were talking about basic income and how it won’t be feasible. Do you think that if we ever did get into a world where this was a thing, then perhaps it would increase culture and creativity because people now have all this free time to use? Or do you think it would just end up going to waste? That’s the first half, so it stays as one.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: And the second part is, you were also talking about AI in the broader sense, and how it’s developing rapidly, and how it’s a bigger thing than we thought it would be. Do you think we have a future where our creativity and culture stems from AI and things they imagine and build?

COWEN: In reverse order. First, in chess, so much of the creativity already stems from AI, computers playing chess. I’ve listened to computer-composed music, art. I don’t think it’s impressive yet, but I don’t rule it out by any means. So I think, at some point, those molecules will impinge on me.

Guaranteed annual income — I could imagine that working pretty well in countries like Australia and Denmark, smaller markets where life is already less harsh in some ways, and there’s more collaboration, and the work ethic is understood differently to begin with, and they have more cohesion than the United States.

But I am an American exceptionalist. We have this unique vision, a kind of extreme Puritanism, adopting personal projects that are work based and obsessively seeing them through in a determined way that I think is so special that, say, I never felt when I lived in New Zealand, a wonderful country. They can do UBI. But I don’t want it here. I’d rather keep that culture. I think it will do the world more good. And I think it also means we never will adopt UBI, or not any time soon.

COLLISON: You write a lot about mood affiliation and the problems within it. And you write about this despite the fact that, I think, you believe that cognitive biases are themselves overrated. Can you, just for the folks here, quickly describe your current take on mood affiliation and what it is? And then, what is something that people here don’t believe and really don’t want to hear because of our own sort of collective Bay Area/Silicon Valley mood affiliation?

COWEN: Mood affiliation was a concept I first coined to refer to people who judge arguments by the mood of the argument. There are some writers — maybe they’ll remain nameless — but they’re optimistic. If an argument is optimistic, they think the argument is more likely to be correct: “Well, things have been getting better.” I’m not saying that carries no weight, but be a very strict Bayesian, not just because the mood feels comfortable.

A lot of very contemporary partisan debate is really about moods. If you feel someone is not condemning something with the right mood, you’ll reject the attached substantive claim. So a lot of the exercise I do on the blog is trying to teach myself how to detach and how to unbundle things, and inter-temporally substitute moods and contain bundles of optimistic, pessimistic, condemning, approving, tolerant, intolerant — whatever moods — at multiple levels at the same time, in some way.

The Bay Area strikes me as having a lot of pearl clutching and a reputation for thinking it’s more tolerant than it is, and I think that’s true of both coasts. I think, in general, all cultures are oblivious. And America, in particular its coasts, tend to think, “We’re the cosmopolitan side of American culture.” And I really don’t believe that. I think you’re a uniquely brilliant, twisted, inward-looking, diverse monoculture, and I’m very glad you are.

COLLISON: [laughs] Wait, wait, wait. You’ve already accused us of that. I want something that you, yourself believe or are quite confident is true but that, again, we don’t want to hear.

COWEN: Well, that’s really the main lecture I want to give. Religion is underrated. I think, in general, people in California overrate the efficacy of government. I think libertarians underrate it. But if we’re in California, I guess I can’t not make that point. And you have unique advantages here. You have the cluster. So there’s a lot of things you can do and get away with that don’t work in a more general way, like raising the minimum wage to some level. That cluster gives you enormous rents.

The world is not built out of clusters like that, so I would just say, be careful about overgeneralizing from your experience here. But so many things, we’re like, “I’m sure my view is right; California’s wrong.” I don’t think that’s the right way to go about it.

I would say, “Oh, I like Southern California better than I like it here.” Maybe that’s unacceptable. I think Los Angeles is the greatest city in the world. I’d love to live there; it has the best ethnic food. There’s something about it, the way it’s a cosmopolitan city, sense of openness. Someone once said, “What’s real there is so phony and what’s phony is so real.” It’s always surprising me, and I love their diverse monoculture. My favorite part of this country.

COLLISON: [laughs] Tyler Cowen, thank you very much.|||

Cowen and Collison discuss diverse monocultures, macroeconomics, Donald Trump, George Mason econ, Peter Thiel, Brian Eno, Thomas Schelling, Twitter, and of course, marginal Revolution.