Crypto-eyes are on Tokyo, where Japanese electronic retailer Bic Camera announced two shops would begin accepting Bitcoin as payment for goods, with thousands more to rollout the service in coming months. A number of intrepid YouTubers recorded themselves exchanging Bitcoin for actual goods, and lest these moments become trees falling in remote forests, The Coinist is here to explain why this matters!

In 2010, a Bitcoin acolyte and computer programmer named Laszlo Hanyecz convinced some schmo he'd met in an online Bitcoin forum to accept Bitcoin for a couple of pizza pies. The incident turned into a national headline, since Bitcoin, to most observers, had no value. But hark! Here was Bitcoin used as a medium for trade. Laszlo was folk hero and Bitcoin did have value. The upsetting piece of the story: poor Laszlo paid ten thousand Bitcoin for the pizzas. At today's rate, that's $12 million for some Papa John's. The Coinist hopes Laszlo got the garlic dipping sauce as well.

Though years have passed and Bitcoin has matured, vendors have not flocked to accept the cryptocurrency as payment for goods. There are any number of reasons for this: Bitcoin seems fake to the uninitiated. It can't be held, passed across a counter, bitten, folded. One needs to place a fair shake of trust in the system underpinning the electronic currency, and with paper money and credit cards as options, there's no huge incentive to invest in a new system. To boot, Bitcoin remains less liquid than paper currency. A US dollar is easy to cache, put in a bank or turn around and spend. Even in Tokyo, Bitcoin's new mecca, there remain fewer than a dozen Bitcoin ATMs (according to Coin ATM Radar), which can turn your Bitcoin into cash. Though Bitcoin exchanges are more and more accessible to the common computer owner, there is a learning curve. And with users of Bitcoin counting fewer than ten million globally, the demand for Bitcoin-accepting vendors remains low.

But, scream The Coinist's vast throngs of underlings, the world of the future will accept Bitcoin, and we will dispense with wallets in favor of all-purpose smart phones on which we will hold our cryptocurrencies, and payment will be exchanged without so much as a hint of friction! And herein lies the potential of Bitcoin. As more vendors accept the nascent form of payment, spenders won't carry change in their pockets or cash in their money clips. What's more, this future is not far off. Japanese retailer Recruit Lifestyle plans to accept Bitcoin in as many as a quarter of a million shops. By summer. This summer. The future might not be here yet, but it's sure close. In keeping with the times, The Coinist has opened a branch in Kyoto with plans to keep a finger on the pulse of the vanguard of Bitcoin retail.

This week, The Coinist is not going to tell you what to do with your cash or your crypto-coins. We, in the offices, are afraid to appear too frenzied about the current boom cycle. We would, however, like to direct you toward Jeremy Liew, the man behind the first venture capital infusion into Snapchat. The Coinist is not interested in the ghost icon, Silicon Valley's current darling. The Coinist is, however, enjoying Mr. Liew's belief that Bitcoin could reach $500,000 by 2030 due to increased demand, a finite supply and the disruptive nature of cryptocurrency. Along with Blockchain CEO Peter Smith, Liew built an economic model around Bitcoin that has holders (or, in Bitcoin parlance, hodlers) salivating. As with all Bitcoin evangelizing, (and, as we at The Coinist have gotten fond of saying) take your Bitcoin news with a grain of salt. It's all still ones and zeros.

Good luck in all of your crypto-endeavors this week. We'll be reading up. And hodling...|||

