Primarily, let me say thank You for the kudos.

As tawk.to’s founder, there are two things I’d like to clarify:

If you were about to enter a market, and someone is giving out the shit for free (even if it's slightly worse: which tawk.to is definitely not), I'm pretty sure 99.99% would never risk their time and money on such a "biz idea". So what the fuck is going on here?

When we launched, tawk.to we would most certainly have been considered a late entrant.

The incumbents that came before us (many of whom have responded to this post) paved the way well before we entered - though that didn’t scare us, as what was available out in the market, simply didn’t fit our use-case.. and more importantly, didn’t solve the problem(s) that businesses were having as well as they could have.

At the time, we took a punt that there were other companies out there that felt the same way we did :

Tawk.to offers 24x7–365 live support. We never close, you can always reach us.

Just being available to help customers get the widget installed, has been a massive differentiator for our business.

Just being “Free” was NEVER going to be enough - tawk.to had to be the best.

This month, we’re on target to hit a pretty significant milestone of serving our widget to over 1 Billion unique visitors. To put that in perspective, almost 1/3 of every single internet user will interact with a tawk.to widget this month.

So now you’re asking yourself.. how do we manage to ship a feature packed product - in 27 different languages, to tens of millions of visitors every single day whilst providing 24x7–365 live support to 650,000+ business users completely for free, and still manage to keep our lights on?

If you are thinking of building your own chat software, and you think that you can do a better job than what is available in the market place, or have an idea of how to differentiate your service offering to gain (or grow) market share; then I say go for it!

Hell.. I’ll go as far as to say that I’m available to give you some advice on how to go about it, this pie is big enough for everyone to eat - connect with me, I’d be most happy to have a chat with you. Don’t let competitors in a market place scare you.

Many entrepreneurs fear that a crowded market place means there is is no room for new entrants, though tawk.to has proven the opposite to be true. With careful planning; a solid strategy for growth and a tight USP you can compete as well as anyone else - regardless of when you decide to enter.

You need only look as far as Nokia? Kodak? Blackberry? and Yahoo? to recognize that just because a brand was market leader at one point in time, it doesn’t mean 2 girls/guys in a garage can’t build, launch & compete.|||

