I am now starting a Feature Friday section, where I feature someone I admire and share their creativity, skills, and input with all of you!

I would love to introduce you to my dear friend Diana. I have known her for a whopping 20 years-ish (!!!). She is not in the food industry, but is a hard-working pharmacist, wife, and dog momma. So many people, especially nowadays, have such high demanding lifestyles, that dinner kit companies like Blue Apron or Gobble are making a killing. But which one is best? Here is Diana’s feedback regarding both companies and the pros and cons of each to help make it easier for you to pick the best fit.

I work about 10 hours a day, I’m married, and I’m a newbie cook. So when I first heard about meal kit services like Blue Apron, I knew I had to try it out! It sounded like a dream come true! Every week, you get new exciting recipes and all the fresh ingredients required to make each one, delivered straight to your door. This saves you a trip to the grocery store as well as time spent on meal planning. So far, I’ve tried two different ones called Blue Apron and Gobble, each for about a month and this is my comparison of the two.

PRICE. More expensive than Blue Apron. It costs $11.95 per meal if you order 6 or more meals and $13.95 per meal if you only order 4 meals. If you are ordering 6 meals per week, it costs $71.70 total (delivery included). However, the ingredients are never frozen so I think of it as a gourmet tastier version of a TV dinner.  Since a lot of it is premade, you don’t get to learn how to make for example, the sauce or know exactly what went into it.

In conclusion, both Blue Apron and Gobble are convenient because of the ingredient and recipe delivery and both result in delicious meals! Blue Apron is cheaper and tastes fresher, but Gobble is a lot easier and faster. One isn’t better than the other. I think the decision comes down to your lifestyle and priorities. Would you rather save time or money? Either way, I highly recommend trying one of these if you’ve never done it before, especially if you’re new to cooking or want to learn some new recipes! It’s also great for busy people who work long hours. If you don’t have a lot of time to go grocery shopping or sit and come up with meal plans for the week, this is for you!

*All photos and opinions are that of Diana.|||

