Never tell California the odds. Not only has the state recovered from its record-breaking drought, it did so in record time. According to a new NOAA study looking at 445 years of climate data, California had a 1 percent chance of breaking the drought in just two years.

You remember the drought, right? Between 2012 to 2015, California’s epic dry spell—its worst in recorded history—depleted reservoirs, melted mountain snow, and forced farmers and cities to recklessly suck up groundwater reserves. Things got so dire that, in 2014, governor Jerry Brown signed a state of emergency curtailing water use for cities and official business. Then came 2016’s El Niño, then 2017’s commute-clogging, weekend-ruining, and infrastructure-crippling onslaught of storms. These two years of successive soaking prompted Brown, barely a week ago, to announce that the state’s drought emergency had ended.

As far as twists go, this is about on par with blowing a 3-1 lead in the NBA finals.

Like its basketball teams, California’s climate has a variable record. Rain and snowfall can fluctuate as much as 50 percent year-to-year. The only problem is those swings don’t happen with discernible regularity. And climate change is making them more dramatic. “What we see in the historic record is an increase in the likelihood of warm and dry periods, punctuated by wet conditions,” says Noah Diffenbaugh, climate scientist at Stanford’s Woods Institute for the Environment.

And that history goes way deeper than the hundred or so years people have been seeding the state with thermometers and rain gauges. “What we used are existing climate reconstructions based on tree ring data, which show river and stream flows,” says Eugene Wahl, the study’s lead author and a paleoclimatologist for NOAA’s National Center for Environmental Information.

If you remember from summer camp, tree rings roughly equate to years, and thick ones mean that year was wet. Wahl correlated ring samples with stream flow data from the surrounding area—and by comparing stream flow rates to precipitation and temperature data from the same year, made a reasonable linkage between tree rings and climate.

To make sure their correlation was sound, Wahl and his co-authors calibrated tree rings to stream flow for over 60 years of data—from 1916 to 1977. Even better, they tested the results by using it to predict precipitation and temperature from 1896 to 1915, years they also had instrument records for. Once they were confident the method worked, they used it to recreate streamflow volumes across California as far back as 1571. And because the state has so many old trees, they were able to reconstruct the climate at a fairly fine scale (1/2 a degree latitude by 1/2 a degree longitude, for any geography geeks in the audience). And they did this for California’s many climate regions—from the wet northwest, to the arid southeast.

But scientists have been piecing together past climates since the early days of geology. All this legwork was really so Wahl and his team really could figure out the rate at which California recovered from its most recent drought relative to those in the past. “So what we did was look at the lowest precipitation deficits and see where they were in relation to the years that followed,” says Wahl. Imagine each of those low years is an empty bucket. The following year, the bucket gets a little more water. A little more the following year. Then less. Then more. Less. More. More. More. On and on until the bucket is full.

Those four and a half centuries of data revealed that the median recovery time for a dry spell like the one that happened between 2012 and 2015 was 39 years. And say you don’t trust those historical reconstructions? Using just the instrument data, the median recovery time is still 29 and a half years. That puts a two-year recovery like the one California just saw at the skinny end of the distribution—a 1 percent chance.

Wahl is careful to say that his study only looks at dryness, not drought. The latter is a more formal definition that accounts for things like soil moisture, which is impossible to recreate by proxy. Drought also tends to imply how much water is available for people and crops. Because Wahl and his co-authors were able to recreate dryness conditions on such fine geographic scales, their analysis shows how regions that are now California’s most populous and agriculturally valuable are also the ones that typically get hit hardest by dry spells—and take the longest to recover.

Information like this is critical in California—a drought-prone economic powerhouse. “We spend a lot of money every year recovering from climate and weather disasters,” says Diffenbaugh. Such as the drought, which cost California about $600 million. But studies like this could be endangered: President Trump’s budget proposes huge cuts to NOAA’s climate monitoring divisions. Anyone wanna take a bet on how that will turn out?|||

According to new research, the state had a 1 percent chance getting enough rain in just two years to end its epic drought.