This document specifies identifiers and challenges required to enable the Automated Certificate Management Environment (ACME) to issue certificates for IP addresses.

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

This Internet-Draft will expire on September 28, 2017.

Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document authors. All rights reserved.

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

The Automatic Certificate Management Environment (ACME) [I-D.ietf-acme-acme] only defines challenges for validating control of DNS host name identifiers which limits its use to being used for issuing certificates for these identifiers. In order to allow validation of IPv4 and IPv6 identifiers for inclusion in X.509 certificates this document defines a new challenge type and specifies how challenges defined in the original ACME specification can be used to validate IP identifiers.

In this document, the key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119 [RFC2119] and indicate requirement levels for compliant ACME-Wildcard implementations.

ACME only defines the identifier type “dns” which is used to refer to fully qualified domain names. If a ACME server wishes to request proof that a user controls a IPv4 or IPv6 address it MUST create an authorization with the identifier type “ip”. The value field of the identifier MUST contain the textual form of the address as defined in RFC 1123 [RFC1123] Section 2.1 for IPv4 and in RFC 4291 [RFC4291] Section 2.2 for IPv6.

An identifier for the IPv6 address 2001:db8::1 would be formatted like so:

When creating an authorization for a identifier with the type “ip” the following challenge types MAY be used to perform validation.

With Reverse DNS validation the client proves control of an IP address by provisioning a TXT resource record containing a designated value for a specific validation domain name constructed using the value of the PTR record for the reverse mapping of the address.

A client responds to this challenge by constructing a key authorization from the “token” value provided in the challenge and the client’s ACME account key. The client then computes the SHA-256 digest [FIPS180-4] of the key authorization. The record provisioned to the authoritative DNS server is the base64url encoding of this digest.

The client constructs the validation domain name by prepending the label “_acme-challenge” to the domain name referenced in the PTR resource record for the IN-ADDR.ARPA [RFC1034] or IP6.ARPA [RFC3596] reverse mapping of the IP address. The client then provisions a TXT record with the digest for this name.

For example, if the IP address being validated is 2001:db8::1 and its IP6.ARPA mapping had the following PTR record:

then the client would provision the following DNS record:

The response to the Reverse DNS challenge provides the computed key authorization to acknowledge that the client is ready to fulfill this challenge.

On receiving a response, the server MUST verify that the key authorization in the response matches the “token” value in the challenge and the client’s ACME account key. If they do not match, then the server MUST return an HTTP error in response to the POST request in which the client sent the challenge.

To validate a DNS challenge, the server performs the following steps:

If all of the above verifications succeed, then the validation is successful. If no PTR or TXT DNS records are found, or the returned TXT records do not contain the expected key authorization digest, then the validation fails.

IP identifiers MAY be used with the existing “http-01” and “tls-sni-02” challenges from RFC XXXX Sections XXX and XXX respectively. To use IP identifiers with these challenges their initial DNS resolution step MUST be skipped and the address used for validation MUST be the value of the identifier.

The existing “dns-01” challenge MUST NOT be used to validate IP identifiers.

Adds a new type to the Identifier list defined in Section XXX of RFC XXXX with the label “ip” and reference RFC XXXX.

Adds a new type to the Challenge list defined in Section XXX of RFC XXXX with the label “reverse-dns-01”, identifier type “ip”, and reference RFC XXXX.

Add the value “ip” to the identifier type column for the “http-01” and “tls-sni-02” challenges.

Given the often short delegation periods for IP addresses provided by various service providers CAs MAY want to impose shorter lifetimes for certificates which contain IP identifiers. They MAY also impose restrictions on IP identifiers which are in CIDRs known to be assigned to service providers who dynamically assign addresses to users for indeterminate periods of time.|||

This document specifies identifiers and challenges required to enable the Automated Certificate Management Environment (ACME) to issue certificates for IP addresses.