There is a common tension between ideas and execution. On the one hand, working on a bad idea can often burn up resources. On the other hand, without execution, no idea can ever come to fruition.

The new conventional wisdom is that execution is king. Lots of articles chastise readers for foolishly believing that ideas are important. Ideas are a dime a dozen, execution is everything.

But a problem with this reasoning is that ideas and execution are intertwined to the degree that separating them is not particularly useful. Ideas often include details about execution. If an idea is specific enough, execution should be easy. On the other hand, if an idea is truly brilliant, execution is probably very hard (no matter what they say, people don’t embrace revolutions quickly.)

In my view, arguing about the importance of ideas vs. execution is silly. Yes, ideas without execution are worthless. But look at the other way around: great execution of a terrible idea? That’s worse than worthless. I’m a marketing phd student, and all of my professors keep old, failed products in their offices. Remember McDonald’s salad shaker? That is a good example of an expensive failure, which I chalk up to “good execution, bad idea.” Crystal Pepsi. Cosmopolitan Yogurt. (Yes, that happened.)

There are lots of examples of “good idea, bad execution” too: all mp3 players besides the iPod. The Zune may top the list.

Let’s move beyond this false dichotomy now. Ideas are important, execution is important, and the two things interact continuously. They form a feedback loop.

You have an idea, and it tells you how to execute, to some degree. Then, you execute, test, and you learn stuff, and that new knowledge feeds back into the idea.

The key to everything is experimentation costs. Seriously, this is a big, big deal.

Let me rewind a bit. In 2013, I read a book called “Uncontrolled: The Surprising Payoff of Trial-and-Error for Business, Politics, and Society.” This book changed my entire mindset.

You see, humans are a bit arrogant about their beliefs. We tend to think we know what will happen, how something will play out, and whether an idea is “good” or not. But in truth, we are terrible at that stuff. Uncontrolled basically makes the argument in favor of A/B testing for more stuff. That doesn’t do it complete justice, but it’s the gist.

Now, back to experimentation costs: this is why they are so important. The big drawback of A/B testing is that you need to do a lot of them to find something really good, because most stuff doesn’t work.

Let me dwell on this last point. Most new ideas aren’t better than what is already happening. This is because of selection effects that accumulate. There are so many ideas that have great theoretical appeal, but don’t end up surviving reality. A recent example of this is the trucking startup Palleter. They started with an appealing story about inefficiencies in the trucking industry, but the story fell apart as the founders learned that there wasn’t as much low-hanging fruit to be had after all.

This happens all the time, of course. The reason is that industries, organizations, and markets all change over time and stuff that doesn’t work dies. This means, quite often, that so-called “new ideas” have actually been tried before, and didn’t survive.

Let me provide another example: in just over 50 years, Albert Einstein published 300+ times. He is known for 5 of those publications. Think about it. If Einstein is not smart enough to figure out in advance which of his works would be blockbusters, why do so many of us think we can?

Tim Hartford, an economist, makes this point better than I can. He refers to this as The God Complex: the idea that a person is smart enough to devise the one true solution to a difficult, complicated problem. In short, we often can’t.

The way to break this is through lots of trial and error, and updating.

I’m not saying theory has no value, of course. If you doubt, go back and read the first section on the value of ideas. What I am saying is that trial and error is way more valuable than we want to admit.

Now, the important thing to notice: in a complex system, when you want to find a good solution (or a good new product), trial and error is powerful. But to implement it, you need low experimentation costs. Otherwise, this kind of “brute force” approach may not work, because you may run out of resources before you hit something good.

T.H. Palmer had it right on the nose: try, try again. Just make sure you can try again.|||

There is a common tension between ideas and execution. On the one hand, working on a bad idea can often burn up resources. On the other hand, without execution, no idea can ever come to fruition. The…