These release notes for Ubuntu 17.04 (Zesty Zapus) provide an overview of the release and document the known issues with Ubuntu 17.04 and its flavors.

Ubuntu 17.04 will be supported for 9 months until January 2018. If you need Long Term Support, it is recommended you use Ubuntu 16.04 LTS instead.

Find the links to release notes for official flavors here.

Images can be downloaded from a location near you.

You can download ISOs and flashable images from from:

Note that the server upgrade will use GNU screen and automatically re-attach in case of dropped connection problems.

There are no offline upgrade options for Ubuntu Desktop and Ubuntu Server. Please ensure you have network connectivity to one of the official mirrors or to a locally accessible mirror and follow the instructions above.

Ubuntu 17.04 is based on the Linux release series 4.10.

We now support printers which allow printing without printer-specific drivers. These printers are IPP Everywhere and Apple AirPrint printers, but also some PDF, Postscript, and PCL printers work. This way connecting a printer gets as easy as connecting a USB stick.

Qemu has been updated to the 2.8 release.

See the Changelog for details.

Libvirt has been updated to version 2.5. See the Changelogs for details.

For administrators worth to consider is that depending on the system setup and huge page size availability the specification of a page size for hugepages in a guest xml can now be mandatory.

LXD, now at version 2.12, introduces support for GPU passthrough, including NVidia CUDA. A new storage API has also been added, allowing for the creation of multiple storage pools which can then be used to host containers or independent storage volumes.

And a number of new images have been added, including support for Ubuntu Core 16.

See the Release Notes as well as the stable release announcement for more detail.

As a tech preview DPDK is now also available for ppc64el. This includes the latest improvements made in version 16.11.1 in general, but also further improvements to enable the i40e PMD and vfio-pci scanning on spapr platforms.

Ubuntu 17.04 includes the latest OpenStack release, Ocata, including the following components:

Please refer to the OpenStack Ocata release notes for full details of this release of OpenStack.

OpenStack Ocata is also provided via the Ubuntu Cloud Archive for OpenStack Ocata for Ubuntu 16.04 LTS users.

WARNING: Upgrading an OpenStack deployment is a non-trivial process and care should be taken to plan and test upgrade procedures which will be specific to each OpenStack deployment.

Make sure you read the OpenStack Charm Release Notes for more information about how to deploy Ubuntu OpenStack using Juju.

Cloud-init has been updated to be more strict when identifying the cloud platform that it is running on and searching for datasources. The driver for doing this is to:

For more information see the mailing list post and bug 1669675 for details.

As is to be expected, with any release, there are some significant known bugs that users may run into with this release of Ubuntu 17.04. The ones we know about at this point (and some of the workarounds), are documented here so you don't need to spend time reporting these bugs again:

OpenVPN 2.4 removed its tls-remote option. Current setups using that option will fail to work. Update your configuration to use verify-x509-name instead.

The release notes for the official flavours can be found at the following links:

Your comments, bug reports, patches and suggestions will help fix bugs and improve the quality of future releases. Please report bugs using the tools provided.

If you want to help out with bugs, the Bug Squad is always looking for help.

If you would like to help shape Ubuntu, take a look at the list of ways you can participate at

You can find out more about Ubuntu on the Ubuntu website and Ubuntu wiki.

To sign up for future Ubuntu development announcements, please subscribe to Ubuntu's development announcement list at:|||

