Bacteria-busting toothpastes that help prevent cavities in your teeth could be making small dents in the community of microbes in your gut—possibly allowing antibiotic-resistant bacteria to fill in—preliminary data suggests.

In a small study, women who switched to brushing with toothpaste that contained the antimicrobial triclosan saw a troubling shift in the microbes in their guts as well as a slight change in drug resistance, Stanford researchers report.

The data is preliminary—it has not been peer-reviewed or published in a journal yet—and the study was small, including women and infants from only 39 households. But, the findings fall in line with several other studies that found that triclosan and other common antimicrobials can cause subtle disruptions in all-powerful gut microbiomes.

Last fall, the Food and Drug Administration banned triclosan and 18 other antimicrobials from soaps. After years of reviewing data, the agency concluded that adding the chemicals to soaps did not make the soaps more effective at ousting germs—for one thing, people typically don’t wash their hands long enough for the antimicrobial effect to work. Plus, the chemicals posed potential risks.

Researchers have reported that triclosan can disturb microbial communities in the guts of rodents and fish and promote drug-resistance. In rats, it helped the nasty Staphylococcus aureus set up shop in the nose. Other studies have found that it may disrupt hormone signaling, specifically thyroid, testosterone, and estrogen regulation, which could cause a host of subtle developmental issues in exposed children. And after the chemicals are flushed down the drain, researchers have found them messing up the microbial communities that break down sewage in wastewater treatment plants.

Mounting data suggest antibacterial soaps do more harm than good Yet, triclosan and its ilk, such as triclocarban, are ubiquitous. Manufacturers have used them not just in soaps but in toothpastes, plastics, fabrics, and other household items. As such, triclosan can be found in people’s urine, blood, breast milk, and snot.

The FDA’s ban only applied to soaps, though. The agency was particularly focused on soaps because it became clearer and clearer that “antibacterial” soaps were no more effective than normal soap at getting rid of bacteria. But for other products, such as toothpastes, there is evidence of a benefit. Studies have found that adding triclosan to toothpaste is effective at helping to prevent gingivitis and plaque. And, without clear evidence of harms from triclosan-containing toothpastes, the FDA sees the benefits as outweighing potential risks. Triclosan is used most notably in Colgate toothpastes.

But scientists are still chasing down the potential health effects of triclosan and other antimicrobials. In the new study, Stanford researchers, led by Ami Bhatt and Julie Parsonnet, tried to assess the effects of triclosan on the gut microbiomes of new mothers and their infants. The team enrolled 39 mother-infant pairs and randomly gave 17 of them batches of triclosan-containing household products, including toothpastes, to use.

By collecting stool samples over the course of a year and examining them for their microbial composition, the researchers could track if the antimicrobial products had any effects. Overall, the team didn’t find big differences between the groups. Triclosan products didn’t seem to disrupt the development of the babies’ microbiomes. And the adults didn’t show major changes in microbial diversity.

But, there were subtle effects in the adults. In the months after women switched to using triclosan-containing toothpaste specifically, the amount of Proteobacteria in their guts increased. This group of bacteria include E. coli and Salmonella. Though not all members are harmful, many of them are known to be able to become broadly resistant to antibiotics. And booms in Proteobacteria in the gut are linked to “dysbiosis,” basically an out-of-sorts microbiome that can contribute to health problems, such as intestinal inflammation.

In terms of antibiotic resistance, the researchers didn’t find significant differences between the groups of mothers. But they did note an increase in one antibiotic resistance gene that makes bacteria resistant to penicillin and similar drugs and has been found in resistant oral bacteria.

The overall effects are minor, the authors note. But the findings suggest that “personal care products not covered by the FDA ban may play a role in the expansion of antibiotic-resistant species in the intestine,” they conclude.

The study has some big limitations. It’s very small, short, un-reviewed, and it didn’t completely control for antimicrobial exposures. Though the mothers given the triclosan-containing products did have more triclosan in their urine than the other mothers during the study, those other mothers had higher levels of triclosan than expected. This suggests that they had other products in their households, plastics for instance, that were shedding triclosan. With the ubiquity of these chemicals, it’s not surprising. But it means that triclosan's effects could be underestimated.

Still, the findings “highlight the need for consumer safety testing of consumer antimicrobial products on the human microbiome,” the authors said.|||

Small study finds minor, but troubling, disturbance in the microbial force.