Motorola has got all eyes on, just after it published a video that briefly teased their upcoming devices, owing to the company’s 44th anniversary. Supplementing it, now a group of images of, four of the upcoming Moto handsets, the Moto C, C Plus, Moto E4 and Moto Z2, has been surfaced, sourcing from @OnLeaks.

Moto C and C Plus

The Moto C segment is a new series from the company, certainly of budget smartphones. According to the leaked renders, the Moto C Plus will be quite slimmer than the Moto C; and we could see the camera bumped-up a bit, in the C Plus.

Both the devices comprise capacitive navigation buttons; LED-flash up front; a speaker placed at the rear side; and apparently the same screen-sizes. Though there aren’t any noticeable difference on the outer outlook, we expect the C Plus to pack a higher configuration inside, than the Moto C; like a better RAM, Storage and SoC.

From the leaked images, we could clearly see the antenna bands running across the Moto E4’s back; and well, it indicates that it will feature a metal back cover. If it’s so, then it will be a fresh new move, from the company.

Other than that we can see the new Moto E4, featuring a fingerprint scanner and a LED flash, at the front. It also consists a back-firing speaker grille, the aspect which we thought the company was disposing. Yes, considering the leak to be true, Moto is clinging on to the rear facing speakers.

The Moto Z, released last year, is well-known for its compatibility with the MotoMods; and, its successors are also greatly expected to retain the amity. Hence, we could simply say that the Moto Z2, will be very much similar to that of the Moto Z, in almost all the aspects. The newly leaked images also pretty much confirms that though there are a few visible changes.

The changes includes, a dual-LED flash and a new fingerprint scanner, both on the front; and a dual-camera on the back, which is expected to pay off the long running distress of poor camera performance, from the crowd. While the outer-look remains pretty same, we can expect up-gradations, in the CPU, probably a Snapdragon 835 processor; and a battery larger than 2,600mAh.|||

Motorola upcoming Budget friendly smartphones, Moto C, C Plus, E4 and Z2 Render images leaked online, sourcing from @OnLeaks.