As we took Thumbtack from 10 to 500 people and my team from 0 to 50, I interviewed more than 1000 candidates across dozens of roles. I realized interviewing is a craft that takes time to develop. As a leader at a growth-stage company, it was one of my most important tasks.

After sitting across the table from 1000 people — from new grads to seasoned execs — here are five things I learned:

Everyone knows it’s hard to find great people. A corollary of this is that it’s easy to miss great people. As an interviewer, I learned to be as concerned about false negatives as bad hires.

I quickly form impressions, but I learned to spend time trying to disprove those impressions. When a candidate stumbles on a question, I form a hypothesis that they’re bad at a given skill. But at first, I treat this as a hypothesis. I then ask another question or two or give them another scenario to react to. If they continue to struggle, I draw the conclusion. If they do better, I ask another question to dig further.

Candidates can get things wrong for a lot of reasons. Maybe your instructions weren’t clear. Maybe one flawed assumption sent them off course. Don’t give up too soon. Don’t let a good hire get away because you jumped to conclusions.

In my early days as an interviewer, too often I walked out of the room without a strong opinion on whether a candidate would be a good hire. Why? We’d had a nice conversation for 45 minutes, but the only skill I’d explored was whether they could communicate effectively.

Having a candidate solve a highly relevant problem in front of me was way more revealing. We’d have designers solve a problem with wireframes on a whiteboard. We’d give analysts time to dig into a data set and tell us what they learned. I wanted to understand a candidate’s thought process and have the opportunity to ask “why” when I’m wasn’t tracking their thinking. I tend to favor in-person exercises, but take-homes are also effective.

People cautioned me that exercises might seem insulting to more experienced candidates. I didn’t get that response. People we hired, rejected and who rejected us all consistently said that our exercise-heavy interview process was engaging and gave them confidence we were rigorous.

Especially when you get into manager, director and VP jobs, it’s tempting to make a page-long list of things you need a person to excel at. Sorry, no one is actually great at everything.

A thoughtful investor told us that if our list of skills was too long, we’d end up hiring to minimize weaknesses instead of hiring for strengths. We decided that as long as people’s abilities aligned with the core skills of the job, we preferred to have a team where people had spikes of brilliance, even if that meant they also had some rough edges. Generally, it’s easier to go from rough to competent than from competent to great.

I kept my interviews focused on going deep on a few skills. As a hiring manager, I made sure all interviews and our debrief discussions were equally focused. I clearly identified which skills were being tested in which interviews. During debriefs, I made a grid on the whiteboard with each key skill down the left and strengths / weaknesses across the top. I kept the decision focused on what we needed and avoided saying no based on less important factors.

The worst outcome is hiring someone who’s unmotivated and unexcited to be in a role. I’ve made this mistake, and each time the person left Thumbtack after consuming a lot of my emotional energy. At a high-growth startup like Thumbtack, people interview for roles that they see as “a foot in the door” even if they don’t really want that job.

I learned to not hire someone unless I was confident that there was strong alignment between what drove a person and the day-to-day responsibilities of a role.

If I simply asked people what drove them, they were generally smart enough to give an answer I liked. Therefore, I came up with a pair of questions that the team and I found to be very revealing.

I asked candidates to tell me about a time, at their most recent job, when they’d been really engaged and excited to come to work. I then asked them to tell me about a time when they’d been frustrated and disengaged. The latter question was often the most useful. Too often I heard them describing things that frustrated them that were exactly the day-to-day of the job they claimed to want. These questions saved me from at least a few bad hires.

The best people — of course — are the people I wanted. They’re the people you want. They’re also the people who have the most options. That means the interviewer is being evaluated as much as the candidate is. I wanted candidates to walk out saying, “I want to work at Thumbtack, in part because Jake is impressive.”

Especially when I had multiple interviews a day sandwiched between meetings, it was easy to use an interview as a chance to turn the presentation part of my brain off. However, it’s super important to be engaged and thoughtful with the candidate. How clearly I talked about my background and my passion for the company, and how thoughtfully I asked follow-up questions were key signals to the candidate.

More broadly, I wanted a candidate’s interview experience to give them a sense of what life would be like at Thumbtack. When a slate of interviews is engaging, and the interviewer shows deep understanding of the job in question, the candidate reasonably assumes that they’ll be challenged in similar ways if they join the team. Interviews are your best chance to show how great your company is, using both specifics and intangibles. I wanted the best, so I needed to put my best foot forward too.|||

(1) Try to disprove you initial impression. (2) More exercises. Less chitchat. (3) Only test for three skills that matter. (4) Understand what drives someone. (5) You’re being evaluated too.