BlueHostb was founded in 203, by Matt Heaton and Danny Ashworth.  It is a leading web solution service provider powering over 2 million websites Worldwide.

BlueHost has an affiliate program that allows you to join free and earn commission on every referral that you sent to them through your referral link.  As an affiliate with BlueHost, there is no cap on how much you can make.  You can promote BlueHose on your websites using your custom link and banners and earn $65 for every person who clicks on your link or banner and signup.  Click Here to become an affiliate with BlueHost now!

Free To Join  – it only takes a few minutes and it is completely free.  You will receive a unique tracking code, including link and banners to use on your website right away.

Unlimited Earings – There is no cap on the amount of commission you can earn.  You refer as many people as you would like and get paid for each of them.

Dedicated Team – The affiliate managers at Bluehost are committed to helping you succeed.  Always on hand with support, insight and personalized advice to help you.

Receive one-time referral fee for each person who signed up for a hosting account (Qualified Purchase).

Affiliate account must be activated at the time of referral

Affiliate must meet a minimum threshold of $100.00 USD before the first referral fee must be made.  This minimum threshold only applies to the first payment, all other fees will be issued immediately once all tax and address information is correct.

Affiliates are responsible for keeping all information up-to-date, such as postal and email address, name, payment, and tax and all other personal information, in order to receive payments on time.

Payments are sent using the PayPal mass payment system. Bluehost pays for the transaction fee associated with the mass payment system.

If you would prefer to receive payments by check, you must notify Bluehost and payments will be sent to the address you provide, but payment by check can take up to an additional 30 days to arrive.

In the event that Bluehost re-issues any payment, a USD$35 charge will apply and be deducted from the Affiliate’s earnings.

Affiliates are responsible for making sure they are able to accept payments. Please ensure that your bank or PayPal account can accept payments from US-based companies.

Affiliates are responsible for any and all fees, taxes, exchange rates, surcharges and other expenses incurred in order to receive their referral fees. Please check with your local banking institution or PayPal to find out if any of these apply for your account.

A $65 USD commission is made for each qualified person who is signed up through your affiliate link or banner.  The affiliate referral fees are determined approximately 45 days after the end of the month in which the Qualified Purchase is recorded. Payments are then processed and sent to Affiliates between the 16th of the month and the last day of the month.

see here for details on BlueHost hosting programs and pricing:|||

Web hosting site and affiliate marketing