In my role I am flying a lot. Haneda, Changi, Incheon. You name the Airport in Asia, likely I have been there. And for the first time in my life I am truly grateful that I am not flying in the United States.

From the distance it seems that the USA is further and further spiralling into a culture of excessive violence. That fills me with great sadness since I enjoyed living there for a while after the turn of the century.

In the latest case of ultra-violence was a paying customer of United Airlines violently yanked out his airplane seat. You likely have seen the video and/or pictures as the violent act was recorded of several phones and swiftly shared via social networks for the world to see.

This case is especially shocking, because could have happened to everyone at any single point in life. It was not a drunk or crazy person. Here it was an Asian doctor on the way home.

That’s why I want United Airlines to go out of business for it.

The punishment for this rash act needs to be harsh and it might come from the masses of travelers who are shocked like me about this unacceptable behaviour — Capitalism in the times of social media.

Whatever you think of Capitalism and regulation, in the end winning means , besides the notion to make a profit, to win the competition for the best product. In many cases, if you have a good product the market will follow. Only if customers decide to buy your product you are in business.

Of course in recent times Capitalism has changed. Platform capitalism is not revolving around creating the best product but use existing network effects to lock-in their existing customers into their ecosystem. Amazon, Facebook and Google are prime examples for this. The problem here is that regulation has not found an effective attack pattern yet. And the ongoing decline of retail is surely a sign of the times here as well.

In 2014, Peter Thiel wrote famously “competition is for losers” where he explains that he is interested in companies that aim towards achieving monopolies in their segments. Traditionally monopolies can charge any price they want for their products and the need to innovate to create competitive products diminishes. Only Trumpian’s might follow this line of thought.

Interestingly, Peter Thiel is using in his article the American Airline industry as an example for a market with large competition where margins are so razor-thin that, despite having a gross revenue of around 200 Billion USD in 2012, they only earned 37 cents per customer. From this he concludes that competition is bad.

But wait! In reality is the American Airline Industry is hardly competitive. On the contrary, and Peter I believe your reasoning is wrong, I am following here the line of thought outlined in this article by the New York Time. In the American Airline Industry is not enough competition ! 80% of the market is controlled by the four big carries reaping in 22 Billion in profits in 2015. In the business sciences we call that an Oligopoly.

For example, for several connections at a specific time there is no choice at all and thus no chance to choose the best product. If you are flying out of Newark 70% of all flights are operated by United. That quasi-monopoly on certain routes has effectively led to the unbelievable treatment of this passenger through United Airlines.

Think about it, how can it be possible that they could not find a single passenger to accept 800 USD to take the next flight. The ugly face of the monopoly is unveiled through the fact that the can treat their customers like shit without any repercussions. Because these customers don’t have an alternative!

And this is now where the power of communal or social media comes in. Millions of people in the US have seen this video and millions further worldwide. And I truly hope that this social connectivity will have a regulatory effect on the Airlines Industry in the United States. Social media could increase the price for bad customer experience into astronomical heights.

This could have been you. This could have been me. The bloody face of this doctor has become the symbol of mis-treatment of customers through corporations especially while traveling in the United States. And the ongoing rebirth of related content covering the incident proves that there is a price to pay.

But that’s what it is. Only a symbol. Social media is too fluid to battle dysfunctional markets and have a regulatory effect in the long run. Usually these shit-storms last for a couple of days and are then swiftly brushed away by the next outrage. How about another gun-laws discussion about the 8 year old who got killed in San Bernadino? Did Manafort get paid by Russia ? Was the airfield in Syria destroyed? Social Media is the only tool of passengers to create awareness for the unfair market conditions they have to exist in. If there is no choice you have to accept what is being handed to you.

And because of this I hope that United Airlines will cease to exist. A working capitalist model needs to punish the dramatic failure of large corporations to ensure the safety of their customers. The United Airlines disaster should send a clear message to the companies that overprice medicine, use bad food, pollute the environment, and violently mistreat their customers.

Who believes that a market works without taken care of your customers will lose.|||

In my role I am flying a lot. Haneda, Changi, Incheon. You name the Airport in Asia, likely I have been there. And for the first time in my life I am truly grateful that I am not flying in the United…