Google chrome was actually a fairly latecomer to the browser wars but was an immediate success that rapidly became the favorite of windows and mac users. Everything about chrome extension, from its nominal and extremely practical interface to its solid WebKit core and vigorous extension scheme, creates it hands down one of the greatest modes to access the web.

Sometimes web developers and designers couldn’t find their desired font on the webpage. WhatFont is the best extension to find it. This extension hover on the website and collects desired font. Other extensions may be easier for the developer but this extension is suitable for all.

Setting up different shortcut and buttons for every website is painful for web developers. This extension allows you to add multiple developing tools and toolbars over the same web page. This has access to all your data and history in order to provide you the best service.

This extension was previously named “Geisha”. This is the favorite extension for designers. You can easily visit hacker news, Behance, dribble and many more websites any kind of problem. It provides you inspiration news and motivational article fastest way.

You may wonder and curious to know that what is this website built with. For this kind of curiosity developers give you the BuiltWith Technology Profiler. With this extension you can easily acknowledge about the material that used to build that website.

Awesome screenshot is most popular and one of the best screen capture extension available for Chrome. You can capture any part web page, edit, and can share with friends easily. I personally, use this for my daily screen capture needs.

Pocket is best solution for saving useful links such as: articles, resource or anything. Default browser bookmarking system is messy, unorganized and sometimes its so hard to find useful bookmarks. If you start using pocket, I must say you will be fan of it someday. This chrome extension provides a pretty simple button to save link with a single click in your pocket account.

Detox is great extension to replace your facebook newsfeed with updates from your favorite websites such as: Behance, Dribble, Hackenews, Mashable etc.

The window resizer extension allows you resize your browser window on the go. By clicking on the icon in the menu bar creates a drop down menu of different window sizes which you will be able to customize.

Initially developed for firefox, Color Zilla enhances a multitude of color tools, such as an eyedropper, pallette viewer, color picker, and a gradient generator, to chrome.

Color tab is a color inspiration extension that will provide you an attractive latest color scheme every time you open a fresh new tab.

Perfect pixel is an extension that will allow you to include a semi-transparent image overlay on the top of the established HTML, letting you to carry out a per pixel comparison among them.

ProductHunt is a popular portal to showcase new creations such as: product, resource and startups. If you are always looking for something new, you will love it. This extension replaces your blank tab into product hunt showcase and displays recent hot and trending items.

If you still don’t know what buffer is, you are missing something really cool. Buffer is a great web service which gives you opportunity to update status and share link on multiple social profiles at a time. This extension provides simple buffer icon so, you can share instantly.

The Minimalist markdown editor chrome extension lets you to have preview markdown syntax as soon as you type. You can rapidly convert the markdown into HTML.

Originally established by Facebook, fb-flo is a chrome extension that will permit you to edit on-going functioning apps without requiring reloading. You can also live edit javascript, CSS, pictures, or any motionless resource.

Page Ruler is a great extension for drawing out and displaying the height, width and position of a web page. You can draw a ruler over a page. With this ruler you can manually update the size of the ruler and change the position of it.

Firebug Lite offers the rich visual demonstration that we are used to in Firebug when it drives to dom elements, HTML elements, and Box Model shading. It offers some cool features such as inspecting HTML elements with your mouse and live CSS editing feature.

This google chrome extension is freely available for applying custom web fonts through CSS. This extension lets you to rapidly apply google fonts to precise CSS selectors in order that you can get a quick preview of what that font will appear like in your design before essentially updating your files.

It is google chrome extensions that serve as a neat little tool that rapidly grabs colors from any image and aids you promptly form solid color schemes.

This SEO and website analysis is an extension for google chrome that offers a profound SEO analysis including more than 50 SEO and usability criteria.

Ghostery is one of the great google chrome extension which notices trackers, pixels, and any other embedded code on a website. With this, you directly see which plugins and trackers are already installed on the web page you have earlier visited. It lets you safeguard your privacy. There is no registration or sign up needed to make use of this chrome extension.

When you are operating on the web, browser tabs management is a great skill required. Session manager is the chrome extension designed for this purpose. It keeps your browsing state and allows you re-open the session afterward. It is chiefly useful if you find yourself opening the similar web pages repeatedly.

If you require finding broken links on the site and prefer to restrict spidering to a precise directory you require Site Spider chrome extension.

Colorpick Eyedropper is a kind of simple color picker tool that lets you to choose color values from any of the web pages.

Above discussed are the useful chrome extensions for developers, designers and some of them good for online entrepreneurs use. All of them offer time-saving solutions to numerous of the design and development matters that will frequently crop up. If you find more interesting extensions, feel free to share it by commenting on this post, We will review and add it on the list.|||

We are here to share Top 20+ Must-have Chrome Extensions For Web Developers, Designers and Entrepreneurs for Time-saving Solutions in 2017