In one of our previous blogs, we had elaborated on how marketers nowadays have intuitive ways to visualize, design, execute, and manage customer experiences across different channels. Using simple icons and event boxes, you can easily control your marketing content, channels, scheduling, budgeting, and resources. And then enjoy watching the results in real time. However, not all campaign journey builders empower you with an exhaustive array of options and customizable campaigns as Gamooga does. With Gamooga’s intuitive and user-friendly Campaign Journey Builder, you can build comprehensive customer lifecycle campaigns on a in a DIY model without ever having to depend on technology. Listed below are some examples of campaigns that may be designed for e-commerce businesses:

Cart abandonment email campaign: A reminder email may be sent to users who have added items to their cart but have left the site without completing the checkout action within a stipulated period of time . This is a triggered email and is sent as soon as a business rule is satisfied, i.e (for example) if checkout does not happen within a specific time period (typically within ½ hour or 1 hour). You can make this campaign a multi-wave campaign and further re-target customers who have not opened the cart abandonment email or have not completed the checkout within 24 hours with another email containing unique discount coupons. You can set up the campaign flow in such a way that another campaign is automatically triggered if the customer does not complete the checkout within 24 hrs of receiving the first email.

With Gamooga, our customers are able to target 40% of the cart abandonment instances while they were able to target only 15% without Gamooga. This is because Gamooga is able to send out cart abandonment emails to even those who are not currently logged in to the site. The open rate of emails hovers at around 18% which is substantially higher than what they were seeing previously. When the message is personalized, it gets read more often. The checkout success post opening the emails was also substantially higher (8%) than the average conversion rate of their website (1–2%). A four-fold jump such as this shows that personalized messages improve the purchase intention of visitors drastically. Note: You can send cart abandonment emails to non-logged in customers too, because we create a profile for every user as soon as he identifies himself at least once on the website during his lifetime. Hence the number of customers you will be reaching out to would be very high compared to your internal systems and other tools you might be using for cart abandonment restriction.

Search based website notification campaign: While analyzing the users’ data of some of e-commerce companies, we noticed that those who search for something on the website have a much higher purchase intention than the average visitor. Hence we suggested the companies run a search based website notification campaign. Based on what the visitor searched for, we suggested they show the best offer or the most popular product in the same category s/he searched for via website notifications, 10 seconds after his search. The response rate for this kind of notification was around 9% and the checkout success post was around 6%, both of which are very healthy numbers going by the e-commerce industry standards.

Replenishing Campaign: Reminding the buyer at right time to replenish an oil bottle, their herbal tea or weight loss capsules can be very good campaigns. Since one purchase has already taken place, trust is already established. Now it’s just a matter of being there at right time. E.g. If Rhonda buys a bottle of Garcinia Combogia weight loss capsules (which last 20 days) on 3rd of Feb, she will be happy to click on an SMS link sent to her on 20th Feb reminding her to re-order. In your online store, if most of the products are such that they need a refill, this can become a high impact campaign bringing back visitors at the right time, when the need is high. Moreover, all the other campaigns listed above may also be done through the SMS channel. However, the effectiveness of each channel needs to assessed well.

Retargeting: Retarget users whose contact information is not yet known to you via powerful web push notifications. These are browser based notifications and do not require the end user to have your mobile app installed. The end user may be browsing any website on the internet or may even be working on any application such as Microsoft Word and the browser push can still be sent. You can get started with a cart abandonment campaign via web push. We can retarget users who have added items to their cart and have left the site and whose contact information is not yet known to you via this channel.

Mobile Push Notifications: Re-engage users with Push Messaging — Our integrated marketing solution empowers you to engage and re-engage like the perfect one-two combo thanks to push and in-app messaging. Bring latent or less engaged users back into your app with push messaging. — Gamooga’s mobile app campaigns help improve conversions, engagement, and revenue through highly targeted push campaigns even when users have not been in the app for days, weeks or months. Push messaging can reunite those valuable users with all the latest and greatest features your app has to offer, with just the right tap on the shoulder. For example, you could set up an automatic re-engagement campaign primed for customers who have not logged into your app for 30, 60 or 90 days. Tailor the push message to the right group, and schedule their homecoming. Create segments based on any custom user behavior or profile data or combine multiple parameters. Demography, geo-targeting and Event-based segments help create meaningful user buckets. Engage with your users on a personal level. Address them by their names, include offers on their favourite products and give out unique coupon codes. These are available for both iOS as well as for Android.

While the above are some of the suggested use cases for e-commerce companies, Gamooga may be used to generate enhanced engagement and revenue for all industry verticals. For a better understanding about how Gamooga can jumpstart your sales through intelligent marketing technology, contact us at: https://www.gamooga.com/|||

In one of our previous blogs, we had elaborated on how marketers nowadays have intuitive ways to visualize, design, execute, and manage customer experiences across different channels. Using simple…