There are so many prophecies which have taken place in the past and present we can't ignore. In regard to Syria's bombing, the threat of war from North Korea, the strained relationship between Russia and America and the impending doom of Third World War, are already been prophesied in the Holy Bible.

The Bible warns the US will not or cannot defend Israel.  According to the Bible, Israel must stand alone … with God. For when this coming war does finally start, the United States will be unwilling (or unable) to help Israel defend herself.  Even though the Bible warns the invading armies will be ultimately destroyed by God, it will be a devastating war for both Israel and the whole world.

Bible scholars are divided as to whether this coming war is part of the prophetic battle of Armageddon or will just precede Armageddon in order to prepare a path for the Antichrist (a coming World Leader who will  enforce a Peace Plan (“covenant”) upon Israel) which will trigger the final  prophetic 7-Year period of time which God has set aside for Israel and the World which is sometimes called the “Apocalypse”. Ezekiel Bible Prophecy and World War III.

All people of the World should be sitting on the edge of their seats with white knuckles watching this terrible prophecy slowly start to unfold … while those who call themselves Christians (followers … both Jew and Gentile … of Jesus (Yeshua), the promised Messiah) are told to “examine” themselves in the Word and in their faith to ensure they are not just ‘almost’ Christians (Matthew 7:21-23) who are “lukewarm” in their faith in Jesus (Yeshua) and God’s Word.

‘Behold, I am against you, O Gog  (a powerful human or dark-angelic leader behind Russia), the prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal.  (Turkey) I will turn you around, put hooks into your jaws (Israel’s Leviathan gas fields, mutual defense treaty, or UN effort) and lead you out, with all your army, horses, and horsemen, all splendidly clothed, a great company with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords (weapons). (Ezekiel Bible Prophecy and World War III)

(The Russian army will march again) Persia (IRAN), (Iran is listed first, meaning it will be the ‘lead’ ally) Ethiopia (Sudan …”Cush”), and Libya (northern Africa) are with them, all of them with shield and helmet. Gomer and all its troops;  (Germany-France, eastern Europe, or “Galatia”- Turkey) the house of Togarmah (Armenia) from the far north and all its troops – many people are with you.

In the latter years you (Russia-Iran-Turkey) will come into the land of those brought back from the sword  (Israel!) and gathered from many people on the mountains of Israel, which had long been desolate  (this war will take place after Israel became a nation in 1948) they (the children of Israel) were brought out of the nations, and now all of them dwell safely.

‘Thus says the Lord GOD:  “On that Day it shall come to pass that thought will arise in your mind, and you will make an evil plan: You (the one who leads Russia) will say, ‘I will go up against a land of unwalled villages; (the cities in Israel are no longer ‘walled’) I will go to a peaceful people, who dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates’ to take plunder and to take booty,      (Greed, envy, and arrogance will fuel this invasion) to stretch out your hand against the waste places that are again inhabited, (look at Israel today) and against a people gathered from the nations,  (this will take place after 1948!) who have acquired livestock and goods, who dwell in the midst of the end.

Some scholars feel it must be part of, or the beginning of “ ” (because of some of the terminology used), and others believe it must happen sometime before Armageddon and will set the stage for the coming “Antichrist” (who will rise over 10 nations which were part of the Roman Empire) to fill the world power vacuum that will be left after this coming war.|||

Your description