Users on Windows are having many network issues due to misconfigured network settings or due to bad proxy settings. When a user tries to run the troubleshooter and receives an error about network proxy settings. This error might occur due to bad proxy gateways.

In some cases viruses attacks on your network configuration causing several damages to your network access. Windows 10 users are facing this problem mainly. There are even not able to open anything with any browser they’re trying. This means there’s something wrong with your network settings.

If you’re receiving an error saying Windows Could not Automatically Detect This Network’s Proxy Settings then below is the fix for the problem.

Providing static IP to all clients is the solution if a number of users are getting this error. In this article, we have a solution for all. If you’re receiving this issue with your personal OS this can be fixed by changing some network settings.

Proxy is the server address to browse from unknown locations. If your proxy is not working, means your computer can’t be able to connect to that proxy server/proxy server is closed then you will get error.

Disabling proxy or checking whether the proxy address is working or not is the first solution of this problem. Below are the steps you need to perform to check so:-

Now check whether your Internet is working or still jammed due to some reasons. If your connecting was interrupted due to any bad proxy gateway, the method given above is the fix for that and if your connection still not working, this means your problem is caused by any other reason.

We have seen in many cases that users installed infected software in their systems and that software have Ad-Wares injected in them. These ad-wares might interrupt your network connection deeply.

You need to reset TCP/IP of your computer in order to gain access to the internet.

Resetting your TCP/IP is a very easy work. You can do this using your CMD(Command Prompt). You should have Administrator privileges to run a command in your CMD.

If you’re still getting the error there are huge chances that your any software which has access to configure your network related settings is the root of this problem. We strongly recommend you to uninstall all those software.

You should also uninstall your antivirus because your antivirus might be the reason that you can’t connect to the internet.

This additional method might fix your problem because some software installed in your Windows OS having access to configure your Internet Connection. This software might overlapping your Internet settings or something which is disabling your access to the internet.

You can also try resetting your router or modem if using the internet through them. If you’re still getting this error( Windows Could Not Automatically Detect This Network’s Proxy Settings ), let us know in the comment section below.

Read Also : The Active Directory Domain Services Is Currently Unavailable|||

If you're receiving an error saying Windows Could not Automatically Detect This Network’s Proxy Settings then below is the fix for the problem.