By establishing analytics as a true business discipline, banks can grasp the enormous potential.

Consider three recent examples of the power of analytics in banking:

Results like these are the good news about analytics. But they are also the bad news. While many such projects generate eye-popping returns on investment, banks find it difficult to scale them up; the financial impact from even several great analytics efforts is often insignificant for the enterprise P&L. Some executives are even concluding that while analytics may be a welcome addition to certain activities, the difficulties in scaling it up mean that, at best, it will be only a sideline to the traditional businesses of financing, investments, and transactions and payments.

In our view, that’s shortsighted. Analytics can involve much more than just a set of discrete projects. If banks put their considerable strategic and organizational muscle into analytics, it can and should become a true business discipline. Business leaders today may only faintly remember what banking was like before marketing and sales, for example, became a business discipline, sometime in the 1970s. They can more easily recall the days when information technology was just six guys in the basement with an IBM mainframe. A look around banks today—at all the businesses and processes powered by extraordinary IT—is a strong reminder of the way a new discipline can radically reshape the old patterns of work. Analytics has that potential.

Why? Three factors are coming together to kick off the coming heyday. First, consider advances in technologies. The availability of information is booming: in the past few years, the amount of meaningful data—true signal, not noise—has grown exponentially, while the size and cost of processors decreased. By 2020, about 1.7 megabytes a second of new information will be created for every human being on the planet. Businesses have opened their minds, freely adapting new analytical techniques that in the past might have been dismissed as too impractical and theoretical for the real world.

And those techniques have improved radically. We are well past simple linear regressions—machine learning now features support vector machines, random forests, gradient boosting, and many other astonishing algorithms. Any company’s ability to perform these analytics has been significantly boosted by the exponential increase of computing power (which makes it possible to undertake, in just seconds, an analysis that in the past would have taken weeks) and by new data-storage technologies, such as Hadoop.

Second, banks in many regions are under enormous economic pressure. Our latest research finds that of the top 500 institutions around the world, 54 percent are priced below book value. In 2014 we calculated that just 18 percent of banks captured all the value in the industry. Recognizing this reality, banks have tried all manner of improvements, especially digitization and cost cutting. But these moves have taken them only so far; something new is needed.

Those digitization efforts underlie the third factor pushing analytics. Much of a typical bank is now digitized and throwing off data by the terabyte. A mostly manual bank would have serious difficulty using advanced analytics; at digital banks, the highways are already paved.

Put it all together, and you get advanced analytics: industrial-scale solutions to exploit data for authentic business insights and vastly improved decision making. The tools are there; banks must now carry them forward into actions that can drive meaningful change. The canvas is as broad as a bank itself. Rich real-time data—numbers, yes, but also text, voice, and images—now exist for literally every action that customers make, every product that banks sell, and every process that banks use to deliver those products. In this article, we will explore the vast opportunities, as well as the problems of integration and scaling that keep banks from making analytics a coherent discipline. We will then suggest the strategic and organizational elements that banks need to realize the analytics dream.

As the saying goes, “The future is already here. It’s just not evenly distributed.” Banks—and companies in every other industry—are already deploying advanced analytics to move their businesses forward. We see three ways it can generate a meaningful increase in profits (Exhibit 1).

In our recent survey, we found that almost every bank lists advanced analytics among its top five priorities. Most plan to invest further in these techniques. A few banks are already seeing the rewards. These leaders have built substantial foundations by establishing data lakes and centers of excellence and using machine-learning techniques. They and many others have spent hundreds of millions on their data (especially risk data) and on compliance. For them, advanced analytics is becoming a reflex action, with commensurate rewards of about €300 million in additional annual profit, on average.

Most banks we surveyed, however, are struggling. A good many are “started but stuck”: they have invested significantly in data infrastructure (mostly as a result of regulation) and experimented with advanced-analytics techniques (mostly through specialized teams loosely connected to the corporate center). But the expected results have not arrived. A few banks have yet to begin.

The started-but-stuck ones are running into a number of problems. At the highest level, their efforts remain unconnected and subscale; they have not yet tied together their disparate efforts into a single, unified business discipline. Tactically, we see banks making unforced errors such as these:

Avoiding the pitfalls and accessing the broad set of opportunities requires CEO leadership as banks develop two assets: a strategy for the transformation and a robust analytics organization to assist and empower the businesses as they learn to use analytics in their everyday work. (New technologies and tools are also necessary; see sidebar, “A quick take on the CIO agenda.”)

Readers may notice something that’s missing from this list: setting the aspiration. That’s because we think every institution, unless its circumstances are extraordinary, should set the same aspiration: to establish analytics as a business discipline—the go-to tool for the thousands of decision makers across the bank. Earlier we mentioned analytics as a reflex. To extend the metaphor, analytics should resemble the human nervous system; every part of the body knows what to do when presented with certain stimuli. The big difference among banks will probably be the pace at which they can build and train their systems. Just as some parts of your brain are trained and some are not, banks will find that some nerve paths are already working well, while others must be laid down and taught how to react.

There’s something else missing from our list of required assets: an additional $100 million or so of spending. Many bank leaders look at analytics and fear an outsized investment. That’s not unreasonable, since in recent years institutions have had to spend billions on things they could not have anticipated, and budgets are very thin. But analytics is not a bet-the-bank investment with no graceful exits; it’s a short-cycle flow of investments with lots of options to kill unsuccessful pilots. The small but immediate payoffs from the initial work can finance the next wave of projects, which in turn finance more and larger efforts. Once the system is built, the investment is over and the margins become enormous—like those of software or tech companies.

Three elements are essential to the strategy. First, banks need an analytics-ready mind-set. Analytics transforms everyday work in surprising ways, so leaders must open their minds to the possibilities. Our core beliefs about advanced analytics can help.

A second element of the strategy is a set of prioritized use cases and a mechanism to create a pipeline of them. The scope for analytics is vast. Anywhere a bank uses rules of thumb or something is done “the way we’ve always done it,” analytics can probably make improvements. The CEO must lead the hunt for these issues and help prioritize them. Critically, at the beginning, the chosen use cases should not be limited to applications in which analytics could produce a substantial uptick in results; they should also include areas where scale can be increased quickly, to avoid the “pilot trap.”

Most of the potential use cases are relevant to every banking business. They include commercial applications: cross-selling and upselling, customer acquisition, reducing churn, and winning back customers. Business-improvement levers (such as dynamic and value pricing, credit underwriting, sales-area planning, yield and claims management, fraud detection, call-center routing, and workforce planning) are also relevant for most banks. While the first couple of use cases can be introduced top-down or outside-in, it is just as important to encourage everybody in the bank to become creative and make suggestions—while always ensuring a clear path to creating value. To avoid discouragement, long validation and delivery cycles need to be shortened. Innovation labs can help accelerate the process.

Finally, a strategy should set out a vision for how the bank will use analytics applications. For each use case the bank is considering, it should start by asking what problem holds back the business from having a greater impact. It can then work through a set of five steps: identifying the source of value, considering the available data (easier to do with a data lake, as we describe in the sidebar), identifying the analytics technique that will respond to the problem and probably produce insights, considering how to integrate analytics into the workflow of the business, and anticipating the problems of adoption (Exhibit 2).

Will sellers use the tools? If not, why not? What are their needs, and how can you make the analytical tools responsive to them? Sometimes the answer involves bundling insights from algorithms with useful data for sales managers in an app that they can use on external visits. Other times, a bank will have to change the way it develops campaigns and pushes them to the front line and to customers. Finally, in many other cases the bank will have to develop a group of high-performing champions who embrace this discipline and act as role models.

Embedding analytics in the organization is not simply a matter of getting specific teams to use specific tools, though that’s essential. The CEO and the top team must do much more to communicate clearly that analytics is important to the bank and empower everyone to join the revolution. The classical steps of successful change management will be essential: role modeling the new behavior, clearly explaining why change is needed, building the skills of the businesses so they can succeed with the new tools, and reinforcing the bank’s commitment through formal mechanisms (such as incentives).

The businesses will need help to design analytics systems, to build applications exploiting them, and to promote adoption. Banks will want to establish a central team that supports these needs. But the last thing they should do is build another silo. What they require is a networked structure, a kind of nervous system. More than anything, banks must have open channels and accessibility to make a knowledge of analytics pass freely throughout the enterprise. An analytics center of excellence, the spine of such a system, will probably need some or all of the following components:

More than 90 percent of the top 50 banks around the world are using advanced analytics. Most are having one-off successes but can’t scale up. Nonetheless, some leaders are emerging. Such banks invest in talent through graduate programs. They partner with firms that specialize in analytics and have committed themselves to making strategic investments to bolster their analytics capabilities. Within a couple of years, these leaders may be able develop a critical advantage. Where they go, others must follow—and the sooner the better because success will come, more than anything else, from real-world experience.|||

By establishing analytics as a true business discipline, banks can grasp the enormous potential.