In this article, I am going to talk about Pingdom Alternatives.

I am sure you will agree with me when I say:

Pingdom is a great tool. But its expensive and comes with limited options in terms of features and customer support.

Well, it turns out, there are many tools (aka Pingdom alternatives) that are cheaper, have more features than Pingdom and are more easier to use.

And in today’s post I am going to show you some of the best Pingdom alternatives that are perfect fit for your needs.

ServiceUptime allows you to monitor your website from 10 different locations around the world. They have customizable monitoring frequencies from as low as 1 minute to 60 minutes. It features a number of different monitoring services such as HTTP, HTTPS, ICMP, FTP, DNS, POP3 etc.

What makes ServiceUptime a great monitoring tool is the fact that each time your service is checked from a different location, and an alert is generated only when multiple locations detect a failure.

If you need to trigger scripts on your website (webhooks) for special conditions such as downtime, then ServiceUptime is a great tool to consider. All premium plans of ServiceUptime support the use of Webhooks.

ServiceUptime has free and paid monitoring that you can choose from. The free monitoring service allows you to monitor one service every 30 or 60 minutes; while the paid services ranges from 10 monitors to 110 monitors depending on the plan chosen.

SiteUptime monitors your website every two minutes from 8 different locations spread across 5 continents. It features multiple monitoring options such as HTTP, HTTPS, DNS, ICMP, POP3 etc.

SiteUptime avoids false positives by confirming the alert from an alternate geographical location.

If you’re considering trying a free website monitoring tool before moving to a paid option, SiteUptime is a great choice. The free plan allows you to setup one monitor that checks your website every 30 minutes. It also includes uptime reports, email alerts and a control panel. The advanced plans allow you to setup upto six monitors that check your website every 2 minutes.

Pingometer monitors your website 24/7 from 10 different locations around the world using protocols such as HTTP, HTTPS, DNS, ICMP etc.

Pingometer offers a number of different ways to get alerted including text messages on your phone, emails and Twitter direct messages. It also allows you to create distribution groups that get alerted of important events.

What makes Pingometer a great choice is the fact that they perform multiple checks on the alerts to ensure there are no false positives.

Pingometer also features multiple types of reports such as availability and performance trend reports. If you’re interested to know how your website has performed over a period of time, these trend reports are going to come in handy.

They also support API, which means you can have your own solution integrate with Pingometer.

Pingometer has multiple pricing options starting with the lowest one that features 5 monitors, to their most valued one that offers 50 monitors.

Host Tracker isn’t just about content monitoring and response time check. They also include database monitoring.

Host Tracker monitors your website from more than 70 locations around the world using multiple protocols such as HTTP, HTTPS, ICMP, FTP, SSH, RDP etc.

Host Tracker’s got more than just email, SMS and phone call to get you alerted. You can also choose to get alerted over Hangouts and Skype.

In addition to web monitoring, Host Tracker also allows you to monitor load on your CPU, HDD and RAM; and certificate expiration.

Reports can be downloaded in different formats such as PDF, XML and CSV.

You can integrate your own application with Host Tracker using their API.

Host Trackers’ stats certainly make it an option to consider: 8 years on air, 40000+ customers and 200000+ monitored websites.

Site24x7 is an all-in-one solution that allows you to monitor not just your website, but also your mobile website, mobile apps and cloud assets running on Amazon EC2.

A recent report from Fortune states that mobile traffic is set to grow at a compounded annual rate of 53% from 2015 to 2020. This reinforces the importance of monitoring your mobile websites and mobile apps.

Site24x7 monitors services such as HTTP, HTTPS, ICMP, DNS, FTP etc. from over 50 locations around the world. It also features real-time user monitoring with metrics such as browser type, location and platform.

What more? Site24x7 also features server performance monitoring and network monitoring. It monitors servers such as Windows, Linux, Amazon EC2 and VMware ESX; and network devices such as routers, switches, firewalls and printers.

Site24x7 should be your choice if you’re looking for more than just website monitoring; like monitoring your mobile applications, application performance, server performance and network performance.

The alternatives mentioned here give you a number of different choices for monitoring your websites.

The choices differ not only in terms of cost, but also in terms of services that can be monitored, number of locations, reporting formats and metrics, and alerting mechanisms.

Consider these factors while making your choice for a website monitoring tool. Please comment below and let me know the one you choose. Good luck!|||

Pingdom is a great tool. But its expensive and comes with limited options in terms of features and customer support. Well, it turns out, there are many tools (aka Pingdom alternatives) that are…