Tesla is diving into the trucking industry.

Tesla CEO Elon Musk on Thursday said the company would unveil a semitruck in September and a pickup truck in 18 to 24 months.

"Tesla Semi truck unveil set for September," Musk wrote on Twitter. "Team has done an amazing job. Seriously next level."

This isn't the first time we've heard Tesla express interest in building a semitruck. Musk first announced the semitruck project in his "Master Plan, Part Deux," released in July.

"We believe the Tesla Semi will deliver a substantial reduction in the cost of cargo transport, while increasing safety and making it really fun to operate," Musk wrote in the plan.

Musk said in February that the company was making progress on its semitruck. Jerome Guillen, Tesla's vice president of programs, is leading the company's semitruck product.

Tesla's chief technical officer, JB Straubel, has also discussed the role Tesla could play in the trucking industry.

"I can't say too much about the new products and the things we are developing, but from a pure technology point of view, everything that we've done on vehicles translates directly into trucks," Straubel said at a forum in 2016. "There's no reason that today you can't make a very compelling electric truck."

Musk will have some competition in electric trucking.

Daimler, Mercedes' parent company, first showed off its electric truck in November. Guillen actually led Daimler's semitruck program before joining Tesla in 2012.

Daimler is testing the vehicle, which can drive 124 miles on a single charge, on public roads in Germany. The company said in February it was talking to 20 potential customers about its electric truck.

Tesla also plans to build a self-driving, electric bus, Musk wrote in his "Master Plan," but he has yet to disclose a timeline for that project.

Musk teased some other announcements on Twitter.

Musk said the company's next-generation Roadster, which he previously said would be Tesla's fastest car when it's released in a few years, would be a convertible. Musk also said the final unveiling for the Model 3, the company's mass-market sedan, would occur in July.

Tesla is having a big month. The California-based company is now valued as high as Ford and General Motors, making it one of the most valuable automakers in the US. That puts pressure on Tesla to execute Model 3 production; the sedan is set to roll out to customers at the end of this year.

Tesla has an ambitious goal of producing 500,000 cars a year by 2018, and it will soon add two more vehicles to its offerings.

Get the latest Tesla stock price here.|||

Tesla says it is officially getting in the trucking business and will reveal its semi in September.