We just released Falco 0.6.0. This has several great new features as well as continued improvement to the default ruleset. Here’s a summary of the changes:

Rules now have an optional set of tags that are used to categorize the ruleset into groups of related rules. Here’s an example:

In this case, the rule “File Open by Privileged Container” has been given the tags “container” and “cis”. If the tags key is not present for a given rule or the list is empty, a rule has no tags.

Here’s how you can use tags:

We’ve also gone through the default ruleset and tagged all the rules with an initial set of tags. Here are the tags we’ve used:

Rules can have multiple tags if they relate to multiple of the above. Every rule in the falco ruleset currently has at least one tag.

Prior to 0.6.0, falco used the kernel module from sysdig called . As of 0.6.0, falco uses its own kernel module . The kernel modules are actually built from the same source code, but having a falco-specific kernel module allows falco and sysdig to be updated independently without compatibility problems.

By default, the kernel module will be installed when installing the falco debian/redhat package or when running the docker image. The script that installs the kernel module tries to install it in 3 different ways:

For options using a pre-built kernel module, the kernel module should have the following filename: is a md5sum of the config file that sets kernel options (e.g. ). This file can reside in other locations–see the kernel module builder script for full details on the set of paths it tries to find the kernel config file.

This release also includes some other new features:

This release has a ton of rule changes to eliminate false positives. The full list is too long to include here, but here are some examples where we’ve improved coverage:

For the full set of changes in this release, you can always look at the changelog at github.

The release is available via the usual channels–rpm/debian packages, docker hub and github.

Let us know if you have any issues, and enjoy!|||

