15–16th March 2017. Focused on Angular NG-NL 2017 is a two-day conference (a training day and a conference day). Another good reason to visit Amsterdam.

25th / 26th of March. Check it out!

Single day event on the 28th of March. Great talks on React from people from the community.

Full day conference — 21st of April. This is part of the React series of conferences that started out in San Francisco

Another two day event, 6–7 May. If you’re close by you could check it out. And visit Berlin at the same time.

Moving a bit south we have the jsDays conference in Italy. Two day event — May 10–11th.

12–13th of May — Multi track, two day conference in English and Spanish covering JS, node, React, Angular and more.

22 speakers (so far). They also have two days of workshops that you can attend between May 16–15th.

A two day event in Oxford on the 30 and 31st of March. Lots of different speaker and topics specific for front end developers.

Part of the Jconf family of events, this is a day day JavaScript party on the 1st and 2 of June.

A two day event in Cluj Napoca, a huge IT center in Eastern Europe.

Focusing on community and education. Happening in July, the season to see beautiful Barcelona.

A very interesting conference covering JavaScript, Node Angular and iOT. In its fourth edition it’s grown to a huge event.

In Wroclaw, happening between June 21–23. More here: https://conf.vuejs.org/.

Design and technology, happening in late August — 31 August — 1st of September. 2 days, 20+ presentations.

Have you ever been to Stockholm? Here’s your chance, on the 7–8th of September. Call for speakers still open if you’re interested.

So far no other details have been released, but we’re still early in the year. Follow them on Twitter to keep in touch.

3 days of talks in Bratislava between October 25–27th.

No in its third year, this is an “intimate one-day, single track, front-end JS conf in a London pub”on November 17th. The afterparty includes a JS pub quiz. Tickets are the call for papers/speakers are now available”.

The second edition, hosted in Sofia. One day event on November 19th.

Dubbed the largest JavaScript conference in Europe, it’s a two day event in the French capital on November 30 — Demcember 1st.

The first Angular conference in Belgium, in the city of Ghent, between December 8–9.|||

There also pretty fun and great opportunities to get a look at new products first hand and get insights from some of the best professions in the business. JavaScript is everywhere so there’s no…