Financial privacy is so important. Before I delve into the travails of trying to shop online without giving every merchant a full name, mailing address, email address, and phone number, it's worth noting that there are plenty of legitimate reasons to want to purchase something more discreetly. Pay for an item with cash and nobody bats an eye, but many people think online transactions that are difficult to track are, by nature, suspicious. But there are a myriad of sensible reasons to want to keep information from the hands of companies (and whoever else gets ahold of them).

After making a purchase, consumers have little power over how long their transaction data or credit card information is stored, or which third party advertisers it's shared with. Even companies with reasonable data retention policies are susceptible to security breaches, so it's not unfair to say that simply making an online purchase can leave one vulnerable. Even if you're not concerned about the possibility of  identity theft, perhaps one day you'll want to purchase something related to a medical condition and don't necessarily want to broadcast that information. Perhaps you'd like to send someone a present anonymously as part of a gift exchange, and you don't have time to get the item shipped to you to resend—or knowing the city and state you mail it from could give you away. (Even Amazon outs "anonymous" gift givers by allowing recipients to send thank you notes, and listing the name of the buyer.) Maybe you want to make a donation to a non-profit organization that you think is under government surveillance and are concerned about getting your name on a list somewhere—or maybe you simply would rather pretend you didn't make any donations rather than fill out a conflict of interest disclosure form at work.

In any case, it is possible to make online purchases that leave a smaller footprint, but it sure as hell ain't easy. I'll run you through my successful—and unsuccessful—attempts.

For $39/year and a small fee per transaction (plus a $5.95 fee every 30 days for carrying a balance), you can use Abine's MaskeMe feature to get virtual credit cards to use for online shopping. These function like prepaid credit cards, and allow you to use any name you want along with Abine's Boston mailing address. It's worth noting that Abine knows who you are and what your transactions are, since of course you are paying it with your regular credit card, so this wouldn't work for all threat models, but it can help you leave less of a footprint while shopping online, and allows you to use a fake name and Abine's mailing address to hide your identity from a merchant. (You can find fake names online, but unfortunately, sites like the Fake Name Generator are limited. (I was able to pick a Hobbit name and a Klingon name, but an Israeli one was not available.)

I tried to use a masked card to pay for an online fitness course. This seemed like a realistic scenario to me because I'm also a health writer, and on top of the usual politics and infighting that's not unique to any one industry, there are certainly times when people seek online coaching but would rather not broadcast that information.

The first problem I encountered was that the course I wanted to sign up for had ongoing monthly payments over several months, and Abine's masked cards do not allow you to add money to the cards. In order to make a monthly payment, you have to pay the entire amount upfront, which sort of defeats the purpose. (Also, I logged onto Abine's chat to ask questions two times, each with a different name and IP address, and they definitely asked me how I intended to use the masked cards since they viewed this as suspicious behavior.)

The second problem is that there is a spending limit, which begins at around $50/week. I bypassed that limit since I'd already been using Abine Blur, but still had a weekly limit of $500 which Abine would not lift, even though their FAQ said "If you'd like to inquire about higher limits, please contact our support team and we'll look into your account." So if you want to drop a ton of cash in one place, best to start using masked cards before you need them. There is still a way to make monthly payments even with these limits. You have to buy a new card and enter the information whenever your payment is rejected, or you can proactively switch cards yourself.

The third problem is that not everyone accepts the masked cards. At the moment, you can only use them with US merchants, which means that my payment to a Canadian company was unceremoniously denied.

The exact reasons are unclear, but when I paid for a masked card (after paying for premium access) with a credit card, it triggered PayPal's fraud detection system. (PayPal did not respond to request for comment, probably for obvious reasons.)

My attempt to sign up discreetly was an utter failure, especially since I tried to pay with my regular credit card after the masked card was rejected, but my regular card was also rejected due to the fraud alert. Because there were limited spots, I then tried to purchase the course for “a friend” using one of Abine’s masked email addresses, but forgot which one I’d used, so when the welcome email didn’t get through and I was asked which address it was sent to, I didn’t know how to respond, and reported that my so-called friend had already signed up, and asked it to be transferred to my regular email address… the one with my name on it. The experience was equivalent to trying to sneak into a store to make a cash purchase and instead walking in with a big neon sign with flashing arrows over my head.

Eventually I managed to use a masked card to make an anonymous $10 donation, but getting set up and navigating all the rules and issues that arose sure was a headache. Pro tip: if you plan on working with this feature, make sure to play with it before you need it.

I took out $20 in cash and went to the drugstore to buy a prepaid gift card, and then realized most of them had a $20 minimum in addition to the cost of the card. One of them only had a $10 minimum, so I snagged it, only to later learn that one must register it with a name, address, phone number, date of birth, and social security number. So, uh, nevermind. Turns out it's not a gift card at all, but rather an FDIC-insured transactional account... though it may turn into a gift card if you buy one by accident and then give it away to someone who doesn't mind sharing their SSN.

Well, this one was a lot easier. Pay in cash for a prepaid Visa gift card, and you’re set. I bought a Vanilla Visa gift card using cash at a drugstore, and at this point I just wanted to buy something with it, but it had to be a digital good, because I’d need to add a mailing address, or at least a name, to have something sent to me.

First, I tried to buy a VPS through Digital Ocean, but the site would not take a prepaid card, even though there was no indication of this on the FAQ.

At this point, I just wanted someone to take my money, so I decided to make small donations to a few nonprofits. I will point out that the card was a bit finicky. One nonprofit’s site just spun and spun, but worked both over Tor and over Chrome the following week. The card was declined outright at a second nonprofit, perhaps because some payment processors decline prepaid cards. I couldn’t make a donation on the third nonprofit’s site because the expiration date for the card, 2024, wasn’t available as a selection in the drop-down menu. Even if you use a random identity with your card, the company still has a record of which payments were made on a specific card. (It’s possible that simply making a payment at two different sites could narrow down your identity, depending on the circumstance.) Still, this option was the least expensive and perhaps most private for now.

Have you had luck shopping online anonymously or while trying to leave a smaller footprint, or was your experience riddled with problems? I'd love to hear your stories in the comments, or on Twitter.|||

All sorts of glitches and limitations come up when trying to buy something online anonymously (or leave a smaller footprint).