Charlie Murphy, renowned comedian and performer, has passed away at the age of 57. Murphy’s publicist confirmed to PopWrapped that the star had succumbed to his battle with leukemia. The older brother of Eddie Murphy, Charlie Murphy enjoyed a very successful career of his own, starting his career in show business in the 1989 film, Harlem Nights.

Since his debut, Murphy had many smaller parts in movies such as Jungle Fever and Mo’ Better Blues, both highly-regarded Spike Lee films. It wasn’t until he became a member of the Chappelle’s Show cast that Murphy got his big break. Murphy was part of several sketches that shined during the show’s run, notably The Mad Real World in season one.

Though that segment was undoubtedly hilarious, Charlie Murphy will always be remembered for the two legendary segments of Charlie Murphy’s True Hollywood Stories. The tales of his encounters with music artists Rick James and Prince will forever be treasures in the vaults of comedic television history. Only Dave Chappelle and Charlie Murphy could have pulled off the brilliant display. So many clever quotable lines were born of those two sketches. For example, calling Rick James a “habitual linestepper.”

There was no limit to Charlie Murphy. It was apparent that he was able to captivate his audience based upon his own merit and not just the fact that he was the brother of Eddie Murphy.

Charlie Murphy continued to develop and grow as a performer, as well as proving his versatility and talent as a writer. He co-wrote Vampire in Brooklyn and Norbit, with his brother starring in both films. His latest projects included voice work for Black Dynamite, and also appeared in Meet the Blacks just last year. Also in 2016, Murphy joined Cedric The Entertainer, D.L. Hughley, Eddie Griffin, and George Lopez for the Comedy Get Down tour.

Many stars took to social media to offer their condolences and to remember Charlie Murphy for his work as an entertainer.

Charlie Murphy’s last tweet was posted just yesterday, a poignant statement that reads almost as a premonition:

Thank you for the laughter, Charlie Murphy. Rest in peace.|||

Charlie Murphy, renowned comedian and performer, has passed away at the age of 57, having succumbed to his battle with leukemia.