We all know about Yuri Gagarin: we could depict him smiling before the historic start and after his successful return. But few people could depict him as a child and know the place where was born and raised the first man in space. He was born on March 9, 1934 in Klushino village in Smolensk region that is about 200 km (125 mi) far from Moscow (https://yandex.ru/maps/-/C6QCfXMP). You could take to Klushino from Moscow in 3 hours by car Now there is a museum in his simple wooden ‘izba’ (classical Russian rural home) (http://www.gagarinm.ru/museums_info.html). Many items in this museum belong to the Gagarins. Some of them were recreated according to the reminiscences of his mother — Anna Timofeevna. Museum of the Gagrins in Klushino village In spacious ‘seni’ (inner porch) there are different instruments. Also there is an entrance to the outbuilding used for running a household.

The most warm place at home — classical Russian furnace. Also there is tradicional for Russian home ‘red corner’ with an icon. White starched tablecloths, elegant towels and napkins create an atmosphere of coziness. It’s a light at the table: it’s nice to have tea or just read a book here. The Gagarins had a gramophone. The original in the house is not preserved, but there is its analogue — produced by the Leningrad gramophone factory. On the gramophone there is a vynil disk of the Soviet singer and actress Klavdia Ivanovna Shulzhenko “The Beginning and the End”(https://youtu.be/9uMBcOrYa9E).

There is a clock “Mayak” produced by Serdobsky Clock Factory (SCHZ) with a reproduction of the well-known Russian painter Shishkin’s picture “Morning in the Pine Forest” — a popular clock model in the postwar period in the Soviet Union. «Bedroom» in the separate part of the room The Gagarins had four children, here they are in family photos. On the top left photo there is a little Yuri with her sister Zoe (pictured right) and brothers, Valentin and Boris. Yuri was the third child in the family, and when he was born, Valentin was 10, and sister Zoe — 7. Yet after 2 years was born the youngest Gagarin, Boris. Here are Yuri’s parents, Alexey Ivanovich and Anna Timofeevna. The photo was taken after the successful launch and return of Yuri from space. At the end of the tour you can buy souvenirs on the theme of space — biographical books, postcards, t-shirts, badges, coins. For sure you would not leave the museum without any souvenir. My advice is very simple: sit with friends in the car, choose a route to Klushino and say together, “Poekhali!” © Yuri Gagarin (“Let’s go!”).|||

He was born on March 9, 1934 in Klushino village in Smolensk region that is about 200 km (125 mi) far from Moscow (https://yandex.ru/maps/-/C6QCfXMP). Now there is a museum in his simple wooden ‘izba…