As a repeat founder, entrepreneur, and product guy, I have a learned a lot about what to do and not do when it comes to startups. My three exits have totaled almost $2 billion. But I’ve also pivoted more times than I can count, as well as had to shut companies down. I’ve done self-funded companies, credit cards, accelerators, pitch contests, friends and family funding, angels, venture capital, and crowdfunding. It costs money to start a business and grow it, and I have experience in most of the options.

While SaaS and mobile are basically expected these days, they weren’t when I was pioneering them years ago. I’ve built great teams since the 2-way pager days, doing fun stuff in the consumer space as well as at massive scale in b2b and enterprise. At one startup we landed Apple retail, globally, by pioneering smartphone mobile payments. And helped to inspire Jack Dorsey in the kickoff of Square. I even led a mobile gaming startup to millions of paid installs, before free-to-play existed, with a take on 6 degrees of Kevin Bacon and a children’s game called My Underwear—which is always fun to talk about.

One thing I learned through it all is that anyone close to your startup is biased. It’s really hard to get fully impartial advice or help. And I had some fantastic mentors. Most of the time as founders we don’t even know we need help, because everything seems to be busy and moving along. That’s why I started the No B.S. approach to what I do. I believe wholeheartedly in founders and startups and the ability for them to change the world. But if 90% (according to Forbes) are going to fail it’s going to take a while. My goal is to get more startups out of the muck and on to the scaling and growth part. With over 100M businesses launched annually, if I can just decrease the failure rate to 89% (my audacious goal) I will have saved around 1 million startups per year! Will yours be one?|||

Andy Rosic has founded multiple startups, with 3 exits of nearly $2Billion. Let him get your startup or team from stuck to success. With no B.S.