Ricardo Soto and his wife had saved up for a down payment and were ready to buy a new home in the San Diego area. They could afford the monthly payments, but they also had some other important considerations. They wanted to maintain their financial flexibility so they could support their children’s educational goals and be prepared for any emergencies that might come up. Their loan officer suggested they look at the Unison HomeBuyer program – a new financial offering from Unison Home Ownership Investors. “The major problem that the Unison HomeBuyer program solved is that it reduced the monthly payment that we would have for the purchase of this home” Soto says. “This gave us the financial flexibility to commit towards our children’s education and other financial priorities that we have in our lives.”

Prior to founding Unison, Chairman and co-CEO Thomas Sponholtz was the co-head of active fixed income in Barclays Global Investors’ $130 billion Fixed Income Group ,and instrumental in launching the first Fixed Income iShares (ETF) at Barclay’s Global Investors. In the early 2000s, it became clear to Sponholtz that institutional fund managers needed a large-scale platform that could efficiently expose them to U.S. residential real estate. At the same time, he realized, home buyers needed access to debt free capital to purchase a home, and homeowners wanted an easy way to pull cash out of their home without taking on additional debt. These ideas grew into what is now known as a home ownership investment.

Today, a home ownership investment provides cash financing to homebuyers or homeowners from investors seeking long-term price exposure to residential real estate. This new concept aligns the interests of the homeowner and the investor as partners. Today, Unison’s programs (HomeBuyer and HomeOwner) address several financial issues, including home ownership rates, under-saved retirees and the scarcity of investments for those with important social mandates like pension funds and endowments.

Those pension funds and endowments have a need because they are influenced heavily by the interest rate environment. “In a high-rate environment, fewer risky investments are required because lower risk investments provide adequate returns. However, when interest rates are low, as they have been for a long period, many institutions find themselves underfunded and needing to take on more risk or require additional funding to meet obligations,” said Thomas Sponholtz Chairman and co-CEO of Unison. “Inflation is another driver of institutional investor strategy. Inflation impacts the income needed for a retiree to maintain his/her standard of living or the funds required by an endowment/foundation to support its work” says Sponholtz. “These two motivations – inflation hedging and exposure to the largest asset class in the world – make single-family real estate very compelling to an institutional investor.”

Unison’s home ownership investment is not a loan. It is a long-term investment in the property.  There are no interest charges or monthly payments. Unison does not receive a payment until the homeowner decides to sell their home – up to 30 years in the future.  “What sets Unison apart from others in the home ownership investment category is true partnership: we invest at the same home value as the homeowner and share with them the downside risk and upside potential,” says Jim Riccitelli, co-CEO of Unison.

The need is clear for consumers and institutional investors, but for mortgage lenders who are continually looking to bring innovative programs to consumers the Unison HomeBuyer program could dramatically impact housing accessibility for people who want to buy the home they want with less debt and risk. Guild Mortgage Company was the first lender to offer a home ownership investment in combination with a conforming loan in August of 2016.|||

A home ownership investment provides cash financing to homebuyers or homeowners from institutional investors seeking long-term price exposure to residential real estate. This new concept aligns the interests of the homeowner and the investor as partners.