The Bonobo Hypothesis: The Link Between Sex and Islamic Terrorism

There are many ways to answer this question, but for the purpose of this article, we are going to focus on one topic in particular: sex. The average Bonobo has a lot more orgasms and sex than the average Chimpanzee, and as we know, orgasms and sex have a number of positive benefits. Most notably, they reduce stress and aggression, particularly in males.

Bonobos, as a result, are quite peaceful because of the large amount of sexual activity they engage in as a species. In fact, sex is a central part of Bonobo conflict resolution. If two bands of Bonobos are about to engage in conflict, females from both groups will rub the genitals of the males until they calm down and cease to engage in the hostile behavior.

Chimpanzees, unlike Bonobos, do not engage in such friendly mediations, and males are quite aggressive and warlike. Male Chimpanzees will engage in violent conflicts in order to capture opposing tribes females and rape them. We know this from science and research done on both chimps and Bonobos.

The answer is both. As a species, humans display similar behavior to both Bonobos and Chimpanzees. This is because humans share 99% of our DNA with Chimpanzees and Bonobos alike. They are our closest relatives on planet Earth.

Scientific research shows that sex dramatically reduces all of the chemicals and hormones in the brain that makes a human want to be violent. Similar to our close relative species, sex is shown to increase dopamine and endorphin levels in humans, which increases happiness, reduces stress and acts as a natural narcotic to the brain. Humans as a species are in essence addicted to seeking dopamine through, among many other methods, sex. This has an effect on both the individual and societal level.

This view is backed up by the work and research of James W. Prescott, a leading thinker on the link between human sexuality and societal progress. Dr. Prescott found that “cultures that punished pre-marital and/or extra-marital sex… are aggressive and violent… [and that] the opposite patterns of behavior were found to characterize those cultures that accepted pre-marital and extra-marital sexuality.” Historically, this matches the sexual liberalization of the West during the Renaissance and later periods and leads us to the present day situation.

On one side of humanity, there are sexually liberal and open societies like much of Western Europe, parts of Central South America, and North America; on the other side of the spectrum are Eastern Europe, most of the Middle East, and much of Africa. There is a clear correlation between sexually repressive nations and conflict as a way of life. This connection coincides far more directly than poverty or a lack of resources, which are traditionally thought of as catalyzing conditions for terrorism.

The Global Peace Index (GPI) is calculated based on twenty-two different metrics ranging from “[number] of external and internal conflicts fought” to “[ease] of access to small arms and light weapons.” Of the ten countries with the lowest ratings, extramarital sex is illegal in nine. Masturbation is illegal in eight. Those eight nations are all majority Muslim and implement Sharia (Islamic) law into their legal systems, specifically in regard to moral issues. In addition, homosexuality is illegal in all of the Muslim nations in the top ten, and is punishable by death in five of them. In contrast, the top ten most peaceful nations in the world, as rated by the GPI, all possess amongst the most liberal sex laws in the world, and all are secular nations. For instance homosexuality, extra martial sex, and adultery are all legal, women cannot be compelled to marry their rapists, and pornography is allowed.

Nine out of the ten nations ranked highest on the Global Terrorism Index (GTI) are Muslim majority nations, and the other country is India, which has the world’s second-largest Muslim population after Indonesia, and is also extremely sexually repressive. Twenty-two of the world’s thirty least peaceful nations are Muslim majority countries. Twenty-six of these thirty are currently fighting against internal Islamic terrorist movements. Sexual repression is abundant in each in part because Islam, particularly as it is practiced in these nations, is a sexually repressive religion.

While correlation does not show causation, Islamic terrorist organizations also frequently use the promise of “seventy-two virgins” to persuade young men to become terrorists and suicide bombers. This promise of sexual release in paradise is enough to convince these young men to kill themselves.

The effect of sexual repression on a human male cannot be underestimated. In an article published by the Centre for Homeland Defense and Security, Ken Adcox quotes The Roots of Jihad by Dr. Tawfik Hamid, a former Egyptian radical turned policy consultant: “The main attraction to join was… ‘extreme sexual frustration.’” The article goes on to support this with further studies from other professors who conclude that “sexual frustration” is a major factor in becoming a suicide bomber because “sex… is unattainable to most young Muslim men.” The “promise of [seventy two] virgins” for “martyrs” makes this further “appealing” to the sexually frustrated young men. In addition, the article finds that sexual frustration is often a factor in violence for many young men, including mass shooters in the United States.|||

There are many ways to answer this question, but for the purpose of this article, we are going to focus on one topic in particular: sex. The average Bonobo has a lot more orgasms and sex than the…