The digital ecosystem in India is growing rapidly. Demonetization has definitely acted as a catalyst to bolster the growth of digital India. However, the internet connectivity still poses a challenge to all the digital marketers. As the digital penetration in India grows, so are the technologies or channels to reach a consumer efficiently in different ways. Before we get into this discussion, let’s talk about the common mistakes that most advertisers do before or after they launch a campaign.

If the answer is No (and yes for the last point) then you are definitely at the right place, reading the right blog. Most often we don’t give much importance to channels that works best in driving awareness and consideration in consumers. We push our budgets to channels which helps us achieve a good amount of last click conversions. This is the reason why channels like Programmatic, Content and GSP are still the unexplored areas of digital world. You need to look beyond last click conversions if you intend to scale your campaigns or brand. With multiple brands offering more or less the same product as that of yours, you can create a difference by investing your budgets wisely on channels across the entire marketing funnel (Awareness > Influence > Consideration > Action) and giving users a reason as to why they should consider you over others.

Let’s take an example of Michael’s activity on different channels.

If an ad is shown in each of these channels where is Michael more likely to respond? So if the behavior of a user is different in all the channels then why do we compare the numbers? I will leave the rest of the analysis up to you.

When was the last time you logged into Gmail to check your mail? I did it 15 mins ago and guess what, so did 10 million people.

People often get confused between a Newsletter subscription and a Gmail ad. Newsletter subscriptions are the regular mails on your inbox that you receive from an advertiser to stay up to date on any new announcements, sale or promotions.

Gmail Sponsored Promotions or GSP, are the special kind of display ads that you will find under the social and the promotions tab of your Gmail inbox. These ads will only appear in “Free” Gmail accounts and not on custom domain business accounts on Gmail.

There are two parts of a Gmail ad:

When a user clicks on a collapsed Gmail ad it expands just like an email in an expanded ad. This ad can include images, video or embedded forms. You can save or forward the ad and you only pay for the first click on your ad.

More information can be found here –

So, the big question — Why you should use Gmail Sponsored Promotions?

*For a major BFSI giant, we observed 35% increase in the lead volume after the usage of HTML creatives.

*At Sokrati, we have observed a desktop CTR of 7–10% across different verticals with the right set of targeting and ad messaging .

*For one of our major ecommerce fashion client, we observed 25% increase in transactions by making use of different ad templates and right set of targeting options.

*For one of leading global telecommunication client, we observed 30% increase in the lead volume due to proper device optimization.

CTRs is not the only metric to gauge the performance of your Gmail ads. You can use Gmail metrics like Gmail saves, forwards and Clicks to Website to measure how users are interacting with your ads. These are very good indicators of efficient targeting especially if branding and awareness is important to you. External CPC( Gmail clicks to website/ Internal Click) is a very important metric to monitor traffic to your website.

We have been using these strategies for our clients across different verticals and they have been really helpful in setting new benchmarks. Hopefully, this post has given you insights on some of the best practices to be followed for running a successful GSP campaign. This ad format is definitely worth trying.|||

The digital ecosystem in India is growing rapidly. Demonetization has definitely acted as a catalyst to bolster the growth of digital India. However, the internet connectivity still poses a challenge…