With the first round of the French presidential election just nine days away, Facebook is tightening up its game with regards to false information being shared in users' news feeds.

Last week, Facebook said it would start publishing notifications about its "10 tips to spot fake news" at the tops of users' feeds. The tips include pretty basic ideas like closely examining the URL, article date, and source, as well as encouragement to "check the evidence" and suggestions to compare the "news" to other articles. Here's the full list of tips.

The idea was just to flag the tips for "a few days" in 14 countries, but today it looks like the war against fake news is far from over. With a major election upcoming, Facebook—which saw mounting criticism following the US election in November—is eager to let the world know it's on watch against false information.

It’s time to get rid of the Facebook “news feed,” because it’s not news Facebook has now run the "fake news" tips in several major French newspapers, including at least Le Monde, Les Échos, Libération, Le Parisien, and 20 Minutes, according to TechCrunch's Parisian correspondent.

People who still regularly read print newspapers aren't likely to have huge overlap with people getting snookered by fake news—and it's debatable how many of those there are, anyhow. Rather, the print run is likely more about letting the more educated parts of the French electorate know that Facebook is being diligent about doing the work that's going to be expected of it in Western democracies.

On Wednesday, Facebook published a post on its security blog about how it was taking further action to delete fake accounts and to stop bots that create such accounts. In France alone, that led to the deletion of 30,000 accounts.

"With these changes, we expect we will also reduce the spread of material generated through inauthentic activity, including spam, misinformation, or other deceptive content that is often shared by creators of fake accounts," wrote Shabnam Shaik, a Facebook technical program manager.|||

The 10 tips are basic news literacy, but Facebook wants the world to know.