Since building an app is similar creating an art, with many elements and each one amalgamated in the appropriate proportions, it is a craft that requires mastery.

And with pervasiveness of Smartphones it becomes quintessential for businesses especially e-commerce ones, to better have a presence or lose the healthy stream of revenues.

However building a website which has exceptional navigation, is user friendly and visually appealing is no joke. It requires carefully crafted strategy, U/UX, Design, development and other various factors to finally get a feature rich app; until now.

Cedcommerce has done it all for you: be it brainstorming about the best design, icons, theme and other aspects. The MageNative app that convert any Magento website to a feature rich magento app into a feature rich app without any fuss.

It is uber important to weed out all the guessing work from the navigation and embed a user friendly design that weeds out all the guessing work and ensures easy navigation and fluent user actions. For this your customers get:

The interface must convey interactivity or your consumers will leave the app immediately. Therefore, the pleasing Interface of the Magento app ensures your customers engage and understand the app almost instantly.

With each extra page you kill the enthusiasm of the visitor to purchase and your chances to earn revenue. Thus, the app is optimized to ensure Redundant buyer journey, killing all the extra pages and steps and ensuring the buyer journey is optimum and compels decision making, minimizes the cart abandonment rate and maximizes the conversion rate. To ensure this, the app has:

Aforementioned embedded features ensure whenever your user visits your website he has an awesome experience. But it doesn’t end here, MageNative app has all the feature which puts you on the full control of your app and help you scale.

The app has Multifarious approach to marketing. Which ensure maximum outreach of your products to your targeted audiences and help you influence. To achieve this, the app contains several tools that ensures you to run your marketing campaigns aggressively.

Another important facet. If you can’t standout you can’t sell and we understand that. Therefore, the MageNative app lets you personalize your app. You just need to be prepared with eye-ball grabbing graphics and upload them into the app and ensure complete personalization.

Also, the app almost has all the measures put-in place that ensures your customers instantly contact you which further helps in building trust and establishing authority

If you can’t measure your growth, you would always be short of your goals. Most Certainly. Therefore. The app has all the provisions and tools that help you track your marketing efforts and create reports to out perform your competitors.

Barcode Scanner : Your customers can scan barcode of any product and search it at your m-commerce store:

RTL (Right to Left Language) Compatibility: Supports Arabic, Hebrew and other right-to-left compatible languages.

OTP and Phone No Login : for you to ensure hassle free sign up and login (in pipeline).

Available with 90 day free trial period, the MageNative app ensures you start your mobile commerce journey in the whisker and you don’t have to run after developers, designers and then push them to comply with deadlines. All of it and everything ends with MageNative app.|||

Since building an app is similar creating an art, with many elements and each one amalgamated in the appropriate proportions, it is a craft that requires mastery. And with pervasiveness of…