When I started SendOwl I had a choice: to bootstrap or go down the VC route. A lot this decision I’ve talked about before: how I wanted to retain control, how the VC model only creates temporary companies and how you have to grow fast or die. This wasn’t what I wanted. And I knew this because I’d already worked out what drives me — my Why. And it worries me how few people think about this.

If you ask somebody what they’d do if they won the lottery, or sold their company for $100 million, they’d usually say they’d live on a beach. This might sound quite appealing to you right now. However, a beach, good cocktails and all inclusive food are great for a 2 week holiday each year. Then the novelty wears off. That’s true of anything in life — the novelty wears off. You might last a month, 3 months or even a few years on that beach. But at some point you’re going to get bored of Mojito island. And you’re going to look for something to do in your life — something to add meaning. And that’s why you need to work out your Why.

Money is nice: it can make life a lot easier. But chasing money for the sake of it is futile. I remember vividly a conversation with a financial broker who worked with high net worth clients in London’s financial district. He told me he’d met some incredibly rich and successful people over his career but one thing that stood out was the difference between millionaires and billionaires. Whilst the millionaires were on the whole arrogant and seemed obsessed with their wealth and creating more, the billionaires weren’t in it for the money. They were there for the passion, to do what they loved. And the money was a side effect of that. Study after study finds money doesn’t improve life quality but so many people chase it because they’re striving for their Why without realising.

So how do you work out your Why? Well it can be hard, but one of my favourite technique is to question yourself about what it is you want in life and then keep going deeper. I want to be rich because it’ll give me the time to train as a full time athlete. I want to train full time as an athlete because health is extremely important to me and I’ve always wanted to know where my boundaries are. Health has always been important to me because… At some point you get to a core value you can’t break and that’s your Why.

Another approach is to think why you’d like to be a millionaire. Think about what it is that being a millionaire buys you that you don’t have now. Not material possessions but things like “freedom from working for others”, “ability to give back more to my community”, “the chance to go do X that I’ve always wanted to do”. Then think if you had that whether you’d be bothered about being a millionaire any more. If not you’ve just hit your Why.

This presentation from Simon Sinek is also excellent. The same principle applies to companies as much as people and if you’re struggling to get started it should help. It may take a few attempts but you’ll eventually get there. You’ll hit some point you can’t get past and your face will light up. You’ve just found your Why.

For me, I didn’t like working for other people, I didn’t like working long hours with no choice about it, and I didn’t like being stuck in a 9–5 job with no end in sight. The bureaucracy and politics in the corporate world drove me crazy and the interesting jobs were only available at the end of your career. And who wants to wait for that? I knew I could do a better job on my own (and have a lot more fun doing it). What I wanted was the ability to choose my projects/interests and go after them when I wanted. It’s freedom I craved. My Why.

Take marathon running for example — after several years of training I ran a sub 3 hour marathon and then I pretty quickly lost interest. People encouraged me to go for the next milestone but I knew it was over. I’d done what mattered to me: had the freedom to follow an interest until my passion for it had dimmed. Equally, I created the freedom to set up my own company, SendOwl, in 2010 with $50. And my passion for this — and the company itself — is as strong as ever.

It’s at this point you could get tangled up in the old saying: “Money buys freedom”. But this is the critical bit where many people go wrong. There’s a lot of ways to have more freedom without first becoming a millionaire. You could, for example, move to a lower cost country and work remotely while earning the wage rate of your role in Europe/USA. Your disposable income would rise as your expense base would be lower and that extra cash would give you a lot more freedom.

Or you could jack in the job you do and take something you’re passionate about that’s only 3 days per week. It brings you just enough money to live (if you skip pointless spending and avoid high rent areas) and a lot of spare time to do what you want. If your passion is a discipline that pays poorly (eg art, journalism) you could take a higher paying job out of hours to get you started and fund your dream. Although it may not seem like it, there are always options.

Once you’ve discovered your Why you can work on optimising your life around it. Want Freedom? Start a company or choose a career where you’ve got a lot more control over your work type and duration. Want adventure? Take a high paying contract for 6 months of the year and minimise your expenses so you can spend the remaining 6 months of the year travelling. Whatever you do though, don’t chase the money. In the long run your motivation will fade, you’ll make decisions based on the wrong reasons and you won’t end up enjoying the ride.

Work out your Why and chase that. Forget the money.|||

When I started SendOwl I had a choice: to bootstrap or go down the VC route. A lot this decision I’ve talked about before: how I wanted to retain control, how the VC model only creates temporary…