Over the last few weeks the Drupal community has been in turmoil over the news that Drupal 8 lead developer Larry Garfield AKA Crell has been forced to leave the project:

This comes due to personal differences in thinking of the Project Lead Dries Buytaert and Larry. The exact reasons remain murky, but no crimes have been done - this much is certain.

Larry has been open in his communication from his part, in a series of articles - ending with Regarding the continued mystery. In the meanwhile the Drupal Association has also been communicating to the community, and Dries has promised expediting organisational changes to the Drupal Association.

While the backstory remains unclear the bottom line is that for the Drupal project Larry is a great loss. He was fundamental in architecting the underpinnings that make Drupal 8 tick, actively developing as well as maintaining relations with the broader PHP community.

Apparently Larry had already been looking at focusing on other things, and this was key in Dries' decision to enforce his power to expel him from the project. Regardless of whether or not Drupal will continue to be a large part in Larry's life, we hope all the best for him both professionally and personally.

It's worth nothing that these news comes in just months after the ousting of another key member of the Drupal community, Karoly Négyesi (chx) following accusations over edgy personality. The key teaching here is that Open Source is very much politics and committing yourself too much into a single project with a strong leader can be risky.

Looks like the Drupal community has already felt the tremors in the form of the Drupal Confessions movement:

It looks like the upcoming Drupalcon Baltimore in the US later this month will be an interesting event and can be a significant watershed for the Drupal project.

Update: In some recent news the Drupal Community Working group has taken to say that Larry has NOT been officially exiled from Drupal, but that this is only Dries personal move which is yet to be ratified. In the meanwhile Klausi, who originally did reporting on Larry's activities has been temporarily banned from Drupal:|||

