Tailor is a layout service that uses streams to compose a web page from fragment services. O'Reilly describes it in the title of this blog post as "a library that provides a middleware which you can integrate into any Node.js server." It's partially inspired by Facebook’s BigPipe, but developed in an ecommerce context.

Some of Tailor's features and benefits:

Tailor is part of Project Mosaic, which aims to help developers create microservices for the frontend. The Mosaic also includes an extendable HTTP router for service composition (Skipper) with related RESTful API that stores routes (Innkeeper); more components are in the pipeline for public release. If your front-end team is making the monolith-to-microservices transition, you might find Tailor and its available siblings beneficial.

Microservices get a lot of traction these days. They allow multiple teams to work independently from each other, choose their own technology stacks and establish their own release cycles. Unfortunately, frontend development hasn’t fully capitalized yet on the benefits that microservices offer. The common practice for building websites remains “the monolith”: a single frontend codebase that consumes multiple APIs.

What if we could have microservices on the frontend? This would allow frontend developers to work together with their backend counterparts on the same feature and independently deploy parts of the website — “fragments” such as Header, Product, and Footer. Bringing microservices to the frontend requires a layout service that composes a website out of fragments. Tailor was developed to solve this need.

Tailor uses parse5 to parse the template, where it replaces each with a stream from the fragment server and with the result of function.

A fragment is an http(s) server that renders only the part of the page and sets header to provide urls to CSS and JavaScript resources. Check for the draft implementation.

A JavaScript of the fragment is an AMD module, that exports an function, that will be called with DOM element of the fragment as an argument.

Note: For compatability with AWS the header can also be passed as

Some of the concepts in Tailor are described in detail on the specific docs.

Go to http://localhost:8080/index after running the specific example.

Note: Please run the examples with node versions > 6.0.0

To start running benchmark execute and wait for couple of seconds to see the results.

Please check the Contributing guidelines here.|||

tailor - A streaming layout service for front-end microservices