We’re building a new kind of learning environment: One with immense collaboration but no coercion, and diverse participants but a common purpose of becoming better programmers. We’re building a place to realize the ideas of Holt, Illich, and Papert.

Want to help? If you’re new to RC, read on to learn about the role of facilitators and if this might be a good fit for you. If you’re a member of the RC community, read on because this job is probably not what you think it is.

RC is a radically self-directed educational retreat integrated with a recruiting agency. The primary educational value of RC comes from Recursers themselves: RC is peer-to-peer, which is why it gets better as the community becomes larger and more diverse. RC is self-directed because we believe that education is (to quote John Holt) “the product of the activity of the learner,” and that people learn most effectively when they are in control of and have responsibility for their own education.

Experienced and new programmers come to RC from around the world to spend six or twelve weeks in New York focused on getting better at programming. Afterwards, alumni remain highly involved in the community, both offline and online.

RC is funded through recruiting fees paid by partner companies when they hire alumni we refer to them. This allows us to keep RC free for everyone, and to fund need-based living expense grants for people from groups traditionally underrepresented in technology. There is no expectation or requirement that people who attend the retreat want or take a new job.

The job of facilitators is to improve the environment, structure, and operations of RC. This includes both the experience of participating in our retreat and of being an alum, and both the educational and career services aspects of our business.

Much of this work can be thought of it in terms of questions we try to answer: How can we establish a stronger culture of peer code review and feedback? How can we make it easier for people to find good pairing partners and collaborators in the RC community? How can we help Recursers tackle more challenging and ambitious projects? How can we better support people in learning how to navigate a self-directed environment? How can we maintain and improve the cohesion and trust in our community as it continues to grow? How can we more effectively support people in finding jobs they like? How can we change our physical and social environment to better support both collaboration and quiet, individual work?

Answering these questions and changing RC in response to them requires wearing many hats, from writing to programming to building furniture to project management. It also involves both working independently and collaborating closely with other RC employees and members of our community.

Every job has downsides, and this one is no exception. People usually learn about these things after they join a company, but we think it’s important to highlight them in advance:

Thankfully, we think this job has many more good things going for it:

Lastly, it’s important that you share our core beliefs about education. Dissent and skepticism are great, but if we don’t all agree on enough of the big things we’ll never get anything done.

After each stage we’ll let you know whether or not we’d like to continue as quickly as possible (our goal is within two business days). If you’re advancing to the next stage, we may also give you feedback about what we thought you did well and what you could improve on for the next round.|||

The Recurse Center is a self-directed, community-driven educational retreat for programmers in New York City.