We caught up with Geert-Jan Persoon, one of our alumni and co- founder of SignRequest. SignRequest is a platform that enables business professionals and their network to get documents signed easy, fast, legally binding and secured within a tailor made solution.

The company was founded in 2014. They now have users in over 25 countries while the number of users, at least ten folded since 2015. In October of 2016 SignRequest won the Dutch Legal Tech Award, rewarding their hard work. Putting it in Geert-Jans’ own words “there is a lot of growth going on”.

It is quite impressive how much they have grown in the last years, especially while dealing with a big competitor. In the early days, investors were keen on bringing up this competitor whenever talking about the concept of SignRequest. Geert-Jan explains: “in the world of VCs everybody knows DocuSign, this is our biggest competitor — it is a company that raised a large amount of money — and they would say “how are you going to hold up?”. But now that sentiment is starting to change as Geert-Jan noticed that investors as well as consumers are getting to know & work with the brand. “Now they are saying: How is DocuSign going to keep up now that you are here?” Geert-Jan adds.

SignRequest was able to finance everything themselves, which is quite an accomplishment on its own. Even now, when asking if they are looking for an investment at this time, Geert-Jan tells me that its taken into consideration, but they are not quite certain about it. What is certain, is their clear vision for the future. At the moment they are working on the realization of short term goals. “We are going to link SignRequest to bank applications. In addition, the web application is something that is continuously getting updated for the better, there is a new release almost every day”. Looking at the market, their focus right now is on Human Resources, Childcare and Sales. These niches seem to have high interest in a product like SignRequest, as a variety of contracts are being signed every day. Customers of the fast growing startup are companies like Young Capital (Recruitment) and Travelbird (Marketing).

When asked what Geert-Jan is most excited about he tells me that he’s quite proud of their growth model, that makes anyone that uses SignRequest automatically introduce it to the person on the receiving end, who is also going to use the application. “The beautiful thing is that we can grow rapidly with a relatively small team”. And not only that, but it’s truly adding value to its users; “We are proud of the fact that it’s a fine tool that eliminates a lot of irritations. We get a lot of positive reactions of our clients which we put up on our wall in the office”.

The inspiring story made me realize it’s not a losing game when starting out with a big competitor in the business. Maybe even more so, it gives you that extra push to work hard, aim high and prove sceptics wrong. So when having a startup, or even when still in the idea phase, don’t get nervous when similar concepts are popping up around you, it’s all in the determination, passion and of course data driven decision making that decides your company’s faith.

This passion and drive is very noticeable when talking with Geert-Jan “We aim to be the biggest player in the market, of course that is what everybody wants” he says while laughing. But I am under the impression that they might actually get there.|||

We caught up with Geert-Jan Persoon, one of our alumni and co- founder of SignRequest. SignRequest is a platform that enables business professionals and their network to get documents signed easy…