Games are a great way of releasing stress. After a hectic day nothing gives more satisfaction than enjoying a good video game. And it’s even more fun when you get to play as the bad guy because that gives you a freedom to do anything! Here are 8 AAA games that let you play as the bad guy.

Grand Theft Auto games have always been wildly popular and in the limelight for all the wrong reasons. This game series allows you to go into the shoes of a criminal character and do anything you wish to do in it’s vast open world. You can be as bad as you want in this game and in it’s missions you are also rewarded for the same.

Mafia games allow you to play as a Mafioso and play through the story of intense organized crime. The 2nd installment of this series was perhaps the best one ever. Let’s not talk about the third one..

Kratos, the God Of War, is on a mission to kill all the Gods and his Father Zeus. What can get more evil than this? You slaughter all the Greek Gods that are worshiped religiously. Perhaps the most evil game ever made!

Saints Row is a light hearted take on what can be debated as being a game that Grand Theft Auto truly intended to be if it didn’t go the whole realistic route. It’s hilariously awesome to play as the bad guy or girl(depending on the gender you choose) as you have some real nasty weapons to kill people around you.

This highly controversial game created by Rockstar is one of the most goriest survival horror game which let’s you play in a stealth based mode to kill. It won many awards and recognition as well as had a sequel in 2007.

Many might debate that the protagonist might actually be a good guy, however, none of his actions done in the game would say so as he brutally murders innocent civilians just to test his powers essentially treating everyone in the city as his lab rats of sort.

Clearly the title itself gives us an idea about the intent of the game. You play the role of a Hitman, wherein you go through a series of plots in which you can decide how to kill your target. This game let’s you be creative and gives you full control over scenarios in which you can complete missions.

This game’s premise is quite similar to Grand Theft Auto. Although your main character is an undercover cop, yet your actions depending on the way you play the game can be deemed as being bad morally. It’s all a matter of your choice on how you choose to play this game.

Hope you enjoyed this list. Follow us on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram for more such posts and you can also download our app to stay updated: Tell Me Nothing|||

