Co-founders Joric Gonzales (center left) and Archie Dolit (center right) with wives Abby Angeles-Gonzales (left) and Marieden Dolit (right) at a VirtualRacePH event in U.P. On behalf of Charity First Foundation, co-founders Joric Gonzales and Archie Dolit of VirtualRacePH organized a virtual race and successfully raised funds for one student's tuition fee. VirtualRacePH has also raised funds for Marine Wild Life Watch. Furthermore, they are currently organizing a third virtual race for the victims of the 6.7 magnitude quake that devastated Surigao. Proceeds for this third virtual race will go to Caritas Manila, Inc.

Perhaps you've heard of fun runs. A virtual race is pretty much the same. But in this case, you do a run on your own time on your own space. Then after you have reached your goal, you submit proof of your accomplishment to the organizers. In this case, the organizer is VirtualRacePH. They take things two big steps further. Most virtual races use competition to fuel registration. VirtualRacePH uses advocacies. Most fun runs would shell out at most 10% to a worthy cause. VirtualRacePH contributes at least 35% of its gross proceeds to charity. MBPS Running Club and Team TOES finishes VirtualRacePH's 21 Day Challenge for Charity First Foundation.

A Will to Run, A Heart for Charity

With each new day, Joric Gonzales is needing less and less of an introduction in the running community. He can run 50 km in 5 hrs and 20 minutes. He just broke the 1 hr 30 min mark for a 21 km race. He is known as the "RedCapGuy", courtesy of his favorite running attire. He is the founder of Fit Feet's Feats. And now, he is also the co-founder of VirtualRacePH. On the other hand, his co-founder and office mate, Archie Dolit, could use some introduction. Archie completed his first international marathon in Standard Chartered Marathon Singapore back in 2016. But really, the interesting story with Archie is that he's paying his education forward. Archie has been an engineer for a multi national company for eight years now. But his career would not have been possible with out his five year ECCE course in the Ateneo. During our coffee interview, Archie said, "I owe my college degree to Pathways, Ateneo Office of Admission and Aid, and Charity First Foundation". It isn't, at all, odd to see Archie giving back to the community. In fact, that's how he spends most of his Saturdays.

This is why The 21 Day Challenge, the first event hosted by VirtualRacePH, selected Charity First Foundation as its beneficiary. Archie has a soft spot for that charity because it was one of the charities that paid his way through college. Registration took place between December 12, 2016 to Jan 29, 2017 and closed at 450 participants. The virtual race took place from Jan 22 to Feb 19. As we have verified with Mr. Konrad Chua, Charity First Foundation's Executive Director, VirtualRacePH released P36,000 to Charity First Foundation on April 6, 2017. This amount is equivalent to a year's worth of tuition fee for one deserving student. The first event was aptly entitled The 21 Day Challenge because according to Joric, it takes 21 days to build a habit. In this virtual race, you aim to complete a total of either 25 km, 50 km, or 100 km in 21 days. And true enough, one of their participants, a mom who had never ran in her whole life, built a new habit by completing the 100 km category in 21 days. To add more to her accomplishment, she started her new habit less than a year after giving birth. First time runner finishes VirtulRacePH's 21 Day Challenge (100 km category) for Charity First Foundation. Their second event, Beach Buddies Challenge, took place from March 26 to April 9. In this event, a total of 106 km must be completed either solo ("Kaisa"), by buddy ("Kasama"), or by Trio ("Katropa"). In this event, VirtualRacePH was able to rake in around 350 participants. Furthermore, they were able to get their youngest participants on record - a triplet of kids aged 8! That's a good win for the fitness advocacy! This event's proceeds will be released to Marine Wild Life Watch. 8 year old triplets participate in VirtualRacePH's 106 km Beach Buddies Challenge for Marine Wild Life Watch.

Their third event, Tindog Surigao, was hatched during the registration phase of Beach Buddies Challenge. On Feb 10, 2017, a 6.7 magnitude earthquake devastated Surigao into a state of calamity. News state that over 100 were injured. The local airport was closed. Power was interrupted. Eleven towns were affected. Caritas Manila, Inc. executing their advocacy. Photo courtesy of Caritas Manila, Inc. and VirtualRacePH. It's a virtual race with a very real cause. VirtualRacePH aims to mobilize at least 500 runners to raise P100,000 to aid the people of Surigao. Proceeds will go to Caritas Manila, Inc. Tindog Surigao is the first of three events in VirtualRacePH's Bayani Series. In this series, they aim to support three worthy causes - one in Luzon, one in Visayas, and one in Mindanao. Participants of Tindog Surigao gets the first piece of VirtualRacePH's Bayani Series of medals. This piece represents your aid to the people of Mindanao. To pledge your aid to Tindog Surigao, please visit the VirtualRacePH website.|||

Virtual Race, Real Cause