You don't have a data team, your engineers are still producing your business reports and you’re being asked to deliver increasingly sophisticated and diverse analytics to the business. The business has multiple initiatives and even though the definition of success is in an email (or even scribbled on the back of a napkin) it is not tracked. Sounds familiar ?

For a Mid-Stage SaaS startup (approximately 50 to 150 employees), the data needs are demanding and unique. You want to see indicators showing that your growth hacks or marketing initiatives are working or at least moving towards the desired outcomes. You want 'just enough' insights.

Get one metric out quickly and show value.

This requires you to install a reporting tool and show something relevant for a recent business initiative. For example: The number of signups from a campaign you ran. We use the open source tool Metabase for this.

Your data models serve as the underlying business logic for your analytics and should be shared across all of your analytics use cases, from BI to data science. Make sure that your process allows all users to make changes to data modeling scripts.

What we have done at QuestionPro is our home grown warehouse collects data from our decentralized databases and also doubles in as our data model whose scripts are managed by our DevOps team. To be mature here - you will need data analysts controlling the data model. Another open source tool which I recommend here is dbt . Each analyst can use dbt to build their own isolated copy of the analytics schema with an sql syntax.

This is a critical business question which your SaaS company needs to figure out sooner than later. If you use Google Analytics, you better have eCommerce tracking on. This helps your Marketing and Product Marketing team figure out which landing pages to spend more time optimizing in terms of content and conversion. This is especially useful for price sensitive countries like LATAM and the Middle East because you can start testing different messaging.

What we do here is (because we are always short on resources :)) is we work with a pre revenue startup ( thanks to Silicon Valley there are hundreds of these companies !) to help us set our Google Analytics properly so we can do attribution right.

This is when you have truly matured in your analytics setup. You have to start tying marketing and product analytics together. For that to happen you will have to send marketing and product events to one datastore. A little known fact is even though there are very expensive solutions out there ( which easily charge $8k+ per month at a minimum), with a little bit of scrappiness and a roll up your sleeves attitude you can get this setup done by yourself. Snowplow Analytics does everything that the paid tools do, but it’s open source. You can either host it yourself or you can pay Snowplow or Fivetran to host the collector for you. If you don’t make this transition during this phase, you’re going to be missing out on collecting much more granular data which will give you a holistic view of product usage.

It is time to get out of your excel document. For a SaaS business, you should be working on a churn forecasting model. This includes churn by Product Category and churn by Product SKUs. The messaging content and frequency outside the product will start making a difference when combined with a Retention strategy. This is your insurance policy for not losing customers.

You also want some level of lead scoring which can help with Pipeline forecasting. You can do this in a non scalable way using google spreadsheets. This is better than NOT doing this at all.

We are fond of the BET paradigm which Spotify popularized. It doesn't matter if it's a product feature rollout, a sales or marketing bet - you don't know where you are, what you are doing unless you can look at your data. So when you roll out something ensure that you have your dashboard ready to measure what you are rolling out.

The core of your data team should always be data analysts: folks who are proficient in SQL and your home grown BI tool and spend their time working with business users to help them service their data requests. Figuring out the profile of this person and how to train and equip them is incredibly important.

* That does cost money. Good talent don't come for free :)|||

