“A lot depends on the ability of a person to break into circles, meet people, network and interact.” ― Magnus Nwagu Amudi

Networking with thought leaders is an important practice that can facilitate your business growth as it can extend your brand’s reach and boost your visibility by taking advantage of thought leaders huge followership.

A study by Twitter and Annalect has shown that 49% of people say they rely on recommendations from influencers when making purchase decisions.

That being said: connecting with influencers is what you should be looking to do if you’ve not started.

But make no mistakes, it takes hard work to connect with this busy influencers.

In this article, you’ll learn 7 steps to connect with thought leaders in your industry without having them say no.

Having a clear goal and objective can help guard your steps and allow you stay focus in the networking process.

Why do you want to connect with this thought leader? Do you want advice, mentorship, recommendation or are you seeking to partner on a project? Your objective should be clear to you.

Find out details about your target thought leader -- their preferred social media platform, forum, and the type of content they like to consume. Be where they are. Write valuable long comments on their articles.

To further research your influencers, use tools like Buzzstream, Ninja Outreach, Mail shake, Inky bee and Big Outreach.

Generally, with these tools, you can search and dig deep into discovering details about your target influencer. While they are not free tools, you have access to their free trials and if you like their service. You can consider paying for it. It’s a worthy investment.

Here comes the best part:

Track the conferences your target influencer is attending and ensure you attend. Meet with them at the conference and ensure you have a conversation with them. Write a blog about your experience at the event.

Mention your chat with them and share some insights you learned from your conversation with them on your blog.

If there were keynote speakers at the event -- pretty sweet. Mention some key takeaways you got from the event.

Let them know you wrote about them, share it on social media and ensure you tag them. This is by far the easiest way to connect with influencers.

Almost everyone will more likely read a content that they are been mentioned.

Remember the quote by Dale Carnegie:

﻿“When you are networking you are doing more than just marketing your business; you are marketing yourself.” -- Timothy M. Houston

It’s important to have it in mind that when you do connect with your target influencer they’ll check you out. Create a consistent social media account with a high-quality professional photograph sshowing our headshot across all your social media accounts.

Make sure your first impression is compelling and convinces them that you are worth their time.

It’s easier to connect with people you share similar stories with. Find out cities they’ve been to, find something you have in common with them – that thing that makes both of you thick. It’ll be easier for you start an interesting conversation from there.

“ Networking that matters is helping people achieve their goals.” -- Seth Godin

Don’t make the mistake of asking right away. Firstly, find a way to help them, share articles/tools you think will be valuable to them.

Find a way to add value to them. Look at their websites, take the time to find something you think they are not seeing that may affect their bottom line, look out for ways to help.

That way you’ll make yourself relevant and made it difficult for them to say no when you ask.

You know influencers are always busy people, they receive lots of requests as yours. So ensure you make your request brief, clear and courteous. Don’t waste their time.

Your request should not be selfish, it should be should have a way to improve their life or business.

Send them an email, give them a call or better send a handwritten letter(I recommend this) expressing your gratitude for their time and effort. Make sure your email is personalized and stands out. Don’t send an email from a gobbled template.

Networking for your business is a great way to grow your audience and improve your visibility. Be on the lookout for opportunities to connect. As you practice these fail-proof steps to connecting with influencers.

Have more tips to share? I’ll like to see them at the comment section.|||

