

 The human design is something I only found out later in life and I wish I knew about this many many years before.

And the reason I wish that is because when I found out about it, I just realised how due to conditioning and limiting beliefs I’ve spent years acting and doing things that were not part of my human design type, and therefore many times struggling and feeling frustrated.

I already had an idea at the time I found out about my human design type of how I feel good and peaceful when I do things a certain way, but knowing my type was like a huge relief, like a weight lifted off my shoulders.

So, what is the Human Design?

It is basically a map of your unique genetic human design. It is like a “user manual” for life, based on the decision-making process.

It uses your birth date, time and place to generate it and is related to the

When you find out about this (usually in your adult life), it can truly awaken your self awareness and inner power. It surely did it for me.

When you find out about your type and is description, it will be like a A-HA moment.

You’ll understand so many things from your past, why you’ve had the successes you’ve had and also the failures you’ve had.

You’ll know how your own energy works and how you’re supposed to navigate through life easily and effortlessly achieving everything you want.

Because your human design type will tell you how to operate in alignment with whom you truly are.

It is basically going out of the mind and its tricks and start listening to your body and how you feel.

We’re so conditioned in life to act through the mind and ignore how we feel that knowing your human design type can bring a profound sense of relief.

When you start taking decisions based on your energy type and your human design, it will eliminate resistance from your life.

And, guess what? When you eliminate resistance from your life, you can use the Law of Attraction fully and stay in the vortex and in alignment with everything you want. Things will just flow and start to manifest for you.

As you live according to your design, the vibration of your energy field (your aura) changes. Resistance and negative behaviour patterns go away giving space to new positive things to enter your life.

There are 4 types of human design (and a 5th one “integrated” in one of them): Projector, Generator (and Generator Manifestor), Manifestor and Reflector:

Manifestors are only around 8% of all people.

This is the only type that is here to take initiative into doing things.

Do you know the slogan “just do it”? We tend to think that is intended to everyone, but in reality it is intended to manifestors only.

This type are the ones that go and make things happen. The go-getters of the world.

In order to fully succeed in life, they simply need to inform others of what they’re going to do before they do it, especially when there is other people involved and impacted by their actions.

Communicating with others needs to be key for them.

Many manifestors are seen as the rebels, especially in an early childhood and as the ones always causing problems (especially when they do not inform of their actions beforehand), which can lead for parents trying to control them or putting them on a “leash” and it can lead to anger and apathy.

Strategy: Inform those who will be impacted by your actions.

This type is about 22% of the population.

They are not here to work, they are here to guide other people.

But, they need two things before they guide someone: they need to be recognised by others and they need to be invited to do so.

If they try to go out and initiate (the just do it of manifestors) without an invite from others to do so, they’ll find resistance and feel no one values them and it can lead to bitterness.

Many projectors go through life trying to guide others without waiting for the invitations to come to them, afraid the invitations will never come, but it is really when they relax that their aura does the “talking”, and the right invitations will come effortlessly.

Almost 70 % of all people are Generators.

Generators the workers and builders of the world and the world needs them.

But they very often end up doing work they do not want or like because they tend to go against their human design. And the same applies to relationships and other life situations, which can lead to frustration and exhaustion.

Their energy field is based on the sacral, but many live in their minds.

For generators, life is not about the “just do it”, but about the “just wait to respond”.

In order to live successfully, they have to take the time they need to feel things before they take a decision. This can be hours or days.

Like the projectors, they should not initiate and let life come to them instead.

Their aura is like a powerful magnet, bringing to them everything they want. And when they learn to not initiate and relax, waiting for the Universe to bring them the right things to them, life is much easier and effortless.

Because when generators try to push and “make things happen”, they meet incredible resistance and will attract the wrong things to them.

Their life is all about doing what they love and only that shows them who they are and brings them happiness.

There are the Pure Generators and the Manifesting Generators.

The difference is, Pure Generators need to not initiate and wait for divine guidance to move them forward, and then responding from how they feel.

Manifesting Generators are even more tempted to initiate and by doing so very often skip important steps of a process.

Reflectors make up only about 1 % of the population.

They have all their centres open and therefore are completely open to the world and others.

They take in the energy of other people very easily and are very influenced by other people’s energetic frequencies.

Their total openness can make them at times almost invisible to others.

It is very important that reflectors be with the right people and understand their human design to be successful in life.

They also need to take their time to make important decisions and avoid any kind of pressure.

They are lunar beings, tied to the lunar cycle, so the strategy for them is to wait 29 days (a lunar cycle), before making any major decision .

Life for you is an impersonal experience. As you go through life, learning the truth of “this isn’t me” again and again, your greatest potential is that of complete transparency.

Your openness can be energetically exhausting so it is important to have your own space where you can relax.

I am a Generator and the relief I felt when I found out about the human design and about my type was unbelievable.

I remember reading through the description of my type and going yes, yes, yes!

I was conditioned since childhood to live in the “just do it” mindset, and having played competitive tennis for many years only helped on that, I was very much focused on initiating and making things happen and brought that into work and relationships later. But it never felt right to me.

It was after my spiritual awakening that I started to truly value how I feel and live from my inner truth. And I started to realise that things happen much more successfully and effortlessly when I just wait for divine guidance and respond to it. In other words, when I just flow with the current of life.

I then found out about the human design and it was an incredible revelation and validation of what I was already feeling – that I should not initiate and just wait for life to bring me the right things to me and respond according to how I feel, taking my time to do it.

Needless to say that nowadays is it exactly how I live my life and I feel it is really like bringing heaven to earth, getting out of your mind and out of conditionings and just living life according to your design and your energy.

If you wish to know your human design type and have a more detailed analysis to help you, click below and I’ll send you your report within 2 days:|||

The human design is something I only found out later in life and I wish I knew about this many many years before. And the reason I wish that is because when I