Network performance monitoring is the use of a system that constantly monitors a computer network for slow or failing components and that notifies the network administrator (via email, SMS or other alarms) in case of outages or other trouble. Network performance monitoring is part of network management.

Networks are normally present where a big group of computer systems are working in tandem and there can be needs to share data and access common data by them. All the devices connected to a network are normally known as nodes. A network allows to share the hardware and software between the nodes. When the network is created, it can lead to a lot of issues like slowing down of nodes, some nodes being unresponsive or being down, a node being affected by a spyware or ransomware and more. The security, the availability, the always on status and just the working of network as intended is important to avoid any kind of disruptions or downtime. IT departments use a myriad of software and tools to achieve the goal of network monitoring and to make sure they detect any inefficiencies or abnormalities at an early stage but not all tools are created equal. A lot of them would do something well while might be mediocre at other things.

A great network monitoring tool can not just monitor network but provide better insights by correlating other metrics and adding intelligent layers of useful information; which can be used in network monitoring to take remedy actions and avoid catastrophic situations. The intelligence added to the raw data is what network monitoring tools have been missing until lately. A network is lifeline of the organisation because the modern day workplaces are highly computer centric and a small problem in the network can greatly affect the productivity of the entire company. The IT staff cannot afford a downtime not only because of the internal work but also because the organisation’s goodwill is at stake in such circumstances.

An ideal situation would be a solution that anticipates the issues, correlates to other plausible events and even suggests steps analysing this data in order to make sure that the network monitoring is not an isolated task. Moreover, network monitoring is not just for avoiding the disturbance in the workflow but also for security purposes. Any unauthorized access attempts should be immediately flagged and the administrator should be informed of such events. All of these events affect the performance of the network and as such are critical for monitoring.

Motadata has been one of the pioneers in the industry providing a unified dashboard with correlation, integration and analysis of the data to provide a robust solution which makes network performance monitoring a cohesive task. Check out Motadata to supercharge your network performance monitoring and find out what you have been missing on.|||

Network Performance Monitoring Network performance monitoring is the use of a system that constantly monitors a computer network for slow or failing components and that notifies the network administrator (via email, SMS or other alarms) in case of outages or other trouble. Network performance monitoring is part of network management. Networks are normally present where…