There’s an open source project called Anbox aka Android in a Box that lets you run Android apps in Linux!

The software is still in alpha and the installer the installer currently requires an operating system that supports snaps, so not all Linux users will be able to easily install Anbox right now. But Ubuntu, arch, Debian, Fedora, OpenSUSE, and several other popular Linux-based operating systems already support snaps.

That’s because Anbox is designed to run on GNU/Linux distributions such as Ubuntu or Fedora, using the same Linux kernel for both the host operating system and for Android.

Anbox is a new open source system that lets you run Android apps on a PC natively, as if they were desktop applications. There’s no emulation required.

Want to run Android apps on a PC? Developers have been offering emulators like BlueStacks and Genymotion for years. But for the most part those applications set up a virtual machine that isolates your entire Android experience from the rest of your operating system.

These are some thoughts about Anbox of Linux Redditors:

E06SP: “Is this legit? I’ve only seen people talking about it, but no reviews.”

Venoush: “It works on my 16.04 machine, but feels like alpha version right now (crashes on music player) but its quite snappy.”

SecretelyAMosinNagant: “Just FYI, it looks like this is only available via snap right now. The github script just installs the snap too.”

Marcthe12: “It uses kernel modules. They are part of the upstream kernel but usualy excluded. Competable checks are needed. May be check the script for the list of modulkes and port it to your distro. that’s the best right now. This is how it does not use the kernel.”

smartdanny: “I would imagine that Google probably doesn’t want this right? Since the newest big selling point of Chromebooks is that they now run Android apps.”

Seriousn00b: “Google can’t do anything about it, the project uses AOSP as a base. They’d have to make Android entirely closed source before and that won’t happen unless they wanna fight almost every other big IT company these days.”

Iommu: “The arc++ backend that chromebooks use for running android apps is open source as well so if they really don’t want people to run android apps on linux they’re not trying very hard.”

FogNL: “Couldn’t get this going on ubuntu 16.10 . Following instructions, i’m left with the anbox container not being able to launch due to missing android.img. Haven’t figured out how to fix this yet. There are a nice few reports of this exact issue on the bugs page of the github.”

Tech_tuna: “I want to be able to run Windows on Android on Linux now. In Docker of course. From VirtualBox VM on OSX.”|||

Run Android Apps in Linux! There’s an open source project called Anbox aka Android in a Box that lets you run Android apps in Linux! Brad Linder reports fo