WordPress is arguably the most popular CMS platform to create and maintain your blog or website, even if you have no coding experience. It powers 27% of the internet – and that tells you everything you need to know.

WordPress is packed with thousands of user-friendly plugins of which many are 100% free. Many developers pay for advanced premium plugins that add amazing value to their websites, but the free plugins featured on this list are more than you need to start taking control of your own website with confidence.

We’ve compiled a list of 11 free plugins that every WordPress website should take advantage of – especially when you’re just getting started – but also for existing, professional WordPress websites.

The plugins on this list are all trusted and highly rated by the WordPress community, they’re easy to install and they’ve all been tested and approved to work with the latest version of WordPress 4.7.3. (and they all include regular updates).

JetPack is packed with a variety of features – it’s like installing many plugins, but you only need to activate one. It includes more than 30 different modules that you can enable or disable as you wish, including web stats, SEO tools, picture galleries, backups, social media sharing and much more. Installation is quick and easy and you can setup a free plan in minutes.

Jetpack includes many functions that other free plugins on this list also provide, but you can easily disable any module on Jetpack and use another plugin instead.

Yoast SEO is one of the most complete WordPress SEO solutions that exists today. It shows you how to optimize your website with better content, meta descriptions, keywords, image titles and XML sitemaps – to name just a few. Yoast Premium also provides premium support, multiple focus keywords, a redirect manager and more, but the free version alone will set you well on your way with all the essential tools you need to get serious about SEO.

Keeping your sitemaps up to date is crucial, so this plugin will automatically generate a XML sitemap and notify all major search engines about any new pages and content.  Rated as one of the best WordPress plugins, it does exactly what it’s supposed to do – without you even knowing it’s there.

The speed and loading time of your website is an important factor, so this plugin takes your dynamic WordPress blog and turns it into static html files, which means your website will load much faster. You just have to install and activate the plugin and it will take care of the rest – no experience required.

Contact Form 7 is the most popular free contact form for WordPress. With an easy setup process and a user-friendly interface, it enables everyone to easily create and manage multiple contact forms. It’s simple, yet reliable and effective – and it gives you more than just the basics to engage with your audience and customers.

This plugin conveniently displays real-time stats and web analytics right in your WordPress dashboard – providing detailed, easy-to-understand stats about users, page views, locations and more. It easily installs in a few minutes and automatically inserts your Google Analytics tracking code into every page of your website.

MailChimp is one of the world’s leading email marketing platforms that allows you to create professional email campaigns – without any coding or design experience. It helps you to create stylish sign-up forms for your website and to manage your subscribers and newsletters without breaking a sweat. It’s so easy, you can start sending today.

Smush allows you to compress and optimize your image files easily without losing quality. You can pretty much resize, optimize and compress all of your images – and improve your SEO ranking – with this impressive tool brought to you by WPMU DEV.

With WooCommerce, you can create an online shop to sell anything, anywhere – whether you sell physical or digital products and services. It’s incredibly user-friendly with more than 300 extensions and fully adaptable to suit your store’s requirements. Take full control of your online store and start selling today!

Page Builder is a powerful page creation plugin with a simple drag and drop interface, which means you’ll never have to touch a line of code to make your website look great. It generates light-weight, SEO friendly code and easily fits in with your favourite WordPress themes and widgets.

Hackers, server crashes or user errors could destroy your website in seconds. UpdraftPlus is trusted by millions to back up and restore their WordPress websites with an easy-to-use interface and scheduling that suits you. Back up all your files to Google Drive, Dropbox, FTP and more and restore your website directly from your WordPress control panel with a single click.

Which essential free WordPress plugins did we miss? Let us know via Twitter &#x1f642;

Want to receive more content like this, along with great guides from the wider startup ecosystem? If so, be sure to join thousands of other startup founders and subscribe to our awesome newsletter:|||

We've compiled a list of 11 free WordPress plugins that every website should take advantage of.