DMV conducted two public workshops in 2013 related to developing regulations for testing of autonomous vehicles. The proposed regulations were then published in the Office of Administrative Law's California Regulatory Notice Register on November 29, 2013. The publishing marked the start of a 45-day public comment period, which ended on January 13, 2014. After a public hearing held on January 14, 2014, DMV delivered final testing regulations to the Office of Administrative Law for approval.

The autonomous vehicles testing regulations were adopted on May 19, 2014 and became effective on September 16, 2014.

You may view the details of the adopted regulations by clicking on the documents below.

The autonomous vehicles testing regulations establish an Autonomous Vehicle Tester Program that is administered by the department's Occupational Licensing Branch. DMV is currently accepting applications for the Autonomous Vehicle Tester Program.

You may view the requirements and application process for manufacturers to obtain DMV's approval prior to testing autonomous vehicles on California public roads by clicking on the link below:

As of May 11, 2017, DMV has issued Autonomous Vehicle Testing Permits to the following entities:

Under the testing regulations, manufacturers are required to provide DMV with a Report of Traffic Accident Involving an Autonomous Vehicle (form OL 316) within 10 business days of the incident.

View Autonomous Vehicle Accident Reports submitted to the department. Each OL 316 is redacted of information that is not appropriate for disclosure under the California Public Records Act.

The California Autonomous Vehicle Testing Regulations require every manufacturer authorized to test autonomous vehicles on public roads to submit an annual report summarizing the disengagements of the technology during testing.  This "disengagement report" is due by January 1 of each year.  The first report covers the period from the date of issuance of the Testing Permit to November 30 of the following year.  Subsequent reports cover the period of December 1 to November 30.

Seven manufacturers (VW/Audi, Mercedes Benz, Google, Delphi Automotive, Tesla Motors, Bosch, and Nissan) were required to submit their first disengagement reports by January 1, 2016.

Four manufacturers (Cruise Automation, BMW, Honda, and Ford) were permitted in 2015 and were required to submit their first disengagement report by January 1, 2017.

If you have been unable to attend the previous workshop or public hearings, you may view the webcast videos of the hearings by clicking on the link below.

For more general information about autonomous vehicles, visit Autonomous Vehicles in California.|||

