Konversation v1.7.2 is a repackage of v1.7.1 with incomplete and badly maintained translations removed. They were accidentally included with the v1.7.1 release. There are no code changes in this release.

Konversation v1.7.1 is a maintenance release that addresses issues with some of the new features introduced in the last major release, such as SASL EXTERNAL and server-time support, along with other minor fixes. As per usual this maintenance release also ships the latest round of translation updates.

Changes from Konversation 1.7 to 1.7.1:

Konversation v1.7 is a major feature release focusing on greatly expanded protocol support, with newly-added support for many more IRC v3 extensions and the much-requested support for SASL EXTERNAL and 'server-time'. Many bugfixes and cleanups along with reinstated features initially lost in the first Frameworks 5-based release series v1.6.x are included as well. Finally, the handbook has been thoroughly refreshed in this release, and building and running on macOS and Windows have seen several fixes.

Changes from 1.7-rc1 to 1.7:

The above change list is relative to the release candidate released last month. Check out the v1.7-rc1 news item below for a list of the bulk of the changes relative to v1.6.2!

Konversation v1.7-rc1 is the first release candidate for the next major version of Konversation. The focus of the v1.7 release is on greatly expanded protocol support, with newly-added support for many more IRC v3 extensions and the much-requested support for SASL EXTERNAL and 'server-time'. Many bugfixes and cleanups along with reinstated features initially lost in the first Frameworks 5-based release series v1.6.x are included as well. Finally, the handbook has been thoroughly refreshed in this release and building on Mac and Windows has seen several fixes.

Changes from 1.6.2 to 1.7-rc1:

Konversation 1.6.2 is a hotfix release that fixes an unfortunate severe crash condition that crept into 1.6.1.

Changes from 1.6.1 to 1.6.2:

Konversation 1.6.1 is a maintenance release that contains various bug fixes for the stable KDE Frameworks 5-based version of Konversation.

Changes from 1.6 to 1.6.1:

Konversation 1.6 is the first stable release of Konversation built on the new KDE Frameworks 5 and Qt 5 library sets, improving integration into many desktop environments, including Plasma Desktop 5, and adding first support for hi-dpi scaling. In addition to porting and reworking things for hi-dpi scaling, a number of behavior improvements and bug fixes were implemented, particularly improved nickname selection behavior at connection time and better layout behavior for the channel topic area.

Unfortunately the 1.6 release removes support for integrating with the KDE Address Book, as the interfaces Konversation was using to achieve this were dropped from KDE Frameworks. A replacement is in the works in the form of the new KPeople library, which we intend to use in a future release. Using KPeople, Konversation will then be able to tightly integrate with various contact management-related features in Plasma Desktop.

Changes from 1.6-beta1 to 1.6:

Konversation 1.6-beta1 is the first release of Konversation built on the new KDE Frameworks 5 and Qt 5 library sets, and intended to allow you to help us test and shake out the remaining issues in the ported code. With stability despite many changes under the hood as the primary goal, the 1.6 release will not bring any new features, though Frameworks 5 and Qt 5 offer a host of efficiency improvements over the old stack and will enable us to support hi-dpi scaling and Wayland going forward.

Known issues in this beta include a lack of addressbook integration support (the needed Frameworks dependencies have not yet been released), drag and drop support for tabs being disabled, and minor visual polish issues, including some visual assets not having been updated to match KDE's new "Breeze" visual identity yet. We expect to resolve these issues in upcoming releases.

Changes from 1.5.1 to 1.6-beta1:

Konversation 1.5.1 is a maintenance release containing only bug fixes. The included changes address several minor behavioral defects and a low-risk DoS security defect in the Blowfish ECB support. The KDE Platform version dependency has increased to v4.9.0 to gain access to newer Qt socket transport security flags.

Changes from 1.5 to 1.5.1:

Konversation 1.5 adds numerous major features over the previous stable release. Of particular note are support for SASL and client certificate authentication, all-new topic management UI, overhauled authentication UI in the Identities dialog, per-tab spell-checking language settings, user-configurable nick context menu entries, mouse spring-loading on tabs, all-new versions of major bundled scripts and improved Ignore and Watched Nicknames systems. Many under-the-hood changes to improve codec support and general performance, along with the usual slew of bug fixes all over, further sweeten the deal. Don't miss out on reading about various other new features and more fixes in the full changelogs since version 1.4, too!

Changes from 1.5-rc2 to 1.5:

After a (too) long wait, Konversation 1.5-rc2 is hopefully our final bid for your aid in assuring the quality of a now-impending final release. Quite a few gnarly bugs have fallen since rc1; some of them long-standing, others were introduced along with the features that made their debut in the preceding test release. Of particular interest to many users will be robustness improvements in the Watched Nicks system and the lifting of certain restrictions on Unicode support that had been in place as a by-product of supporting older, defective Qt versions. See the changelog for more details!

Changes from 1.5-rc1 to 1.5-rc2:

Konversation 1.5-rc1 is the first test release for our next major release. The 1.5 development cycle has lead to significant new features in many areas of the application, from support for SASL and client certificate authentication on the protocol side, to all-new topic management UI, overhauled authentication UI, per-tab spell-checking language settings, user-configurable nick context menu entries and mouse spring-loading in the frontend and all-new versions of major bundled scripts. Improved Ignore, Watched Nicknames and Edit Paste functionality and behavior, performance improvements in some critical codepaths and many other bug fixes and minor UI touch-ups round things out.

Changes from 1.4 to 1.5-rc1:

The dominant theme in Konversation v1.4 is improvements and feature additions to the user interface, particularly to text views, dialogs, (context) menus and input line commands. However, nearly all areas of the application have seen some amount of improvements in this release, as is to be expected given the relatively long relase cycle: Connection behavior, IRC protocol handling, scripting support, encryption support, user documentation - new features, polish and certainly also bug fixes are to be found in all of them. In summary, we hope you will enjoy the best Konversation yet.

The changelog for this release starts with a (very) brief summary of major highlights relative to v1.3.1, followed by the short list of changes since v1.4-beta1. If you skipped the beta, please do refer to the changelog for v1.4-beta1 as well, which is highly detailed and categorized for your reading pleasure.

A brief selection of highlights since 1.3.1:

Changes from 1.4-beta1 to 1.4:

Konversation v1.4-beta1 is the first pre-release leading up to our next major release. A dominant theme in this release cycle have been improvements and feature additions to the user interface, particularly to text views, dialogs, menus and input line commands. However, as you might expect given the amount of time since the last release (sorry about that :-), improvements are to be found in nearly all areas of the application, including connection behavior, IRC protocol handling, scripting support, and more. Please have a look at the changelog for a short summary of the major highlights, as well as the usual extensive coverage of the details.

Changes from 1.3.1 to 1.4-beta1:

General User interface (more UI changes in individual sections below):|||

