In the 1980s, a power company almost built a floating nuclear power plant off New Jersey It may not be as crazy as it sounds

Nobody wants a nuclear power plant near where they live. They’re up there with toxic waste dumps and strip joints as NIMBY boogeymen. In 1969, a utility company engineer named Richard Eckert was struggling to address just that issue when an audacious and absurd idea came to him in the shower: Why not put a nuclear power plant in the middle of the ocean? Well, not the middle exactly. It would actually float 11 miles northeast of Atlantic City, in international waters.

Eckert, who worked for the Public Service Electric & Gas Company (PSE&G) of New Jersey, sought to keep up with the growing power demands of the state. But the construction of a new nuclear reactor would face widespread public opposition, even if it were feasible to build one in the densely populated state which lacked, among other resources, an abundance of river water to keep it cool.

There were some, albeit limited, precedents for portable and sea-going nuclear reactors. Beginning in the 1950s, the United States led the charge in the construction of nuclear-powered submarines, which unlike their diesel-powered counterparts did not need to go to the surface for fuel. But the closest thing to Eckert’s idea was MH-1A, known as the Sturgis, a ship outfitted with a nuclear reactor that was used to power the lock system of the Panama Canal during a water shortage.

The Atlantic Generating Station was to include two reactors (in case one required shutdown during maintenance or refueling), and produce 2,300 megawatts of power, a comparative leap from the 10-megawatt output of the Sturgis. A new company, Offshore Power Systems, was established for the purpose of constructing floating power plants, made from a joint venture between the Westinghouse Corporation and Tenneco, a conglomerate that owned Newport News, the largest shipbuilder in the world.

Building a nuclear power plant the traditional way was inefficient. It required skilled labor in the form of engineers, welders, and technicians, who would have to lead a peripatetic existence moving from one plant site to another, sometimes separated by thousands of miles. But if a power plant could be built and situated on a barge, however, and shipped just as easily to Newfoundland as to New Jersey, a sort of assembly line could be established in a single location — keeping the talent in one place, while at the same time reinforcing safety standards.

But how does one protect a floating plant from the ocean? Nuclear meltdowns are a very real fear. Engineers decided on a breakwater shaped in two main sections — one being a thick straight wall facing the coastline, and the other a semicircle, with enough space between them for ships to transport parts, personnel, and fresh nuclear fuel.|||

Nobody wants a nuclear power plant near where they live. They’re up there with toxic waste dumps and strip joints as NIMBY boogeymen. In 1969, a utility company engineer named Richard Eckert was…