Office wireless panic button systems are on the rise in today’s society. Businesses around the world are altering their stance on the way they look at security. In the United States, many companies are utilizing technology to help make their facilities safer for employees. There are a large number of safety and security tools out there to research. When shopping for the perfect device to fit your facilities’ needs, be sure that you take into consideration whether the product is innovative or traditional.

Traditional notification systems often become outdated relatively quickly. These types of notification systems can be rather expensive to install. The construction alone can disrupt daily activities and decrease productivity within your facility. Furthermore, these traditional panic buttons do not offer free system updates or rapid mass notification. These small details could leave you with a system that renders your facility vulnerable.

Meanwhile, innovative wireless products are most often able to adapt to your security needs. Office wireless panic button systems, when incorporated into an active crisis incident response plan can save lives. Also, these wireless panic button programs are always evolving, while striving to increase workplace safety. A wireless panic button program is rather inexpensive, which will not drain your company budget. Saving money is always a plus for every company.

Traditional panic buttons offered through alarm companies require hard wiring into your phone line. So changing your office around would require an alarm company representative to move the buttons at your cost. I can’t speak for other office wireless panic button systems, but I can explain how the program offered through CRS operates. The CRS office wireless panic button is shipped to clients pre-programmed and ready to use. Plug the device into any workstation running CRS Notify, and it automatically works. You can change the wireless panic button system to any other computer running CRS Notify at any time, and it will work. Simply unplug the wireless panic button from the primary workstation and plug it into the workstation of your choice. As long as the CRS Notify program is installed on the workstation, your wireless panic button is fully operational.

Unlike traditional panic buttons, the office wireless panic button works with a software program installed on the computer and uses the power of the internet. I advise clients that use traditional panic buttons to have an incident response plan to account for seven minutes between the onset of an incident until responders arrive. Most of that seven minutes are because most traditional panic buttons take over two minutes to alert just one type of responder. In contrast, office wireless panic button systems using the power of the internet result in instantaneous alerts sent to both internal and external responders. That is a significant amount of time during an active crisis where every second counts. Rapid notification to multiple responders ensures that the alert is received promptly. The quicker responders are notified, the faster the crisis can be resolved with a more favorable outcome.

Office wireless panic button systems have multiple ways to alert several responders at once. However, traditional panic buttons only alert one responder of an emergency. Well, how do we inform everyone else in the event of a crisis, you ask? Office wireless panic button systems can simultaneously alert multiple responders and staff using various methods. These methods include automated voice calls, text messages, phone apps, emails, and computer-based panic buttons. Office wireless panic button programs merge all your alerting needs into one button for a prepared response. These mass notification methods confirm that the message was received by all parties. The computer-based alert room acts as a two-way communication device that is perfect for relaying information during a lock down or active shooter situation. With this real-time communication channel, everyone involved can stay in the know about the emergency situation.

Police officers respond to initiated traditional panic button alerts with no hesitation. However, officers only receive the information that a panic button was activated and the address. Officers do not know who initiated the panic button, the potential victim’s particular location, or how long ago they triggered the device. Moreover, the lack of information negatively impacts a substantial response and resolution of the situation. I cannot speak for other organizations offering a wireless panic button system. However, CRS office wireless panic buttons allow customizable messages for both alert levels and each individual end-user. The messages can relay a particular communication in several different ways. Information is sent via computer application, text message, email, and an automated voice call displaying the exact location and the party who initiated the alert. The details allow responders the ability to pinpoint the duress location and efficiently respond to the situation.

Again, I cannot speak for other wireless panic button system companies. However, the wireless panic buttons offered through CRS can initiate both a high or low-level alert in addition to using a computer mouse. Using the CRS wireless panic button system, a client can determine company responses for each button. Meanwhile, traditional panic buttons only have one alert method to one responder and are no longer competitive with technology today.

With CRS, clients can use the low-level alert to help mitigate a problem before it escalates, only notifying a few select responder without alerting everyone. Furthermore, the low-level alert is ideal for suspicious activity. Also, business managers can handle the situation without causing any further or unneeded panic to all staff members. The high-level alert lets responders know that the situation has escalated into an emergency where employees need to be aware. Staff members and responders are then set in motion to react to the crisis in a prepared manner.

The crime rate is skyrocketing all across the nation. Violence is more prevalent now than ever before. We go through our day never actually thinking about the danger that moves past us. However, if you turn on the news, the heartbreaking devastation is laid before your eyes. For instance, In Dallas, Texas 14 people were shot.  Five Dallas police officers died, and seven other victims wounded, leaving behind a wake of sadness. Reporters say this is the worst mass shooting since 9/11.

In the last decade, the world has experienced acts of terrorism and violence that have shaken the very core of governments and citizens alike. With that said, be proactive about your facilities safety and security. Have an incident response plan in place to train staff on how to react in situations of crisis. Consider the option of a technology-driven wireless panic button system that offers mass notification as well as desktop alerts.

Being proactive now can substantially lower the chances of a tragedy within your facility. However, don’t rely on technology alone to protect your employees. Give your staff the knowledge and the tools needed to react responsibly in a dangerous situation. There is no independent, foolproof way to handle any given crisis. Although the most compelling evidence points to taking advantage of all resources that are available to you. Wireless Panic Button Systems are the way to go when designing your safety and security initiatives.|||

Office wireless panic button systems are on the rise in today’s society. Innovative technology products are most often able to adapt to your security needs.