

 Stock brokerage firms around the world are now using Self-Serve Business Intelligence solutions with integrated functionality for data warehouses (DWH), trading application, Customer Relationship Management (CRM) and other enterprise solutions. The ElegantJ BI stock brokerage out-of-the-box solution is used by many of the leading stock brokerage firms in India, including Religare Securities, KIFS and Sharekhan. This cutting-edge, self-serve BI solution allows users to easily analyze business data from disparate sources and make confident decisions. ElegantJ BI offers an easy to implement, easy to adopt self-serve business intelligence environment that requires no specialized skills and provides mobile capabilities.

“Our ‘design once, use anywhere’ approach to BI helps our stock broker clients to democratize business intelligence,” says ElegantJ BI CEO, Kartik Patel. “With improved reporting and performance management dashboards, and a scalable, flexible approach to architecture and infrastructure, these complex organizations can simplify business intelligence and improve performance.”

ElegantJ BI clients include some of the leading stock brokerage firms in India. These clients have successfully used the ElegantJ BI solution for more than three (3) years, supporting, on average, more than one million customers and more than one million transactions per day, with hundreds of branches all across India.

CEO, Patel says, “Our stock brokerage clients use ElegantJ BI for sales analysis, branch performance, customer segmentation and analysis by customer segments, and to analyze performance at various levels within organization and compare performance to the overall market performance and the enterprise share in the market.”

Visit the ElegantJ BI site to find out more about the ElegantJ BI Stock Brokerage solution with out-of-the-box dashboard, KPI and reporting templates and data mart solutions, and the ElegantJ BI team has proven experience in this domain so implementation takes only two to three weeks and ROI and user adoption is immediate. The success of the ElegantJ BI solution in the Stock Brokerage market is detailed in ElegantJ BI Case Studies: India-Based Financial Services and Stock Brokerage, Share-Broking and Securities Trading Company.

The ElegantJ BI Business Intelligence suite was listed as a Niche BI and Analytics Vendor in the August 2016, Gartner Competitive Landscape: BI Platforms and Analytics Software, Asia/Pacific Report. ElegantJ BI was also listed in the February 2016 Gartner ‘Market Guide for Enterprise-Reporting-Based Platforms’ as one of Representative Vendors, and in the ‘Gartner Magic Quadrant for Business Intelligence and Analytics Platforms’ Report, in the Other Modern BI Platform Vendors section.

ElegantJ BI is the flagship BI solution of Elegant MicroWeb, powered by unique Managed Memory Computing technology, and intelligent ‘Design once, Use anywhere’ adaptive UI engine for out-of-the-box roll out for Mobile BI. Its independent product suite analyzes data from any transaction system and has ready-to-use BI apps for verticals like stock brokerage, banking fixed deposit and landing, Logistics – freight forwarders, toll plaza performance management, urban transport management, and for small and medium businesses including finance, inventory, sales, purchasing, HR and production. ElegantJ BI is used by large, medium and small businesses around the world, including Saudi Telecom, Religare Securities, IPCA Laboratories, JMC Projects, Sharekhan, Raychem RPG and many other small and medium size businesses.|||

Find out more about our Out-of-the-Box, domain-specific solutions for Stock Brokerage, Banking and Financial Services.