Before we highlight our favorites, lets point out base level requirements we're looking for. To begin with every secure email provider must have bulletproof SSL on their website. All messages must be encrypted during transport (TLS) and utilize a trusted protocol to manage key-swaps (PGP,S/MIME,DANE,DIME). Platforms must be scaleable to the needs of a mid-sized business, feature transparent code (ideally open-sourced), and incur a monthly fee. This last point will surely seem counter-intuitive to "bottom-line hawks", but let me reassure you that the adage "if you're not the consumer, you're the product" is an absolute maxim in this case. With that out of the way, here are our selections.

Any user / businesses need is unique, but there are a few use cases that should help narrow down your picks. Want to Integrate Secure Email into a Your Business? This was the exact situation we found our company in last year. If you're not particularly tech savy or simply prioritize ease-of-use, I'd suggest debating Protonmail vs Posteo. Both secure providers offer high quality with a gentle learning curve. Need the Absolutely Most Secure Email Possible? I'd first suggest boning up on your understanding of the whole key-exchange process, then I'd start the hunt with a Lavabit vs Posteo showdown. Want to Dip Your Toes in the Water? While I've already mentioned that I'd shy away from a "Freemium" model, if you absolutely must your starting point should probably be Protonmail vs Mailfence. Our All-Around Favorites? Much like any other small business owner, I stress one factor that can be generally overlooked at times. Coming from the "Measure Twice / Cut Once" school of thought, I place plenty of weight on a products longevity. With that in mind, Our internal debate really centered around Protonmail vs Lavabit. The driving factor here is that it can be a bit of a headache to set everything up, so we may as well choose an email provider that won't become dated quickly or require too much attention.

The factors involved in selecting a secure email provider could be a post in and of itself, but I'll try to cover the big points for you quickly. End-to-End Encryption is a must. The key exchange protocol is also important, but I'd be hesitant to pick a favorite there. Widely accepted approaches like DIME, DANE, and Open-Sourced PGP (like OpenPGP) should be sufficient. Local laws should be considered for where the servers are physically located and where the certificates are issued. The less logging the better and anything thats stored should ideally be encrypted. All aspects of the proved should be SSL secured and I'd even push TLS and Two-Factor-Authentication towards a "Must". The final factor will seem suspicious to older folks, but I believe anonymous payment is important. Bitcoin is obviously not 100% anonymous, but splitting that direct link provides an incredible layer of security that any provider could be using. Most business owners would simply think "I shouldn't need that if I'm not doing anything illegal", but if you've been following the legal tightening around the world I think a better mental approach would be "Why should I provide more info then is absolutely needed". The last factor I'd recommend is completely agnostic of your provider and very important - Any secure email provider has holes and the single largest can be plugged by utilizing a solid VPN. While that topic deserves it's own post, put briefly your ISP can intercept crucial data and a good VPN is your best defense against that.

Hopefully this post has helped you understand the basics of secure email and given you a few options to start your search. The benefits of secure email might be tough to identify, but that's really because we're not trying to add value so much as limit liability. Find a provider you like, share these options with your friends, and give them some social love if you have a moment. These companies are fighting an honorable battle and it's one that rarely draws praise. As always - Thanks for stopping by, feel free to shoot us any feedback through your favorite social media site, and if you've found the information at all useful - Please Share.|||

All businesses need to communicate, but how can they communicate securely? In this post we'll cover the best secure email providers available.