,,,,,,,,,,,, 





We can remember an horrible experience we had when trying to buy and order for a television set on jumia with my smartphone (Lumia 630).





Ever since i started blogging, i only leave home with my lumia phone and earpiece, leaving my laptop and other gadgets behind for when i come back. Still, with my heavy day by day work load, i try to update you guys regularly.





Below are frequently asked questions on websites design for mobile first;





* How to build mobile first website?

* What is mobile first web design?

* What is mobile first website?

* Why mobile first web design?





All thanks to the new mobile world where i don't have to go everywhere with my laptop 💻. I wonder how those using a desktop computer try to be more frequent in researching, writing and publishing, because with my smartphone always with me, i can do most of all these at any time which makes INFO Retweet what it is now.





 I just work with some apps on my phone that helps me do the work faster with my smart phone. Thanks for apps like my BLOG MATE, which helps me write, edit and publish posts in a twinkle of an eye.





In case you are wondering how i use a lumia app to run INFO Retweet so easily, you can take a try by downloading the windows BLOG MATE app.





 

Check out "BlogMate" for Windows Phone

DOWNLOAD HERE using a windows phone.





 

We have come to realised that our blogging life could by mostly mobile operated instead of going around with laptops and other gadgets.



Sometimes we just wish if there wes a way we could just write our contents / tutorials with our mind's, that way we will be able  to update you regularly and write great contents that come directly from the experts mind.



We believe it's not only we that are thinking like that. There are so many people out there wo wish their mobile could do anything.



Like for example, you could remember how we would go out to an outlet to by a recharge-card. But now our banks maid it simple for us by introducing How To Get Airtime Directly From Your Bank Account Using Your Mobile Phone which has helped alot, all by mobile.



Nowadays, most of your website traffic comes from mobile, so you need to focus on the mobile design and earnings before thinking of the larger view. Even at that, some web designers still seam not to understand that. Because you use a pc to create or build a website or blog doesn't mean you will only customize it for for the desktop view only.



This is why most of those platforms like Jumia and other websites have a public phone number to call and make orders or complain instead of using the website, which makes the mobile world easier too.



We recommend every website including blogs to have a public phone number placed in a bold and visible place on your page for customers to get to you easily.



If you're wondering what our own public phone number is, sorry we didn't put it on a bold page, its because we don't really want much call's from customers. It's mainly only on our Contact Us , but because of you, we will let it out here. The numbers to call for INFO Retweet Tech Tutorials are +2349068320474 or +2349087418172.



Isn't this the kind of world we want to live in? One where you don't have to stress your self in getting things done, all done with your mobile phone.



But the bad part is at times, these websites and designers don't seam to understand the jeck. Then they take us back to the old time's, not understanding the principle of Mobile First. And we have to use a pc to access their sites. Please try to make your website or blog ready for mobile users first.

Just think how many people will want to search for he latest song to download and will go and ON their laptop for it? Your answer will be properly few, like 20% out of hundred, then 80% goes fir the mobile users.



Did you enjoy the lecture? Is there anything you would like me to know? Or ideas you would like to add? Just include it by COMMENTING below.



From now on, if you already have a website or blog, try to ensure you check it out using a mobile device and edit it properly to fit as a mobile website at all cost, even if its at the expense of the desktop view.



Also, try reducing your website or blog work load and move around with only your mobile phone or a tablet so you can continue your writing and publishing system while on outing.



Don't also forget to share this post using the below social media button's so others can be aware too. You could help change the world to a mobile place only by doing that. Thankyou.

|||

Why Your Website Neesd To Be Properly Designed For Mobile First
best mobile first website
best mobile first websites
build mobile first website
building a mobile first website
cool mobile first websites
create mobile first website
creating a mobile first website with angularjs and sass
first data mobile pay website
first mobile web browser
great mobile first websites
head first mobile web amazon
head first mobile web code
head first mobile web ebook download
head first mobile web free download
head first mobile web pdf
head first mobile web pdf download
head first mobile web review
head first mobile web source code
how to build mobile first website
ibm mobile first web server
mobile app or website first
mobile first and responsive web design bundle pdf
mobile first approach website
mobile first or web first
mobile first responsive web design bundle
mobile first responsive web design pdf
mobile first responsive web design pluralsight
mobile first responsive web design pluralsight download
mobile first responsive web design template
mobile first responsive website
mobile first site examples
mobile first vs responsive web design
mobile first vs web first
mobile first web app framework
mobile first web app framework based on bootstrap
mobile first web app theme
mobile first web app theme download
mobile first web app theme free download
mobile first web application
mobile first web design
mobile first web design 2014
mobile first web design 2015
mobile first web design approach
mobile first web design book
mobile first web design examples
mobile first web design html
mobile first web design inspiration
mobile first web design luke
mobile first web design template
mobile first web design with bootstrap
mobile first web framework
mobile first website
mobile first website builder
mobile first website design
mobile first website design examples
mobile first website design inspiration
mobile first website development
mobile first website examples
mobile first website inspiration
mobile first website templates
mobile first website tutorial
mobile first websites
mobile first websites examples
mobile-first websites meaning
my first mobile website
schools first mobile website
top 10 mobile first websites
website-konzeption mobile first und responsive sites
what is a mobile first website
what is mobile first website..