Pay-per-click (PPC) advertising strategies continue to evolve — but all too often people hang on to practices that have become obsolete. And some advertisers lack real data to support some of their beliefs about how users interact with online ads.



These unfounded or outdated tactics can result in overspending on ad campaigns that can cost a fortune if not halted. To help you save money on promotions, here’s a list of the seven most common misconceptions about PPC advertising.

While having the top position is good for visibility and traffic, it is not beneficial in every situation: sometimes your ad attracts those who are not yet ready to buy.

Furthermore, companies with larger budgets can outbid you for top placement. It can be far more efficient to bid on bid on second, third or even fourth position, as they are less expensive and tend to generate almost as much traffic as that coveted first position.

Fact: No doubt businesses choose PPC to boost their sales and many want to see results immediately. Sadly, even experienced marketers assure their clients of instant results. Unfortunately, this is an illusion.

A well-planned PPC campaign can takes months to deliver results. The actual time it takes can vary from business to business depending on the competition, budget and site optimization.

Fact: Most marketers stuff their PPC campaign with every possible keyword. Yes, that can boost the traffic, but not all of that traffic will be useful.

Carelessly adding more keywords only makes your budget decline faster, depleting funds you could have used toward getting clicks and conversion. Instead, strive to understand your target audience and predict which terms they type into the search box.

Fact: Google’s Keyword Planner helps marketers locate efficient keywords for AdWords campaigns. But that doesn’t mean you should limit yourself to that tool only. Other tools like SEMrush and Moz’s keyword planner can help you find the right keywords for your campaigns.

Fact: Click through rate (CTR) refers to the percentage of users who click on your ad to go to your website. While a high CTR is a good thing, that is just half of what you need — it’s successful only when user ends up buying at your website. Even a low CTR can be beneficial if your conversion rate is high.

Fact: Many marketers think they don’t need to worry about SEO when they have PPC campaigns underway — and vice versa.

That is the furthest thing from the truth, as there are many ways Google Adwords can help in boosting SEO efforts — and vice versa.

Integrating SEO and PPC increases your website visibility and exposure while maximizing the conversion rate. Whereas PPC can get you traffic relatively quickly, SEO takes time to show results. Yet both SEO and PPC are powerful digital marketing tools.

Fact: Not paying attention to a PPC campaign can cost you a fortune. PPC campaigns require constant monitoring, testing, bidding and new keywords to generate results — constant experimentation is crucial for successful PPC campaigns. They also needs time and patience.

This is why many businesses hire a digital marketing expert to manage their PPC campaigns — someone who knows how to generate results.

Hopefully reading about these seven PPC myths will help you let go of outdated strategies. Follow the latest trends to make the most out of your campaigns — and give it time to achieve results.

This post was written by Varun Sharma, co-founder of KVR WebTech.

P.S. — If you liked learning the facts of PPC, you just might love the insights you will gain into your campaigns by analyzing their performance in DataHero.|||

It's very easy to overspend on pay-per-click promotions -- best practices continue to evolve, so strategies become outdated ad myths faster than you think.