Executing an effective email marketing strategy can be challenging when you are working with a new set of leads or are sending out emails for the first time. However, there are certain things you can do to increase the chances of high open rates and consistent click through rates with each send. The goal is to build a positive relationship with your audience so there is little to no risk of unsubscribes and you are truly engaging your target audience with something they are interested in receiving.

Here are six things you should NEVER do in email marketing:

While it’s a good idea to time your emails so that new subscribers or customers receive a welcome email right away, you need to set up a complete email campaign that keeps them engaged beyond that first email. Sending just one email may not be enough to convey your core message or trigger an action. Some people may not even see it in the inbox and others may easily forget the message. Plan on sending a series of emails over the course of a few days or weeks to stay fresh in the recipient’s mind.

You need to strike the right balance of promotional emails and informational emails to keep your subscribers engaged. Too many promotional emails and special offers can appear like spam and turn many people away. Consider the frequency and quantity of each type of email so you don’t end up with a long list of unsubscribers.

You want to direct your readers to your website, landing page, or other web pages as part of your CTA, but you don’t want to weigh down your content with several hyperlinks throughout the copy. Too many links can also appear as spam in the email filter so play it safe with just two or three links when possible.

While you want your reader to buy something, read more, shop now, or perform any other type of action, you don’t want to overwhelm them with all of these options in one single email. Including just a single, focused call to action message is ideal since you want to guide the reader to the button or link and have them click it without thinking too much. Too many options can leave the reader annoyed or confused -- and less likely to follow through with a click.

Unless you are following up with a shipping confirmation or similar follow up for a purchase, you don’t want to send more than one promotional or informational email to your subscribers in the same 24-hour period. Stage your emails and messaging so that you can keep readers engaged and interested, but not irritated. Your goal is simply to stay on top of mind with a well-timed series of emails.

Considering that 53% of emails are opened on a mobile device, you need to make sure your email content is mobile-friendly. Use a template that works across all mobile devices — preferably a single-column layout with easily identifiable buttons and links — so that a mobile user on the go can easily understand the message and take action. Remember that many people speed read or scan content on a mobile device since they are usually doing something else while on their smartphone or tablet.

If you want to maximize your reach and engage your audience with your email marketing campaigns, make sure you’re not making some common mistakes that can trigger unsubscribes or direct your emails straight to the trash folder. Use these tips to send impactful emails with every single campaign.|||

When engaging with a new set of leads or sending out emails for the first time, make sure you avoid the following email marketing no-nos.