As a biotech investor, it’s been fascinating to watch the Snapchat IPO and the fanfare around this $25B sensation following its offering as a “camera” company. As one of the big tech unicorns, it’s justifiably gotten considerable attention in the media and tech community. Despite the pullback in value since the offering, it remains a monster win. Kudos to Lightspeed and Benchmark, who have generated returns in the billions.

Of the 3000+ tech startups that got funded in 2012, Snapchat is almost certainly the most impressive lottery ticket of the group. This is what tech investing at its best looks like.

But it’s also reminded me of how different the basic dynamics of our respective venture sectors are.  In many ways, we live on different planets in the venture universe.

One sector relies on stochastic 0.1%-type outliers as the driver of fund-level and even industry-level returns, the other offers a steadier path to 5-10x returns as a more frequent top decile outcome. When aggregated at the sector-level, the returns (multiples and IRRs) have been biased in favor of biopharma venture over the past few years (here, here).

Most readers will know that I’ve explored the “tale of two startup ecosystems” in biotech and tech venture several times over the past five years, in particular highlighting the different dynamics around venture creation. But in light of all of the changes in the past year, I thought it worth revisiting data on a couple points to see if there’s been a change in the startup environment.

As I shared last week (here), the biotech financing market has been in remarkable equilibrium over much of the past decade. According to data from Pitchbook, the pace of startup creation has been relatively constant, as has the overall pool of biotech companies getting financed – driven by a stable number of active investors.

This couldn’t be more different in the tech space, especially looking at the software sector. While the pace of venture creation is off its peak of 2014, it remains significantly above the long-term average, cranking out ~250 new startups each quarter last year, a significant increase over the pace a decade ago. This rapid increase in startup formation has led to a huge tidal wave of financings in the tech sector – backing 200-300% more tech startups than just a few years ago (versus a ~3% increase in BioPharma).

As you might expect, the number of startups in a sector is directly related to the number of active investors. By defining an active investor as a firm that invests in at least five financing rounds per year, we can get a sense of the number of institutional investors participating at scale in a sector, again leveraging the dataset at Pitchbook. Broken out below are two cuts of the data: those that participate at least 5 rounds of $1M or greater (capturing bigger seed investors or micro-VCs), and those investing in five or more larger rounds of at least $10M (note y-axis scale is different).

While the biotech sector’s investor universe has been relatively tight, the software investing world has exploded with participants at both ends of the scale – small and large rounds. The growth rate in participating investors roughly mirrors the growth rate in number of companies getting financed, as you’d expect.

These two data points are reflective of vastly different structural forces at work in these two ecosystems: biopharma and tech venture capital are two different beasts.

To put a finer point on the differences, it’s worth highlighting a few key industry structure aspects.

Here are four observations on the dynamics in the tech venture sector today:

In short, with low barriers to entry and hyper-competition amongst VCs, generating consistent outsized returns is incredibly hard for all but a few venture firms – and is especially challenging at the sector-level.

Biopharma is characterized by a very different set of dynamics, as evidenced by the striking contrast in the charts above:

For biotech, qualified investor and experienced entrepreneur scarcity are major constraints on the number of new startups and help keep the supply of innovation tight and of reasonable quality. This is a healthy dynamic at the sector-level, and helps to create an environment where quality early stage biotech investments can generate outsized returns consistently – as evidenced by the attractive aggregate returns data of biotech venture capital relative to other sectors (here, here, here, here).

The tale of two very different ecosystems is still a very real narrative.|||

