Andrew Mustun of Ribbonsoft says he's likely to postpone the release of QCAD Community Edition. The reason? LibreCAD.

It's quite disturbing how much controversy a small software niche can get in a relatively small timeframe. As if recent LibreDWG story wasn't quite sufficient, the most recent news is that Ribbonsoft is not going to release Community Edition of QCAD right now.

QCAD is a CAD system for Windows, Mac and Linux, created by Ribbonsoft and available in two editions: the commercial one and the free one called Community Edition (GPLv2).

Isometric grid and projections in QCAD. Screenshot courtesy by qcad.org.

The difference between commercial and free versions was mostly about amount of features and the date of availability. According to Andrew, the time gap between them was usually about a year, and it increased while the lead developer was working on QCAD 3, since there was nothing new to release during that period of completely rewriting QCAD.

Indeed, around 2009 the company started rewriting QCAD and released the first public beta version of QCad v3.0 in August 2011. It was the first new public release of QCAD since late 2009. The community edition was years old by the time. The final release of QCAD 3.0 followed in summer 2012.

Before you ask, according to Ribbonsoft, the whole idea of mixing the open source and the closed source business models wasn't exactly controversial. Andrew says that feedback about QCAD, the QCAD community edition and the business model was mostly positive with very few negative voices.

The lack of strong opinions on the matter could partially be explained by the lack of source code contributions. Reportedly, there have been few patches and more other kinds of contributions — translations, CAD part library items, fonts, hatch patterns. All in all, no reason for hard feelings.

According to Andrew Mustun, an open source version of QCAD 3 was also planned and would have made perfect sense from a community perspective as well as a business perspective:

In 2010, Ries van Twisk decided to add CAM features to the Community Edition of QCAD and instead got himself into working on the Qt4 port and then on the core features of what later became LibreCAD.

Somewhere in the middle of it Ribbonsoft found out that LibreCAD was still using data that didn't have the same license as the code, and requested the LibreCAD team to remove it.

The LibreCAD team ended up writing new help system and creating new CAD fonts to replace the sorely missing bits of the application.

As QCAD 3 was finally released to the masses in mid-2012, people began to wonder if the Community Edition was coming. Some even acquired a license in order to support the QCAD developer and encourage him to release the free version. However, Andrew has a different point of view:

This is where the two teams provide mutually contradictory information. According to Andrew:

You are, of course, at liberty to draw your own conclusions, but here it looks more like a rather unfortunate misunderstanding between the two teams. All the better that neither of them is willing to get involved into any further controversies.

In fact, calling the data license incident a controversy would be an exaggeration: both sides came to terms with each other faster than you could say “versus”.

With LibreCAD anf QCAD now going their separate ways there are just few more things to discuss here.

Since all this fuzz started from a mere wish to get CAM features into QCAD CE, what's up with CAM in both applications?

Ries van Twisk eventually came back to his original plan and did some work on a CAM module which is available on Github. In December 2012 he stated in a public mailing list:

There's also a prototype of a CAM plug-in by Dietmar Kühn that was last updated about a year ago.

As for QCAD, the situation is not a lot more different there. An automated CAM module for QCAD 3 is currently at alpha stage.

How much do these two applications differ by now? If you take a closer look at QCAD 3.0 and recently released LibreCAD 2.0beta2, you'll see that the difference is already increasingly large.

Here's just a raw list of the most important changes from QCAD 2.x to QCAD 3.0:

As for LibreCAD, a lot of work has gone into making various internal adjustments. The team made some important geometry improvements and added the anticipated advanced snapping. Unfortunately there are some issues as well.

Judging by reports from users, LibreCAD has a problem working with large files, while QCAD handles them rather well. This was going to be addressed by a kernel rewrite, which also involved GPU-based rendering (successfully tested with 1 million lines), but LibreCAD is badly out of active contributors to pursue this goal right now.

In terms of customization it's hard to say which application is preferable. If you need to change core features, LibreCAD looks like an obvious choice. But if you think that a plug-in would do, QCAD allows writing those in both C++ and ECMAscript, whereas LibreCAD apparently needs more cleanup in the plug-ins department first.

Of course, for a number of people there's also an ethical choice involved, as in “only free GPL software is OK to run”.

What does it all mean to QCAD and its users? Given the price tag of mere 32 euros, the delayed or completely abandoned release of the Community Edition isn't likely to seriously affect anyone except probably some government institutions (like public schools) on a really tight budget.

To LibreCAD users who care a lot about GPL it means less choices or more reasons to get involved with development of the application, because the code doesn't write itself.

All commits to LibreCAD over time, note the gradual decrease of activity since 2011

Even though growing open hardware and personal fabrication economies are likely to give a big push to engineering, and hence to CAD, right now it doesn't look like people are rushing to join free CAD software projects. So let's hope we won't see too many further forks.|||

Andrew Mustun of Ribbonsoft says he's likely to postpone the release of QCAD Community Edition. The reason? LibreCAD.