When your looking for a lifestyle change you can look for Sandpoint Idaho Real Estate to give you that.

Some people call it paradise, some call it heaven. We live in a pretty cool place that offers year round entertainment.

With a lake that is to die for, a ski resort on the mountain that will keep you busy for 3-4 months out of the year.

When you want to make that lifestyle change you will need to find a Sandpoint Idaho Real Estate agent to help locate that perfect house.

Did you want a lake home in Sandpoint Idaho?

Or were you thinking maybe a water front cabin in Sandpoint?

With any request you will have the agent can help you find you Sandpoint Home that is for sale.

There is the opportunity to also get your dream home on Schweitzer mountain ski resort as well.

It will really depend on what your family wants, is this a vacation home or a permanent residence?

When we first moved here we really were looking at lake pend oreille real estate to be close to the lake.

You can start your search by looking for the Sandpoint MLS which will show you everything listed for sale within Sandpoint, Sagle, Ponderay Idaho.

There is so much to do in Sandpoint Idaho. There is a wide selection of restaurants , bars, brewery’s. The Sandpoint downtown area is super awesome to spend a day shopping , eating ice cream.

When you are coming to visit Sandpoint area, there are a few regions or area’s you can check out.

Sagle Idaho is a very nice community over the bridge and is water front.

There is Lake Cocolalla which is a smaller lake and not very deep. It is around the 22 feet range in depth.

It is also a smaller community with just a gas station.

When it comes to restaurants there is a huge list in Sandpoint:

There is a lot more to choose from of course. Use your smart phone to find the place or food you think will fit your family.

When it comes to hotel and motels i would recommend these places:

These are some of the top places around the area. But if your wanting to stay for say a week or 2 or even a month i would check homeaway.com Sandpoint Idaho and you will get a decent amount of homes to choose from located all around Sandpoint.

There is enough realtors to make sure you find the best Sandpoint Idaho Real Estate so your family will be truly happy.

Sandpoint has an amazing summer calendar with the park. Its called festival of Sandpoint and features over 5-8 groups that come into Sandpoint to perform on the weekends.

Just down the road we have Silverwood Theme Park, Boulder Beach Water Park and Scarywood. This is a awesome facility and will give hours and hours of fun.

With Sandpoint’s population growing right now at a very fast rate, now is the time to look into a lifestyle change.

I hope to add some local Sandpoint, ID Real Estate & Homes for Sale on this website soon. Check back often to see our updates as we will be building out this page more.|||

Here is our reasons to look for Sandpoint Idaho Real Estate before you choose your next home. There are plenty of realtors in Sandpoint. Get started today.