There are several different standards covering selection of curves for use in elliptic-curve cryptography (ECC):

Each of these standards tries to ensure that the elliptic-curve discrete-logarithm problem (ECDLP) is difficult. ECDLP is the problem of finding an ECC user's secret key, given the user's public key.

Unfortunately, there is a gap between ECDLP difficulty and ECC security. None of these standards do a good job of ensuring ECC security. There are many attacks that break real-world ECC without solving ECDLP. The core problem is that if you implement the standard curves, chances are you're doing it wrong:

These problems are exploitable by real attackers, taking advantage of the gaps between ECDLP and real-world ECC:

Secure implementations of the standard curves are theoretically possible but very hard.

Most of these attacks would have been ruled out by better choices of curves that allow simple implementations to be secure implementations. This is the primary motivation for SafeCurves. The SafeCurves criteria are designed to ensure ECC security, not just ECDLP security.

Other attacks would have been ruled out by better choices at higher levels of ECC protocols. For example, deterministic nonces were proposed in 1997, are integrated into modern signature mechanisms such as EdDSA, and would have prevented the 2010 Sony PlayStation ECDSA security disaster. However, this security issue does not interact with curve choices, so it is outside the scope of SafeCurves.

All of the standards listed above add further constraints for the sake of efficiency. For example, the NIST P-256 curve

Subsequent research (and to some extent previous research) showed that essentially all of these efficiency-related decisions were suboptimal, that many of them actively damaged efficiency, and that some of them were bad for security.

SafeCurves does not attempt to correct the erroneous efficiency claims in the standards listed above. SafeCurves does not consider efficiency issues, except to the extent that they interact with security issues.

The SafeCurves web site reports security assessments of various specific curves. Some of the curves listed on this site are deployed or have been proposed for deployment. Some of the curves are merely toy examples meant to illustrate how curves can fail to meet various security criteria.

"Safe" in the following table means that a curve meets all SafeCurves requirements. The curves are sorted in increasing order of the prime ℓ.

The following table splits the SafeCurves requirements into (1) basic parameter requirements, (2) ECDLP security requirements, and (3) ECC security requirements beyond ECDLP security:

SafeCurves is joint work by the following authors (alphabetical order):

SafeCurves should be cited as follows:

This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under grant 1018836. "Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation."

This work was supported by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) under grant 639.073.005.

Many calculations used the Sage computer-algebra system. The most difficult factorizations were completed with CADO-NFS.|||

