Github is very popular amongst developers and startup community to host open source project. Many developers upload their college and part time project they are working on Github. Github project is called repository. Currently, GitHub has more than 25 million repositories of source code and 10 million developers on board.

And hence every recruiter should be using this platform for sourcing the technical talent. The advantage of using Github is that it doesn’t restrict to search according to your choice like in StackOverflow. But before understanding GitHub you have to know about git, why GitHub is so popular amongst developer community.

The “Git” in GitHub

To understand GitHub, you must first have an understanding of Git. Git is an open-source version control system that was started by Linus Torvalds — the same person who created Linux. Git is similar to other version control systems — Subversion, CVS, and Mercurial to name a few.

Version control systems:

So, Git is a “version control system,” what’s that mean? When developers are creating something (an application, for example), they are making constant changes to the code and releasing new versions, up to and after the first official (non-beta) release.

Version control systems keep these revisions straight and store the modifications in a central repository. This allows developers to easily collaborate, as they can download a new version of the software, make changes, and upload the newest revision. Every developer can see these new changes, download them, and contribute.

The “Hub” in GitHub

We’ve established that Git is a version control system, similar but better than the many alternatives available. So, what makes GitHub so special? Git is a command-line tool, but the center around which all things involving Git revolve — effectively, the Hub, is GitHub.com, where developers can store their projects and network with like-minded people.

Let’s go over a few of the main reasons that geeks like to use GitHub, and learn some terminology along the way.

Repository:

A repository is a location where all the files for a particular project are stored, usually abbreviated to “repo.” Each project will have its own repo and can be accessed by a unique URL.

Forking a repo:

“Forking” is when you create a new project based off of another project that already exists. This is a fantastic feature that vastly encourages the further development of programs and other projects. If you find a project on GitHub that you’d like to contribute to, you can fork the repo, make the changes you’d like, and release the revised project as a new repo.

Social networking:

The social networking aspect of GitHub is probably its most powerful feature and is what allows projects to grow more than anything else. Each user on GitHub has their own profile, which can act as a resume of sorts, showing your past work and contributions to other projects via pull requests.

Free:

Github is free for unlimited collaborators and unlimited public repository. Any number of people can be collaborators with you on your project, and you can add any number of public repository on Github

As said each user on Github has their own profile, We can search developers profile according to our selection criterion with Github’s advanced search. And this feature of GitHub makes it an ideal place for recruiters to screen technical talent with ease.

I hope with the above information you got an overview of how Github works and how it can be useful for you, so let’s start digging into it.

There are mainly two ways a recruiter can source candidates on Github

- With advanced search on Github

- X-ray search on google

- Looking for a job

But before going into to the details on sourcing candidates you need to have a GitHub account. Click here if you don’t have a GitHub account.

Finding is developers is easy on GitHub, just go to https://github.com/search/advanced and head over the end of the page. You will be able to see the following.

You will be able to search developers on the developers on the basis of four parameter

1. Location

2. Language

3. Number of followers

4. Number of public repositories

I have found 13 users who are having more than 25 followers and working in Python. Change the language to whatever language you want. You even don’t have to do any changes in a search query. You can change language through option present on the left side.

By default GitHub will show best match result, the result will order people according to how they have coded in that particular language and near the location you have included. There are many other options to sort as you can see in the below image.

According to advanced search result we have got 13 users but this not the only way to search profile.

But first, lets go to first candidate profile and check out developers activity on GitHub and how it can help recruiter to source better.

This guy has a follower count of 300 which is an exceptional number. On the left side, you will get developers all information like

This information is critical for a recruiter, however not necessarily all the developers would fill this information. When you come to the developer profile first thing, you would be able to see the developers famous six repositories. For above person, pym is the most popular repository. Below name of the repository, you will be able to find three things

Language- Language in which the repository is being written

Start: How many people starred this repository

Fork: “Forking” is when you create a new project based off of another project that already exists. How many people forked the repository.

After the repository, you will be able to see the year timeline of the developers’ activity on the GitHub across the each month, i.e., The contribution may be for developers own repository or repository he forked. Below that you will be able to whole contribution activity of a developer across the year(on the right side you can choose the year) and month. It will be helpful to understand how much he is active on the Github. Your developer can help you out if you want to go deeper and check developers contribution.

Now coming back to the result page. On the right side above languages, you will be able to Repository, Code, Issues, Wikis, Users. Let us dig in deeper on we can source candidate with those options also.

Code:

Another use case of using code is you have already shortlisted the candidate for a particular technology, and now you want to dig down and want to see whether he knows the libraries, functions or any other coding stuff which one should be aware of working in your company or a project.

This option might not be very handy for recruiters who don’t have technical knowledge. If I want to check whether a particular candidate know how to use sqrt in python your search query will look like this

my result will look like

Ask your developers what their ideal candidate should know in coding perspective. And replace math.sqrt with those terms and also username.

Issues.

Collaboration is the main thing on which GitHub grew so rapidly. Developers can simultaneously collaborate on the work they liked or work they are using in their existing project. Every repo on Github is evolving and handling the new use cases. Many developers can raise an issue if they are having any problem with the repo or not handle the use case they are trying make in their own project.

If you have already shortlisted the candidate and want to know how he used a particular library and did he face any same problem that you faced and how he solved that. In this also you have involved your technical team. Or what are the problems they are currently facing

As recruiters are from the non-technical background, The easiest way to find developers to search them on Google, we all love X-ray search. We use custom X-ray search find developers on StackOverflow, LinkedIn, Twitter and on many more site.

The same X- ray search can apply to Github. For this, I have found one awesome tool called https://recruitin.net/ When you land on the go GitHub tab which is the second from the left. Most of the recruiters’ searches are based on two things one location and second is skills.

So taking the same above example, I am going to put Python as a skill and Pune as my location as you can see in the below image.

After clicking on the call to action, I am getting the X-ray query like this

Open the URL in Google, and you will be able to see the below result. Voila I have got 161 profiles

But still these are the people who know Python in Pune, but Still, I want people who have more than 25 followers. Just add (“followers 25..”) to end of x-ray query generated by Recruit’em your previous results get filtered and as you can see in the image I have got 28 results.

As I said previous having followers more than 25 on Github is a great sign of developer’s quality.

Often people who are looking for job enter `looking for a job` text on their profile description. With GitHub search, you can easily find such candidates. Let me tell you first that you won’t be able to get many candidates through this method. But if you are lucky then you might find your potential hire.

These are the candidates who are active job seekers or looking for a new job so they might be contacted by many people. For sourcing developers, through this method, you have to go github.com/search

currently, I haven’t selected any language, but you can easily choose that from option present on the left side.

Github is a great place for developers to showcase their work & collaborate and that make it an excellent platform for sourcing. The above techniques are only application to the public repository, and there are many developers who have done remarkable work for their company but however they are present in private repository which they can’t showcase.

To build a great Github profile person has to collaborate to other repository and upload the recent projects they have done. There are many good developers are present on the GitHub but are not active. Many great developers are out there who are not even on Github.

However GitHub is community of over 31 million developers globally, being able to source them on the basis of their actual work is very helpful. This certainly gives a technical recruiter to look beyond candidate’s LinkedIn profile and Resumes.

I am Prasad Founder of QuodeIt.com which is a Pune based startup trying to save recruiters time spent on initial filtering of programmers. We are going to post such in-detailed blog twice in a month. If you like this blog don’t forget to like and share, Peace!|||

Github is very popular amongst developers and startup community to host open source project. Many developers upload their college and part time project they are working on Github. Github project is…