RT (formerly Russia Today) is an international TV network operated by the Russian government. Right now, it fits among a number of alternative media sources which are on the rise given the falling trust in the mainstream media among the western world (as an example, here is 2015 data for the USA).

RT’s content has been criticized from multiple angles. Regardless, I find it to be a valuable source of news; among other things, I particularly like that they frequently feature commentators like Ron Paul (for nearly 8 years already!) and John McAfee.

However, RT Live (so called On Air) requires you to use Flash Player plugin and does not offer HTML5 video, which is sub-optimal at best. RT uses HTTP Live Streaming (HLS) in JW Player for 5 channels (News, USA, UK, Arabic, and Documentary) and YouTube for one (Spanish). Knowing how JW Player HLS configuration looks allows us to use some hackery to dig up the stream URL.

On Air page embeds the player from another page and the URLs are in variable streams.hls which is set in static/libs/octoshape/js/streams/news.js. Digging through the same file for each of the other channels will uncover their URLs as well (I have listed all of the URLs below). A simpler solution would be to have Flash Player plugin installed (yuck, proprietary software!) and use Video DownloadHelper, which can uncover the URLs accessed by Flash Player plugin while the video is playing.

To play the streams from URLs listed, you can use an open source media player such as mpv, MPlayer, or VLC. I have tested and confirmed all three work with the URLs listed below. If you don’t like those three, there are plenty more options.

RT News, as well as RT America and RT UK, are served using a CDN from Level 3 Communications. Unfortunately, we are limited to receiving the stream over the unencrypted HTTP.

RT Arabic and RT Documentary use a different CDN (though operated by Level 3 Communications, just like the CDN for the first three channels). This CDN offers HTTPS in addition to the unencrypted HTTP.

RT Spanish is broadcasted live via YouTube, therefore it already does not require Flash Player plugin. If you want to watch it outside the browser, the players mentioned above should be able to do that.

And that’s it. No Flash Player plugin required! Hopefully, RT will start offering HTML5 video at some point and allow watching live content without requiring Flash Player plugin. You can try bugging them about it, as I did over Twitter.|||

