

The board setting that is working is listed under arduino/ genuino UNO.  I tried others but that was the setting that was selected at the start. In reading the getting started pages on the arduino site, I was also thrown off by looking in the ports for something saying Arduino as they said rather than the CH340 it came up as.  I don't go poking around there a lot for the simple fact I have no need. I'm always plugging in card readers and external drives and other crap so I presumed the CH340 was something else because I was too ignorant and was looking for something that said arduino as the instructions told me it would come up. That one thing threw me off a lot and caused a LOT of wasted time and frustration. 



I have ZERO knowledge or experience with these things so I was just following the numbers I was given in the hopes of getting the most basic things going. I have built dozens of computers from scratch, loaded them and set up servers as well but with this I am starting from zero knowledge save for what I have read and largely still goes 80% over my head. 



Another thing that threw me was there was nothing that said 328P on the board list.  2650 or whatever it is, yes.  Also on the chip mine is marked Mega 328P so I am still not sure if that is a mega or a standard chip. From the pinouts it certainly seems to be the standard one. 

When you are told to look for something and it's not there, it's easy to get thrown especially when there is nothing to say " it might also be this or that or look for something else". 



It was only when looking at the board under my powerful magnifier to try and make certain of what I had been sent, I saw the chip marked CH340G and the penny dropped. I knew then I had the thing right that far. The next key was I heard the sound the computer makes when plugging in and unplugging USB devices. I had the speakers turned down at the start as my mobile phone gives interference when on my desk and it comes through so I turn them down. It was only because I was looking at things on YT to try and figure things out I turned them up and head the connection sound. 



I believe the only thing I had to do was load the Ch340 drivers and it was probably working fine at that point, I just didn't realise it.  I was looking for the LED to blink not knowing enough that that board would not do that. 



The thing with starting off is often the dead simple steps between 0 and 1 are not really documented well. 1-100 is in depth but the basics are presumed to work as described with no possible problems being considered. 

 I find this in other things as well.  Here's how to solve this high end problem but the absolute basics weren't there. I was looking for a LED to blink. Nothing said the onboard one like in the tutorials may not exist on some boards. Nothing said if the thing compiles and says finished uploading you are good. Maybe a smarter man would have worked that out.  I do lots of things people tell me won't work and I figure out how to make it work perfectly and I would not consider myself stupid however I would say in some things I am naive, ignorant and just haven't comprehended the mentality required. 

ask me about mobile phones. No, don't, never going to get my head round those things other than to make and receive a call. 



It took a bit of reading to find the pin 13 thing and as this was a tutorial going back 4 years, I assumed the board I had would be like the others and the on-board LED which was shining bright would blink when the data was uploading to show I had communication AND that the most grass roots function of all with these things of the led blinking would also happen. 

I didn't have an LED in my box of crap to try it, loads of Diodes, resistors, transistors and things designed for high current power but no little LED's.

I have a proclivity for Multimeters however  ( getting a bit worried I keep buying them like a fetish!) so the obvious thing to me ( finally) was to see if there was power there. 



Finding it changed my mood from dissapointment and great frustration to relief and happiness. At 3am, that's a real good thing!  :0)



Now I'm trying to anticipate the shields and things I might need for the projects i'd like to do. 

I'm still nervous about the coding, even learning the language to make things work but now I have got an external LED to Blink, As soon as all the wires and stuff arrive I'm sure I'll be writing sketches that will enable the Space shuttle to fly unmanned!  :0) 



I have bought some Nano's already. Should arrive in a week or so.  For $1.28 ea I had to buy some just for the thrill of getting something sent to me so cheap. I think it was you that said they will do a lot of things so I thought why not?

I can't figure out how they do this.  Post a letter here is a buck! I bought 4 to make my time placing the order worthwhile! 

Was also looking at buying a mega as well. Then I would have what I think is the basic set.  Mega expensive those things,  Over $10!!  

 

How many nanos in a mega power wise?  :0)



Thanks for your help and input. It is appreciated and being benefited from.|||

Getting started with UNO