How often have you come across articles such as “Mobile Phone Radiation: the largest biological experiment ever” and “What They Don’t Want You to Know- Cell Phone Radiation Causes Cancer”, and  “Top 10 smartphones with highest and lowest radiation”.

There is a large proportion of society that are worried about cell phone radiation and its possible effects on human cells, this is reflected by these types of articles on the internet.

These articles you often see about cell phone radiation being dangerous cherry pick data and quote specific studies or scientists to show their point. You can do this with almost any opinion or statement you have with the help of google these days. In some sense we are doing this now. But read on, we will show you how we come to our conclusion that you don’t need to worry about cell phone radiation.

Although we are a blog about radiation therapy and cancer treatment we have written several articles about mobile phone radiation and its  perception of being dangerous.  Here are some articles we have written on the subject before;

We get most of our question from these articles.  Such as “In 2011 the WHO classified mobile devices as a group 2B risk, which means that they have the potential to be carcinogenic. What do you think about that?” and others along these lines.

Ok, we are not going to quote specific studies and scientists to show our point. We are going to use the World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research of Cancers Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk to humans. This is a compiled list of substances classified into carcinogen risk groups by looking at all available evidence from credible scientific studies.

This is the same study as many of the people who question us are using, but they are looking solely at cell phone carcinogen risk, and not looking at the report as a whole.

It is true that cell phone radiation is classified as a 2b carcinogenic risk. But what does that really mean? Let’s look at the different classifications. There are four broad classification of carcinogenic substances. A total of 1063 substances have been classified.

This classification is for substances that there is a sufficient amount of evidence that they are carcinogenic to humans. These substances have a known agent or acts through a relevant mechanism to cause cancer.

This classification is split into two, on one side there is group 2A, where the evidence is almost sufficient for a substance to be classified into group 1, and then there are the other extremes where the substance has not human data available, but experimental animal data may show carcinogenic risk.

This classification is for substances that there is a limited to sufficient evidence that they are carcinogenic to humans. Some substances may have sufficient evidence that they are carcinogenic to animals as well.

This classification is for substances that there is a limited to sufficient evidence that they are carcinogenic to animals. It is used for substances that have no human data and less sufficient evidence in animals

This classification is for substances that there is a inadequate or limited  evidence that they are carcinogenic to humans or animals. Substances that do not fall into any other category are places in group 3, but that does not mean that they are non carcinogenic or safe, just that further research is needed.

This classification is for substances that there is a evidence suggesting a lack of carcinogenic risk to humans or animals. 

  

 

 

 

 



Cell phone radiation is classified as group 2B. A classification for substances and exposure circumstances that are possibly carcinogenic to animals. To gain some context, let’s look at what other substances are in this group? Lets first look at what substances are in group 1.

Group 1 as substance known to cause cancer; they include things like;

That is not the entire list, but some of the more common know things. There are a total of 120 things in group 1.

There are 120 substances in this classification.

Group 2A are substances that are probable carcinogens in humans. Common substances and activities like;

Even shift work that disrupts the circadian rhythm are classified as 2A. All the substance you have read so far are classified as a higher risk than cell phone radiation.

There are 81 substances in this classification.

Group 2A are substances that are possible carcinogens in humans. Common substances and activities like;

These things are classified as having the same risk as cell phone radiation. Therefore if you are worried about cell phone radiation you also need to be worried about aloe vera, coffee, and energy drinks.

There are 294 substances in this classification.

Group 3 are substances that there is not enough evidence to classify them into any other group. This includes

While there isn’t enough evidence to classify them as carcinogenic, there is not enough evidence to classify them as non-carcinogenic.

There are 505 substances in this classification.

Group 4 are substances that there is  enough evidence to classify them as non carcinogenic, in other words substances that do not cause cancer. This list isn’t very long- in fact only 1 item is currently in this list.

Only one! There have been 1063 classifications in total and only one is deemed to be non-carcinogenic. Think about that before you judge cell phone radiation as a risk.

The substance that has been deemed as non carcinogenic is caprolactam. And organic compound used to produce nylon.

There are 1 substances in this classification.

You have to remember that there are only 4 classifications in the WHO classification scheme, They are;

So how did cell phones become Group 2B- possibly carcinogenic?

Cell phone radiation is obviously not a Group 1 substances, as there is no conclusive evidence that it is carcinogenic. The same goes for Group 4, since it is extremely hard to rule it out anything as a carcinogen. This is shown by the fact that only 1 of the 1063 classified substances is in group 4.

So Cell phones can’t be group 1, or group 4. What about group 3?

Group 3 is reserved for substance and things where there is not enough evidence to classify them into any other group. This basically means, when the research panel looked into the substance they didn’t find enough evidence to put it into any other category. And since there has been research on cell phone radiation it can’t be put into this category.

This leads naturally to cell phones landing in group 2. The only thing left is to classify it as group 2A or Group 2B. Group A is reserved for substances and things that have sufficient evidence in causing cancer in humans. There is no study concluding this, so it can’t be classified as group 2A.

There are animal studies showing the possible link between cell phone radiation and cancer, so cell phones get classified as Group 2B

The over zealous and excited popular media has taken the classification of cell phones being in category 2B and started to write hundreds of click bait articles warning people of the possible dangers. But why don’t the delve deeper into the classifications and look at other substances with a higher risk than cell phones?

The 2B classification was the best assessment the IRAC working group could come up with. It was a broad conclusion based on the total evidence available to them “in the view of the limited evidence in humans and in experimental animals”.

Some of the studies examined “could not be dismissed as reflecting bias alone”- the authors may have had a bias to prove that cell phone radiation is dangerous. The group concluded that “ a causal interpretation between mobile phone RF-EMF exposure and glioma (brain tumors) was possible, although these studies were susceptible to bias in design and analysis.

You have to remember that that the reports suggests that RF-energy from cell phones was not considered any more carcinogenic than coffee, as both are now in the company of one other in class 2B carcinogens. This should  put the risk in some context. Are you going to give up coffee?

Breaking news in 2011 when the classification of cell phones stated that cell phone use could cause cancer. No consideration was given to the fact that the report was merely a summary of previous studies, and not a carefully laid out scientific study of its own.

The media was looking for quick material for sound bites and emotive news such as;

The true classification by WHO needs to be communicated clearly to the public to avoid any panic as well as suggest the limitations of the studies. Anything related to human health is a complex subject and singling out one causality on human health is extremely difficult.

So please, if you know someone who is concerned or worried about the cancer risk of cell phones, or sharing with everyone that cell phone cause cancer, share this article with them. Or at least link them to the WHO classification website.

WHO has suggests that cell phones and RF- energy are considered to be classed as 2B carcinogenic risk. So it is possibly a cancer causing substance, not a probably cancer causing substance. WHO itself states that the classification of possibly and probably carcinogenic as having no quantitative significance on the level.

You should be more worried about; eating red meat, drinking hot drinks, frying food, and where you work. These are some substance that have a higher risk than mobile phone radiation.

Cell phone radiation is classified alongside things such as coconut oil, coffee, aloe vera, and energy drinks. So why is there not a media hype over these substances?

You need to do you part in sharing this information to give people context about the current classification of cancer risk from cell phone radiation. And help stop the click bait articles out there trying to scare people with the dangers of a group 2A carcinogen substance without knowing the true meaning of it.

Everything here is from the  World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research of Cancers Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk to humans.|||

How often have you come across click bate articles tell you of the dangerous of cell phone radiation. Do they even put the risk of cell phone radiation into