Cupertino, Calif. – April 12, 2017 – Rancher Labs, a provider of container management software, today announced the general availability of RancherOS, a simplified Linux distribution built from containers, for containers. RancherOS eliminates any unnecessary libraries and services, resulting in a footprint three times smaller than that of other container operating systems. The simplified container environment reduces container boot time, increases efficiency and improves security by reducing the number of components that can be exploited.

“At BRCloud Services, we strive to deliver the best solutions to address our customers’ needs,” said Helvio Lima, CEO at BRCloud Services. “RancherOS epitomizes what modern infrastructure should look like. We’re thrilled to integrate the container operating system into our portfolio.”

RancherOS makes it simple to run containers at scale in development, test and production. By containerizing system services and leveraging Docker for management, the operating system provides an incredibly reliable and simple to manage container-ready environment. System services are defined by Docker Compose and automatically configured using cloud-init, reducing administrative burden. Unneeded libraries and services are eliminated, significantly reducing the OS footprint and minimizing the hassle of updating, patching and maintaining a container host operating system. Containers running on RancherOS boot in seconds, making the operating system ideal for running microservices or auto-scaling. Teams can use the Rancher container management platform to easily manage RancherOS at large scale in production.

“RancherOS is a minimalist Linux distribution that is perfect for running Docker containers,” said Sheng Liang, co-founder and CEO of Rancher Labs. “By running Docker directly on top of the kernel and delivering Linux services as containers, RancherOS delivers just what you need to build a containerized application environment.”

For additional information on Rancher software and to learn more about Rancher Labs and the company’s open source products, please visit www.rancher.com.

Rancher Labs builds innovative, open source software for enterprises leveraging containers to accelerate software development and improve IT operations. With infrastructure services management and robust container orchestration, as well as commercially-supported distributions of Kubernetes, Mesos and Docker Swarm, the flagship Rancher container management platform allows users to easily manage all aspects of running containers in production, on any infrastructure. RancherOS is a simplified Linux distribution built from containers for running containers. For additional information, please visit www.rancher.com.|||

