ASCII art is a graphic design technique that uses computers for presentation and consists pieced together from the 95 printable (from total of 128) characters defined by the ASCII Standard from 1963 and ASCII compliant character sets with proprietary extended characters (beyond the 128 characters of standard 7-bit ASCII).

It is very common for programmers to have fun on their own ways, and we all know that we did stupid things with computers to have fun as a programmer.

In this post, I am going to share with you guys how to use ASCII art with Python Programming Language.

If we describe our project in a few words, we are going to use images to print them to the command line as ASCII characters. (Cool ha)

First of all, we are going to use Python 3.5.2 in this little project. You can download it with Anaconda (this is strongly suggested by me and lots of python lovers).

And before start, you can find whole code from my github repo here.

Here is the one example how this is going to be:

Here are some reasons:

And you can use this link to download Anaconda. https://www.continuum.io/downloads

And then, we are going to need to install PIL library (it is mentioned as Pillow these days) and also numpy library to use their features. You can easily use pip install to install them. Following code lines are for downloading numpy and Pillow with pip install.

But if you downloaded python with Anaconda, these libraries are came wit default installment, so you do not need any extra effort.

After everything is set, we are ready to start to code.

We are going to have 3 functions in our project run. First one is going to be main. And why we need main function in our code?

Here is the good answer to that.

Without the main sentinel, the code would be executed even if the script were imported as a module.

So basicly, our main function is going to look like this:

As you see, we also going to need makeArt function, which is going to do the real job here. But before that, we need user to choose which image file to use to makeArt.

To do that, we can use tkinter library.

And the good news is, tkinter library is also comes with the default installment of Anaconda.

So here is the code:

Now comes the important part, we are going to write makeArt function. It is going to be like below:

This makeArt function is some kind of different version to this repository.

Lastly, here is the whole code:

You can also download this code from my github repo here.|||

In this post, you are going to see what is ASCII Art, and how to use it to have fun a little from your chair.