Using dating apps is pretty straight forward, but many still shoot themselves in the foot by ignoring a few key things. By optimizing just a few of these things your matches will significantly increase.

Being one of the creators of Dine, I wanted to share with you some tips on how you can increase matches and essentially the amount of real life dates on dating apps. Recently, I made a youtube video on this topic which you can check out or watch just below:

…But if video isn’t for you right now, please continue reading on.

I’ve run quite a few experiments on dating apps in my day mostly testing my photos to see which one perform better. Most dating apps will allow you up to 5 to upload. After a lot of reading and A/B testing I found that these 5 pictures are winners and ever since I’ve been using this set, my matches have significantly increased on every single dating app I use.

A high resolution photo of yourself taken by a 3rd party that shows off your full body and face. What I found is that these types of photos come off very natural to the viewer and therefore make the best profile pictures. They also seem to give women a good enough information about your appearance, fashion, etc. in one single picture which caters to the fast moving experience they are going through on dating apps. Be sure to always, in any picture, avoid mirror selfies and other pictures that don’t properly show who you are. Mirror selfies can make you seem like a narcissist and pictures where your body and face are cut off are just asking for an immediate left swipe.

You don’t have to be the kind of person who jumps out of planes, but the second photo should be a picture of you in action or doing something you love. This could be hiking, fishing, running a marathon bowling, etc., or just doing one of your hobbies.

Having a picture of you doing an activity or shows you off in your natural element. It tells women that you like to get out and live life. It sends the message that you do things, have hobbies. It also reflects that you have a passion and that you’re not the boring type who likes to just stay home. An unlimited amount of positive conclusions, envisions and fantasies can be drawn from this single picture.

This next photo should be of you and your friends out and about. Could be at the bar, out to eat, fishing, etc. This picture shows women that you are that you are social, outgoing and have a network of friends. These are some major qualities most women find attractive in men. Display this on your profile and let people know who you are. It will only send a positive message about you.

Although I strongly recommend never using a selfie photo for your main profile picture, I highly recommend including one of these in your winning set. This photo is important because it’s a close up of your face and it shows the girl that you aren’t afraid to show who you are. It shows confidence and that your not being shady and hiding your identity. It’s pretty reassuring and lets women make the unbiased decision that you aren’t going to catfish her.

Maybe you’re holding your dog, cat or maybe a picture of you overlooking a mountain top. Having a photo that shows you connecting with the earth and your surroundings shows a light and compassionate side. You don’t have to be the cut out “nice boy” but on dating apps where there are safety concerns and women have to keep their guard up against bad people, it’s nice to show that you are human.

Keep all of your pictures natural. Even in my last picture, you can see that I’m out with my friends, smiling and just living life when someone snapped that. Keeping the photos you upload only natural pictures of yourself sends a good, positive, strong and honest message about who you are.

People are busy and women have plenty of options on dating apps coming to them regularly. Inconveniently for women though, finding a quality match is a bit harder to score. Because women are considering many different things before they can declare to meet someone IRL, they must weed through the weak (lots of left swipes).

So because a women’s process of weeding out male users is intensive, why should they have a reason to swipe or request someone who has a profile picture of a dog? Not showing yourself in your main picture could even be taken as shady or creepy. As superficial as it sounds, if you want to get some matches going, you have to be competitive on dating apps and that means having a quality set of photos.

Almost all dating apps these days, Tinder, Bumble, Happn, Coffee Meets Bagel and even my app Dine, to name a few, all require Facebook login for joining the community and making a profile. However, even when importing your Facebook profile details, many men (also women) commonly leave their profiles blank or with little to no information listed.

See men, as you just maxed out your daily FREE swipes for the day on tinder after swiping right on literally every person you saw with the hopes of yielding some hot matches, the women were carefully browsing the profiles of the men they found attractive or interesting.

Scoring a match is one positive step forward in the conversion process, but when it actually comes to women deciding whether or not they are going to meet first date, most will likely take other things into consideration other than just physical appearance.

Besides your appearance, important things to women are your occupation, education and age. All of these things can be easily conveyed by displaying it neatly on your dating app profile. Women want to make sure they can trust someone completely before meeting IRL so it’s only natural for women to run a simple evaluation of the male user they will potentially see for a date. Keeping your profile vague doesn’t say much or reveal much about you for an average right-minded person to trust meeting an online stranger.

Your bio is important too. For example, you may be an avid rock climber or hiker and then a beautiful girl who also happens to be a frequent hiker and climber comes to browse your profile. How is she supposed to know that you also love rock climbing if you didn’t mention that’s one of your biggest hobbies in your bio? Right there, you would have just blown your chance of making a meaningful and high quality match.

Add as much as you can to your dating app profile. Make sure to write as much about you as possible, even if that means maxing out the character limit in the description box. The more details the better. Really, it can only help you and taking literally 1–5 minutes to write something up will significantly increase your matches.

Other things that sweeten the deal for female users is compatibility so the more things you list will only help because the more your list the more opportunities you create to for making connections.

So if your not using Dine, then in your case it’s probably swipes and not sending requests, but the point is make moves. Although dating apps are superficial by nature and it’s good to be picky, don’t be so hasty to skip someone based off of pictures alone. With that said, it’s not wise to swipe right on every single person you see. The idea is reach out to a lot of people but only to the ones that you are serious about meeting. On Dine, I recommend sending at least 1 request per day to try and get some matches going. Make sure it’s someone you actually want to meet though or your just wasting both of your time!

Do not, I repeat, DO NOT, initiate the first conversation with a simple “Hey, what’s up?”. Have you ever seen a girls tinder inbox? It’s lined with that opener and 100 more boring variations.

When you open that conversation up, try to personalize your message. For example, if the user’s profile says something like “I love Thai food”, a clever opener could be something like, “Hey, nice to meet you! I actually know a Thai place on the lower east side that supposedly makes the best pad thai ever. You wanna try it together this weekend?

Now why is this a good example? First of all, you are putting a personal touch in your message by mentioning something that the user stated on her profile. Therefore, it reflects that you took the time to read a bit about her. Secondly, you stated a specific thing (pad thai) about the particular subject which shows that you know about Thai food too. This reflects a level of compatibility. Thirdly, you stated a day to meet so your essentially cutting through the bullshit small talk.

This is good because it gets straight to the point and shows your serious and also suggesting to meet in a safe, public place. If she is serious about meeting you, she will consider and answer. Also, restaurants make great places for conversation. Don’t be that jerk who asks a girl to come over for Netflix and chill on a first date. Honestly, men like that are pretty low and really giving a bad name for the rest of the dating app community. Set an example.

Dine which has been featured in Apple App Store as well as Business Insider is creating a buzz as a new social dating app centered around meeting someone for the first time over the best food or drinks in town. Endless swipes from left to right that only lead to dead end conversations are history. With Dine, it’s time to meet people, get back out there and go on an actual date.|||

Using dating apps is pretty straight forward, but many still shoot themselves in the foot by ignoring a few key things. By optimizing just a few of these things your matches will significantly…