delete that is in the OS X Dock library folder

I bought a Netgear router, and noticed something strange when I installed the Netgear Genie software: the dock vanished for a moment, and when it returned, my desktop picture was reset to the Apple-supplied default. And all my desktop picture settings (e.g. random rotation of a particular folder) were wiped out.The explanation is simple. I can see in the Genie installer that at the end of a new or upgrade installation, it runs a script which contains this command:That's right: the installer will blithelyPerhaps that had some ill-conceived purpose long ago. But in today's world, the file it is deleting is, you guessed it,: the database that holds the desktop picture settings. There is no possible justification for why a Netgear installation program should be deleting this database.Well, I'm within the tech support period, so I can report it to Netgear. This is simple to explain and whoever is in charge of the installer should know exactly what I'm talking about, right? Right?40 days and over 50 exchanges with Netgear's so-called Tech Support, the answer is: No. They don't have a clue and it is impossible to give them one. They can't understand that the actual Genie software has nothing to do with the problem, nor the actual router. For example, they've told me to:Netgear refused to proceed further until I did that last item. Talk about fixing the barn door after the cows have escaped.I've had two teleconferences with Netgear support people. I finally made a video where Ithe installer deleting the desktop database and resetting the settings. And I pointed out the danger: what if in macOS 10.13 Sierra Mist (or whatever) Apple puts a new, critically important database in this folder?Finally I thought I had made progress. Netgear agreed to escalate the issue to the engineering team, which is all I wanted.But then it turns out that even for an issue that only affects the Genie installer program, Netgear can't escalate the issue unless I tell them:And before you ask: They won't accept "N/A". Or telling them the router is turned off. Or that the computer I installed the Netgear Genie is on is not connected to the network.I think this comes down to the usual thing: if no one with OS X tells Netgear that their installer is damaging system files on the computer, they don't think it is an issue.|||

