Already more than a week ago Bas Buursma and I released CodeSandbox: an online code editor with a focus on sharing projects in React. The response was beyond all my expectations: already more than 1500 sandboxes have been created and more than 280 users signed in via Github! The idea of CodeSandbox started when I was on a trip to St. Ives (hah!). I was working at that time on the conversion of Catawiki to React. While I was gone I got a lot of questions from other developers about React, but there was no easy way for me to answer them without having access to an editor where I could access the libraries we have. Simply said: CodeSandbox is an online code editor. It automates things like transpiling, bundling and dependency management for you so you can easily create a new project in a single click. After creating something interesting you can show it to others by just sharing the url. CodeSandbox features a live preview to show the result of the code while you’re typing. The editor works with all javascript projects, but it has some React specific features, like the ability to download the project in a create-react-app template.

We’ve been working on CodeSandbox for the past 4 months, so there are a lot of things I built that I’d love to talk about. If you have any suggestions I’d also love to hear them! I will feature (pun intended) the biggest features. This is really important for us since it should be easy to try out a library in a separate environment without too much hassle. We support NPM dependencies by creating a dependency build on the fly for the specific combination of dependencies. WebpackBin does the same thing and I’m working at this moment with Christian Alfoni to build a service that we both can use. It’s also possible to add external resources, like css and javascript files.

If you want to take your project out of CodeSandbox you can easily do that by clicking the ‘Download’ button in the header. You will get a zip file with the create-react-app template to work with. The package.json and index.html are generated for you. CodeSandbox is built around sharing, that’s why this feature was a priority #1 from the start. It’s possible to share a sandbox in two ways: the fullscreen and the editor mode. You normally work in the editor view when working on a sandbox, but you can share a fullscreen version of it. The fullscreen version is a small version of CodeSandbox with just the editor and preview. You can specify what file and what view to show with the sharing options in the header. It should be possible soon to showcase a sandbox on Medium. I’ve found these developer tools (especially Prettier) a requirement for me to work fast. You can enable or disable all of these in preferences. Prettify on save is enabled by default (you can still turn it off) because this ensures the same style between sandboxes and makes it easier to read the code of other sandboxes. ESLint follows the rules of the airbnb preset, I want to make this a preference too in the future.|||

Already more than a week ago Bas Buursma and I released CodeSandbox: an online code editor with a focus on sharing projects in React. The response was beyond all my expectations: already more than…