Slack has just rolled out message menus option for its apps. It may have a solid impact on workflow improvements within Slack. We, at Standuply, strive to help remote teams to be more productive. So we’ve updated the bot to make daily standup meetings easier using message menus in Slack.

These are one of the most popular feature requests from our users:

We have foreseen Slack’s features that would allow us to bring these requests to life. So, right after the latest Slack release, we began coding hard to improve Standuply’s functionality.

It took us a couple of days and nights and so we’re ready to announce message menus in Standuply that we’re launching next week 🎉

From now on, every standup meeting via Standuply comes with a button Snooze and dropdown menu Select quick reply.

Using Snooze button, you’re able to postpone answering the report to a later time. By clicking it, a message menu is loaded with options from 1h to 8h delay.

Also, Standuply will let others know that you can’t answer at the moment:

Once the time has gone the bot will get back to you to run a standup meeting again. When you finish answering the questions, Standuply will add your responses to the daily summary.

Sometimes we report the same things as yesterday or just don’t have time to do so at all. To make things easier Standuply provides you several pre-defined answers for a quick response via message menu Select quick reply.

In that case, your teammates will see the response you’ve chosen from the dropdown menu. Don’t overuse this feature, otherwise, what’s the point in having a standup meeting at all?

For those lucky ones we’ve added a button Report now. Even if a report is missed, you can click that button, and Standuply will run a standup meeting for you again. Then the answers are attached to the daily summary so that you can catch up with others.|||

Slack has just rolled out message menus option for its apps. It may have a solid impact on workflow improvements within Slack. We, at Standuply, strive to help remote teams to be more productive. So…