What is your career resolution for 2017?

Remember that decision you made January 1st and by the end of the month, you have totally forgotten about it.

Yes, it called New Year Resolution.

According to research, only about 8% of people actually fulfill their New Year resolution and I must say, those are the lucky ones.

Whatever it is, you want to do in 2017, it is possible to achieve it as long as you know what you want. So I decided to pick the brains of successful career coach and ask them to share their career resolution with you.

Hopefully, you will get an inspiration in case you have failed to make one or you have totally forgotten about yours.

“My career resolution for 2017 is to continue to inspire job seekers to pursue every opportunity to build, manage, and maintain a personal and professional brand that will continue to resonate with companies and hiring managers so they can achieve ongoing career success!”

“I chose a word each year for my Career Resolution. For me, I find that focusing on one word and the uplifting, freeing way it makes me feel is more motivating than the way I used to make resolutions that did not stick. This year my word is ‘Releasing’. Letting go of what no longer energizes me is giving me space to find even more joy in my work!”

“Whatever your current position, decide to shine so brightly in it that you get noticed.”

“My career resolution for 2017 is to rebrand myself and shake things up a little bit. Over the years, I’ve become stagnant and haven’t focused on my growth potential. This year, I will face the fear of the unknown by starting something completely new, which I feel will put me closer to my overall vision as a working parent advocate.”

“My 2017 career resolution is to expand my network.”

“My career resolution is to do more interview training for Managers within companies and more speaking”.

“To read up on my industry daily. It’s not good enough to just go to work and do my job. Especially given that as a social media manager, the social media landscape is changing every single day. This year I’m focusing on learning as much as I can through articles, networking groups, and podcasts, so I can better myself as an industry expert.”

“My number one career resolution for this year is to significantly grow my network. I am totally an introvert, so reaching out to strangers is always a little intimidating for me, but I realize the importance networking plays in developing my business. There is a direct relationship between your network and your net worth. I love meeting readers of The Confused Millennial and partnering with other business coaches and strategists to help elevate other confused millennials to hustle hard and build the career of their dreams today, rather than feeling stuck in a dreadful 9 to 5 they hate!”

“In addition to work on a number of small projects with a special focus on young adults, I run a successfully Human Resources Consultancy and I’ve published two books to date. Whilst thankful for what I’ve achieved to date, there is still so much more that I believe that I need to achieve in my career in order to be able to say that I have achieved my purpose here on earth. With this in mind there are some key things that I have set out to achieve this year.

There are two book projects that I am working on that I intend to complete this year:

The first book, “Who Could Have Imagined” explores the journeys of people that I went to school with, exploring how they have progressed and achieved success. My hope is that this will both encourage and inspire young adults on their journeys through the ups and downs that they may face.

The second book explores food as a representation of culture.

For my HR work, my plan is to develop and implement a model that encourages Diversity, Inclusion, Engagement and Talent Management within the organization. I refer to this as the Mosaic Model and my intent is that within a few years the Mosaic Index will become a key measure of success for organisations.

I’ve long worked with and supported young adults. This year my plan is to expand the work I do with young adults on a global basis, helping young adults to come to a full recognition of who they are and their place in local, national and global societies.

With these plans as with most other things that I have succeeded in, key strategies that will enable my success include:

“As an entrepreneur that built their company from the ground-up, I struggle with any semblance of work-life balance. While my company is now three years old and does not require the 24/7 effort of a young startup, I tend to work all the time and never make any time for myself. So this year, I’m scheduling two afternoons off a week, plus two three day weekends a month – all times dedicated to doing the “non-work” things I love, like: hiking, kayaking, photography, etc. !”

“My career resolution for 2017 is to make sure I love everything I’m working on. When you run your own blog, sometimes your vision can get lost temporary. So this year I want to make sure I’m always working on different projects I’m passionate about… and my audience will love.”

There you have it, the 2017 Career Resolution of top successful career coaches. Use them for inspiration.|||

The Best 2017 Career Resolutions by successful career coaches.