Would you be willing to go all-in when there is no guarantee you would win? Or walk away with nothing from a situation where in long term you would only keep on losing?

What about taking unreasonable risks by putting your reputation on the line for something you truly believe in? Or doing anything the general consensus would skip in fear of offending the other party?

Often stepping into the unknown others would rather ignore. Sometimes losing, but always winning.

For me, the latest must have been decision to move on from Shipitwise. Not knowing where it leads me, while still feeling it would become an awesome journey. One that has already started to unravel!

But long before that, I made another reckless choice to enter the field of marketing. Again being completely ignorant on what it is all about.

This, in turn, let’s me break the conventional rules of the industry. Only because I do not know how the things “should” be done, while willing to take risks others would not.

Such as putting the pedal to the metal when the only thing we have is an unfinished product. Or deciding to overshare all posts on social media — hoping this leads to a bigger audience.

Things most marketers do not want to do, fearing there is not enough to show or that they would appear as spammers. All of which, of course, is bollocks! As people that truly would believe in the mission take no hostages.

Moreover, starting to sail when the weather is “right” reduces the chance of succeeding. Because this way the produce will have not been built based on the feedback of the end-consumer. And the potential competition (which always exists) would have a chance for a head start. Both that should not be welcome in the eyes of the business…

Therefore, it is always wiser to start when the route is still uncertain. Giving thyself a bigger opportunity for achieving the victory.

One does not need to know all the answers to start. Or what do you think?|||

Difference between a man that succeeds and the other that doesn’t only lies in how courageously they make hard decisions.