Windows 10 is the latest build from Windows and users are facing many problems using Windows 10. When you tries to plug a USB drive into USB ports an error shows in your screen or device manager listing “Device Descriptor Request Failed“.

On screen, you’ll get a message saying “Windows Can’t Recognize The USB” or similar. There are many reasons due to which you are receiving this error. You can’t plug and play any USB drive and start doing your work.

There are many possible ways you’ll receive this error. Error codes and listening for this error might be different in your case. The solution for all errors is available in this article. Below are the errors listening you might be receiving in your case:

These are the some of the common error users might receive while plugging their USB. Your USB port might be damaged, USB is damaged etc. are the hardware failures which might be the possible reason for this error. Below is the quick advice you should perform before proceeding:

This quick advice should be followed by every user who is looking for the problem. It’s important because this problem might be caused by hardware disability resulting in your ports stops working.

If you’re still getting the error you should quickly start exploring and solving your error. Below are the all possible ways which are useful to fix this problem.

Drivers handle most important work in your computers. You external devices like screen, USB ports, Audio jacks etc. are configured properly by drivers. In the case of USB, Windows have inbuilt USB driver and you should try Un-Installing that driver. This might fix your problem.

This fix might be useful to fix your problem. You can use any Free/Premium tool to update your drivers.

Fastboot is a feature in Windows which boot your Windows OS quickly. Enabling this feature will save an image of your loaded kernel and drivers files and configuration in hiberfile.

This means your drivers’ configuration is saved in a file and Windows reads configuration from those files automatically and if any error in the configuration then Windows won’t fix this on its own.

Disabling fast boot might fix your problem in this case. Below are the steps showing how to disable fast boot to fix device descriptor request failed.

Well, this FIX may fix your problem but if you’re still stuck in problem below is another FIX.

Windows manages power supply to USB ports frequently and you can easily change them through Control Panel. If your Suspend Settings is enabled, drivers will tell windows to slow down the power supply to the USB and USB might stop working.

Windows has its own troubleshooter which is capable of fixing most of the problems encountered with your PC. You should definitely use Windows Troubleshooter to fix your problem.

These are all the possible FIX for your problem of device descriptor request failed for windows 10 or below.

These fix will also help you to solve USB Device Not Recognized problem. Comment below if you still have the problem.|||

When you tries to plug a USB drive into USB ports an error shows in your screen or device manager listing "Device Descriptor Request Failed". Fix this problem