This has been forked from Gulp Starter

Skcript's very own Gulp Starter Kit for faster Front-End Development.

Directory and top level settings are convienently exposed in . Use this file to update paths to match the directory structure of your project, and to adjust task options.

All task configuration objects have and directories specfied. These are relative to and respectively. Each configuration also has an extensions array. This is used for file watching, and file deleting/replacing.

If there is a feature you do not wish to use on your project, simply delete the configuration, and the task will be skipped.

Not all configuration is exposed here. For advanced task configuration, you can always edit the tasks themselves in .

This runs from , using the version installed with this project, rather than a globally installed instance. All commands in the package.json work this way. The command runs the task, defined in .

All files will compile in development mode (uncompressed with source maps). BrowserSync will serve up files to and will stream live changes to the code and assets to all connected browsers. Don't forget about the additional BrowserSync tools available on !

To run any other existing task, simply add the task name after the command. Example:

This will compile revisioned and compressed files to . To build production files and preview them locally, run

This will start a static server that serves your production files to http://localhost:5000. This is primarily meant as a way to preview your production build locally, not necessarily for use as a live production server.

Test files located in folders are picked up and run using Karma, Mocha, Chai, and Sinon. The test script right now first compiles a production build, and then, if successful runs Karma. This is nice when using something like Travis CI in that if an error occurs during the build step, Travis alerts me that it failed. To pass, the files have to compile properly AND pass the JS tests.

This task compiles production code and then uses gulp-gh-pages to push the contents of your to a (or other specified) branch, viewable at http://[your-username].github.io/[your-repo-name]. Be sure to update the property in your .|||

skcript-gulp-starter - Gulp Starter template for creating landing page