Recently there has been a lot of coverage in both tech and non-tech news outlets about internet privacy and how to prevent snooping both from service providers and governments. In this article I am going to show one method of anonymizing internet traffic; using a TLS enabled HTTP/HTTPS Proxy.

In this article we will walk through using stunnel to create a TLS tunnel with an instance of TinyProxy on the other side.

TinyProxy is an HTTP & HTTPS proxy server. By setting up a TinyProxy instance on a remote server and configuring our HTTP client to use this proxy. We can route all of our HTTP & HTTPS traffic through that remote server. This is a useful technique for getting around network restrictions that might be imposed by ISP's or Governments.

However, it's not enough to simply route HTTP/HTTPS traffic to a remote server. This in itself does not add any additional protection to the traffic. In fact, with an out of the box TinyProxy setup, all of the HTTP traffic to TinyProxy would still be unencrypted, leaving it open to packet capture and inspection. This is where stunnel comes into play.

I've featured it in earlier articles but for those who are new to stunnel, stunnel is a proxy that allows you to create a TLS tunnel between two or more systems. In this article we will use stunnel to create a TLS tunnel between the HTTP client system and TinyProxy.

By using a TLS tunnel between the HTTP client and TinyProxy our HTTP traffic will be encrypted between the local system and the proxy server. This means anyone trying to inspect HTTP traffic will be unable to see the contents of our HTTP traffic.

This technique is also useful for reducing the chances of a man-in-the-middle attack to HTTPS sites.

I say reducing because one of the caveats of this article is, while routing our HTTP & HTTPS traffic through a TLS tunneled HTTP proxy will help obfuscate and anonymize our traffic. The system running TinyProxy is still susceptible to man-in-the-middle attacks and HTTP traffic snooping.

Essentially, with this article, we are not focused on solving the problem of unencrypted traffic, we are simply moving our problem to a network where no one is looking. This is essentially the same approach as VPN service providers, the advantage of running your own proxy is that you control the proxy.

Now that we understand the end goal, let's go ahead and get started with the installation of TinyProxy.

The installation of TinyProxy is fairly easy and can be accomplished using the command on Ubuntu systems. Let's go ahead and install TinyProxy on our future proxy server.

Once the command finishes, we can move to configuring TinyProxy.

By default TinyProxy starts up listening on all interfaces for a connection to port . Since we don't want to leave our proxy open to the world, let's change this by configuring TinyProxy to listen to the interface only. We can do this by modifying the parameter within the file.

Once complete, we will need to restart the TinyProxy service in order for our change to take effect. We can do this using the command.

After completes, we can validate that our change is in place by checking whether port is bound correctly using the command.

Based on the output it appears TinyProxy is setup correctly. With that done, let's go ahead and setup stunnel.

Just like TinyProxy, the installation of stunnel is as easy as executing the command.

Once has finished we will need to enable stunnel by editing the configuration file.

By default on Ubuntu, stunnel is installed in a disabled mode. By changing the flag from to within , we are enabling stunnel to start automatically. However, our configuration of stunnel does not stop there.

Our next step with stunnel, will involve defining our TLS tunnel.

By default stunnel will look in for any files that end in . In order to configure our TLS stunnel we will be creating a file named . Once created, we will insert the following content.

The contents of this configuration file are fairly straight forward, but let's go ahead and break down what each of these items mean. We will start with the option.

The option is similar to the option from TinyProxy. This setting will define what interface and port stunnel will listen to for incoming connections. By setting this to we are defining that stunnel should listen on all interfaces on port .

The option is used to tell stunnel what IP and port to connect to. In our case this needs to be the IP and port that TinyProxy is listening on; .

An easy way to remember how and should be configured is that is where incoming connections should come from, and is where they should go to.

Our next two configuration options are closely related, & . The option is used to define the location of an SSL certificate that will be used to establish our TLS session. The option is used to define the location of the key used to create the SSL certificate.

We will set these to be located in and in the next step, we will go ahead and create both the key and certificate.

The first step in creating a self-signed certificate is to create an private key. To do this we will use the following command.

The above will create a 4096 bit RSA key. From this key, we will create a public certificate using another command. During the execution of this command there will be a series of questions. These questions are used to populate the key with organization information. Since we will be using this for our own purposes we will not worry too much about the answers to these questions.

Once the questions have been answered the command will create our certificate file.

After both the certificate and key have been created, we will need to restart stunnel in order for our changes to take effect.

At this point we have finished configuring the proxy server. We now need to setup our client.

Like the proxy server, our first step in setting up stunnel on our client is installing it with the command.

We will also once again need to enabling stunnel within the configuration file.

After enabling stunnel we will need to restart the service with the command.

From here we can move on to configuring the stunnel client.

The configuration of stunnel in "client-mode" is a little different than the "server-mode" configuration we set earlier. Let's go ahead and add our client configuration into the file.

As we did before, let's break down the configuration options shown above.

The first option is , this option is simple, as it defines whether stunnel should be operating in a client or server mode. By setting this to , we are defining that we would like to use client mode.

We covered and before and if we go back to our description above we can see that stunnel will accept connections on and then tunnel them to , which is the IP and port that our stunnel proxy server is listening on.

The option is used to define what level of certificate validation should be performed. The option of will cause stunnel to verify the remote certificate with a local certificate defined with the option. In the above example, I copied the we generated on the server to the client and set this as the .

These last two options are important, without setting and stunnel will open an TLS connection without necessarily checking the validity of the certificate. By setting to and to the same we generated earlier, we are giving stunnel a way to validate the identity of our proxy server. This will prevent our client from being hit with a man-in-the-middle attack.

Once again, let's restart stunnel to make our configurations take effect.

With our configurations complete, let's go ahead and test our proxy.

In order to test our proxy settings we will use the command. While we are using a command line web client in this article, it is possible to use this same type of configuration with GUI based browsers such as Chrome or Firefox.

Before testing however, I will need to set the and environmental variables. These will tell to leverage our proxy server.

With our proxy server settings in place, let's go ahead and execute our command.

From the above output we can see that our connection was routed through TinyProxy.

And we were able to connect to Google.

Given these results, it seems we have a working TLS based HTTP/HTTPS proxy. Since this proxy is exposed on the internet what would happen if this proxy was found by someone simply scanning subnets for nefarious purposes.

In theory as it stands today they could use our proxy for their own purposes. This means we need some way to ensure that only our client can use this proxy; enter PreShared Keys.

Much like an API token, stunnel supports an authentication method called PSK or PreShared Keys. This is essentially what it sounds like. A token that has been shared between the client and the server in advance and used for authentication. To enable PSK authentication we simply need to add the following two lines to the file on both the client and the server.

By setting to we are telling stunnel to use PSK based authentication. The option is used to provide stunnel a file that contains the secrets in a format.

In the above we specified the file. Let's go ahead and create that file and enter a sample PreShared Key.

Since the file contains sensitive information. Let's ensure that the permissions on the file are set appropriately.

By setting the permissions to we are ensuring only the user (the owner of the file) can read this file. These permissions will prevent other users from accessing the file and stumbling across our authentication credentials.

After setting permissions we will need to once again restart the stunnel service.

With our settings are complete on both the client and server, we now have a reasonably secure TLS Proxy service.

In this article we covered setting up both a TLS and HTTP Proxy. As I mentioned before this setup can be used to help hide HTTP and HTTPS traffic on a given network. However, it is important to remember that while this setup makes the client system a much more tricky target, the proxy server itself could still be targeted for packet sniffing and man-in-the-middle attacks.

The key is to wisely select the location of where the proxy server is hosted.

Have feedback on the article? Want to add your 2 cents? Shoot a tweet out about it and tag @madflojo.|||

Using stunnel to create an SSL tunnel to a TinyProxy HTTP proxy