An Arizona high school student has made history by becoming the first woman to ever receive an NCAA football scholarship.

Becca Longo, who is a kicker for the Chandler Basha High School football team, signed her letter of intent to play college football with Division II Adams State University in Colorado last month.

However, she was quite surprised when her football coach, Gerald Todd, said that she was the first woman ever to receive a scholarship at the Division II level or higher, according to ESPN.

Longo told the sports news site that she had no idea she was the first woman to receive this distinction and that she's 'still in shock from it'. 'I'm just amazed,' she added.

The 18-year-old will also play basketball at the university, where former Cardinals quarterback Timm Rosenbach serves as the head coach.

'To me, there is no doubt she can be competitive. She has a strong leg, and she can be very accurate,' Rosenbach told the Arizona Republic.

Longo told ESPN that she has had a fascination with kicking for years, despite suffering a back injury that led doctors to believe she would never play sports again.

In 2014, she was the junior varsity kicker at Queen Creek High in Arizona but was forced to sit out her junior year after transferring to Basha High.

Last year, she won a starting job on field goals and extra points.

Longo converted 35 of 38 extra-point attempts last season and was good on her lone field goal attempt of 30 yards, according to ESPN.

During the season, Longo reached out to Adams State, but didn't hear back until it was over.

An assistant coach eventually came to the school and invited Longo to visit the university.

She kicked in front of the coaching staff, which earned her an offer.

'It was like recruiting any other athlete,' Rosenbach told the Arizona Republic.

Longo told ESPN that she is aware of the competition at Adams State.

The university recently signed kicker Tiago Paim and they have a returning sophomore Eduardo Majalca on their roster.

'I'm ready to compete,' Longo said. 'I don't really have any expectations beyond that.'

There have been at least a dozen women who have played college football, but none of them had ever received an NCAA scholarship.|||

Becca Longo (pictured), 18, who is a kicker for the Chandler Basha High school football team in Arizona, made history when she became the first woman to ever receive an NCAA football scholarship.