Being a fresher isn't a bad thing. You are a fresh grad who is full of energy with a zeal to work on exciting projects and latest technologies. But the way one presents itself to the company matters a lot. Today we will talk about different strategies on how can you showcase yourself.

Nothing shady works here. You got a 7.99 CPI and the cutoff is 8.0 (on a scale of 10), you are rejected. It is better to maintain your academics excellent so that the HR doesn't find any grain on the resume. Here are a few things which you must do to get a chance to interview with them.

These companies love crazy stuff on your resume. Let us look at few of them and what they think of you.

These companies have a significant demand for frontend technologies as well. So be prepared with frameworks like AngularJS and ReactJS. App development also comes into picture here.

JAVA and J2EE. That is all they want. Not criticising the technology but development is significantly slower when compared to others. It is better if you have a OCJP certificate with some basic projects. HTML/CSS is a must. They help you get ahead of the rest.

Another breed looks for C# and Dot Net developers too. God help you unless you are developing intense applications like games and stuff for Windows platform. Rest of the world has already embraced Linux in various flavours.

A career in freelancer is going to take you places. Trust me, it is the most viable career option. You are your boss. You chose project, design, code and develop it as well. All on your own with your style of coding. No interference or bullshit of others. No politics.

Few of the freelancing friendly technologies are here as follows:

There are also few mistakes which one should avoid. To avoid getting blacklisted, here are few tips.

Good luck to your career. Do your best each time. Will come up with blog posts on how to prepare for interviews as well.|||

basic skills to get into startups, resume for startups, how to get internship in startups, how to get job in startups, how to freelance