The fact that workers can-within seconds—connect to friends and family, network with peers, and easily communicate with coworkers is a huge development across all industries.

There is no doubt that social media impacts our lives. But when it comes to our work lives, we may not often think of Facebook and other social platforms as great tools. In reality, however, they’ve played a large role in helping feed the growth of remote working that we’ve seen over the last few years.

Remote working is when you work from a location other than a central office. If you’ve ever worked from home or set up camp at Starbucks, you’ve worked remotely. While this sort of arrangement used to be a relative novelty, new technologies have made it easier than ever to work from anywhere. Many businesses are embracing this trend, and they’re finding that their employees are happier and more productive when they’re able to work where they want.

According to Gallup, 37% of US workers claim to have worked remotely—and those numbers are from 2015; based on trends, the percentage is likely even higher now. Those employees who work remotely are more likely to report that they are happier with work, according to a TINYpulse survey, and a full 91% of workers polled report feeling more productive when they work remotely.

This trend of remote work is fueled by increasing options for staying connected. The pervasiveness of technology makes living and working remotely much more bearable. These days, tech is driving accessibility for almost any service you can think of, from Elon Musks’s SpaceX internet to mobile and app-based entertainment. And the variety of tools available for connecting is only growing more.

Here are some of the ways social networks and tools help make remote working more productive and fulfilling:

If you’re working and living far from home, you might feel isolated from your support network. And when you’re separated from your core social group, it can be hard to step away from work and recharge. Social media makes that work-life balance a little easier by giving you fast access to your personal network of colleagues and family.

Top Platform for Work-Life Balance: Facebook

 Facebook needs no introduction. The social network can help you stay connected to friends and family wherever you are, helping you feel less lonely no matter which corner of the world you’re living in.

One of the toughest aspects of working remotely is not having an in-house network of coworkers who share your interests in your work and industry. Luckily, social media can help remedy that problem: social technologies enable you to join in global conversations around the latest developments in your trade.

Top Platform for Professional Networking: Twitter

 Twitter is a fantastic resource for remote-working professionals. It allows people to connect and share info in easily digested bites, and it’s a favorite hangout in for many business-minded people. Professionals from myriad industries regularly participate in Twitter chats—conversations linked by a specific hashtag—which can provide easy access to a vast network of connections.

Social networks aren’t just for personal growth and networking. The flexibility and informality of social media encourage communication—making it the perfect setup to enhance workplace collaboration. New social platforms unite the communication-fostering elements of traditional social media with the clean organization needed for work interactions.

Top Platform for Work Communication: Slack

 Slack, a popular team communication tool that allows for organized chatting between coworkers, may not top a list of traditional social media channels, but that could be changing. Since its inception, Slack has quickly become a social network of choice for many users, making communicate with team members feel more natural and friendly than ever before.

The fact that workers can-within seconds—connect to friends and family, network with peers, and easily communicate with coworkers is a huge development across all industries. If the productivity and satisfaction returns for remote work hold up, it may be time for businesses to encourage their workers to develop a greater social media presence.

Learn the latest trends, insights and best practices from the brightest minds in media and technology. Sign up for SMW Insider to watch full-length sessions from official Social Media Week conferences live and on-demand.|||

The fact that workers can-within seconds—connect to friends and family, network with peers, and easily communicate with coworkers is a huge development across all industries.