The readers will love our list because it is Data-Driven & Objective. Enjoy the list:

I am not a recruiter. I am a software engineer. And as such, I know what it's like to be asked to whip up brilliant algorithms on the spot and then write flawless code on a whiteboard. I've been through this as a candidate and as an interviewer. Cracking the Coding Interview, 6th Edition is here to help you through this process, teaching you what you need to know and enabling you to perform at your very best. I've coached and interviewed hundreds of software engineers. The result is this book.

Before you buy this book, please first head over to our sample page - elementsofprogramminginterviews.com/sample. The sampler should give you a very good idea of the quality and style of our book. In particular, be sure you are comfortable with the level and with our C++ coding style. Solutions include code snippets which are primarily in C++. Programs concerned with concurrency are in Java. Complete programs are available at epibook.github.io. Java versions of the C++ programs in the book can be found at the website.

3. Cracking the PM Interview: How to Land a Product Manager Job in Technology 

 $22 Cracking the PM Interview is a comprehensive book about landing a product management role in a startup or bigger tech company. Learn how the ambiguously-named "PM" (product manager / program manager) role varies across companies, what experience you need, how to make your existing experience translate, what a great PM resume and cover letter look like, and finally, how to master the PM interview questions.

4. Programming Interviews Exposed: Secrets to Landing Your Next Job 

 $17 In today's tight job market, competition for programming jobs is hotter than ever. This third edition of a popular guide to programming interviews includes new code examples, information on the latest languages, new chapters on sorting and design patterns, tips on using LinkedIn, and a downloadable app to help prepare applicants for the interview. Like its earlier editions, this guide covers what software companies and IT departments want their programmers to know and includes plenty of helpful hints to boost your confidence.

5. Data Structures and Algorithms Made Easy: Data Structures and Algorithmic Puzzles, Fifth Edition 

 $24.48 Data Structures And Algorithms Made Easy: Data Structures and Algorithmic Puzzles is a book that offers solutions to complex data structures and algorithms. There are multiple solutions for each problem and the book is coded in C/C++, it comes handy as an interview and exam guide for computer scientists. It can be used as a reference manual by those readers in the computer science industry. This book serves as guide to prepare for interviews, exams, and campus work. In short, this book offers solutions to various complex data structures and algorithmic problems.|||

Top 5 Technical Interview Books