After the Mobile World Congress and the presentation of the Samsung Galaxy S8, the turn of rumors is now moved to the entry ranges and media, with the permission of Xiaomi.

And if there is a brand that has focused on those two ranges in recent years that has been Motorola, which has reaped great success with its MotoG range, which is already going for the fifth generation.

These past days we have seen how the entry range of the brand in the hands of Lenovo could receive a new family soon, the Moto C, but this would not mean goodbye to the classic Moto E.

Recently the Moto E4 passed under the magnifying glass of the FCC, leaving some clues as to how it will be, but today we have more news, in the form of a photo of two models filtered, again, @evleaks.

The Moto E family already had two members in its third generation, the Moto E3 and Moto E3 Power, and it seems that way will be in the fourth. According to Evan Blass, this time the corresponding names would be Moto E4 and Moto E4 Plus and from what we see in the photo, with the first to the left and the second to the right, both would share a very similar design.

Of course, the E4 Plus would have a button on the screen, which we can not rule out as a fingerprint reader.

Beyond the physical aspect of the new Moto E4, rumors about its technical characteristics are still scarce.

These indicate that Motorola would continue betting on Mediatek for the processor of these terminals, a four-core 6737 could be, accompanied by 16 GB of internal memory and from 2 GB of RAM, as there would be different configurations depending on the market.

In addition to memories, another of the points that would differentiate both models would be the battery, since the Moto E4 would have 2,800 mAh, while the Moto E4 would raise the bar up to 5,000 mAh.

As we say, it’s all premature rumors, but it seems we will not have to wait too long for Motorola’s new Moto E and Moto C, which would not necessarily have to reach every country.|||

According to Evan Blass, this time the corresponding names would be Moto E4 and Moto E4 Plus and from what we see in the photo