Art should be made because of art. Not that I know what you understand by the word 'art' though. I can't find a reason to do electrical circuits because of electrical circuits. Nor study to take tests because I want to study to take tests. No — art to me is whatever you do because you're able to replicate a piece of your inner self onto that. Most commonly, people do that by painting, singing, composing and etc. But I've met artists of many kinds. Engineers. Programmers. Cooks. Subway employees. Yes, subway employees. I've seen many of them doing sandwiches because they need the pay check. Totally valid reason, not judging. There are the ones though, that despite only having seconds with it in their hands, make sure to put the pieces of cheese perfectly aligned to each other. Some will go the exact opposite way: to make a complete mess out of your cheese, just for the chaos of it, in the hope that you're not even looking. There is a high chance you aren't. They have an inner sense that makes them feel they need to do it that way, and they do it. Often they have covered tattoos under their uniforms because the company that tells them they are artists suddenly think that covering art with cottom qualifies as art. Subway will call all of their employees 'sandwich artists'. I think that is unfair. Very few sandwiches they produce have a piece of self expression lying in it.

I have a very strong disappointment with the way we're supposed to learn. Study study, take tests. I can't make art out of electrical circuits, even if there are people out there doing it. I'm not asking for an easy test. I just want to have the right to express myself, even in the most tiny details, without having to worry about getting failed, which almost always happen. I've seen people write poetry with code. Not in the literal sense of 'poetry', although I'm sure that also happens. But people who go around the code making sure that the words in it actually reflect what they're feeling somehow. Also, that the words are more than just pure code: they're pieces of imagination and mathematics flowing from one human mind to another. You can spot those people quite easily. Often they're the quiet ones in the room. Or even if they're loud, you'd bet your life that they have no artistic interests at all. It might be the case that they don't know that either. But they are artists, even if they're not on MoMA, or Spotify or whatever. They're on Github, often with a zero stars repo. And they matter. When our times present us with such difficult conditions, self expression, regardless of it's form, is what unites us all. From the little boy in Syria who only knows that one song his mother taught him and holds onto to it with his deepest sources of strength, even if he just barely made it out of early infancy, to the students feeling the world over their shoulders on top universities, to poor people in underdeveloped economies who might just have enough to live by that day. A huge number of them share the desire, even if not conscious, to leave their mark in the world. It doesn't have to be big. Or popular. It could be just a tiny scratch on a tree to show the world how much they love their partners. Or taking photos everyday for 18 years in a roll, until they pass away. Or just having 8 years old and writing poetry because that is what takes you of the bed every morning. Or just letting yourself go with the music, eyes closed, in the secrecy of your bathroom and headphones, because no one else would understand how that quiet kind-of-loner high school kid could be dancing so passionately when it is hard even to extract an answer from him in the classroom. We don't have to take tests to be humans, we don't have to be recognised to be artists and more than that, nobody should tell what is art and what is not if they can't feel what the other person is feeling in that very moment. That small moment. A couple of seconds in a look, or a couple of minutes staring at nothing on a busy street. Feeling those moments is what keep humans together.|||

Art should be made because of art. Not that I know what you understand by the word 'art' though. I can't find a reason to do electrical circuits because of electrical circuits. Nor study to take…