Agenda : How to find media (image, audio, video etc) recommendation from user text inputs (it could be a messaging/keyboard app, travel app etc)

What are the difficulties involved ?

One possible solution as follows : (Assuming we are using images as of now, hinglish is involved)

1. Find the commonly used Hinglish words & tag images with relevant words. For example:

So, we create the mapping from images to tags/words.

2. Let us first understand the intuition behind the recommendation process. Say the user types a single word ‘love’, Now,

3. In essence, we need a probabilistic (bayesian) formula to assign scores to images. Moreover, the score assigned to the image should be inversely proportional to number of tags attributed the image. Hence, we compute bayesian probabilities and create a mapping from a word to the images (with the scores).

4. The difficult part is over now. The last part revolves around the fact that each word is present with different probability in the cumulative dataset of tagging words. For instance, many images would be tagged with ‘fun’, ‘love’ etc, There would also be tags, attributed to very few images. Hence, we assign a weight to each tag word. This weight is inversely proportional to number of images, in which the word is present. This weight is widely known as “Inverse Document Frequency”.

5. To conclude, for each input word j, we assign scores to each image i as S[i,j]. For each image, we add weighted scores, which is sum over (W[j] * S[i,j]). Higher the score implies more relevance to the input words.

The code is available at image-recommendation-java. Class StickerRecommenderV2.java has the implementation of above concepts.

1. How to scale this approach for other language pairs like Spanglish, Frenglish etc ?

Recently, there has come up a new approach to find similarity b/w words. which is called as Word2Vectors. The crux is if we have high dimensional vector space (say 500 dimensions), this approach maps words to lattice points in that vector space. Words similar in meaning/context are usually located closer to each other in the vector space. Hence, we can similar words for a word in any language. So whether it is Hinglish or Spanglish or Frenglish etc, we can enrich our dataset in that language for new vocabulary words. Word2Vectors has also ability to preserve connections as described in detail on DL4J blog.

More experiments on generating new dataset for Frenglish, Spanglish etc will be posted soon.|||

Agenda : How to find media (image, audio, video etc) recommendation from user text inputs (it could be a messaging/keyboard app, travel app etc) 2. Let us first understand the intuition behind the…