As the final observing run ended at 11:22 a.m. ET, team member Vincent Fish sat contentedly in his office at the MIT Haystack Observatory in Westford, Massachusetts. For the past week, Fish had been on call 24/7, sleeping fitfully with his cell phone next to him, the ringer set loud.

As the last of the data arrived at project observatories, he watched celebratory comments come pouring in on a special chat line for radio astronomers and engineers. One noted that he was about to open a bottle of 50-year-old Scotch. Another was listening to the triumphant chords of Bohemian Rhapsody.

“Even if the first images are still crappy and washed out, we can already test for the first time some basic predictions of Einstein's theory of gravity in the extreme environment of a black hole,” says radio astronomer Heino Falcke of Radboud University in Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

“They are the ultimate endpoint of space and time, and may represent the ultimate limit of our knowledge,” says Falcke. Yet astronomers have only circumstantial evidence that they lie hidden at the heart of every large galaxy in the universe. Even Einstein wasn’t sure that they actually existed.

Getting this far took years of planning and cooperation between international partners at observatories stretching from the tallest mountain in Hawaii to the frozen terrain of the South Pole. This electronically linked network of eight observatories created a virtual telescope dish as wide as the planet.

The telescope zeroed in on two supermassive black holes: a beast as massive as four million suns called Sagittarius A*, which lies at the heart of our Milky Way galaxy, and a black hole about 1,500 times heavier at the core of the nearby galaxy M87. (Also see "Black Hole at Galaxy's Heart Launches Planet-Size 'Spitballs.'")

The Event Horizon Telescope has probed the neighborhood of each of these behemoths before, but this is the first time the network has included the South Pole telescope and the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), a group of 66 radio dishes in Chile.

With only five nights available during the observing window, Fish and his colleagues met daily to make the nerve-wracking decision whether to activate the network, juggling information about current weather conditions at each site and how those conditions might change over the coming days. From the MIT facility, Fish was constantly monitoring the weather at each site on one screen and communicating with astronomers on another.

Each observatory records so much data that it can’t be transmitted electronically. Instead, the information from all the telescopes—equivalent to the storage capacity of ten thousand laptops—has been recorded on 1,024 hard drives. The drives must be mailed to the Event Horizon Telescope’s processing centers at MIT Haystack and the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy in Bonn, Germany.

Once the data reach each processing center, a stack of servers will perform the all-important task of combining the time-stamped signals from the eight observatories. Comparing and combining the radio waves must be done with extraordinary care, so that critical information about the size and structure of the event horizon is not lost when they are added together.

Even if they can’t generate an image from this observing run, Doeleman and his colleagues already have plans to try again next year, with an even larger network of radio telescopes.

“Over the next ten to 50 years,” Falcke says, “we should even be able to make razor-sharp images as we extend the network into Africa, and ultimately, into space.”|||

Using a massive telescope network, scientists have data in hand that could open new frontiers in our understanding of gravity.