Firstly, I apologize for putting you all through an incompletely drafted post seeking everyone’s help. I had assumed I had more time to complete it and go through 2–3 cycles of editing (as I usually do) to make it crisper and more informative with the below evidences. Unfortunately even before the first draft could be completed with all the relevant information, I was hauled from the streets (while traveling in my car)…. right into jail. My tip to all entrepreneurs in TN, carry your favorite tooth brush with you at all the times as you never know when you might wake up in prison the next day!

Over the last 3 days, I have been going through the support that I have received and feel both humbled and blessed at the same time. Right from my Family & Investors to Help-Yogi.com members to CEO’s of other startups to concerned friends in the media to stalwarts helping make the ecosystem better for all entrepreneurs to various industry bodies to all other well-wishers, the support came from all directions. Please accept my sincere thanks. Your support touched me even more, because of its unconditional nature. You put your faith in me and stood as a rock by my family’s side, even when not being fully appraised by me of the events leading up to the arrest.

It is my duty now to add more context and information to assure you that your support was wellplaced.

We started using Jigsaw in Feb-March 2014, when we gave the first order for advertisement on Baggage tags. This was after over 2 years of email (image attached below) follow ups and office visits by Aditya whose persistence I admired and saw no harm in trying out his firm once. One entrepreneur to another, he had also sought guidance and mentor-ship in growing his business.

By end of 2014, we started using him as an intermediary for coordinating between various other media agencies and vendors. Over a period of 12 months, we found that on an average he delivered what was promised even though we had minor billing issues and hiccups — like not finding our ads on Baggage tags of some airlines which we were getting charged for. This happens occasionally in this industry. (There is many a slip between the cup and the lip, we only validate if there is a full cup and a lip!)

Slowly we started using his company as an intermediary for delivering most advertising — from innovative medias (like in train advertising) to the staple like print/radio. We found that outsourcing a lot of coordination work that is involved in pre and post media planning right onto verifying the execution between various entities was a win-win situation for both of us as it reduced our marketing manpower requirements and the 3–5% commission was a large enough ticket size for Jigsaw at the scale we were advertising. I would like to point out here that despite the claim of him being an ad agency, we never utilized him for anything other than a vehicle for media buying, coordinating between vendors and validating execution for us.

By mid 2015, the interaction between my marketing team and him was almost on a weekly basis, with him bringing various other execution ideas and strategies for the brand (which were filtered out by the team). He used to get wind of other advertising campaigns we were planning and would come up with his own proposal for the execution of the same and slowly started becoming an important part of the team.

After Aditya got to know from the team about a large burst of advertisement we were planning for the end of 2015 — which included Print, Radio & Outdoor — across 20 cities, he asked us to give him a chance to present his media plan and dropped by our Bangalore office to have a discussion on the same, where we gave him the scope of work. He got back with his plan where outdoor played a large part in 1-2 weeks time.

As a norm, for outdoor advertisements there is a fair amount of legwork involved. There would be an initial recce post which locations & sites will be selected post short listing. Further to that there will be random checks after the campaign starts to validate that the ads were continuously up. Aditya’s media plan had a fairly large out door component to it and he recommended the media agency which was introduced by him. The campaigns started in Dec 3rd week. We went along with his plan with his selection of the location sent to us.

The norm in the outdoor advertising business is that there are pictures of the hoardings that are taken on the start date and then on the end date with some accompanying proof (if the pics are not sent to the client the same day it is taken). The accompanying proof is usually a newspaper with the date of the day the pic was taken. This is not fool proof and companies like us take extra steps to validate the pics. We had found clear evidence of forgery in many of the pics that were sent (examples listed below).

On Jan 2nd — Campaign Ineffectiveness: After 10 days from the start of the 20 city campaign, I called Aditya to our office to enquire on why the campaign was not giving the spike as expected on the basis of data we had from past campaigns - when much lower spends had shown far more positive results than the campaign in question. After a 2 hour meeting, I found that there had been no recce done by him and the only means of validation for the spots selected by his company was through photos of sites taken. I was shocked and indicated the same to him. I told him that he knew I had personally done recee’s every time before advertising in outdoor….right from 2012. I was not able to comprehend how somebody like Aditya who had previously recommended recce’s had not done it and neither offered it when he was in charge. I immediately told him that I would be looking at the spots myself and asked him to stop all the campaigns.

I ended that meeting advising him that in his line of business, he can only succeed if his clients succeeded. And all efforts needs to be taken to assure that success, else there is no value add that he brings to the table for we could always directly work with the media agency without having him in the loop. He got my sympathy by stating that it was a learning experience for him - because of the scale of the exercise - and would do everything to make it right for SZ.

On Jan 7th- Found wrong audience segments targeted: I went for a recce in Bangalore (post the campaign finished) and got my suspicion of poor site locations confirmed.

The spots where we advertised included Sec C population while our TG was Sec A and Sec B. (Sec A,B,C are ways of differentiating the audience. Sec A means upper class and upper middle. Sec B is predominantly Middle class. Sec C is lower middle class and the rest). Both the representatives from the media agency and Aditya had worked with us in the past and were well aware of the audience we were going after due to our past advertisements with them. The location prices also differ basis the kind of crowd one is targeting. We were paying premium rates for absurdly low value sites.

On Jan 7th- Picture angles and actual location traffic patterns differed: I also found hoardings where the pictures that were sent for approval showed an angle with good visibility which was not the angle of visibility for the traffic on that road. One spot at the end of a T-Junction even had a tree right in front of the hoarding covering it completely, while the picture was taken from the side. I passed my concern to the team taking me on the recce and asked why they had not taken Aditya on a recce for site selection. They stated it was never asked! Ask any friends from the industry who either advertise on hoardings or sell these hoardings for a living and they will tell you that recce’ing is 70% of the job. To the extent that, media agencies we worked with before enforced recce on us.

On Jan 7th- Using personal email ids for official work: The representatives from the media agency used their personal email ids instead of official ids to set up the recce (after the campaign finished as we did not see even a single live hoarding with our advertisement), which was another red flag. I was not confident now if the media agency was even officially involved. One of them — Aditya’s person in the media agency responsible for our outdoor campaign — stated that he had shifted jobs in between and was in transition. It still did not explain why he and others also were using private mail ids. I passed this bit of information on to Sachit as he maintains a list of approved vendors for various purchases and for him to check if the final invoice came from an approved media agency or otherwise.

The below screenshot is of the official mail ids being used for setting up recce in Mumbai earlier in May 2015. This was when we worked (and got billed directly) by the media agency.

On Jan 18th — Invoices were from Jigsaw instead of the Media agency: We started receiving the invoices. Another major difference this time was that the billing happened through Aditya’s own company. Previously for Print and Outdoor, the invoice would be raised directly by the media agency or vendor to us and we would be able to audit the trail better. Infact, reputed Media agencies even let their clients look at their audited books at a transaction level to prove that they are not over billing clients. The relevant commission would be paid by them to Aditya’s company as agreed between them. This was another red flag.

The below invoice is from the Media agency directly for a campaign earlier in May 2015.

The below invoice in one among many sent by Jigsaw for a service rendered by the same media agency (shown above) who used to directly invoice us till then. We never authorized this change as it creates more confusion in terms of driving accountability and enforcing order obligation.

On Jan 18th — Terms and conditions presented unilaterally: As a result of the unapproved changes in the Invoicing company names, the terms and conditions of payments were also changed which were never disclosed to us before in hand. The media agency who used to bill us had a different terms and condition for Outdoor from the one presented by Jigsaw. Usually the payment terms have 45–60 day credit window from the campaign finish date with a much longer timeframe to raise dispute than the highlighted 7 days. This was another red flag.

After consultation with our lawyers, Sachit called Aditya to our office and informed him about our concerns. Aditya was also asked to send over the following so that we can confirm the said execution.

We were also informed that without this clarification, if we paid the amount, I could be accused of being hand in glove with Aditya in case it was later found that everything was not above the board, considering that I had taken it upon myself to help him.

I must note here that my relationship with Aditya was not just the one between 2 entrepreneurs. Right from the beginning, he had pulled on my emotional strings by stating that he looked upon me for guidance and advice and that I was a mentor for him. If you have mentored anyone or been mentored, you know that there is a sacred bond present which binds one into looking out for the other. Given the evidences of deceit, I trusted Aditya to do the right thing if it was pointed out that we knew and we require more than the doctored photos (like vendor bills, Landlord agreements and Licenses) to make the payment.

Just to clarify, the right thing for him would have been to 1) either get those proofs and get paid or 2) pass the responsibility of the photoshopped images to the vendors and refuse to pay them or 3) to walk away quietly without pursuing payment and with his dignity intact and a lesson learned.

Inconsistently edited pictures as Proof of Delivery: Instead or Inspite of the requested proofs, pairs of pictures with start date and end date of various hoardings were sent. A lot of the pictures seemed to be inconsistent. Some of the inconsistency were independently pointed out on twitter. I would like to catalogue few of them here. We kept finding newer and newer examples every-time we looked.

EG1 — There are too many objects in the exact same place despite the pictures having been claimed to be taken over 2 months apart.

EG2 — Pictures taken two months apart had the same persons in the frame. The curious case of the SLOW moving Benjamin Button?

EG3 — Paper date showing a future date from the camera date making all camera dates irrelevant for validation

Eg 4 — Angles substantially differing between the two photos. Or the Paper obstructing all the other key elements in one of the paired image

Eg 5— What appeared to be substantial location change like a complete flyover being constructed in 1 & 1/2 months time

There were other images (especially the blurry ones) which seemed photo-shopped to our design team members who were adept at that tool. Looking at all this, Sachit now also asked for the original images as taken from the camera in addition to the other 3 requests.

We routinely ask for more concrete proofs from vendors (or even proof of checkin by guests at the hotel from the Hoteliers to release payments) when we have a suspicion that some kind of fraud has taken place. This is part of our fiduciary responsibility.

Continued other Advertisements pre-dating Outdoor

While waiting for more information and requested proofs, we continued working with Jigsaw on our pre-existing advertisement arrangements. I had informed Sachit that given our long relationship with Aditya and the fact that he is also an young entrepreneur, we should give him some space and time. Initially, I had high hopes that the documents requested would be provided and the confusion addressed.

TDS Paid

Sachit called me in March informing me that TDS was being requested to be paid on the ‘suspicious’ invoices (where clarifications were sought) by Aditya despite the requested information to validate the same not being given. I asked Sachit to trust Aditya and make the TDS payment as it was time bound and we could use it instead for settling other payables to him. The hope here was that the issue would be resolved and Aditya would come out right.

Declared the disputed Invoice as Dues

We continued waiting for the proofs which Aditya in a call told to Sachit was taking time due to issues at the vendor end. We even carried the dues in our books at the end of March 2016 (and declared it to our auditors) as I initially felt there was a high chance this was just a confusion — and not a concerted effort to defraud SZ by Aditya or even defraud Aditya by the vendors — and we might have to pay.

Paid Over 2.5 Crores in 2016

We even made a payment of over 2.5 cores from Jan to Oct 2016 to settle other invoices — which we now suspect were just as fraudulent.

Intentional miscommunication and misrepresentation 

Aditya in a mail to my team (without me in the loop), acceptied in a mail (sent by him on March) that I had asked to pause all hoarding with immediate effect on Jan 2nd, Yet he had continued the campaigns declaring to my team that he had informed me of the same….which he had not.

In another discussion, this was questioned by my team member as to why he had not stopped despite orders. He replied that I had only verbally said and not sent any email. Neither did he take any initiative to confirm it as it was not ‘his money’. He tends to get too clever by half, sometimes. This for me was the first indicator as a lot of our discussion were put on mail by Aditya to confirm what was discussed, yet he had intentionally failed to do so when I had asked him to stop the campaigns.

Further, instead of sending the requested proofs, Aditya started getting more aggressive in the way he asked for the disputed payments and priority was shown to settle disputed invoices over others(Baggage Tags). In multiple meetings that were held, he was informed that his actions were breaking the faith we had on him and to deliver to us the requested proofs so that we could all go on with our life.

The meetings continued till December 2nd, where the proofs were again discussed and reasons for delays being shared. On that day Sachit met Aditya and stated firmly that till he sent the requested proofs, he won’t be able to help Aditya on the hoarding dues without an internal discussion. He followed up with an email indicating that he required more time on other invoices (as the invoices were being raised on a continuous basis while the requested proofs were not being sent to validate the same.)

Post the discussion on Dec 2nd and the follow up mail sent by Sachit, 2 goons entered out office in RA Puram and used abusive language infront of our women colleagues. I remember Sachit calling me that day and opening the conversation with the statement “we have been double crossed”. Despite the patience shown by us and the assurance given that very day that the proofs were on its way, Aditya had used influence and brought politicians into the mix. I asked Sachit to suspend all discussions and stop all payments with/to him till he apologized.

Post the suspension of the discussion, he started getting more intimidating. Sachit called me more than once informing me of the direct threats he was receiving from Aditya. We spoke with a security agency to figure out a way to beef up Sachit’s security.

We even had a conversation with our advocates who suggested we give a complaint to police, which I declined to do so. Even after Sachit managed to record one of the threatening calls, I indicated to the lawyers that I was not in favor of pressing charges and spoiling his career, as I felt Aditya was behaving a little immaturely and that he would calm down. I knew that he was a little shot tempered and we (me and Aditya) had discussed multiple times how patience (which he has very little of) is also required with persistence (which he has) if he wanted to succeed in the long term.

I had a sense of responsibility towards him as he had initially requested mentorship and guidance apart from our business…..in hindsight, this faith was misplaced.

I received a call from Mylapore police station stating that there was a complaint from Aditya. We sent our advocates to meet the Inspector who was appraised of the details. He agreed that this seemed to be civil and asked us to file our response which our lawyers got to drafting over the next 3 working days.

While I assumed the matter to be settled in Mylapore station, police from Chennai came to Bangalore to investigate this further. Our lawyers advised us to still get an anticipatory bail as even they were confused by now. What we did not know was that another complaint had been filed at the Crime Branch reporting directly to the commissioner leading to my arrest — without summon or warrant — from the road and my month long incarceration.

Looking at me in prison, my Investors offered to settle the amount to help me. They had even come to meet me there, just to be sure that I got the message that they were willing to help fund the payment. I told them that I will be remiss in my duty if I pay up now with a gun to my head. It’s a matter of principle for me that I don’t negotiate with people who show bad faith and I don’t negotiate with a gun to my head.

There was no question of cash ever being a constraint in case of Jigsaw. It was only a matter of principle. Despite giving the time to produce the requested proofs (and placing faith in Aditya’s intentions), it was not possible for me to swallow that I could pay up just to get out of prison and be free. It would mean that my team and me were wrong all along. In fact this was the exact reason I declined to settle when I was being coerced to do so for 8 hours after my arrest and before my remand.

False Allegations

I am still reeling from all the false personal accusation of siphoning, harassing a women entrepreneur and cheating that were launched on me and Sachit in a well synchronized manner across various media outlets. I am truly grateful for all the support from people like you who could see through the falsity — without which I would probably have been shattered. I am contemplating my next steps here to clear our names completely.

Safety and Security

Given the nature of the threats our family has been receiving and the fear psychosis they have been fighting, we are still deciding on our next steps here.

What unsettles me is not just the threats, it is the nature of the threats.

Spending 30 days in jail, I got to witness occasional fights between groups of young guys — aged 18 to 22 — who would threaten each other with the number of vile things they would subject the other’s mom to. Upon further enquiry, I found that a lot of them were juvenile criminals and they came from broken homes, some having watched their father drink to death or lost their mom to violence at a very young age (One had lost his mom when he was 13 and in a juvenile home. He did not know about it till he was 15). I felt pity for them. Despite that experience, I still can’t understand why an educated man — from a middle class, loving home — still thinks women and children are nothing but objects/property of other men to be used to teach him a lesson. Where are we going wrong as a society?

Criminal case

Everyone has a right to justice and the way in which one seeks justice should not close the other’s right to the same. Even now a small corner in my heart pleads that he could have been a victim of circumstance just like how I am. I would like to validate that this time, though openly. I will be willing to forgive and forget the whole sordid episode if Aditya can provide more details starting with the below for every campaign that we have worked with him since 2014.

Given the openness with which Aditya has shared some information publicly — from the low resolution campaign images to my company’s bank account statements obtained illegally and then used to frame a false accusation of siphoning to top it — I urge him to provide the requested information to all of us. And I am sure we all will be there to help him if he faces any issues with downstream vendors declining to provide the same to him. Won’t we?

In the meanwhile, I will be looking to take this false criminal case filed against us to it’s logical conclusion.|||

Firstly, I apologize for putting you all through an incompletely drafted post seeking everyone’s help. I had assumed I had more time to complete it and go through 2–3 cycles of editing (as I usually…