Accelerators Assessment Metrics: is the program any good?

The common denominator of the two perspectives is that everything comes back to how good an acceleration program is. I have no particular experience in setting up or participating in an accelerator, so I do not know for sure the problems or the metrics on how to assess it. This is my interpretation (quite general with some sprinkle of AI somewhere), but feel free to comment below and tell me more about different metrics and aspects I should also consider:

i) Alumni network: who are the alumni of the program? This base represents the ‘customer base’ of the accelerator, so check it out if includes big names. Do not be trapped by average valuations of the portfolio of the program: having one Dropbox and dozen of ‘John Doe startups’ does not make it a good accelerator, it simply makes it a lucky one (look at different stats, if you want to, e.g., median, variance, etc.);

ii) Raising the next round: even though raising funds is not always a proof of business success, it is very often a good proxy for it. The more companies raise a further fund after the program, the better the program is;

iii) Raising a good next round: same considerations as above, with the additional aspect that companies need to raise a specific amount of money. The more companies can reach their funding goal, the better the program is.

iv) Survival rate: the accelerators are set to provide entrepreneurs with tools and network to survive for at least 12 months (this is my view). The higher number of companies are still operating after one year, the better the accelerator was;

v) Exit: ceteris paribus, if companies coming out from programs are obtaining higher valuation than their competitors, shortening the time-to-exit, or simply increasing the probability of an exit, it means that the accelerator did the job it was supposed to.

However, this point is controversial for at least two reasons: first, it is statistically hard to understand how an accelerator affects a final exit. Life is much more complicated than linking straight accelerator → higher exit, but if all the companies coming out from a specific program obtain higher valuations with respect to their peers, we know for sure that there is some endogeneity there, even if we might not be able to identify the specific factors that make a business more successful.

Second, it depends on your view about business and what it means starting a company. Real visionary entrepreneurs do not start a company to sell it — they start something as it should run forever. An exit is somehow a defeat for some of them (there are exceptions, e.g., DeepMind), but the reality is that this class of entrepreneurs is disappearing. People start business nowadays with the idea in mind to sell out in 5 years to a specific buyer, or to use the technology developed to increase the salary base from $150k (a normal salary in big tech companies in the US for an AI researcher) to $7M (average amount got from acqui-hire in AI and machine learning sector).

I am not saying this is wrong and this is certainly what an investor wants, but it can invalidate the ‘Exit’ metric as one variable to track for accelerators’ performance;

vi) Wider network: a good accelerator has top-level mentors and knows how to engage them to be effective. It also has people behind who can really understand AI technologies and can help entrepreneurs with latest developments in research, or partners that can provide datasets for feeding neural nets.|||

Well, let’s be completely honest: the current startups landscape is incredibly messy. Venture capitalist, angels, incubators, accelerators, private equity funds, corporate venture capital, private…