Convert your KiCAD boards into nice looking 2D drawings suitable for pinout diagrams. Never draw them manually again!

This small Python script takes a KiCAD board (.kicad_pcb file) and produces a 2D nice looking drawing of the board as an SVG file. This allows you to quickly and automatically create awesome pinout diagrams for your project. These diagrams are much easier to read than a labeled photo of a physical board or an actual KiCAD design.

You and your users will love them!

This script requires the Python module (should come with KiCAD), the and modules. No other dependencies are needed.

PcbDraw also needs a module library to work. This library is maintained as a separate repository: PcbDraw-Lib.

Usage of PcbDraw is simple, just run:

The script will output several debug messages of KiCAD Python API you can ignore. I haven't found a way to disable them. If there is a missing module in the libraries, the script will output warning.

There are several options for the script:

Style is a JSON file contain color definitions for the board substrate (they don't have any effect on modules):

Colors are in HEX format, names of the colors should be self descriptive.

Library is a collection of SVG files each containing one drawing of a component. The library structure follows KiCAD library structure - each footprint (module) is a separate file placed in directories representing libraries.

It is also possible to have multiple libraries with different component style.

All the details about the library can be found in its repository. Note that the library is essential for this script and unfortunately it is still incomplete - contributions are welcomed! Drawing a single component from scratch takes less than 10 minutes, which is not much time. Please, send a pull-request for components you have created.

When specifying multiple module libraries, the first library path to match a given footprint is used for rendering. The lookup order is the same you wrote the list.

Boards from Eagle CAD are not supported directly now. You can import an Eagle board into KiCAD and then feed it into PcbDraw. This works fine (PcbDraw can deal with different layer names, etc.), however there are minor flaws with the import and user labels and via stitching can disappear (which is usually fine for the purposes of drawing).|||

PcbDraw - Convert your KiCAD board into a nice looking 2D drawing suitable for pinout diagrams