Hello, welcome to Blog Central. This is where you will find reviews on the latest work from home businesses.

Is partsurvey.com legit? Read this before you go any further with this company. I found this website on Craiglist. I go to Craiglist every so often just to see what they offer. As I was strolling through the work at home jobs I came across this website called part survey. I clicked on it and signed up with them. Here is what this review will cover:

This short review will be on them. I say short because there is really nothing to say about them that is good. Well, this survey company is just a waste of time. You won’t lose any money by joining with them. So as far as that go, it’s not a waste of money, it’ just a waste of time.

Now, this is what’s up. All you have to do is first sign up with them at partsurvey.com. Next start watching adds. All the surveys are videos so it’s easy, at least it sounds easy. The videos are only 2 to 5 minutes so that’s not that bad. You can finish in less than 15 minutes.

They only allow you 3 videos a day. You will receive $14 a survey. That’s a big $42 a day. Now, you tell me, does that sound good? Yes, it does. It sounds so sweet. You will be thinking to yourself, easy money.

They tell you that you can cash out once you reach $700. I’m at $800 and tried to cash out. Nothing. That’s right nothing. Every time I do, it says sending……

But it never comes. I tried contacting this company but they never reply back to me.

you can give them a try and see if you have any luck.

Part Survey is free to join. It does not cost anything, that is why earlier I said that it’s not a waste of money but was a waste of time.

You spend all that time and you don’t get a dime. Afer I joined, I looked at other reviews and realized that they were not good. No one ever got paid.

That is why I give them a 0 out of 100.

I would at least gave them a little higher score if they would have at least reply back to my emails I sent. But they couldn’t even do that. I sent one the other day and still waiting.

So my Final Verdict on the part survey is a scam. Not a money scam but a waste of time scam. Your time could be better spent doing other things. Like trying to find the right online job.

I have found that some surveys are legit. This is not one of them. I tried this one and tried getting the money, but they have failed to do so. You can try it and if you get money from them, I will rewrite this review.

There are a few I find legit but you will not get rich doing them. Here are some that you might want to try:

If you have any questions or would like me to check out a business for you, just leave them below. Or you can join my mailing list and never miss any of my reviews.

Thank you for visiting Blog Central.|||

This company is a scam. Read this before you sign up. You won't lose any money, but its a waste of your time. YOU CAN'T CASH OUT.