Individual income tax returns — including those of public figures — are private information, protected by law from unauthorized disclosure. Indeed, the Internal Revenue Service is barred from releasing any taxpayer information whatsoever, except to authorized agencies and individuals.



 In addition, we have made available returns from recent candidates for president, including those running in party primaries. The Tax History Project is currently compiling a more complete archive of candidate returns, and we welcome suggestions on who to include and where to find additional returns.

 

 To lend a hand with the Tax History Project, contact project director Joseph J. Thorndike. You can also follow him on Twitter. You can also follow him on Twitter. 

 

 The President and the First Lady have released their 2013 federal income tax returns, as well as state income tax return for Illinois.

 

 The Vice President and Dr. Jill Biden have also released their 2013 federal income tax returns, as well as state income tax returns for both Delaware and Virginia.

 

 Note: For tax year 2001, both President Bush and Vice President Cheney released partial returns. For tax year 2000, Bush released only his Form 1040; Cheney provided a summary of his taxes, but released no forms.

 

 

 Gerald Ford

 Gerald Ford did not release his returns, but he did release summary data about his federal taxes for the years between 1966 and 1975. [Source] Franklin Roosevelt did not release tax returns during his presidency, but many returns were later made available by his presidential library.

 

 

 Important Notes: Paper copies of the returns can be ordered from Tax Analysts using the associated document numbers. Copies are also available from the Bush, Carter, Nixon, Reagan, and Roosevelt presidential libraries.

 

 Two caveats: (1) Some of the images are of mediocre quality, reflecting the poor photocopies released by the White House. We're searching for better copies and will make them available as soon as possible; (2) most of the missing years reflect a quirk of the calendar. Presidents release tax returns only for years they serve in office and only while they still hold that office. Consequently, Jimmy Carter did not release a return for 1980 nor did Ronald Reagan release one for 1988 — each left office before returns were due. Likewise incoming presidents do not release returns for the year before they assumed office, even though they hold office when returns for that year come due.|||

