I’ve invested more hours in the board game Pandemic than I care to admit. First released in 2007, it casts players as a team of medics cooperating to prevent a disease-induced apocalypse; over the years, it’s become one of the board game industry’s best-sellers.

But while Pandemic’s struggle against sickness provided some great game nights, I’d be lying if I said I wasn’t perversely intrigued by the biological armageddon the game threatens—a possibility explored in films like Contagion and 28 Days Later. Sometimes Pandemic is most satisfying when the situation is most dire.

Plague Inc.: The Board Game, from UK studio Ndemic Creations, wholeheartedly embraces this love of catastrophe. Based on the company’s strategy video game of the same name, Plague Inc. is essentially the anti-Pandemic: It hands players control of competing diseases and challenges them to wipe out as much of the Earth’s population as they can.

While that might seem like a dark premise, it’s a popular one. The original Plague Inc. video game and follow-up Plague Inc: Evolved have been downloaded more than 85 million times, according to their developer. They’ve also been praised by the Centers for Disease Control as tools for teaching the public about disease transmission. But how well does this success in the digital realm translate to the tabletop?

Plague Inc.: The Board Game sees you and your opponents start on an even footing, controlling identical, low-powered bacterial strains, each with a foothold in a single city. Over the course of the game, you compete to spread your disease across the world while evolving new genetic traits and devastating entire countries in the process. That takes careful tactical thinking.

The game’s board is divided into different regions: Africa, Asia, Europe, Oceania, North America, and South America. As you play, you populate each region with cards representing different countries, and the nations available to infect change as players annihilate some and add others to the board.

Different countries come with varying numbers of cities to infect. You’ll be able to add infection cubes to the board with each passing turn and expand your reach across an ever-widening swathe of the globe. Once all cities in a country have been infected, the player with the most cubes on that country card has the chance to wipe it out, rolling an ominous, blood-spattered “death die” to make the attempt. Should this succeed, the player takes the country card, which counts toward scoring at the end of the game.

Each country thus becomes a battlezone, with multiple players vying for control. You gradually build up your presence in different locations, trying to strike a balance between claiming dominance in individual nations and spreading out across the board to keep your options open for future turns. Even if you don’t end up with the majority of cubes on a country card, it’s worth investing some effort in establishing a presence there, because all players infecting a country receive rewards when it eventually bites the dust.

What rewards? Well, first come DNA points, which allow you to evolve your disease and make it more effective as the game progresses. Symptoms like coughing, hemorrhaging, and organ failure increase the infectiousness and lethality of your strain, letting you place more infection cubes on the board and increasing your chances of destroying countries. Cold and heat resistance allow your disease to thrive in extreme climates, while the waterborne and airborne traits let you use international air and shipping lanes to spread your infection across continents.

Then there are event cards. You draw one whenever a country you’ve infected is eliminated from the game, and each comes with a different and often very powerful one-off effect. “Pandemic alerts” let you block opponents from infecting countries. “Riots” let you increase your hold on nations as they collapse into anarchy. A “nuclear strike” lets you remove a country card from the game and deny points to players who already invested their infection cubes there.|||

Review: Think Pandemic—but you want the diseases to win.