The global unicorn club is comprised of 189 private companies that are each valued at $1B+ as of 4/10/2017. Collectively, this cohort of the world’s most valuable private enterprises is worth approximately $659B. The lion’s share of that value is held by companies that are located in the US. In fact, 52% of the world’s unicorn companies are located in the US, and US unicorns comprise 53% of the cumulative valuation of the global unicorn club.

However, unicorns that are located outside of the US have been proliferating in recent years: Thirty-seven percent of all companies (current and past unicorns) that achieved a $1B+ valuation in 2014 were based outside the US. The following year, 53% of all the companies that reached unicorn status that year were based outside of the US. In 2016, that number increased again to 58%. So far in 2017, there have been 11 companies added to the global unicorn club; 8 are based outside of the US.

Using CB Insights’ database we charted the share of unicorns that have been added to the club each year since 2013 by location (US vs. non-US). We also mapped the locations of current private companies valued at $1B+ that are based outside of the US. Below the map, you can see a list of all the non-US unicorns, select investors, and the date each reached unicorn status.

In 2013, over 70% of the companies that achieved unicorn status that year were US-based. Each year since 2013, the share of new US-based unicorns added to the global unicorn club has gone down. In 2016, 42% of the companies added to the club were US-based vs. 58% from outside the US.

The 8 non-US based unicorns added to the club in 2017 so far, include: Avaloq Group (Switzerland), ReNew Power Ventures (India), BrewDog (United Kingdom) and the Chinese companies: Toutiao, NIO, Ofo, URWork, and Zhihu.

China has far and away the most private companies valued at $1B+ outside of the US, at 46 total. Rounding out the top three most unicorn-rich countries are India and the UK, respectively.

At present, there are two unicorns in Africa: Africa Internet Group and Promasidor Holdings. Two in South America: LifeMiles and Decolar, and three in the Middle East: ironSource and Infinidat in Israel, and Careem in the United Arab Emirates.

The most highly-valued private company outside of the US is the Chinese electronics company Xiaomi. In fact, the top five most highly valued private companies outside of the US are all based in China. After Xiaomi, those companies are: Didi Chuxing, China Internet Plus (Meituan Dianping), Lu.com, and Toutiao, respectively.

Outside of the US and China, the most valuable private companies are the Indian e-commerce platform Flipkart, followed by Spotify in Sweden, and Snapdeal in India.

Click on the map to enlarge.

Want more data on unicorns? Log in to CB Insights or sign up for free below.|||

China is home to the top 5 most highly valued unicorns outside the US.