If you are a professional spray painter or doing DIY spray printing at your home frequently, then most probably you are well aware of orange peel causing at the time of spraying. It is the most common problem as well as the most common question asked too. Here in this blog post, we will find the answer to what causes orange peel and how to spray clear coat on car without orange peel.

While spray painting, orange peel is the most common defect. It is named so because it has a similar appearance to the skin of a fruit called orange. There are three main reasons which cause orange peel while spray painting on car.

Reason 1: Your spray gun settings may be wrong

The most common mistake which causes orange peel is the wrong spray gun settings. You must make the proper adjustments of gun flow, PSI (Pressure per Square Inch) of the hose, and distance of the gun from the spraying surface.

The temperature of the room or the outside area where you are painting the car and also the temperature of the panel play a role in causing of orange peel.

Whether you are spraying for single stage coat or will be applying multiple coats of paint spray on your car, you should make a proper material mixture by adding right additives in the correct volume at certain temperature. Otherwise, it can be a reason what causes orange peel.

Now you know the reasons which cause orange peel. So, how you can avoid that and have a clear coat on your car? Let’s find the answer below.

When there is a problem, there is a solution for it too. Follow the simple tips mentioned below and have a clear spray coating on your vehicle.

When you are doing the painting with a spray gun, you should not apply too much or too little pressure. It can end with some areas with a lot of sprays and some with a too little, and you will see an improper distribution of the paint on your car. So, to avoid uneven texture and orange peel, maintain the pressure uniformity on your spray gun. You can also use a paint extender if you are not getting the proper spray pressure you want.

As we have seen, the environment can play a significant role in the cause of orange peel. If it is too hot outside, the paint dries faster and will result in uneven distribution. So, you should check the temperature of the room or the area where you will be painting and also the panel temperature. You should also check for the windy condition of the time. It should be not too much windy or too much humidity where you will be doing the painting job.

This is one of the most important things you should keep in mind while spray painting your car. If the nozzle or needle size of the spray gun is large, then it will eject a large amount of paint. So the directly contacted areas will have too much spray and others will have too little. Also if the nozzle size is too small, then you will need more concentration and time to finish the job properly. Depending on the size of the surface you need to paint, you should choose the right size of the nozzle/needle to make an even spray layer. It is advisable to check the spray flow and pattern on a piece of wood before start painting your car.

Keep the right distance (about 7-10 inches in most cases) of the spray gun from the surface you are painting at all the time. Too close distance will cause thicker texture and too far will end in light coats.

Also, you need to create a right mixture of additives at a certain temperature while creating the paint material. It should not be too thick or too light depending on the surface and texture you want.

So, here we have mentioned the causes of orange peel and how you can get the clear coat on car without it. Share your thought which kind of other problems you have faced while spray painting your vehicle and how you overcame it.|||

Whether you are a DIY spray painter or doing a professional job, you should check this post to know how to spray clear coat on car without orange peel.