AnyTrans: A powerful alternative to iTunes for Windows and Mac If iTunes is not good enough for what you need, AnyTrans is the software for transferring and managing data between your iPhone, iPad and your computer.AnyTrans is much more than an alternative to iTunes, it has a whole set of functions for copying, transferring and synchronizing files and data. With a modern design, the software offers a lot of features, such as a file manager, iCloud file management, transfer between iDevices and computer, iPhone cloning, among others.From here you can download AnyTrans and get one of the 5 licenses we are giving away thanks to iMobie, for the first lucky users.

The final version of AnyTrans is more powerful and easier to use than ever before. You will never have to worry about switching your device, or when you run out of storage space. Just install the application on your computer, either Windows or Mac, and then connect your Apple device to the computer. From here you can manage all your files, view them and copy them between devices. You can make backups and transfer photos, videos, images and any file that you consider important.It is also possible to access your iCloud account to manage, upload and download all the content that we have in our devices. If at any point you decide to buy a new iPhone, no problem, with AnyTrans you can pass all your data and have them in your new computer intact.

Transfer your music from your iPhone to any other device regardless of iTunes restrictions. Synchronize your music in a bidirectional way so you never lose your iPhone songs again.

AnyTrans also allows your iPhone and iPad to play any video from anywhere. Because it intelligently encodes all incompatible formats such as MKV, AVCHD, M2TS, WMV and AVI and makes them reproducible.

Customize your ringtones: Turn your favorite songs into your exclusive ringtone. It automatically intercepts the first forty seconds when it is transferred to the tonality.Move your videos with drag and drop.

The powerful alternative to iTunes helps you organize, transfer and make copies of your images in a simple and beautiful way. Also, upload, download and remove iCloud photos with just a few clicks.Transferring images to the computer: iPhone devices are known not to allow expansion of storage with an SD card, so the storage space is often reduced. The tool allows you to move photos to PC or Mac with high speed, transferring up to a hundred images in just 3.4 seconds and easily release gigabytes of space in a single click.Systematize Photos and Albums: AnyTrans perfectly categorises all your photos videos, movies, bursts, panoramas and more into albums. Apart from Camera Roll, Photo Stream and Photo Library, it also supports application images in each and every application name folder. No matter how many images you have taken, shared, edited, filtered or even forgotten, each and every one is well archived.Export “Live Photos”: You can export all your live photos as GIF images and share them on Facebook with your friends or use them to enliven your conservations. Your live memories are now activated everywhere.

Take control of all your files by backing up quickly and safely.

Data Management and Synchronization

 AnyTrans is the most powerful alternative to iTunes synchronization. Now you can only track selective files from the iTunes library to your iPhone and also iPad, and vice versa.

Migrate all your data from your old iPhone to the new one easily with the Cloning and Combination tools that gives you the alternative to iTunes. Migration of data does not have to be difficult, much less take too much time.

With the alternative to iTunes you can manage multiple iCloud accounts at the same time. The software gives you full access to your iCloud account so you can edit and move any contact and note to protect them in depth, upload and download the photos you want to improve your compilation, to delete unwanted messages to save more space.ICloud Administration: Access your iCloud account to the application and start exploring, uploading and downloading your files immediately. In addition, it supports the resumed interrupted download, you can continue the transfer whenever you want.Back up your iCloud account: All your personal information is in iTunes, such as notes, contacts, messages and photos. But what if you lose access to your iCloud account? AnyTrans protects your account by allowing you to back up your Apple mobile device to your computer

Easily export all your personal information, such as messages, contacts, call history, voicemail, Safari bookmarks, and more from your iPhone, iTunes backup or iCloud.|||

If iTunes is not good enough for what you need, AnyTrans is the software for transferring and managing data between your iPhone, iPad and your computer.