First, I think you're confusing your readers by calling it "top ten." Many may miss the fact this is an alphabetical list. You've simply gone through the entries with names A-D. Some pretty weak examples there; no Semmelwise, no McClintock, Barry Marshall, etc. It's no way a Top Ten list of vindicated mavericks. That's an OK approach, if you'd presented it as a somewhat random sampling. As it stands, you seemingly "win the fight" by demonstrating the great weakness of the top ten examples, but without actually using a list of the top ten examples. I hope it was just a mistake.

 Second: this is a list of: Ridiculed. Then vindicated. The duration between the two isn't an issue. Were they ridiculed, and later proved correct? That's my requirement. My original intent was to debunk the claims of 1990s SCI.SKEPTIC newsgroup and others, whose members absolutely insisted that, other than the Galileo event, such problems Don't Exist In Science (since if they did, they'd be quite important, and obviously their textbooks would have presented the many instances!) On the contrary, the contemporary ridicule-vindication thing makes science look bad, and hence is a taboo topic. I found no lists like this anywhere, so slapped one together myself. (That's a key point. Where are such lists? Several have appeared online in later years, even some using my words but adding more prose.) But what about the century 1900-2000? 

 Only ten years, that's almost immedate? Or, acceptance took nearly forever: typically ten years! Ahem. :) If each vindication came after a few years, I very specifically DON'T pretend the ridicule never happened, nor do I dismiss it as easily-forgivable, as you seem to. Yes, the typical timeline is ten entire years before vindication. Ten years of postdocs entering a field, ten years of folks achieving tenure. You suggest that, before the ridicule can become a problem for science, it needs to persist thirty years? "Only" ten brief years of blocked publications, that's nothing? So, all victims of such ridicule-suppression should have no reason to complain? Me, I insist that it's supposed to be zero years; that this ridicule-then-vindication is a symptom of a quite serious, (if suppressed and hidden) disease in modern science.

 As statistics it's frightening, since these small and large instances must be part of a distribution. It's a distribution where any major successful suppressions are completely erased. Truely suppressed breakthroughs, the ones with no later vindication; they don't appear in records. We have no clue about their number, except by examining these known instances of the nearly-suppressed. By definition, only the suppressed-vindicated breakthroughs can be detected. Perhaps this list only lacks a tiny percentage of ridiculed-never-vindicated. Or, instead my list may be the tiny, visible statistical tail on a huge number of never-vindicated, lost breakthroughs. (Chilling thought: the next Einstein has died unknown, refused publication, having lacked the necessary aggression to fight for ~ten years before eventual vindication. More chilling: what if there have been twenty lost "next Einsteins?")

 Third, read again, Doppler never tested the Optical Doppler Effect using trains and trumpets. His optical theory was rejected by physicists, and not accepted until astronomical red shifts were discovered after his death. 

 Fourth, JL Baird's televisor: the Royal Society members coming out of the meeting were being interviewed, and they sneered at Baird, convinced that his demonstration was a hoax. When "they didn't believe it," it was because they'd decided Baird was a swindler running some sort of scam. I'm not finding that ref. online. Perhaps it was the book "The Experts Speak." 

 Finally, we differ as to our views of this process. I see these people as heroes who had to actively fight for numerous years to prevail against a biased, ignorant, hostile hoard, with the constant possibility that the hoard would win, and their breakthroughs be ignored or even go unpublished. Various autobiographies go into detail about it all. But you seem to see the same events as examples of normal science, as if there was no danger of complete suppression, as if all these researchers would somehow be automatically vindicated, no need for their years of battle. Also, if you see all this as ignorable and forgivable, I see this as visible flames out the seams of the solid rocket boosters! All these events are danger-signs for much larger events, yet they're being minimized, tolerated, "made normal" by the scientific community, same as you do in your posting. Clearly these automatic hostile responses to new ideas are no part of the scientific process. (Planck isn't supposed to be correct when he insists that science can only progress, funeral by funeral, because the current crop of experts would rather die than change!) 

 Statistics: as "automobile accidents," these examples are the numerous "near misses" implying a population of "fatal crashes." The existence of these instances indicates much larger and invisible events: some probable major disasters. But think about it. Unfortunately any such disasters become completely concealed, by definition. How many Einstein-scale breakthroughs have been completely lost so far? None? None, because we have no evidence of any? But since they're lost, we can't detect them, and their number could be anything. 

 "Those we see are in the daylight. Those in darkness don't get seen"

 - Bertold Brecht, Threpenny Opera's final line. OK, who are the actual "Top Ten" vindicated discoverers Scott should analyze? Everybody will have a different list! One I missed: J. Edgar Lilienfeld, who invented the transistor in 1923, but after a decade had made no headway against disbelief, and finally retired and gave up. Two decades later Bell Labs stumbled upon the modern Bipolar transistor when trying to find some way to get around the expired 1925 Lilienfeld patents on the Field Effect Transistor. (Heh, not part of official transistor history! Neither is Lilienfeld.) 

 Want a free online book referencing some of this? The 1950s edition of Beveridge "The Art of Scientific Investigation" has a whole section on Difficulties in science, including resistance to new ideas. And about Scientific Concensus, Thomas Gold points out a serious instability in the peer-review process, almost guaranteed to produce false concensus which halts progress for long periods.|||

