I heard long ago the saying “Free speech is free speech is free speech. Now while that may still be be said for America it may not be said abroad . Today the mega giant Google fines itself embroiled in a free speech controversy that has broad ramification on a global scale as while as here at home.

The story involves one of my favorite youtube channels ( the slingshot channel) that is run by a brisk german by the name of Jorge Sprave.  I as well as millions of others have watched for years as he went though is mastery of building homemade custom sling shots and other simplistic projectile propelling devices. Some time ago he posted a video on how to modify a knife as to make it suitable for penetrating a “no stab vest”. The vid has over a quarter of a million views. Now he and google the owner of youtube is in ht water with pc police and other who claim it’s content incites “cop killing”. The video has been removed and local police in Germany are considering charges against Mr. Sprave. Sprave points out that he in fact could be saving lives by exposing faults in manufacters claims that the vest are “impenetrable”.

This notion that certain information should not be openly available to any one is way more dangerous then any discussion of any type of weapon design I can think of. Indeed the idea that we should in any way circumvent the first amendment  to “protect” law enforcement or others is ludicrous.

Just as our constitution protects free speech it also protects that very speech with the 2d amendment. Many in this country feel that if the government has guns then we have the right to have guns to protect us from said government should the need to do so ever arise. Other will go even further and say that if the government has fighter jets that could be used against its people then anyone with the financial means to do so should be allowed to park one of the same in his drive way. I can hear the left screaming already that I don’t know what I’m talking about and how “dangerous” that would be. Dangerous for who? I  think I would trust my neighbors over some war mongering power hungry general any day of the week thank you.  And if and only IF said neighbor takes is little ol jet out for a spin and shoots something or someone , then and ONLY then should he be arrested and tried by a juror of is peers. No topic no matter how egregious it may be to some should every be stopped from being discussed on its proper platform. As a wise man once said ” If you don’t like the conversation don’t join it”. Our corporate giants like Google play an important role in elevating the I.Q of the planet. Maybe one day we will evolve into a planet that has no need of weapons or the knowledge of building them. I say that day is a long way off. Some say that people like Mr. Sparve are hurting or efforts in the march to a peaceful society. One thing we should all agree on is the fact that in today’s world there are many wolfs knocking at the door. We the people are smarter than our leaders give us credit for. We need no censorship from government or corporate entities like Google  to help us decide what knowledge is in our best interest to acquire.

and the second

and so on.|||

Google Gets Heat For Y I heard long ago the saying "Free speech is free speech is free speech. Now while that may still be be said for America it may not be said abroad . Today the mega giant Google fines itself embroiled in a free speech controversy that has broad ramification on a…