Tesla, the electric carmaker, briefly became America’s most valued auto manufacturer last week when a surge in its share price saw it roar past General Motors. When the stock market closed last Monday, the market value of Tesla (which sold about 76,000 vehicles in 2016) hit a whopping $50.9bn – $64m more than GM (which sold nearly 9.6m vehicles). It had already overtaken Ford earlier in the month.

The punchy valuation for a loss-making manufacturer has divided the investment community and sparked some head-scratching among car-sector stalwarts. Tesla’s elevated profile with investors has brought both acclaim and a new level of scrutiny.

Despite the soaring share price, a group of investors last week questioned the independence of Tesla’s board, warning it was too close to charismatic co-founder and chief executive Elon Musk. In a letter, they said the board was “largely unchanged” since the company floated and was at risk of “groupthink”.

The shareholders include the California State Teachers’ Retirement System, Hermes Equity Ownership Services and CtW Investment Group, among others, collectively managing assets worth $721bn (£575bn).

In a letter to Tesla’s lead independent director Antonio Gracias, they called for it to re-elect members annually and to add two new independent directors to the board. The investors want Tesla to review its governance before launching its Model 3 saloon later this year – its first vehicle aimed at the mass market, costing around $35,000.

The letter said: “While meeting the technical definition of independence, five of the six current non-executive directors have professional or personal ties to Mr Musk that could put at risk their ability to exercise independent judgment.”

Tesla said it was already engaged in a search for independent directors. However, the tensions between the company and some of its investors were revealed in a tweet by Musk. “This investor group should buy Ford stock. Their governance is amazing …” he tweeted to his 8 million followers.

For now, Musk and his team have built up enough investor goodwill to buy him time to follow through his vision. Tesla narrowly missed its target of delivering 80,000 vehicles last year and has only reported two profitable quarters in its brief history. Nonetheless, its rapid rise could see it accelerate past Honda and move into the top five most valuable carmakers in the world.

This comes as the finances of Ford and GM are in rude health. GM is expected to earn more than $9bn this year and Ford to rake in profits of $6.3bn; Tesla is expected to lose more than $950m.

Analysts note that most investors are valuing Tesla as a technology “growth” stock rather than as a manufacturer.

David Whiston, analyst at Morningstar, said: “The market cares more about the potential new market value of the other businesses Tesla is in than about real profits and cash flow. Right now there is nothing to slow Tesla’s momentum. They could pass Honda too.”

Tesla’s shiny technology has rattled traditional carmakers. GM has responded by stealing a march on the California firm’s mass-market Model 3 with the launch of its all-electric Bolt, which is in the same price bracket. Once the Model 3 starts to roll off the production lines, Musk expects to ramp up the carmaking operation from 80,000 to 500,000 a year by 2018.

It is also developing the Super Cruise system, a semi-autonomous driving feature, for launch in Cadillac’s 2018 CT6 saloon. GM bills it as “the industry’s first true hands-free driving technology” – a clear rebuke to Tesla’s Autopilot system.

But Musk has been adept at promoting Tesla as more than a car company. As well as developing green vehicles and driverless technology, the Tesla boffins are designing batteries capable of storing power from rooftop solar panels. The prospect that all homes may soon be able to produce and store their own energy is a potential game-changer for the energy market. It is this work in the Tesla laboratory that has seduced Wall Street.

Jeffrey Gundlach, who oversees more than $105bn in assets at DoubleLine Capital in Los Angeles, said: “As a car company alone, Tesla is a crazy high valuation. As a battery company – one that expands and innovates substantially – maybe the valuation can work.”

Others take a more cynical view and believe Tesla is a classic “bubble” stock that defies all investment logic.

Michael Farr, president of US investment firm Farr, Miller & Washington, told the Washington Post: “Investors were asked to employ a ‘creative’ valuation methodology. I think that means that when the numbers don’t make any sense, one should ignore them and focus on other things. It’s like being told to ‘ignore the flames coming out of that airplane, I’m sure your trip will be fine.’”|||

The electric carmaker overtook GM in market capitalisation last week. Is this just a bubble – or is battery tech the future?