In the early years of the web, there was a lot of variation and experimentation with where to put content on a web page. Then, it seems we all settled into a handful of patterns and stayed there for over a decade. It wasn’t until the arrival of responsive design that new ideas for page layout started appearing. Now with new CSS properties for layout landing in browsers, we may be about to see a bigger renaissance in layout design patterns. How can we better use the space inside the glass rectangle? What layout innovations could help users better find and focus on what they want? Take a walk through where we’ve been, where we might be going, and how we can better design for the true medium at hand. This talk features practical examples of what's newly possible, along with access to a code repo for you to play with later.

“I wish every web designer could see this presentation by Jen Simmons.” — Jeffrey Zeldman

“As per her usual, Jen is blowing it out of the park.” — Estelle Weyl

“Thoroughly enjoyed being the warm-up act for Jen Simmons. I am but a John The Baptist to her Jesus Christ.” — Jeremy Keith

“If there is a talk that can change your work for the next five years, Jen Simmons’ talk is it.” — Dennis Sheu

“Watching Jen Simmons give one of the best and funniest presentations I’ve ever seen on next-generation web technologies.” — Will Hacker

“What I love about Jen Simmons’ talk is that it isn’t just about the new and shiny — there’s history and context behind it.” — Kathryn Presner

“Watching Jen Simmons talk about the future of design tonight I kept thinking: Wow CSS finally looks like something I can understand.” — Jon Johnson

“Jen Simmons is giving web design the smack in the face it’s deserved.” — Joshua McCarthy

“So so many takeaways from Jen Simmons’ presentation. Boxy boxes in boxes be gone. Can I get an Amen?” — Kristen Burroughs

“I’m in love with Jen Simmons’ passion for great design regardless of medium, and her call to challenge norms.” — Cory Klatik

“One thing’s for sure. Jen Simmons just disrupted the shit out of modern layout design and UX design.” —Robert Raleigh|||

