Performance metrics can be incredibly valuable, a few key variables can make a big difference to the success of any SAAS business. It can however, be difficult to track every metric so this article has referenced 60 SAAS statistics to help marketers and business owners start to define what matters to their goals.

Software companies quite often grow faster than companies in other sectors, so keeping a close eye on growth numbers & benchmarks metrics should not be neglected.

If the numerator of your quick ratio is growing that means your revenue is growing. It’s important to keep increasing revenue to counter any MRR (Monthly Recurring Revenue) that is lost to churn. ( Since churn metrics are such critical elements for success in a SAAS company, it is an area that requires deeper exploration to understand. Making a small tweak to your churn rate can have a huge impact on the overall health of your business.

Non-renewal rates are higher than gross dollar churn rates and higher for shorter duration contracts. ( It is important to analyse and research marketing and sales metrics when it comes to SAAS statistics. Putting more focus and resource on marketing and sales can not only ramp up leads and revenue, but it also helps you stay one step ahead of your competitors.

SAAS companies need to track the number of visitors, trials and closed deals; And also track the conversion rates, with the goal of improving those over time. ( 

These conversion rates represent the ability to forecast future revenue and retention accurately, what’s more, it will impact staffing levels, sales & marketing program spend. It is important to measure the overall ROI from your lead generation activities. The biggest challenge and greatest limiting factor to growth is growing pipeline fast enough to feed the top of the funnel. Inbound marketing strategies can play a big role to help you drive up those numbers! SAAS companies run a unique model that is much more focused on customer success than many traditional models. For this reason, it is important to have a deeper insight into performance metrics to make sure everything is on track and growing in a sustainable way. Most SAAS companies could invest in acquiring more clients in order to grow faster, but many fall into the trap of neglecting customer success and retention. So, you may have invested the money and time to gain new clients, but you lose out on the full revenue potential of if they churn earlier than expected. By reducing the revenue headwinds caused by churn, companies with strong levels of customer success grow faster, and gain further revenues from upgrades / expansions. There are typically 3 key churn metrics: customer churn, gross-revenue churn, and net-revenue churn.

Customer Acquisition Cost (CAC) = sum of all sales & marketing expenses/ number of new customers added David Skok has noted that there is a problem with using this formula, as you may have several expensive people in the team that should scale to handle a larger number of customers as you grow. In this case, your CAC will be too high. David suggested making a very simple adjustment to the Sales & Marketing expenses to take only a portion of those salaries and expenses in the early days. This will provide a better indication of how CAC will look in the future when you are at scale.

Account Churn Rate (ACR) = customers at beginning of month - customers at the end of month / customers at beginning of month Account Churn is very important because it gives a very clear percentage of the customers that are leaving you. It takes away the bias from larger accounts so that you aren’t left with one large customer paying for all of your revenue - which is a dangerous situation to be in. (InsightSquared)

Revenue Churn Rate = (RCR) (MRR at beginning of month - MRR at end of month) - MRR in upgrades during month / MRR at beginning of month You can achieve Negative Churn, which means you are adding MRR at a faster pace than you are losing it. (InsightSquared)

Revenue Renewal Rate= (MRR up for the renewal at beginning of month- MRR not renewed at the end of month)/ MRR up for renewal at beginning of month) You need to be thinking about how the length of each contract will affect churn in a given period when you calculating renewal rate. (InsightSquared)|||

Planning goals for your SAAS can be difficult without the data! Read our post on 60 SAAS Statistics That Will Change The Way You Think