Several trends have already transformed our modern retail landscape and retail’s relationship to space: the success of discounters, the rise of smaller proximity convenience stores, online retail, data-driven omni-channel shopping offers, the opening of pure player brick-and-mortar stores, the increasing number of exclusive brand stores and concepts…

There are basically two ways shopping can be reshaped to fit new consumer expectations: it can either be made more painless and seamless — that’s what accounts for the rise of convenience stores and the concept behind Amazon Go — , or shopping can be made about the experience rather than the products. The second path is a vast terra incognita that retailers, real-estate companies and a wide range of business people are now trying to explore. What does it mean to make it about the experience? There are many possible answers to that question.

One of the possibilities that is now often put forward by experts and already giving rise to many business promises is the idea of providing customers with the opportunity to make, prepare, grow, or build their own things. Sometimes the business, governance and organisation models that come with it are a radical alternative to traditional business ownership: for example, the ‘commons’ could make a comeback. The commons is the cultural, infrastructural and natural resources accessible to all members of a society that are held in common, not owned privately. When owned collectively by a group of workers, it becomes a cooperative…

The success of collaborative spaces — coworking spaces, makerspaces, fab labs, hackerspaces — that have spread fast in urban centres (and sometimes also in more rural areas), testifies to the idea that modern-day commons are indeed being (re)invented. The popular makers movement is further evidence that the Do It Yourself trend continues to spread across the globe. That’s why so many DIY workshops and cooking classes are being offered in lieu of traditional retail. In France, Leroy Merlin, a home improvement and gardening retailer has been leveraging the DIY trend like no other retailer, offering numerous workshops, exchange forums, makerspaces, etc. and even establishing itself as a reference in that area.

Of course the idea of commons typically include so-called fab labs, giving everyone the use of 3D printers and other high tech equipment like virtual reality gear and such things. But what if low tech also became a trend? What if many consumers were also hungry for more traditional old-fashioned ways?

In the late 19th century, Britain was already heavily industrialised. A movement of “makers” and philosophers emerged to criticise industrialisation and offer an alternative to the standardised products British factories were producing by the thousands. Britain’s Arts and Crafts movement was both an artistic and a political movement, which flourished in Europe and North America between 1880 and 1910. It stood for traditional craftsmanship using simple forms, and often used medieval, romantic, or folk styles of decoration. It advocated economic and social reform and was essentially anti-industrial. Its strong influence on European arts lasted until it was misplaced by 1930s Modernism in the 1930s.

To this day the movement continues to influence many craft makers, designers, and town planners. Its thinkers, among them William Morris (1834–1896), enjoy revived fame today.

The utopia Morris published in 1890, News from Nowhere, is now a classic. It combines utopian socialism and soft science fiction. In the novel, the narrator, William Guest, falls asleep after returning from a meeting of the Socialist League and awakes to find himself in a future society based on common ownership and democratic control of the means of production. In this utopian society there is no private property, no big cities, no authority, no monetary system, no divorce, no courts, no prisons, and no class systems. The people find pleasure in nature, and in their work.

William Morris was not only an author, he started numerous workshops to revive old forgotten Medieval arts. And his art work became exceedingly popular with the British bourgeoisie. So paradoxically enough, Morris built a gigantic business empire with the craftsmanship he sold and became immensely rich in the process.

Also today a comeback to forgotten arts and ‘utopian’ commons could provide valuable business opportunities. Abandoned retail spaces could be transformed into new “villages” where villagers go bake their own bread in the communal oven, exchange gossip, go see farm animals with their children, pick flowers and fresh fruit, pluck vegetables. The craftsmen and craftswomen among them could go make things (furniture, decorative objects) in communal workshops.

In Morris’ utopia, everyone is a maker, which questions what it means to work and consume. The shift in values we are witnessing today doesn’t just affect consumption, but our relationship to work and identity as well. Perhaps many more consumers could become producers tomorrow, further blurring the lines between consumption and production. It would mean neither work nor consumption will die, but rather be merged into a new reality.|||

The crisis of retail is not an entirely new phenomenon but it is clearly getting worse. In the US, many shopping malls have recently closed down. Not only are internet giants disrupting retail as we…