Because of this, more of ARM’s products are being developed from the ground up with automotive applications in mind, the most recent being the ARM Cortex-R52 processor with advanced safety features, ideal for enabling the development of next generation autonomous vehicles. Building on this, today we are announcing a platform of dedicated automotive ARM Artisan Physical IP to address increasing user demand for new features and functionality in this fast-growing market. The ARM automotive physical IP platform for TSMC 16FFC brings the proven quality and features of Artisan IP for automotive applications in a FinFET process. Combined with the latest functional safety standards, including ISO 26262 and the TSMC 9000A quality requirements, the platform will accelerate the building of SoCs by our ecosystem of partners for leading-edge automotive applications, including ADAS, infotainment and automated driving.

Growing our long-term partnership with TSMC, a leading foundry for SoCs, our latest collaboration builds on the success of the Artisan physical IP platform for the TSMC 16FFC process for mobile applications and enterprise infrastructure. The new automotive platform has been optimized for implementation with ARM Cortex cores, including Cortex-R52, Cortex-M33 and Cortex-M23, Cortex-M7 and Cortex-R5 which can offer support for advanced (ASIL-D) functional safety as well as the majority of Cortex-A and Cortex-M cores which provide standard functional safety support (ASIL-B).

Our new platform complies with rigid automotive requirements, with dedicated automotive memories optimized for higher electromigration requirements and extended features for testability. Development and qualification of the IP meets the stringent ISO 26262 international standard for functional safety and AEC-Q100 Grade 1, ensuring the high reliability and safety levels vital for automotive systems. In fact, ARM technology has been designed into critical safety systems in cars for more than a decade, including ABS, ESP and airbags as well as factory automation equipment such as robotic systems and programmable logic controllers.

ARM Physical IP Platform for TSMC 16FFC is available now for evaluation and licensing.

Find more information on the latest ARM Physical IP offerings for all process nodes and foundry partners on ARM DesignStart.|||

Because of this, more of ARM&rsquo;s products are being developed from the ground up with automotive applications in mind, the most recent being the ARM ...