“How did they do such a fantastic job of destruction? First thought is the baggage handlers ran it over with some vehicle because the nose and tails are all broken in the same spot. But why is only one broken in half from the middle of the board, while the rest are broken at the nose and tail? Did they open my bag, break that board, and put it back in? I had buckled both straps inside the back which locks the boards down and they were unbuckled. So that makes me believe they went into my bag.”In support of Alex Gray’s situation, a social media campaign has spawned to condemn American Airlines. The company’s Instagram account has been flooded with angry comments and the #AmericanAirlinesBreaksSurfboards hashtag, which Gray used in his original post. In the most recent photo after the incident, the American Airlines account received nearly 1,300 comments. And Alex has taken his story to the local news as well, with KTLA posting a spot about the incident on the nightly news.This isn’t the first time a pro surfer has waged a social media crusade against a major airline. John John Florence’s boards were destroyed by JetBlue, as seen from a devastating IG photo . And Kelly Slater backed Bob Hurley after an issue with limitations on boardbags from Hawaiian Airlines. In each scenario, the surfers hoped to use their personal experience to jumpstart a larger conversation about airlines and their treatment of surfboard bags. And Alex Gray’s situation is no different.“This has happened to thousands of surfers,” Alex told Surfline. “Why would this happen when you pay hundreds of dollars, under the assumptions that your boards will be handled with care? That’s what I’m trying to figure out. My involvement has become a chance to represent the surf community as a whole and to address this issue.”So far, Alex has received no response to the claims he filed with American Airlines. But he’s also not backing down. “I’m thinking bigger picture,” he said. “I want to move for a policy change across the board, from all airlines. But first, we need a response from American.”|||

