Let’s talk about the psychology of Albert Einstein. Steven Gimbel wrote a book on Einstein’s Jewish science. How important was religion to Einstein, how much did that inform his worldview?

David Bodanis: Religion helped Einstein in many, many ways — one was just being an outsider. His family was sort of assimilated German Jews and they weren’t entirely accepted. Thorstein Veblin was a Norwegian economist in America — late 1800s, early 1900s — he wrote a wonderful essay on what it takes to be really, really creative in a field. He said it helps if you’re brought up in a family that teaches you one thing kind of dogmatically. Outsiders, minorities in England or America, Jews in Germany, if you’re a total outsider you don’t have any education. If you’re a total insider it’s tempting to complacently just accept what’s there.

It helps to have a little bit of a problem, minor prejudice against you, not major — that blocks everything — but not total acceptance. So Einstein just was a little bit critical when he was taught at university that this is the way things are. He would say, ‘Maybe. Let’s look at it afresh’.

There are certain asymmetries, for example in Maxwell’s equation, that people would say, ‘It doesn’t mean anything’, he’d say, ‘Maybe. Let’s look at it afresh’. So that was one thing: the outsider.

Another thing that helped a lot was that although Einstein himself didn’t study the Talmud a lot — which is a book of commentary on the Bible — he had a strong Jewish education until he was about 12 or 13, and of course he read widely in Jewish matters. Those of you who perhaps didn’t study the Talmud this morning might be pleased to know that a page of the Talmud looks like this. In one corner here they’ll have a little bit from the Bible. Around that will be commentaries that some people wrote about it, say, 800 years later, around that there’ll be commentaries that people wrote about those commentaries later. And it was on and on and on, and was closed with Rashi in the 12th century.

So Einstein grew up with those notions, and his principles behind relativity are higher-level principles. It was incredibly useful in the patent office where Einstein worked in his 20s. If people would come in with something, say, ‘There’s all these gears and mechanisms and it’ll do such and such’, Einstein would ask them, ‘Does it create perpetual motion?’, which he knew was impossible, and they’d say, ‘Oh yeah, it creates perpetual motion’, he said, ‘Then it can’t work’. He would use a higher-level principle — ‘If it violates the laws of thermodynamics, I don’t care what the gears and stuff are, it doesn’t work’.

So Einstein got that very much from his religious background and from his technical training. His work is repeatedly judging things. Relativity isn’t a detailed law, it’s an approach to things.

Why did Einstein find it so difficult to grapple with uncertainty? At face value that would seem to map on quite well to the Talmudic view that it’s not quite possible to see the full truth.

David Bodanis: I suppose you could say the Talmudic goal is like — they say, you know, two Jews, three political parties. So all the people writing and disagreeing, often in a kind of jokey way, in the Talmud or other writings like that, they have a shared goal. For them, it’s a different goal than science. It’s not to understand the physical universe, it’s to understand the theological universe and what it means for human beings. But they all share this extremely exact goal.

So none of them would say, ‘We can settle this disagreement because God didn’t mean anything clear’. It’s like, ‘I have these arguments, and then you can have counter arguments, but we’re all trying to see what the intention [was] and how things should be done’.

How much did Einstein’s refusals to get quantum physics and accept it damage him reputationally in the field of physics?

David Bodanis: That ended it for him. The shame is that in 1905 he came up with some of the fundamental ideas in early quantum mechanics. Trick question: what year did Einstein get the Nobel Prize of 1921? Answer: not 1921 — they gave to him in 1922 because they couldn’t agree that he really deserved it. He didn’t get the Nobel Prize for relativity — he got it for certain effects that are central to quantum mechanics.

So he’d been in there right at the beginning, and he knew that there was certain uncertainty — by the way, as an example of how good Einstein was, in 1916 he was really tired after coming up with general relativity, and in just a few weeks while he was resting at one point, he came up the idea for the laser. No one on Earth could build one for another 40/50 years, how cool is that? It’s like his 11th best discovery!

So it diminished him in the world of science, how did he personally react to the academic physics community heading in a different direction than the one he wanted to go in?

David Bodanis: That was one of the things I was fascinated by in the research. On the surface he always said, ‘They can do this. History will prove them wrong’. Remember, if he had taken a deep breath and waited 10 years after this beautiful equation of 1915, he would have been proven right.

If he had said, ‘No, I don’t care if astronomers think the universe is static and stars just float there and don’t move, if they think that, they’re wrong. My equations predict the universe is expanding’, if he’d stuck to his guns, 10 years later — when they found the universe was expanding — they would have said, ‘Wow, just from equations in your head and that horrible bachelor flat in Berlin, you came up with mathematical equations that show the universe is expanding? How cool is that?’.

Often, later in life, he’d say, ‘Maybe we’ll have to wait 100 years. People will say that, yes, there’s certain quantum effects, but they’re just the surface manifestations of the deeper order, which is what I’m aiming for, which is what I believe in’. So that’s what he said most of the time. There were few times, though, where he gave a hint, saying, ‘Maybe I’m wrong, and if I’m wrong I’ve really wasted a lot of time’. I don’t know how he felt at the very end.

It is striking how his opposition to uncertainty and aspects of quantum physics was really based on his gut.

David Bodanis: An analogy of that is if you’ve ever been with somebody who’s better at argumentation than you, and they win, but that you’re right. For example, some people feel that lawyers shouldn’t defend guilty parties — horrible criminals, who they know they’ve done a horrible thing. It’s like intellectual judo, though, they’ll put one foot here, they’ll twist, they’ll turn, and you’ll lose the argument, but you’re convinced it’s still the wrong thing. Many of us have really powerful intuitions – in psychology, in recent years, people say that facts bounce off intuitions, but often people will take in the facts but they feel the intuitions, even if you can’t express it clearly, can be true.

Bertrand Russell was a magnificent logician and his daughter was once asked, ‘What was it like arguing with him?’. She laughed, said, ‘You couldn’t argue with my father. His mind was like a razor wire trap. He would always win’. The thing is he was often wrong, but he would persuasively read the arguments. When you’re against people like that, sometimes you just can’t articulate it well, but you’re convinced you’re right. That’s how Einstein felt.

As you were writing this book, was there any part of you thinking, ‘Maybe he will turn out to be right. Maybe not enough time has gone by yet and the Copenhagen interpretation was kind of a compromise’? There’s still various gaps in quantum physics he could yet be right [about]. It could yet turn out to be far from his greatest mistake — could be your greatest mistake.

David Bodanis: To be in the same category, there, would be really good, I’m very happy with that [laughs]. Isaac Asimov, when he was young and studying science, he said he wanted to create a system like Asimov’s universe. Then, like, Asimov’s law would be good enough, then he was like, ‘How about Asimov’s lemma?’, and then Asimov’s hypothesis, and then Asimov’s conjecture. So if I can be like, ‘Bondanis’s mistake’, below Einstein’, it would still be good.

As I was writing the book, I kind of forgot what I knew about physics at one point, and I was going for Einstein, ‘Yeah, I’ll be proven right’, but it turns out that the 1950s and especially in the 1960s, there were some experiments that seemed to show conclusively that this — sometimes called the hidden variable theory — does not hold up.

So there seems to be really rich reasons for thinking that the fundamental level, there is probability and uncertainty, not random chaos, but that things are because they’re bounded with within limits — our cell phones work with quantum mechanics, the internet works with quantum mechanics, but at the core level it’s different than things [that] are around us.

If Einstein had listened to the external world and what the observable universe seemed to be suggesting, he would have, as he ended up doing, made changes to the general theory of relativity — because all the observational evidence was the universe was static. But that was his mistake, that he did listen to the external world.

David Bodanis: In a sense, he listened, but I suppose the thing about science, when it works, is that it will correct itself slowly and pathetically, and people will argue and hide evidence, and they’ll use their great CV and tenure to get in the way. Max Planck was famous for saying, ‘You never out-argue your opponents, but you can outlive them. You can be around after they die’. So although Einstein did make that shift, he then shifted back. To spend about eight years — from 1909 to 1915 — really working on this issue and really trying to get it right while all sorts of other things are going on around you, that takes enormous dedication. It’s sort of like if somebody finds that a certain approach takes him to the Oval Offie or to Number 10, or even to rising up in the civil service, it’s really hard to change that approach.

One question I have regarding Einstein is that obviously his famous equation that everyone knows is E=MC2, that led to developments in nuclear weaponry. I was wondering what you discovered about his own personal views as to whether he felt any guilt about this discovery?

David Bodanis: Did Einstein feel any guilt about the atomic bomb, given that E=MC2 was a key part of it? He wasn’t allowed to work on the atomic bomb project in America. He was living in America at the time, but the FBI considered him a security risk. Plus, he knew by then he was getting a little bit slower with some of the quick calculations. So he was vaguely aware that there were some projects going on, but he didn’t know the details. In 1945 when the first bomb was dropped over the basically civilian city of Hiroshima in Japan, when the news came through he was vacationing on Long Island.

His secretary, Helen Dukas, woke him up and said, ‘Professor Einstein, an atomic bomb with this new energy form has killed a vast number of people’. And Einstein said, she recorded it, ‘If I had known, I wouldn’t have lifted a finger’. He used to say, way back in World War I, that our modern technology is like giving machine guns to savages or to insane people.

So Einstein had been a pacifist in the 1930s with the rise of Hitler. As Hitler got stronger, he stopped being a pacifist. He probably would have supported making an atomic bomb against Germany, at least in a defensive way to keep Germany from winning the war. But he certainly wouldn’t have used it in the final stages of the time in Japan. If he would have used it, he would have used it against troop emplacements or as a demonstration first, not against a city. So he was against that.

One thing that might slightly absolve him is that to make the atomic bomb you needed two things. One was that you had to know that it could happen, and E=MC2 shows that it could happen. I could elaborate on that later. But you also need the practical engineering, just the detail — purifying uranium and stuff like that. That process by itself, he wasn’t involved in and it was actually ongoing itself.

His simple E=MC2 showed people that a little bit of mass could explode into a huge amount of energy. In E=MC2, as I know you were fascinated by after our discussion of the Talmud, C2 squared is just a large number, it’s a conversion factor, like between pounds and dollars, between Fahrenheit and Centigrade. It turns out that if C2 was like the number three, it would mean a little bit of mass, multiply it by three, you get a little bit more energy. In fact, C2 is an enormous number — quintillions and stuff. So that means a little bit of mass. This ring, which I’m not going to take off, if it was turned entirely into energy, this mass would be multiplied by the conversion factor into a huge amount of energy. It would be the end, not just of tech city in East London, but much of the South of England would be beneath the North Sea. It’s an incredible idea. So that shows people that you could make a bomb if you found the right thing that could destroy itself.|||

Bestselling science writer David Bodanis came to Second Home to speak with Rohan Silva about his new book Einstein’s Greatest Mistake- a brisk, accessible biography of Albert Einstein that reveals…