As part of my acceptance into community college, my next step was to take an english and math skills assessment so they would know where to place me for the classes I wanted to enroll in.

But see here's the point where I need to take a tangent: I'm not great at math. Never have been. I did almost perfect on the english portion of my SATs and below average on the math section. Not much has changed since then. I'm one of many women who were once girls who struggled from lack of self-confidence in my math skills. I never had an aptitude for it. I probably could have excelled at it if I had been given the right time, attention, and tutoring I needed at the point in my life when I was struggling. I probably could have overcome that slump. I didn't. Instead of getting mentorship in mathematics I was ignored. The only class I ever failed in all my school years? Algebra 1. From there I generally got C's in my math classes and A's in all the rest.

To be honest, I thought nothing of it at the time, and it didn't affect most aspects of my life at all. It did affect one thing greatly: my choice of career path.

At the time I was so excited and interested in the Internet and technology. I was teaching myself HTML by backwards-engineering friends' Geocities websites. I was spending hours and hours on the Internet as a Geocities community manager. I was talking to internet friends on ICQ and learning how modems worked. I just never saw myself doing that for my career.

When it came time to choose colleges and majors, I chose a communications field. I knew I was good at that. I left behind anything having to do with STEM and went on to pursue my Journalism degree. I ended up back in technology through a confluence of events and accidents and personal connections, not because I set out to be here, but because I had a lot of friends in the field and an ability to capitalize on opportunities that presented themselves to me.

Now here I was, late last year, sitting in a small, quiet room preparing to take a test of my english and math skills. How did I do on that test? Almost exactly as well as I did on my SATs in my last year of high school:|||

