In recent years, the customer support industry has been facing a bit of a crisis. Despite real customer support requiring hard work, dedication, and skill, the overall perception is that it can only ever be an entry-level position whilst working towards something else. For businesses, this is a nightmare because it means they are losing valuable members of staff each and every year. For this reason, I have prepared a short guide for employee retention tips today!

Progress — If you are serious about reducing your employee turnover, the biggest tip we can provide is to offer progress wherever possible. Rather than making employees feel as though they are in a dead-end job, show your employees that the old tale is a misconception and they can progress with your company. As soon as they feel as though they are going somewhere, they will be prepared to stay for a longer period of time.

Horizontal Growth — If there isn’t really a way for you to promote employees currently, work out a way to facilitate horizontal growth. What does this mean? Essentially, it means that you can train them in other areas rather than just customer support. In truth, you will come across employees who don’t actually want to reach management level but you can keep them happy by increasing their training. Over time, they will enjoy the added responsibility and they won’t be stuck in the same role every single day. For you, this is also a great thing to welcome to your business because it means that you have cover just in case one employee is ill or unavailable on a certain day.

Career Advancement Roadmap — To start, we actually like the option of asking your employees because it gets them involved in the decision. If you are honest and ask what it is they want in order to stay longer, you will almost certainly get some valuable feedback. From here, you can develop the road-map of career advancement for all employees to follow.

When this is in place, suddenly all employees know what they have to do in order to proceed. As we discovered earlier, they will feel motivated when they know that they are working towards something beneficial. Without a roadmap, they don’t really know where they are going or, perhaps more importantly, how to get there.

Training — All things considered, everyone on the planet could offer customer service in some capacity. However, it takes training and hard work from both employee and employer to create a special customer service employee. Therefore, this starts on your side with a superb training program. Sure, a certain percentage of people will take the training and then leave but this is a risk you have to take. Ultimately, most will feel valued and they will also improve at their job which is a double boost for you.

So far, we have discussed many techniques but none are as easy as simple encouragement. As the owner, manager, or authority figure in the company, you must have experience in the industry. If you have been where your employees are right now, you know exactly how they feel so this is what you need to draw upon. Whether it is a rewards system or praising staff when necessary, sometimes simplicity is the key to success. This will be all the reward your employees need to stay!

Currently, the industry is struggling with staff retention just as you may be but there are some viable solutions. As long as you are willing to consider the above, your situation can improve as can the industry as a whole!|||

In recent years, the customer support industry has been facing a bit of a crisis. Despite real customer support requiring hard work, dedication, and skill, the overall perception is that it can only…