The quality of service you provide to your customers can make or break your business. Companies like Zappos refer to their customer service department as “Customer Loyalty Team” because they understand ensuring good customer service is absolutely one of the most crucial aspects of long term profitable business.

What is customer service to Zappos?- Delivering Happiness

What is customer service for 10xCRM?

At 10xCRM, we are trying to help every service provider deliver an excellent customer service, every time. We are on mission to empower service professionals with tools to help their customers anytime.

So, here is what customer service means for us.

What is customer service to your Service Business?

No, really — write it down.

Generally you can do two things to improve your business bottom line

Improving sales without incurring additional expense is very difficult unless you are Zappos, delivering great customer service.

Considering how tough the competition is in the market, it is imperative that you make sure that your existing customers stick with you and not jump to the next ship. And how do you do that?

By building their trust in you through good customer service.

How Good Customer Service Sets You Apart From the Rest

Say you are an electrician who has expertise in installing ceiling fans. Just because you are an expert in your field does not mean that nobody out there can match your skills. Also, no matter how affordable your products and services are, that should not make you think that you are indispensable in the industry you are in. Truth be told, there will always be someone out there who can deliver the same quality and cost of products and services as yours.

At the end of the day, it is not the cost of your products or service that will make you and your business stand out. It’s how good your customer service is.

People often hear customer service when talking about business, but only a few understand what it really means. In fact, customer service is so vague that it can mean a lot of different things. Do you deliver good customer service by answering a phone call or setting up an appointment quickly? Is it about wearing gloves at work to ensure safety? How about coming to work in uniform and looking presentable in front of your customers?

Since customer service is so broad a term, you can get what it is all about by starting to look at every single touch point you have with your customer — from the time you introduce your brand to him to the day that you actually serve him. Start building your customer journey and identify the number of touch points involved.

Take a look at this example:

Your customers judge you way before they even call you.

Many business owners tend to overlook these touch points thinking that they are not as extremely important as when the customer is already right there, ready to pay for their goods or services, when in fact, potential customers judge them pretty much along the way — from the time they come across their billboards or visit their websites all the way up to the day when they actually get served. In fact, customer service continues even after the goods or services are already paid.

Now that you’ve understood how broad customer service can be, it’s time to think of the fundamentals that you should apply in every touch point.

Dealing With Customers in Each Touch Point

Nothing in your business matters if you have poor customer service. So before you focus on the other aspects of your business, think of how you can please your customers each time you deal with them. Treating them right is crucial to your success. Without them, your business essentially ceases to exist.

Here are some ways on how you can deal with your customers right:

Be Very Personal. For many businesses, the importance of customer service is more of an afterthought. Some businesses fail because they tend to view customer service as something that is cost-centered, and so they treat customers as a liability. One basic thing that you should remember in dealing with your customers is that you should learn how to be personal with them. Make them feel special and make them feel that you need them. Talk to them as if you have known each other for a long time. Know their concerns and address their needs to the best of your abilities.

Making Phone Calls. Say one potential customer comes across your website, finds your business interesting and decides to give you a ring. In such cases, the customer has the option of reaching your office during business hours or during non-business hours. When your potential customer calls you during business hours, forwarding their call to an answering service and forwarding it to any of your representatives makes much difference. Having one of your representatives talk to him will make him feel more special than having him talk to an automated answering service.

Sending Emails. Dealing with customers via email is common these days. When sending emails to your clients, be courteous enough to make them feel that you are a friend and are willing to address whatever need they may have. Do not send “SPAM” emails that adds no value to your customer.

Make Yourself Available for Them. Aside from being genuine and compassionate in dealing with your customers, you need to make sure that you are always there for them. One of the most important elements of customer service is proper communication, and this is where most business unfortunately fail. When your customer needs you, make sure that you make time for them. This way, you are able to bring yourself closer to them and you bring a huge difference in their opinion of you and your business.

How do you make your clients feel that you are making yourself available for them?

For instance, you are sending out a tech to fix the air conditioner of your client. Before sending the tech, make sure that you send a photo of him to your client via email so he’ll know who he’s going to deal with. If your tech is running late, inform your client right away that the tech is running late. Remember that in dealing with your customers, proper communication is very important. No matter what you do, take your clients’ calls. If you have too many clients to deal with and cannot manage to talk to all of them at a time, let your agents take their calls for you. Just make sure that you or your representatives are able to address their concerns when they need you.

Cater to Their Needs. As a business owner, your third and most important role is catering to the needs of your customers. In every decision that you make, you need to make sure that you are geared towards being able to deliver the services sought by your customers.

So you see, in every touch point you have with your customer, everything that you do or say should be geared towards building their trust in you. Since the quality of your customer service can make or break your business, you can’t afford to get it wrong.

Why Customers Feel That They Get Bad Service

There are certain reasons why customers sometimes tend to feel that they get bad service. Understanding these reasons is just as important as following the fundamentals of good customer service, because customers are your most valuable resources and you are not supposed to bring them down.

Here are the common reasons for customer dissatisfaction:

Miscommunication or No Communication At All. Miscommunication is one of the most common problems of most businesses when it comes to dealing with customers. Businesses have the responsibility to constantly report to their customers the status of their services, and it does not matter whether it is bad news, good news, or no news at all. A simple text message or email expressing your regards or updating them about the work expected of you makes a huge difference. Also, make sure that you respond promptly to every inquiry.

Lack of Courtesy in Expressing Opinions. Remember that customers come up to you because they need your help with something that they cannot do themselves, so expect as many questions from them as possible. When a customer asks you about how something works or why something does not work, be ready to explain everything to the best of your ability and with as much courtesy as possible. Customers vary and some may be too sensitive to words. When you try to explain or guide them through something, make sure that you do not make them feel stupid for not knowing what you know.

Failure to Involve Your Customer. Whatever service you do, you do for your customer. Considering this, you must always involve them in every step of the process. Just because they are your customers does not mean that they should always be the ones consulting you. It should also go the other way around. As your customer approaches you and asks you how to do something or if there are some better ways to do something, do not impose what you know. Lay down your options on the table and let them choose what they think is best for them by considering their budget and preferences.

As a service provider, you don’t always get to please your customers. Instances when you fail to please your customers no matter how hard you try to please them are inevitable. Situations always happen and you can never be so sure that things won’t go wrong.

Often, it is from the worst of situations that businesses learn the most. And the best thing about being caught in bad situations is that you get to learn from the experience so history won’t repeat itself. In whatever business, learning is supposed to be a never-ending endeavor. If you are an employer or a manager who handles a team, you can do something to improve your customer service — through training.

How do such training work?

Each time you run into an awkward situation or encounter with a customer, keep log of that. Keep track of such situations and evaluate them. Think about what went wrong and what you could have done to make things better. Ask your customer what he thinks you should have done to make things better. And as you keep log of these situations and your assessment of each, gather everyone in your team in a training meeting and discuss these things with them. By taking feedback from them and gaining their input, you do not only get them involved and invested in your business, but you also help them learn from the mistakes of the past so they won’t repeat the same mistakes again.

Customer service is the heart and soul of your business. Pleasing your customers is your responsibility and their feedbacks are necessary in the growth of your business. Because they are the reason that your company exists, serving them to the best of your ability and retaining them are far more essential than you can ever imagine. Be careful in dealing with them because one wrong move, you can find them exercising their clout and letting the world know about their bad experiences with your company. If you don’t meet their expectations, they leave. But if you treat them right, you make them want to stay.|||

The quality of service you provide to your customers can make or break your business. Companies like Zappos refer to their customer service department as “Customer Loyalty Team” because they…