Job interviews are the worst, especially with the strange lies people are forced to tell each other. I’ve written before on what happens if you take a “traditional” job interview question to its logical extreme, and it’s not pretty either.

Here, I’d like to give helpful advice when a question comes up that asks “will you work hours beyond what we’ve agreed to?”

This question takes many forms, the worst of which involve dedication or determination. “We here at company X believe in dedication to whatever, how dedicated are you?” This is particularly sneaky because people feel that saying something honest like “Well, I have to pick up my kids from school every other day” implies they aren’t dedicated or lack some other moral virtue.

Sometimes it’s worded to sound conditional, such as “will you put in extra time if we need it” but it’s still basically the same question.

The only legitimate reason to ask this question, in my mind, is to try and get an idea of what to expect in a crisis. There will always be emergencies. Someone didn’t check the backups before going on vacation, someone in the pipeline misunderstood the delivery guidelines, or a slew of other problems that “shouldn’t happen” suddenly will.

When they happen, people need to be reasonable and flexible on all sides. As a hiring manager, you need to know that, when these situations occur, the people you’ve hired will come together and put out the fire. During an interview, your worst fear is that the person you’re hiring just doesn’t care enough and will let the team down without trying.

So you come up with some of these kinds of questions to try and figure out what will happen in these scenarios.

A manager’s job is to make sure they have the right type and right amount of resources (people, time, computers, etc.) to accomplish a task, and to adjust these resources as expectations change.

When an employee is asked to work extra, there are two possible interpretations:

To be clear: any situation where an employee has to work beyond the agreed amount should be seen as a failure in management.

This means you handle it like any other business failure. First, put out the fire. Then, make an effort to figure out why the failure occurred, and put policies in place to make sure the same failure won’t happen again. If this becomes a regular pattern, it’s a sign of chronic incompetence from leadership somewhere, and that person will either need to be trained better, or replaced.

So, as an interviewee, you want to express your willingness to be flexible when it’s reasonable to do so, but you also want to make sure the organization you’re interviewing with has the ethics above, where they treat overworking an employee as a critical pipeline failure and not like “business as usual”.

My go-to response is something along the lines of:

At this point it’ll be very clear whether this organization respects employee’s personal time or not. Either you’ll start a conversation about how infrequent this is (and, in the process, you’ll hear about what procedures are in place to prevent it), or you’ll get some patter about dedication and “whatever it takes” or something vague amounting to “we own your free time if you work here.”

Occasionally, I’ll have a well-intentioned interviewer deflect the question and ask me why it matters. To that, I usually respond with:

It’s a bit more aggressive, but either the interviewer will understand the concern and talk about what the company does to prevent continuous heroics from becoming their business engine, or they will suddenly have a depressing moment of self-realization.

This interview question can be uncomfortable and will make otherwise attractive-seeming job prospects vanish.

I’ve walked away from interviews after this question, but with no regrets. Often, the company I walked away from will have had a sweeping management change and/or will have gone under within a year.

I also realize that I’m lucky enough to be in an industry where this is possible. There are many industries out there that really do power their daily business on continuous heroics, and there’s enough competition that they can afford to cull people who value their free time.

If you’re in such an industry, my only advice is to make yourself valuable enough in your field that you can be picky. If you’re already there, go for a company that values your time as much as you do. You’ll be much happier in the long run.|||

Job interviews are the worst, especially with the strange lies people are forced to tell each other. I’ve written before on what happens if you take a “traditional” job interview question to its…