Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? I have read the FAQs and checked for similar issues: YES 

My site's URL (web address) is: 

Description 

 

I am taken aback that there was no Easter Doodle today. Easter is a major Christian celebration that does not take any review of a committee to see if there is a reason to include. This appears that Google is anti-Christian leaning. What happened to "open consideration" of differing views? I am working in a Muslim country and people here have no qualms about saying "Happy Easter" or "Merry Christmas". I am disappointed you chose to omit it.

Re: Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? Its ok when they're brought before the judgement throne of Christ on the last day they'll give account for all their actions just like everyone else, and everyone will be declared sinful and unclean from the smallest to the greatest including me you and that other guy. then those who believe in Jesus and have been baptized shall be saved. their omission of the only other important holiday of the year (besides Christmas) will be duly noted in the books and they will give account for it. if they choose to deny Christ in front of men, he will deny them before the angels of heaven.



mat10:33 But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

Re: Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? Ultimately, much safer just to stay away from this sort of thing. Because if they did a doodle for the religious festival of one faith and ignored others, it would just get people from those other faiths in here whining that their religion wasn't recognized.  No matter what they decide to put a doodle up in honor of, there'll still be dozens of people in here complaining that Google didn't honor what they wanted.

Re: Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? Just like Christmas with gifts, join with the Birth of Jesus, so does the Easter Eggs and Bunnies for the ressurection of Jesus Christ. Believers will always believe, and those who deny will answer on the day of Judgement. Google didnt Doodle, but Jesus did come back.. He is always in power and he is Almighty. God Bless those who believe, and disbelieve. He will show his light upon us all and we will bow in praise of his love and mercy. Happy Easter to Everyone Believers and Non believers.. God is Good, God is Merciful , God is Just.

Re: Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? Christmas = about half Christian/half secular at this point, Google half-ignores it by putting up some vague doodle that doesn't even mention the word Christmas or have any Christmas imagery Valentine's Day = much more secular than Christian at this point but still has the "Saint Valentine" name, Google recognizes it as the secular theme Halloween = the name means "All Hallow's Eve" but is now completely secular, Google recognizes it every year St. Patrick's Day = the name is the most Christian of all the ones Google recognizes with the "Saint" name, but they didn't recognize it in the USA this year, only in Ireland. No idea why. I'm not a Christian but I think it's ridiculous for Google to ignore such immensely popular cultural holidays. They celebrate Valentine's Day, St. Patrick's Day and Halloween, and those all have Christian names and connotations. Why not be clever and hide an Easter egg in the Google logo somewhere? You hover over the logo and an egg appears? But no, they have to be immensely politically correct and completely ignore Easter (Yahoo! ignored it too) for whatever reason. If Easter was more about eggs and bunnies and chocolate than Jesus, you can bet they would recognize the holiday. They only recognize Christian holidays that have been watered down significantly enough so that they are barely considered Christian.

Re: Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? Remember, Easter was a pagan holiday long before it was considered "Christian". The Easter bunny, colored eggs, etc. have nothing to do with the resurrection of Jesus Christ. It was the catholic church that "combined" the two celebrations into one day so Google should have no reason to avoid an American holiday such as Easter. (It is not religious for most of the world) Even Herod celebrated Easter. I think it is more of an anti-American gesture rather than an anti-religious one. (I don't mean that Google is anti-American, I just mean they are being "careful" in this politically-correct, tolerant of other cultures, world we live in today.)

Re: Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? Why can't Google put whatever they want on their servers, without people getting so upset over it? If and when all of you run a server, you can add whatever logo you want, celebrating whatever holidIay or other icon of importance.  I guess I don't understand why we as a society cannot be more tolerant of others.  Why does everyone need to give a nod to popular themes in culture, and if they don't give a nod or acknowledge it, they are "anti" it?  Maybe Google's message to Christians and other religious practices is they don't have a message. They do whatever they want, because its their playground. And if you don't want to play in their playground because the decor doesn't meet your needs, then go play in another playground.  Go use another search engine. Go to Yahoo or Bing. Wait a minute....their pages aren't adorned with religious decorations, either.  I have a theory as to why...they don't care how you feel. They care about providing a good search experience, not how you feel as a Christian or Muslim. And when they celebrate St. Patrick's Day or Glenn Beck Day or whatever else on their page, they still don't care how you feel. How about taking the focus off your feelings for once and just search for your junk in peace.

Re: Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? Well...  I will only say I'm a little bummed by Google.  If nothing else there is a lot of obscure and beautiful art and traditions to celebrate surrounding the date.  The sort of material that Google seems frequent to mine. I do have a bone to pick with both sides of the issue though.  To the people upset... we ought to calm down.  Hyperbole about it destroying our nation, etc. etc. just isn't balanced, reasonable, measured, or responsible.  It also guarantees we'll be ignored.  It's really not THAT big of a deal.  Google has helped me to discover all sorts of wonderful religious things. So be thankful for that. To the other side... you need to gain some maturity.  True, it isn't a big deal.  However, Google has successfully created a fun little feature that a great many people in the country look forward to on their splahpage.  They should be happy for their success.  I know it is very fun for me.  But in light of that, they know they carry a lot of influence.  That influence is the whole reason behind the feature.  Otherwise they wouldn't have done it.  It is very obvious they have certain agendas that extend beyond a pure "secularism".  And yes, because of its influence, it's very fair for certain groups to be upset by exclusion.  In sum, I know everyone doesnt fall into the above categories. I'm not trying to be annoying.  Just trying to offer perspective or something... I'm bummed by Google.  I look forward to their logos.  I think they could come up with a better solution.

Re: Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? ... just an interesting note.  And while they have all the right to put whatever they want up, they can't avoid making a statement by conveniently neglecting important Christian holidays and figures. I so wish there was a doodle for Martin Luther... or any figure of the Reformation for that matter. I was looking for one for my google logos chrome extension I made. :( btw... Google does recognize Hindu religious holidays like... just an interesting note.  And while they have all the right to put whatever they want up, they can't avoid making a statement by conveniently neglecting important Christian holidays and figures.

Re: Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? If they recognize non-Christian religious days but not Christian ones, they're discriminating, no matter how much people try to deny it. Usually when something seems obvious, it is. The question is, why does it seem that non-Christians are so much more offended by Jesus than Christians are by other religious ideas? Why is it assumed that anything Christian is automatically offensive? BECAUSE THERE'S ALREADY AN ANTI-CHRISTIAN ATMOSPHERE AMONG THE ELITES, THAT'S WHY. They're oh-so worried that someone's feelings will get hurt, but often couldn't care less about Christians. Some on the Left try to hide their hatred of Christianity behind a compassionate concern for the hypersensitive feelings, real or imagined, of non-Christians. I don't know if that's the case with Google. I respect those on the Left who respect others and who are open-minded toward Christians. Unfortunately, many are not.

Re: Why was Easter not a Google Doodle? Thank you everyone for your feedback. We enjoy celebrating holidays at Google but, as you may imagine, it can be difficult for us to choose which events to highlight on our site each year. Sometimes for a given date we feature a historical event or influential figure that we haven't yet highlighted in the past.

 Feel free to send a message to the Google Team that is responsible for creating the Doodles by emailing prop...@google.com. Thank you!|||

