Every hot profession has dozens of myths around it. Mobile design is no different. This story may be useful for those who plan to dive deeper into mobile practices and go into mobile aspect of design.

Today I want to unveil the most common myths about mobile interfaces and designers to show its’ true colors.

It’s common for those who have just came into profession to see mobile design as infinite field of creativity and inspiration. Designers, especially those who came into mobile from printing industry, think about new profession as a place to satisfy their artistic juices. Well, partly, the creative aspect of mobile design is just a myth.

First thing that such designers need to take into account is logical thinking. Designer needs to group the screens logically and find the right connections for various data. He also needs to think deeply and develop an informational hierarchy with all data classified within its’ frame.

Interface designer is also a designer of interactions

Mobile designer needs to find the right tools and mechanisms for every user to interact with the app features. He needs to think about every process that leads towards reaching users’ goals.

Moreover, mobile designer needs to create affordances which are signals notifying that object is appropriate for implementation of certain actions.

There are quite a few ways to get a new user to understand what actions they can perform. For example, you can follow conventional usage. Users will follow what is expected. If you have an arrow pointing left you expect to go left. If you have a scroll bar you expect to scroll using it, not tap it to go somewhere.

Designer can also use coherent conceptual model where a person learns part of the interface and then the same principles can be applied to the other parts.

Only afterwards the interface designer is a visual designer

Only on this stage we come to the creative aspect of interface design. When creating the visual part of mobile application, designer can input the certain emotions and feelings into it. Designer needs to create everything according to store’ guidelines, but on this stage he can definitely manage the aesthetics of user interface.

Of course, we spoke about ideal version of interface designer. In real life such designer can also be an usability researcher, motion designer, illustrator, content manager, psychologist, stunt man… Be ready to play the whole orchestra.

To unveil the truth behind the myth, interface designer is someone who needs to combine completely different aspects and functions, like analytical mind, knowledge of systems and patterns. He also needs to have an objective perception and great visual taste.

We often hear that designers need to create interfaces only according to the guidelines of Apple or Google, depending on platform you’re making an app for. In real life we can face Android app that looks like iOS one and vise versa.

Let’s look at some recent examples. Every year Apple presents its’ own rating of the Best Apple Apps. In 2016 there were dozens of apps there that looked exactly like Android ones with buttons and tabs common for Google. Still, these apps were actually made for iOS and nobody cared for guidelines.

Same thing can be seen at Material Design Awards 2016. The Airbnb app for iOS and Android are similar and have controls from both platforms mixed.

The situation with guidelines is clear: if you’re just starting your mobile design career — it’s better to look at the guidelines. Otherwise, it’s not a bible, it’s just a set of recommendations. Plus, if your app budget and time are limited, then it’s better to proceed with designing according to guidelines to develop everything on time.

We can talk about average user of an app for the whole day, but how designer sees such average user? Well, in our team we imagined such mythical portrait:

This image is far away from an ideal customer, isn’t it? Still, this is a myth that is really close to reality. For example, not so long ago we developed an app for iGooods food delivery service. We created a colorful intro in corporate colors with dozens of interactive animations to support the intro of the app and its’ main features descriptions.

Was this intro implemented in real app? No, because its’ visual attraction is not enough for a user to believe the service. Instead of beautiful animations client put some photos describing the process of delivery and showing the actual people who are in charge of it. So, designer needs to take into account that users are suspicious and won’t trust a beautiful picture.

To avoid such conflict and create a great design from first attempt, you need to know your user. In order to do this, you need to know the goals of the app, its’ target audience and always test your ideas before making them final. Working with users’ feedback makes the process even easier.

By the way, fat fingers’ fear is a 100% myth!

MIT Touch Lab research found out that average width of the index finger of adult person is 1,6–2 cm. This equals 44–57 pt and is optimal to press the buttons in any app.

So, the user isn’t so distant, he’s almost like us, but not in everything.

and all together we are mythical and horrifying

No matter what you may think, designer isn’t a user.

Kathy Sierra, programming instructor and games developer once said:

‘It does not matter how awesome your product is or your presentation or your post. Your awesome thing matters ONLY to the extent that it serves the user’s ability to be a little more awesome’.

Designer isn’t a user when he wants to create an awesome product, but he may become closer to him when he starts helping user to reach his goals with some outstanding features.

First of all, every client knows more about his niche than an average user. Client gathers some data, has some experience working with such services and products, etc. User may be the one who approaches problem for the first time. So, when client speaks from the height of his experience, he often forgets that his users are not so knowledgeable.

Users and their experience need to form the principles of project design. While client thinks about profits, users try to solve their problems. First things designers need to do is to help users to reach their goals.

So, what are the similarities between user, designer and client? In the end the only thing similar is that we all want to solve our problems and please our mom.

There is a statement saying that organic interface needs to be close to zero and has minimum clicks for user to reach his goals. It may be the cause when your mobile app is supposed to be a light version of your website, but in other cases this statement is false.

So, remember, mobile application is not just a light version of the site. Moreover, it can be as complex as its’ web version.

Content is a necessary part of project design stage. Without it designer can create visually beautiful image in the beginning, but the image will transform into something else when product comes to store. Long texts can change the visual completely.

Content is a basic core of application structure that helps to create user scenarios. It also forms emotions and impressions.

That is why designers are content managers and text creators sometimes. If there is no text, it’s time to create content ourselves! Of course, designer also needs to remember to correspond to the unified image of the brand.

Still, if you client gives you no content, it’s a great place to close all your creative gestalts.

There is a common myth that one design needs to correspond for all of these entities mentioned above, but it’s not always true. Trademarks, sites and apps are just different tools of the brand. While creating a design for one of them it’s necessary to remember that:

Mobile app can take several things from branding and web and it will be enough:

In the end, every mobile designer needs to know that every tool has its’ own laws and you don’t need to mix it.

As I mentioned before, visual isn’t a main part of project design. Structure is everything. If you forget about it and dive into visuality instead you can create overloaded design and get bad first impressions from your audience.

Don’t reinvent the wheel, every app needs to have a clear goal firsthand. Only later, based on this goal designer can connect app’ architecture with visual design aspects.

Also I want to remind you to be original. Individual approach makes you safe from copying the mistakes of others and then adding your own on top.

Don’t rely on beauty only, always keep balance.

For more examples and brief summary of the story you can see our presentation on the subject. If you liked the article, please give us a heart.|||

Every hot profession has dozens of myths around it. Mobile design is no different. This story may be useful for those who plan to dive deeper into mobile practices and go into mobile aspect of design…