I’m sure you’ve all heard of that one overly destructive oil called, Palm Oil.

The one that’s sourced from the fruit of an Oil Palm. The one that is responsible for the death of over 50,000 Orangutans and 90% of their habitat. The one that impacts the lives of many children in remote locations due to child labour and human rights violations. The one that significantly contributes to climate change and the demise of our most endangered animals across Asia.

If you haven’t heard about this so called ‘ingredient’, I really do encourage you to learn more about it. It’s an extremely damaging and entirely unnecessary oil (if you ask me) that is used in nearly every category of product we use in our homes. So much so, that 60-million tonnes of it are exported out of South East Asia every single year.

It’s become something that producers simply can’t live without; even when it’s the backbone of the most environmentally destructive industries on the planet, that is completely put aside.

Unfortunately, it’s become seemingly difficult to find things that are free of Palm Oil, and just to make it even more difficult for the people that actually want to do some good, there are also over 200 different names that could potentially mask this pesky little oil:

Ingredients: Acetic and fatty acid esters of glycerol (472a/E472a), Aluminium stearate, Aluminium, calcium, sodium, magnesium salts of fatty acids (470/E470a; E470b), Ammonium laureth sulphate, Ammonium lauryl sulphate, Arachamide mea, Ascorbyl palmitate, Ascorbyl palmitate (304), Azelaic acid, Butyl stearate, Calcium lactylate, Calcium oleyl lactylate, Calcium stearate, Calcium stearoyl lactylate (482/E482), Capric triglyceride, Caprylic acid, Caprylic triglyceride, Caprylic/capric triglyceride, Caprylic/capric/stearic triglyceride, Capryloyl glycine, Caprylyl glycol, Ceteareth (2-100), Cetearyl alcohol, Cetearyl ethylhexanote, Cetearyl glucoside, Cetearyl isononanoate, Ceteth-20, Ceteth-24, Cetyl acetate, Cetyl alcohol, Cetyl ethylhexanoate, Cetyl hydroxyethylcellulose, Cetyl lactate, Cetyl octanoate, Cetyl palmitate, Cetyl ricinoleate, Citric and fatty acid esters of glycerol (472c/E472c), Cocoa butter equivalent (CBE), Cocoa butter substitute (CBS), Decyl oleate, Diacetyltartaric and fatty acid esters of glycerol (472e/E472e), Dilinoleic acid, Disodium laureth sulfosuccinate, Disodium lauryl sulfosuccinate, Distilled Monoglyceride Palm, Elaeis guineensis oil (most commonly recognised in cosmetics), Emulsifier 422, 430-36, 470-8, 481-483, 493-5, Epoxidized palm oil (uv cured coatings), Etyl Palmitate, Ethyl lauroyl arginate (243), Ethylene glycol monostearate, Ethylhexyl hydroxystearate, Ethylhexyl palmitate, Ethylhexyl stearate, Ethylhexylglycerin, Fatty alcohol sulphates, Glycerin, Glycerin or glycerol (442), Glyceryl distearate, Glyceryl laurate, Glyceryl monostearate, Glyceryl myristate, Glyceryl oleate, Glyceryl polymethacrylate, Glyceryl stearate, Glyceryl stearate SE, Glycol distearate, Glycol stearate, Guineesis (palm), Hexadecylic, Hexyl laurate, Hexyldecanol, Hydrogenated palm glycerides, Isopropyl isostearate, Isopropyl palmitate, Isopropyl titanium triisostearate, Isostearamide DEA, Isostearate DEA, Isostearic acid, Isostearyl alcohol, Lactic and fatty acid easters of glycerol (472b/E472b), Lauramide DEA, Lauramide MEA, Lauramine oxide, Laureth, Lauric acid Lauroyl sarcosine, Lauryl betaine, Lauryl lactate, Lauryl glucoside (from palm), Lauryl pyrrolidone, Linoleic acid, Magnesium myristate, Magnesium stearate, Mixed tartaric, acetic and fatty acid esters of glycerol (472f/E472f), Mono-and- di-glycerides of fatty acids (471/E471), Myristate, Myristic acid, Myristic Cetrimonium Chloride Acid, Myristoyl, Myristyl alcohol, Myristyl myristate, Octyl palmitate, Octyl stearate, Octyldodecyl myristate, Octyldodecyl stearoyl stearate, Oleamide MIPA, Oleic acid, Oleyl betaine, Palm Glycerides, Palm fruit oil, Palm Kernel, Palm kernel oil, Palm oil, Palm olein, Palm stearine, Palmate, Palmitate, Palmitic acid, Palmitamidopropyltrimonium chloride, Palmityl Alcohol, Palmolein, Palmitoyl myristyl serinate, Palmitoyl oxostearamide, Palmitoyl oligopeptide, Palmitoyl tetrapeptide-3, PEG-100 stearate, Sodium Lauryl Lactylate/Sulphate, VEGETABLE OIL, Vegetable Fat

Scary right? I hope this has put things into perspective for you. This oil seriously is everywhere, and sadly, many companies are going to extreme measures to ensure we don’t know about the ingredients used in the products we purchase. It makes me really worried about what I’m essentially buying into without any knowledge, and I think you should be too.

In the above list, I’ve highlighted the alternative names for Palm Oil that you’ll most commonly see on the shelf. Basically, anything with the word ‘palm’ in it, is Palm Oil – no doubt about it. Although the one you really need to worry about.. is “Vegetable Oil”.

Many companies have the ability to openly mask their ingredients under this title with very little transparency. Essentially, Vegetable Oil could be a mix of a few different oil’s, but sadly, the most common concoction on the market is made with Palm.

If you’re really unsure of you’re purchasing (which is likely the case when buying an unknown ‘Vegetable oil’), a great tip I found is if the Saturated Fat content is more than 50% in a product, it is bound to be Palm Oil.

They really have made it incredibly difficult for consumers to make an ethical decision. But thankfully, avoiding it is undeniably possible if we keep an open mind.

If completely boycotting isn’t for you… There is another option.

Certified Sustainable Palm Oil is operated by RSPO. The Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil thoroughly believes in the ethical production of Palm Oil for global use products. They mark products from brands/companies that stick to strict criteria, with an eye-catching symbol that makes it clear for consumers. They bid to reduce the negative impact on the environment from deforestation and destructive plantations that brands purchase their oil from.

What RSPO thoroughly believe, is that Palm Oil is beneficial in many circumstances when used in a sustainable manner. They figure that switching to other vegetable oils for the same purpose (such as Sunflower Oil) will have greater negative implications on the planet – This is due to these particular Oil Palms producing 4-10 times more oil than other crops per unit of cultivated land.

To be stamped with the RSPO Trademark, no primary forests or areas that contain significant concentrations of endangered species or fragile ecosystems can be cleared. Fair treatment of workers according to local and international labour rights standards are to be in place at the selected plantations, and a consultation with the local community is to take place before the development of new plantations.

For those who are open to the idea of purchasing Sustainable Palm Oil, look for this symbol…

 Now’s where we found out what products we’ve all been purchasing that contain Palm Oil. Please, be warned; It’s another big list.

I wish I could tell you this list has covered everything.. but sadly I would be lying. Unfortunately, this environmentally destructive ingredient has swallowed up our world by whole – From the things we wash our hair with, to the things we use to clean our homes. Palm Oil has basically found its way into everything that consumers of the human race love and need to buy (smart thinking on their behalf I guess).

To help you reduce your impact, I’ve constructed a list of products you need to remove from your trolley and those that you can buy as a replacement.

It’s important to remember that small things lead to big changes. If we all do nothing, nothing will ever change.

Before you begin reading this… Please remember that this list is only a very minor selection of what’s really on the market. It’s basically just to show you that there are many other alternatives to those that are damaging to our planet.

Contain Palm Oil – Pizza Hut, Starbucks, Fish n Chips (some outlets), Donut King, Taco Bell/Taco Bills, Thai (some restaurants), Chinese (some restaurants), Indian

Palm Oil Free – KFC Australia (aside from some deserts), Hungry Jacks

Contain Palm Oil – Kellogs (Sultana Bran, Just Right, Nutri-Grain, Special K, Corn Flakes and Fruit Loops) Cheerios, Be Natural (Selected)

Palm Oil Free – Milo Cereal, Nesquik Cereal, Coco Pops, Crunchy Nut, Uncle Tobys (except below), Sanitarium, Carman’s, Be Natural (selected)

Contain Sustainable Palm Oil/No Deforestation Policy – Uncle Toby’s (plus antioxidants, iron, plus protein)

Palm Oil Free – Nature Valley Crunchy Granola, Certain Uncle Toby’s, Coles Mixed Fruit, Sunbeam Sultanas, Sunsweet Dried Mango, Fruit for Life, Up and Go

Contain Sustainable Palm Oil/No Deforestation Policy –  Arnotts ( all except above) Weightwatchers, Peckish, Shapes

Contain Palm Oil –  Milky Way Bars, Darrel Lee, Favourites, Picnic, Time Out, Cadbury with soft filling, Quality Street

Palm Oil Free – Milo, Bounty, Crunchy, Flake, Lindt (blocks only – Lindor balls contain Palm Oil), Toblerone, Whittakers, Loving Earth, Twirl, Cadbury (ONLY plain chocolate), Pana Chocolate, Guylain

Contain Sustainable Palm Oil/No Deforestation Policy – Lush, Max Factor, Inika, Natio, The Body Shop, Urban Decay, Australis, L’Oreal, Maybelline, Nude By Nature, Nars, Thin Lizzy

Palm Oil Free – LUSH, Beauty and the Bees, INDAH, Plunkett Sorbelene, Simple Refreshing Face Wash, Trilogy (Large Selection), People for Plants, Schick, Sally Hansen

Contain Sustainable Palm Oil/No Deforestation Policy –  Neutrogena, Aveeno, Natio, The Body Shop, St. Tropez, Sanctuary SPA, Model Co, Sukin

Contain Palm Oil – Nan Baby Formula, Karicare Baby Formula (Selected), A2, Blackmores, Johnsons (except below)

Palm Oil Free – Heinz (Nurture Gold Starter, Starter, Gold Follow-on, Follow-on formulas), Gaia Baby Wipes, Bepanthen, Heinz Organic food, Ungvita, Johnsons (below), Natures One Baby’s Only

Contain Sustainable Palm Oil/No Deforestation Policy – Thankyou, Johnsons Baby Shampoo ONLY, Mum & Me, Cussons Baby

Contain Palm Oil – Centrum, Blackmores (selected), Swisse (selected) Natures Way (Selected) Natures Own (Selected)

So as you can probably tell, Palm Oil is in everything. It would be merely impossible for me to write down every single product on the market that contains Palm Oil, likewise to those that are free of it – I would be here for at least another year.

Luckily for my Australian viewers, there is a handy new app that allows you to see the Palm Oil rating of the products you’re buying. The POI App gives you an indication of your scanned items Palm Oil traceability; whether it is sustainable, environmentally damaging, or entirely Palm Oil free. It can still a little scratchy at times, but the concept is definitely something that’s worth trying!

The world can be such a nasty place at times. Meaning that trying to find brands that are cruelty-free, palm oil free AND good for your health is a whole new level of difficulty. If being completely free of damage is not possible at times, the most important thing is that we as a society, try our hardest to be as ethical as entirely possible. Even if that means only switching up a few small things in our everyday lives, the impact will be much greater than what is commonly thought.

Taking the easy option may undoubtedly be less hassle and less time consuming, but the ramifications could be much more severe than a few minutes of wasted time.

Now more than ever, consumers need to be more aware of where their money is going. Taking note of the brands that are placed in our baskets, in our shopping trolleys and in our mouths, is so important; it’s definitely time to start reading the labels and making educated, conscious and ethical decisions.

Our wildlife, our environment and our planet are at stake.

PS. Making this list was incredibly difficult. A lot of companies lay low on their Palm Oil stance. If I happened to get something incorrect, please let me know so I can adjust accordingly. This kind of information is very hard to find!

PPS. If you have anything else you think I should add to the list, please let me know ☺︎|||

Palm Oil is the most environmentally damaging ingredients on the market today. Here's a list of Palm Oil Free alternatives for everyday life.