And even more.

Yet another lump of letters!

An auditory skeuomorph you've heard many times, without even knowing it.

Have we all been killed by 3D-printed guns yet? I haven't been paying attention.

Not one column, not two columns, but three!

Neil Young's "Pono" thing, encryption with random... ish... numbers, and my reply to the surprising amount of hate mail I got about the Pono column!

On the h4xx0ring of p4sswordZ.

It's a mouse that costs almost nothing.

If it looks random, it probably isn't.

Over at the blog, I just wrote a surprising number of words about a thing that makes tea.

And even MORE letters!

And now for something completely different.

Welcome to my (imaginary) museum!

What does playing video games do to your mind?

When you have eliminated the impossible...

The death of the manual.

In Praise of the Fisheye.

Have you wasted enough time today?

Anybody reading this page who doesn't already have more than enough Photon LED lights may be very, very slightly interested to learn that, this week only, everything in the Photon store is 15% off, if you use the coupon code "SPRING15OFF".

I have avoided pestering readers of this page with announcements of the last couple of Photon-light sales. This one's quite nice, though.

For the duration of the US Fourth of July weekend, they've taken 15% off everything in the store, including a bunch of oddments that you might not expect people famous for high-quality key-ring flashlights. They sell excellent-quality Maha NiMH batteries and chargers, some Leatherman tools and, as they say, more.

Use the coupon code "FIREWORKS" at checkout to get your discount. And, as usual, I get a cut if you click my link to the site and then buy something.

500 gig per second, if we don't get a flat.

Herewith, a product of considerable interest to Australians and virtually none to everyone else:

The Noontec V9-T, a neat little networked dual-tuner PVR and media player of exactly the sort that big media companies want to sue you for owning.

How hot is too hot for a hard drive?

You know what's wrong with episodic games?

Measuring the performance of storage devices is easy.

Forgot to annoy you all with announcement of another Photon-light sale.

15% off everything in the store, I get a cut if you buy things, I'll shut up now.

A new Ask Dan, all about drives.

The US dollar's in pretty lousy shape at the moment, so this could be a good time for people outside the USA to buy some stuff from the Photon factory outlet.

The current "October Pre-Holiday Sale" takes 15% off all Photon lights, Maha batteries and chargers, and Leatherman multi-tools, which they now also sell for some reason.

The 15% discount also applies to their expensive but good variable-brightness "Photon Pro" one-AA-cell light, which has been upgraded with a significantly brighter high-power white LED, in addition to its little red LED for when you don't want to lose your night vision.

And, as usual, I get a cut of the action if you click here and buy something!15 September 2009

In which I figure out why it's possible to get adapters that plug ExpressCards into CardBus PCMCIA slots.

A couple of aspects of modern computing, and modern transport, that'll seem completely bizarre to people in the future.

I haven't begged for money for more than nine months...

...so I thought I'd have a really big beg this time.

Anybody wanna help me buy a new PC?

Next stop, clay tablets: It's possible to back up computer data onto ordinary paper. And it's less silly than it sounds!

I just wrote a blog post about a couple of Australian "economic stimulus" programs which Aussie readers might find interesting.

Which kind of sci-fi super-battery should you ask the aliens for?

Would you like to live forever?

Ask Dan: A PC for the parents?

In the unlikely case that you have not yet bought quite enough Photon lights, they've got another sale running now. The list prices for various of their products have been reduced a bit now, and there's a "March Madness" sale running on top of that, until the end of the month

As usual, I get a cut of the action if you click here and buy something.

A "200Hz screen" can be any one of at least three different things.

We're all prisoners of game theory.

Are you going to believe me, or your lying eyes?

I'm back from my holiday, and yesterday wrote what almost amounts to another flashlight review on my blog.|||

