If You See One Of These Coat Hooks In A Public Toilet, Get Out

If you see one of these ‘coat hooks’ in a public toilet, get the hell out of there.

These aren’t no ordinary coat hooks, no, they’re something far more sinister.

According to police reports, these are fakes installed with tiny cameras.

These ‘spy’ hooks were first reported by officials in Florida were they been attached to women’s public toilets, including one at the beach.

The camera on this object – which are available in the UK – can be seen through a small hole at the top of the plastic.

The owner of the hook can then access and download anything they have picked up to their computer.

A Florida Keys sheriff said at the time: “Anyone who has a public restroom on their property needs to check them closely.”

“If you find anything suspicious you think might contain a hidden camera, don’t touch it. Call us right away and we will respond.

“Keep in mind, though, that these are very small cameras that can be mounted in many locations and hidden in many seemingly every-day items.”

In a Facebook statement, they said: “All of the devices found so far look like simple white coat hooks with the camera mounted behind it and utilizing a very small hole in the top portion of the coat hook for the lens of the camera. They use motion detection cameras inside to take video.”

Florida police even assigned detectives to look into the objects.

Facebook user Mike wrote: “How much of a LOSER do you have to be to get off seeing videos of people in a bathroom, changing room or up a woman’s dress? I mean, really, what kind of lowlife, pathetic LOSER do you have to be? Makes peeping toms appear normal.”

Another person wrote: “There is no way anyone would like to share anything about me on the bog or getting changed… unless they want to lose weight by throwing up!”

So yeah, this might still be just an American thing, but keep a look out here in the UK. Not just toilets but dressing rooms, too.|||

If You See One Of These Coat Hooks In A Public Toilet, Get Out