Bitcoin.org is the first site that many people see when they search for more info about Bitcoin. It’s an independent open source project that resides on GitHub, with contributors from all walks of life, all around the world.

Google Analytics helps us determine which pages to focus on improving based on what parts of the site are receiving the most traffic. It also helps determine how translations should be prioritized because it makes it possible to see which non English speakers are coming to the website the most. This data yields many other helpful insights that can be used to improve overall user experience for visitors, as well.

In an effort to be open and transparent, here are our website traffic metrics, shared with the community. This is shared under the goal that it may be helpful to people who are out there building, to others who are thinking about it, and lastly, to the hodlers, advocates and ambassadors for what we all believe in.

This first report is for the first quarter of 2017, (January 1 — March 31), however, it is my goal to provide this each month going forward. Also, to support those who would like to dive deeper into any of the data points mentioned during the current period, or historically. For any of these types of requests you can reach me by email or contact me on Twitter — I’m happy to try my best to help.

So with that said, cheers to Bitcoin.

May we do our best to work together to build something greater.

In the first three months of 2017, 3.6 million people visited Bitcoin.org, 4.4 million times. This accumulated approximately 9.7 million pageviews. 81% of the traffic that Bitcoin.org receives is new traffic, with ~19% being returning visitors.

Some current areas of focus in the above metrics are:

The above graphic is the aggregated number of visits in Q1, tallied alongside the language visitors had configured on their devices. The language abbreviations are ISO standard specifications. A search engine can quickly tell you what each language abbreviation represents. This graphic correlates closely with where visitors are from, which is up next.

An interesting data point in the above graphic, is that only 25% of the 4.4 million visits came from the United States. Also, just to summarize, here are the top 10 countries along with the number of visits to Bitcoin.org during the last quarter:

Aside from the top 10, as we scroll through the graphic, it’s clear that people are coming from all over the world. This is awesome, because Bitcoin isn’t just for one country, it’s for all of them.

Above are the most frequently used browsers that have come to Bitcoin.org in the last quarter. Within the top 10 are Coc Coc (a browser targeted at the Vietnamese market), YaBrowser (maintained by Yandex, a large Russian tech company) and UC Browser (owned by Alibaba in China).

Above we can see that 62% of the 4.4 million visits over Q1 came from operating systems powered by Windows. Also, both Android and iOS visits (mobile/tablet) outnumber visits from a Mac or Linux device.

72.5% of the visits to Bitcoin.org in Q1 were on a desktop/laptop, compared to 24.8% that came via mobile. Only 2.7% of the visits were from tablets.

Above we can see many of the top pages on Bitcoin.org during the last quarter. It’s important to highlight again, as noted in other sections, that there are a significant number of pages that are visited by people whose primary language isn’t English. For example:

That said, some of the most popular English pages on the site besides the home page were:

The exchanges page is a recent addition that helps new users find places where they can buy bitcoin.

Lastly, we look at the types of channels that drove the most visitors to Bitcoin.org last quarter. Most notable is organic search, which drew just over 50% of the visitors. A third of the traffic came directly from visitors who bookmarked one or more pages, typed bitcoin.org directly into their browser, or visited the site from a link that was embedded within an app.

If you have any questions or comments regarding what has been mentioned above, please feel free to send me an email or contact me on Twitter.

Bitcoin.org was originally used by Satoshi Nakamoto to host his Bitcoin paper. Soon after, it began linking to downloadable versions of the original Bitcoin software, making it the homepage for the Bitcoin program. New educational content about Bitcoin was added to Bitcoin.org over time, but that home page remained even when the name of the original program was changed to Bitcoin Core.

In the years since, the amount of content on Bitcoin.org has continued to increase. There’s more content about Bitcoin Core than ever before and also an expansive amount of content about other Bitcoin software, products and resources.

Learn how you can participate.|||

Bitcoin.org is the first site that many people see when they search for more info about Bitcoin. It’s an independent open source project that resides on GitHub, with contributors from all walks of…