I’m going to start my first blog post out with a small prediction of the future.

You might have heard about Information Literacy:

Definitions of information literacy can be many, but this one resonates very well with my perception. With the evolution of the internet, and the explosive amount of information out there, from both reliable and unreliable sources, information literacy quickly became a necessary skill both in our private as well as professional life so we could sort and filter the unreliable from the reliable sources.

Now, with the escalating amount of data, the equivalent term, Data Literacy has become relevant. In order to understand what data literacy is, let’s try to replace information with data:

Reasons why this is becoming increasingly important, is not only because these skills will be for use in a professional setting, but also because data analytics will become a thing in our everyday life. In the most recent version of Gartner’s Hype Cycle, more or less every single item on the Hype Cycle are technologies leveraging data. As more and more are being digitalised (who said IOT?), data and analytics will become more accessible for everyone so we can start to make better decisions. In one of my upcoming blog posts, I will be further looking at some of the elements from the Hype Cycle, like for instance personal analytics and self-service analytics. This new era of data and analytics will require people to gain an understanding the flow of data and start asking questions like:

To me, it’s pretty evident that most people will have to develop greater data literacy skills, as data will become more and more accessible. Like with digital and IT, which was something that was limited to a single department of a company a few years ago, data and analytics will also soon become something that every single employee will have to embrace and learn how to manage.

The need for information literacy, was a need to be able to filter and sort information because of the increasing level of noise and unreliable sources of information. Likewise, with data I believe we will see a growing need for gaining the ability to better find data that holds the answers to our questions and then actually derive the insights from it in a statistically significant way.

At this point you might think: This is already happening? People are already using data to base their decisions on? And that is right. However, while the average employee don’t have complete access to all data, has no idea what P-values are and what powerful visualisations you can create with tools like Tableau.

What happens right now is that schools like General Assembly and online services like Udemy or Coursera are developing and educating a new workforce of data scientists in an attempt to accommodate the growing demand for people with strong data literacy. This happens at a very fast pace as businesses have suddenly got an urgent need for people who understands data and know how to convert data into insights.

My prediction is that the many of the skills that data scientists possess will become just as common as knowledge of Microsoft Office is today (which is also why I have just completed my Udemy course on data science ;) )

So if you are hiring for the company you work at, why not start looking for people possessing this kind of skill set? Or why not taking it even further? Why not try to identify the people who are already in your organisation, and offer them the chance to upgrading their data qualifications? I think it’s evident to most people that data has become an essential part of how we make decisions, but it doesn’t stop here. The amount of data will continue to escalate, demanding more people and better tools that can actually process it. So no matter what size of organisation you are, now is the time to take action on it an ensure you have the right people possessing the right data capabilities.

I would love to from you if you are actively working with and assessing your organisations data literacy. Just shoot an email at bomannmertz@gmail.com.|||

Definitions of information literacy can be many, but this one resonates very well with my perception. With the evolution of the internet, and the explosive amount of information out there, from both…