Nintendo made headlines this week when NPD figures revealed that the Switch was both the fastest-selling piece of Nintendo hardware ever in the US, but also the fastest-selling console period, besides 2013’s PS4 debut during the holiday season.

It’s enough to put to bed the idea that “well, the Wii U sold out at first too,” as Nintendo managed to have both ultra-high supply and demand for the system to reach this mark. Granted, it’s anyone’s guess if the Switch will be able to maintain this kind of momentum in the next few months and years, but Nintendo couldn’t have asked for a stronger start.

But when you dig into the numbers, one rather strange aspect of this news emerges. The Nintendo Switch sold 906,000 units in March. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild sold 925,000 units.

I thought the answer was obvious, that those Breath of the Wild figures include Wii U totals. They don’t. That’s 925,000 Switch copies of Zelda, while 460,000 copies were sold for Wii U.

So, Zelda: Breath of the Wild has a 102% attach rate on the Switch.

While Zelda is obviously a must-have game for the Switch, the idea that it sold more copies than the system itself is hard to process. And compare this to say, the Wii U, which launched and boasted about a 60% attach rate for New Super Mario Bros. U. While I expected Breath of the Wild to have a high attach rate given its storied history and stellar reviews, this is frankly unprecedented, from what I can tell.

So how does a game outsell the console its made for?

Nintendo has a few ideas, according to The Verge. They believe that some ultra-fans may have bought both the regular version of the game and the collector’s edition, and there are enough Zelda die-hards out there where I can definitely believe that happened.

Also, it’s entirely possible that because of the Switch being sold out in so many locations, many consumers simply bought Zelda with the idea that they would get a Switch eventually, so they might as well pick up a copy of the must-have game for it while it was in front of them.

This sounds almost ridiculous, but it speaks to both the core appeal of the Switch, that consumers are so confident they’re going to want one as soon as its back in stock that they’re willing to pre-purchase games, and the appeal of Zelda itself, which has been reviewed as one of the best video games ever, a statement that I will not dispute after 100+ hours with the game.

Still, this is pretty nuts. There’s a general rule that with a game like say, GTA V, you pick up a copy whenever you get a PS4 or what have you, but even though that pairing has a high attach rate, it’s not close to 102%, which I simply have never heard of before. Mario Kart 8 was praised as having a fantastic lifetime attach rate of 50% on the Wii U, and even if Zelda doesn’t stay this high forever, I have to believe it will crush that.

It’s been a great week for Nintendo, outside of the whole “we killed the NES Classic and no one knows why” story, but the Switch and Zelda are setting records left and right, and hopefully this strength continues long into the life cycle of the console.

Follow me on Twitter and on Facebook. Pick up my sci-fi series, The Earthborn Trilogy, which is now in print, online and on audiobook.|||

When you dig into recent Nintendo Switch sales numbers, one rather strange aspect emerges. The Nintendo Switch sold 906,000 units in March. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild sold 925,000 units for the Switch.