“We installed the plugin, set up 2 upsells for 2 different products and it was amazing to see the sales increase. We had about 25% of our customers taking upsells! This helped boost our monthly revenue substantially. Just having the ability to put beautiful, functional one time offers in front of a customer that just purchased is priceless"

Jasper is the founder and managing partner of the Conversion Wizards. He is an expert at Conversion Rate Optimiztion. Recent clients of his include Microsoft Office 365, Survata (a YCombinator company) and Protalus (the fastest growing online footwear retailer in the US). In past lives he was a Program Manager and Software Design Engineer at Microsoft. He attained is BS Degree in Computer Science and Economics at Yale University.

Bogdan has over 8 years of experience in 'full stack' software development and is an expert at PHP, WooCommerce and WordPress. He is the principal developer of the WooCurve plugin for 1-Click Upsells. Bogdan  studied Physics at the National University of Technology Research in Kazakhstan.

as many one-time offers to your cusomers as you want. Offer 1-Click-Upsells OR down-sells based on the product or category of products they are buying. Example: If you sell guitars offer a pack of guitar strings for a special, one time, price. Your customers NEVER have to re-enter their credit card information.  It's as simple as "Yes" or "No".

With 1-Click Upsells you have full control over your marketing funnel. Direct your customer to any page on your site after purchase. This is product specific. If someone buys Product A and takes Upsell B, you can show a unique "Thank You" page just for them. Your options are endless.

This is huge! With 1-Click-Upsells you can send your customers to an upsell or downsell page that uses a video sales letter instead of text. So if your upsell text page does not convert, maybe your downsell video will.

Our WooCurve plugin works with EVERY major payment processor. Your business won't have to slow down.  You can set up your first funnel in no time and you don't have to worry about complicated programming. We've made it SUPER EASY for any kind of WooCommerce business to hit the ground .

In addition to our WooCommerce work, we are also experts at Landing Page Optimization.  We have partnered with industry leader MECLABS to bring you the best in class landing page optimization service. We typically help our clients grow online sales by 20% to 30% (or more) in 12 weeks. If your goal is more leads or app downloads, we can also help. By increasing your conversion rate, you get more leads/app downloads at a lower cost.

I f you have, they likely asked “would you like fries with that?” or “Would you like to make it a ‘value meal’ by adding fries and a drink?” The fries and value meals are known as ‘upsells’ and contribute about 70% of McDonalds profits! Think about it: Protein (the burger) is expensive but carbs (fries) and sugar water (soda) are cheap, yet are priced about the same as the burger.  The burger is the ‘front-end offer’ used to get you in the door but more profit is made on the upsells.

Today, McDonalds is valued at $106 billion, in part, due to this strategy. They understand one crucial fact: The best time to sell a customer something is immediately after the initial purchase. An upsell is the easiest and most profitable sale you will ever make! McDonalds is now a mega-successful corporation but it wasn’t always so. If you’ve seen the Ray Kroc movie (The Founder), you know that he struggled mightily in the early days, nearly going out of business several times and almost losing his house.  He lost his wife but he found another (Joan Kroc) who was more supportive of his business!

We will provide the software extension (plugin) for free and do all the work (offer selecion, landing page design, copywriting and A/B testing) for no money down. In exchange, we would get either: a) Revenue share: a small percentage of the additional sales we generate b) A flat fee that we negotiate in advance. You decide between a) or b). In both cases, our fees will be paid from the 1-click-upsell revenue. This way, it is truly risk free for you . This option is best for those who either don’t have the time or the expertise. To get started, simply click the button below to schedule a free consultation:

WooCommerce does not come with the '1-Click Upsell'  feature  and so you must use an ‘after market’ software extension (plugin). But if you’ve tried existing plugins, you know how difficult they are to use— they often require a ton of workarounds and rarely work with all payment methods. Chances are, they are also not truly ‘1-Click Upsell’ i.e. works seamlessly and does NOT require the customer to re-enter credit card information or add the item to the shopping cart before the first sale. You will be pleased to know that we recently released a plugin called WooCurve that is the only, truly 1-click-upsell plugin (we are aware of) that works with ALL payment methods and gateways. It is robust and so easy to use that even non-technical people can implement it in less than a day (on most Woocommerce stores).  Over 180 WooCommerce stores have used it successfully! See details and testimonials below.

Along with the software plugin, you also need the expertise to design high converting upsell pages. This entails offer selection, landing page design and copywriting.  . And to maximize upsell revenue, you likely need to run a series of A/B tests, like we did in Again, you will be delighted to know that our team can help with all of this for no money down (see details below). If you don’t have appropriate upsell products, we can negotiate partnerships with vendors who sell complimentary products. Our expertise insures you get the most sales, while not pissing off customers! We all know sites that wring every last cent from their customers but end up destroying their reputation. You and I both know that, long term, your reputation with your customers matters more than any immediate sale.

Redmond, Washington (USA) based, Yinso manages a high quality software team in China that specializes in eCommerce projects. He was previously an associate partner at Accenture and the technical lead for the Seattle office. During his tenure at Accenture, Yinso led several successful large scale software development projects at Microsoft. He attaind a BS in Mathematics at the University of Washington. Originally from Taiwan, Yinso moved to the USA when he was 12 and speaks fluent Mandarin Chinese.|||

