Integration of Photography and 3D are essential to good web design

If you are considering having a website built and do not know which elements need to be incorporated into the design, then I would like to draw your attention to the need for photography and 3D models within your layout. In today’s world, the static webpage is not enough to grasp the attention of the average visitor, therefore aesthetic elements must be added to your design in order to increase their time upon the page and drive them to purchase or interact with the content presented there. Photography and 3D are the best means to do this. Here is why.

Photography on a website captures something that is real and presents it to the viewer. While artwork has its place within some elements of web design, photography is more connective in my opinion, as it relates directly with the individuals world in which they live. Even if the person is on the other side of the planet, he or she can look at the picture and associate with the contents therein. It is important to note that photographs must be of an HD quality in order to have the best impact upon the individual. Low quality JPGs and grainy photography will leave the viewer thinking that there is something askew to the image, and instead of drawing the viewer into the website, it will repel them.

3D gives depth to your design

As humans, we see in 3D. Because of this, sites which have 3D models and 3D characters or implement models from sites such as CGTrader tend to give the viewer more of a realistic experience (even if that experience is based in complete fantasy) than that of the static website. Consider also that the modern day website is constructed with animated features, parallax scrolling, shadowing, videos, and a great deal of other components which would be difficult to achieve without the use of 3D and layering.

Photography and 3D break up the content

In the past, websites used tables and table padding to break up the content of a page. DIV tags were used to place some of the material from the page into a limited 3D like state. However, the aesthetics of such sites were and remain to be rather primitive, causing viewers to skirt away from long views of such pages. In website trends, the one page website is dominating and so those who seek web design services, need to have an effective methodology of breaking up the content while still keeping the viewer engaged. Photography and 3D allow the designer to place content strategically throughout the page to break up the text, highlight certain features, or to redirect the viewer to SEO content.

Perhaps one of the best benefits of using Photography and 3D elements within your website design is the fact that they can be tagged, shared, and commented upon. This boosts the organic content of your site and thereby increases the SERPs of your site through the SEO. Keep in mind that you can also tag your images, your 3D content, and such material to boost your SEO and SERPs. In regards to the design of the site, a person is more apt to scroll down and through your pages if there is something worth looking at. Reading material gets taxing upon the eyes after a while and so photography and 3D elements are essential in giving the eyes a break while at the same time retaining the potential client or the viewer.

Photography and 3D elements set you apart from the crowd

There are millions of websites on the internet with more being added every day. Those which wish to be seen need to set themselves apart from the crowd. A site which appears dull and non-inviting will not see a large number of viewers, or those which visit will provide negative input, potentially harming their SERPs. Sites which do not focus on the user experience and the design elements of their site, aesthetically speaking, are apt to see their site fall to the 3 or 4th page of search engines. This is the worst place that a site can fall, as most people do not go very far beyond the top ten list when searching the web.

Creating a website involves an attention to details, aesthetics, an understanding of web site market trends, as well as the ability to code and combine elements effectively. If you find that you need assistance in developing your website or in the photography which is to be included in your website, please contact me and I will be more than happy to offer you my assistance in this area.|||

Integration of Photography and 3D are essential to good web design If you are considering having a website built and do not know which elements need to be