The Video was made with an Gopro 5 Black Edition - http://amzn.to/2nhou7H



Driving on the german Autobahn on the A3 the A66 and the A648 from from Cologne to Frankfurt.





www.bilderbotschaft.de



The Autobahn (German: Autobahn, plural Autobahnen) is the federal controlled-access highway system in Germany. The official German term is Bundesautobahn (plural Bundesautobahnen, abbreviated BAB), which translates as "federal motorway". The literal meaning of the word Bundesautobahn is "Federal Auto(mobile) Track".



German autobahns have no federally mandated speed limit for some classes of vehicles.[1] However limits are posted (and enforced) in areas that are urbanized, substandard, accident-prone, or under construction. On speed-unrestricted stretches, an advisory speed limit (Richtgeschwindigkeit) of 130 kilometres per hour (81 mph) applies. While going faster is not illegal as such in the absence of a speed limit, it can cause an increased liability in the case of an accident; courts have ruled that an "ideal driver" who is exempt from absolute liability for "inevitable" tort under the law would not exceed Richtgeschwindigkeit.



A 2008 estimate reported that 52% of the autobahn network had only the advisory speed limit, 15% had temporary speed limits due to weather or traffic conditions, and 33% had permanent speed limits.[2] Measurements from the German State of Brandenburg in 2006 showed average speeds of 142 km/h (88 mph) on a 6-lane section of autobahn in free-flowing conditions.[3]



La Autobahn es la red de autopistas sin peaje coordinado a nivel nacional en Alemania. Autobahn es una palabra compuesta del idioma alemán, cuyo significado es muy parecido a «autovía». En alemán se denominan Bundesautobahn (Bundesautobahnen plural, BAB abreviado), traducida como «autopista federal». Las Autobahnen alemanas no tienen ningún límite general de velocidad (sin embargo hay que saber que cerca del 50% de la longitud total está conforme a las limitaciones locales y/o condicionales).



德國高速公路是德國的全國高速公路系統，其德文（Autobahn，[ˈaʊtoːbaːn]）关于这个音频文件 德文發音（帮助·信息）是德文中的高速公路，被稱為Autobahn的高速公路並不僅有德國的高速公路，瑞士和奧地利的高速公路也被稱為Autobahn，但通常Autobahn專指德國高速公路，其德文正式名稱為Bundesautobahn（BAB，聯邦高速公路）。德國高速公路傳統上是沒有速度限制的，但是隨著車輛的增加，許多經過城鎮的路段都先後設立了速限。一份2008年的評論顯示，德國高速公路路網的52%無速限（有130km/h的建議速限，調查顯示德國駕駛者一般保持時速約142km/h），剩下的15%會有因天氣（北方冬季會下雪）或交通狀況而設立的暫時速限，33%有永久速限，例如市區或山路等。



アウトバーン（ドイツ語: Autobahn）は、ドイツ・オーストリア・スイスの自動車高速道路。

本項では、主にドイツのアウトバーンについて記述する。速度無制限道路として有名だが、全区域ではなく制限もある（後述）。







ドイツのアウトバーン



ドイツ







4K Ultra HD UHD.



Time-lapse Time-lapse



ドイツのアウトバーン



ドイツ



driving in germany|||

The Video was made with an Gopro 5 Black Edition - http://amzn.to/2nhou7H Driving on the german Autobahn on the A3 the A66 and the A648 from from Cologne to ...