Alphabet's Life Sciences division, called Verily, is giving the world a peek at its health-focused smartwatch. The Google sister company introduced the "Verily Study Watch" on its blog today, calling it an "investigational device" that aims to "passively capture health data" for medical studies.

Many wearables technically capture health data with simple heart-rate sensors, but Verily's watch aims to be a real medical device. The blog post says the device can track "relevant signals for studies spanning cardiovascular, movement disorders, and other areas." The Study Watch does this by using electrocardiography (ECG) and by measuring electrodermal activity and inertial movements.

Wearables show what “healthy” means for you—then tell if you’re not The ECG is the biggest addition to the watch over a normal smartwatch device. According to a report from MIT Technology Review, which has been tracking the Verily watch's progress for some time, the watch uses a two-point ECG. One contact point is the watch on the wrist, and the other point is formed when the user touches the metal bezel of the watch with their other hand.

The Study Watch beams this data to Verily's cloud infrastructure for all sorts of big-data analysis. Study Watch seems to be the Verily hardware platform of the future, with the company saying the watch will be used in several studies being run by Verily and its partners. The company specifically said the watch would be used in "Baseline Study," a Verily project that aims to measure what a healthy human looks like, and the "Personalized Parkinson's Project."

With the goal of Study Watch to be an unobtrusive way to collect medical data, battery life is a concern. Verily promises "a long battery life of up to one week" for the device. The "always-on" display seems to be e-ink, which is practically a requirement for any watch with a week-long battery life. Verily also gave the watch enough storage to keep "weeks' worth of raw data" encrypted on the device, removing the need to frequently sync with cloud servers. There also isn't much in the way of user features: Study Watch displays the time and date, and that's it for now. The watch is capable of getting over-the-air software updates, though, so the interface might change.

There's no word on price, as the Study Watch is "not for sale." It's just something that will be given out to participants in Verily's medical studies.|||

The unobtrusive smartwatch will collect a bevy of data for Verily’s medical studies.