JA Baker’s The Peregrine is 50 years old, but it feels as if it were written yesterday. In the half century since its publication, this fierce little book has only tightened its talon grip on us. It reads now as uncannily prophetic: of the Anthropocene (our geological age, in which human activity is now the dominant influence on the environment), of extinction events, of dark ecology – even of virtual reality. In ancient Rome a haruspex was a person trained in a form of divination based on inspecting the entrails of sacrificed animals. Baker’s book – strewn as it is with eviscerated birds, obsessed as it is with prediction – is a text of killing and foretelling: of seeing the future in blood and guts. It has haruspicated our present, and I suspect its prescience is not yet all used up.

The story of The Peregrine’s writing is remarkable, and has a mystery at its heart. For around a decade – from 1954 to 1964 – a myopic office worker from Essex tracked the peregrine falcons that hunted over the landscape of his county. He pursued them on bicycle and on foot, watching through binoculars as they bathed, flew, stooped and roosted. He carried Ordnance Survey maps on which he marked in ballpoint pen the locations of his sightings, with circled capital letters – P, SH, HH, BO – recording raptors by species (M is for Merlin, K is for Kestrel). He learned to predict the peregrines’ locations by means of an intelligence that began as logic and ended as instinct, and in a relationship that began as fascination and ended as obsession.

Even the savage winter of 1962–63 – when the sea froze for two miles out from the shore, and spear-length icicles hung from eaves and trees – didn’t deter Baker from his quest. After a day in the field, he would retreat to the spare room of his Chelmsford terrace house, and write up the details in journals that together run to more than 1,600 manuscript pages.

In the mid-1960s, he compressed those journals into a book fewer than 60,000 words long, and written in ecstatic, violent, enraptored prose. The journals were coal to The Peregrine’s diamond: crushed, they became the book. He collapsed 10 years into a single “season of hawk-hunting”, and “stripped” the narrative “down to the livid bone”, to borrow a phrase from one of his early poems. Instead of plot, he deployed pattern. The same actions recur across the book’s course: man pursues falcon, falcon pursues prey.

Repetitious in structure, the prose is nevertheless huge in drama – and much of this arises from the extraordinary energy Baker invests in his language. His style possesses what Charles Olson – laying out his theory of “open field poetics” in 1950 – called “percussive” and “projectile” powers. Grammatically, his prose is dense in metaphors, similes, verbs and adverbs; accentually, it is thick with stressed syllables. This combination of axe-knock emphasis and high-impact syntax results in sentences that are stunning to read.

The mystery: at some point during the writing of The Peregrine, Baker went back to his journals and destroyed nearly all the passages in which he had recorded his field-sightings of the falcons. He left no account of why he had done so, and no version of the originals. By means of this redaction, he ensured that the most astonishing sequences of the published book flew free from any tether, and could not, as it were, be read back against the real.

Birdwatchers speak of the “jizz” of a bird to mean the sum of characteristics – shape, plumage, posture, call, habitat – that allow its instant identification from a general impression. A bird’s jizz is its gist and vibe: the aggregation of its particulars into a compound signature of life. Baker’s style has its own jizz. I think I could encounter a sentence of his prose anywhere and identify it immediately as his.

Adjectives and nouns wrenched into verbs; surreal similes; flaring adverbs: these are among the specifics that make up his unique gestalt. “Five thousand dunlin … rained away inland, like a horde of beetles gleamed with golden chitin.” “The north wind brittled icily in the pleached lattice of the hedges.” A yellow-billed cock blackbird is “like a small mad puritan with a banana in his mouth”. A woodpigeon dead on a winter field “glow[s] purple and grey like broccoli”.

I’ve never taken LSD: thanks to Baker, I don’t need to. His Essex is landscape on acid: super-saturations of colour, wheeling phantasmagoria, dimensions blown out and falling away, nature as hypernature. Baker has inspired many imitators over the years, aiming to riff and rip to a comparable intensity of description. I’ve been one of them. But our style always feels brittle and synthetic in comparison with the original – mere Bakerlite.

Early in The Peregrine, he describes a dunlin being caught by a falcon that approaches it from behind at greater speed. “The dunlin,” he writes, “seemed to come slowly back to the hawk. It passed into his dark outline and did not reappear.” The image is space operatic: a small craft trapped in a larger craft’s tractor beam, and drawn relentlessly in. Baker’s book possesses a comparable traction. It locks on to its readers, and they pass involuntarily into it. By no means does everyone like it. I’ve heard it described as fascistic for its fetishisation of northerliness and predation. I know people who turn away from its misanthropy, which I think of as species shame. But no one doubts the book’s bleak bite.

Unlike much that passes for the culture of nature, The Peregrine cannot be passively consumed. It sticks in the craw, it rakes the mind. The reprimand it offers – with its rituals of killing, and the spitting self-hatred of its narrator – to sentimental representations of a capitalised “Nature” is surely one reason for its contemporary grip. Under the sign of the Anthropocene, messy entanglement has replaced cool spectatorial distance. In an age of mass extinction it has become hard to tolerate notions of nature as an external or salvific “other”, except as forms of cute or kitsch.

Baker’s sanguineous nature is very far from cute. It exists at the frayed edges of things, in a scruffy landscape of medieval woods and suburban sprawl, salt marshes and sea walls. Human experience is drastically decentred in favour of what the philosopher John Gray (another of the book’s admirers) calls the “godless mysticism” of creaturely life. The Peregrine is not “green” literature. It suggests no basis for the establishment of an environmental ethics born of commonality. “We are the killers. We stink of death,” writes Baker in the most self-lacerating passage. “We carry it with us. It sticks to us like frost. We cannot tear it away.” Yet its furious vision has given it an oddly hopeful power over many of its readers.

Over the years I have been told many stories of the effects of The Peregrine on individuals. A former student cited it as the main influence in her decision to move to direct action as a means of environmental protest. A man wrote to say that he had grown up in working-class Walsall and at the age of nine had read The Peregrine. “A whole new world opened up to me among the post-industrial gloom of the 1980s,” he said, “and directly as a result of the book I came to see the kingfishers that lived on the canal banks, and from there arose a lifelong fascination with the more-than-human world.” He went on to become a professional conservationist, bringing everyday nature into the lives of young people.

Several years ago, I came to know a young musician living in a south London squat, and performing as frontman for a hardcore punk band. He was a talented, troubled person for whom “nature” as usually understood was irrelevant. But the dark fury of The Peregrine spoke to him. He read it repeatedly, and lent his copy out often (though always claimed it back). He and I collaborated on a project one summer; there were plans to work together again. Then he died of a heroin overdose aged 23. He was buried in a winter field in Cornwall, with the cars of his friends pulled up near the grave, their stereos blasting out his music in tribute – and placed in the coffin with him was his copy of The Peregrine.

No other book – save perhaps Nan Shepherd’s The Living Mountain, which stands as The Peregrine’s golden twin, offering light to its darkness, relation to its depletion – has been so influential on the recent British literature of landscape. Roger Deakin, Tim Dee, Kathleen Jamie, Richard Mabey, Helen Macdonald, James Rebanks and I are among the many to have acknowledged its force. The Peregrine is increasing its territorial range, too. It was published last year in Germany, and editions are forthcoming in Chinese, Dutch, Spanish and Hebrew.

The book’s impact is not confined to literature. An opera company is presently considering an adaptation. A one-man theatrical interpretation is in development. A decade ago, the Australian composer Lawrence English picked up a copy from a friend’s desk and opened it at random. He read a description of an owl silently hunting, and was gripped by the intensity of “listening” in the prose. “The book changed my life,” recalled English in 2015. To him it marked a “turning point in the 20th century” in its “recognition of the role humans play in shaping their environment”. In response English produced an album that surprised me when I first heard it for its sonic scarcity. Responding to The Peregrine’s preoccupation with absence, English used frost-bitten drones and high strings to compose a burnt-out, irradiated soundtrack: a half-life soundscape of white ash.

He sent a copy of The Peregrine to the film director Werner Herzog; Herzog read it and was astonished. He has since spoken often of the book, and it is now one of only three required texts for his Rogue Film School – along with Virgil’s Georgics and Hemingway’s story “The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber”. Herzog describes The Peregrine as inducing “ecstasy” in the radical sense of the word: not just entranced or frenzied, but literally beside oneself. There are moments, he notes, “where you can tell that [Baker] has completely entered into the existence of a falcon. And this is what I do when I make a film: I step outside of myself into an ekstasis; in Greek, to step outside of your own body.”

The attraction of The Peregrine to a film-maker is obvious: the pristinated vision, the sudden rapid pull shots (a stooping lens), the immense field of vision, the swivelling eye. The attraction to Herzog is clear, too, compelled as he has been in so many films by obsession, extremity and wildness (Fitzcarraldo, Grizzly Man, The Ends of the Earth). The puzzle to me, for years, was why Herzog had not yet filmed The Peregrine. In 2015, I wrote to ask if he was planning to do so. “If anyone can, it should be you,” I said. I sent him a photograph of my local peregrine perched on a church spire, part-gargoyle. Herzog replied within a few hours, generous about my own writing on Baker, but adamant about the book’s adaptability: “A feature film would be very wrong. There are texts that should never be touched. Georg Büchner’s Lenz is one of these cases. In fact, whoever tries to make a feature film of The Peregrine should be shot without trial.” Oh! Right. Message received and understood.

Thirteen years ago I described The Peregrine as “not a book about watching a bird, [but] a book about becoming a bird”. Baker himself often suggests a comparable process of conversion, writing of how – by means of primitive rituals of following and mimicking – “the hunter becom[es] the thing he hunts”. Now, though, I no longer believe The Peregrine is a book about “becoming a bird”. Truer to say that it is a book about “failing to become a bird”.

Unmistakably Baker longs for the deterritorialised experience of the falcons, wishing as they do to live in a “pouring-away world of no attachment”. And there are many moments of extreme interspecies identification, as when he finds himself “crouching over [a] kill, like a mantling hawk”. But these ecstatic moments are always followed by Baker’s wounding awareness of his anchorage in a crabbed human body. Again and again, subject-object distance is almost closed – only to yawn wide once more. Baker craves to “think like a falcon” (to adapt the title of Thomas Nagel’s famous 1974 thought experiment) but also knows he cannot slip his form or quit his species.

Baker is, as English nicely puts it, a “ghost of a narrator”. He tells us almost nothing about himself. He scarcely eats or drinks, doesn’t sleep, never defecates, has no life beyond the fields and the sky, barely describes his clothing or his body. In mystical terms, he is an ascetic depleting himself in advance of disembodiment. In shamanic terms, he is a body preparing for sky burial. In terms of virtual reality, he is readying himself for upload into the cloud, and transformation into pure avatar. But however imagined, this activity of self-depletion can never quite be completed. Baker seeks a conversion from human to falcon, but the book’s desolation arises from the futility of his hope for this magical metamorphosis.

On 1 July 1940, when Baker was 15 years old, the secretary of state for air in Britain issued the “Destruction of Peregrine Falcons Order”. Adult and juvenile birds were to be shot, eyasses killed in the nests, eggs smashed and eyries disrupted. The order was made under wartime emergency defence regulations: peregrines were deemed too great a threat to the carrier pigeons that RAF bomber crews routinely took with them on flights. If a plane ditched at sea and a location could not be radioed through, the pigeons would be released with a leg tag to report their position. Falcons were dispensable, airmen were not – and so the falcons died. During the six years that the destruction order was in force, around 600 peregrines were shot, and unnumbered eyasses and eggs were destroyed. In certain counties – especially in southern England – peregrines were almost exterminated. By the time the order was lifted in 1946, the number of nesting pairs in England had been reduced to around half of its prewar level.

The recovery of the English peregrine population from its wartime decline was incomplete when the next major human threat emerged. In 1956 – two years after Baker took up birdwatching – the first symptoms of the crisis became visible, as increasing numbers of peregrine pairs failed to hatch chicks. The toxins of organochlorine pesticides used in agriculture, most notably DDT, were concentrating as they moved up the food chain. Raptors suffered increased adult mortality, and a thinning of eggshells to the point of non-viability.

The result was, in the words of raptor-specialist Derek Ratcliffe, “a spectacular crash of population with a speed and on a scale seldom found in the vertebrate kingdom”. By 1963, only three territories were reported as occupied by peregrines in southern England, and Scottish and Welsh populations were also in freefall. “Few winter in England now, fewer nest here,” writes Baker early in his book. “The ancient eyries are dying.” He was well aware of the connection between pesticide use and peregrine death: hence his hissing fury in the book at what he calls the “filthy, insidious pollen of farm chemicals”. “If further decline had continued unchecked,” noted Ratcliffe later, “extinction of the peregrine in Britain could have occurred around 1967” – the year The Peregrine was published.

As the falcons were dying, so the Essex landscape was also undergoing its most drastic transformation since enclosure. Urban growth caused green belts to bulge and break, and the postwar drive for big-field farming and agricultural self-sustainability resulted in the destruction of thousands of miles of hedgerows. We know from Baker’s letters and poems that his affection for the Essex countryside, especially inland Essex between Great Baddow and West Hanningfield, was profound – and his pain at its disruption correspondingly acute.

An even greater threat hangs over The Peregrine, though, than the extinction of a single species in a single country or the devastation of a loved landscape. In the famous prologue of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring, an imaginary American town is poisoned by a “white … powder” that drops from the air “like snow upon the roofs and the lawns, the fields and the streams”. This is the powder of agrichemicals – but of course it is also the dust of radioactive fallout.

It is hard to read Silent Spring outside its cold war context, and I also take Baker’s book to be nuclear as much as it is pesticidal. Baker was researching his book through the first decade of atomic and hydrogen bomb testing, and began writing it shortly after the Cuban missile crisis. In 1957 construction work started on the massive nuclear power station at Bradwell-on-Sea, right in the heart of Baker’s hunting territory. Generation was commenced in 1962. His prose is riven with nuclear anxieties: this is a book in which death falls from the air, and in which the landscape is figured frequently as “burning” and “dying” on a planetary scale.

Fifteen years ago, relatively little was known about Baker. This was partly due to the writer’s strategic development of his own mystery. In the winter of 1967, he was given an Arts Council award of £1,200. The Daily Telegraph reported on the award: “The most unusual of the [recipients] is John Baker, who lives in a council house in Essex and does not want to say which town in case the neighbours discover what he does. He has no telephone and never leaves his home.”

As the cult of Baker has spread and strengthened, much more has been discovered in terms of biography. Thanks to the efforts of David Cobham, James Canton, Mark Cocker and especially John Fanshawe – who painstakingly gathered and secured Baker’s archive, including journals, letters, book drafts and a list of the titles in his library – our picture has now filled out. This autumn, Little Toller books will publish the first biography – the beautifully titled My House of Sky by Hetty Saunders.

The two details that perhaps bear most forcefully on The Peregrine are Baker’s extreme short-sightedness, and the agonising inflammatory arthritis that afflicted him for most of his life. By the 1960s his illness was so severe that it was first stiffening and then fusing the joints in his spine, fingers and legs. Suffering as he did from curtailed vision and a stiffened body, the peregrine stood as both his dream totem and his prosthesis – perfected in precisely the ways that Baker was lessened. A peregrine’s eyeballs magnify vision by around 30% in comparison to human sight, allowing it to spy prey from sky high, and then fall on it at up to 270mph, the fastest speed of any creature on earth.

What Baker could not see unaided, he saw with the aid of technology: his Miranda 10 x 50 binoculars and his featherweight JH Steward spotter scope, which he carried with him in the field. “Binoculars and a hawk-like vigilance,” he wrote, “reduce the disadvantage of myopic human vision.” The Peregrine is therefore a product of what Tim Dee has nicely called “the magnified century”. Faces, in The Peregrine, usually have something held up to them: some object or prosthesis interposing between eye and world. Imagery recurs of visors, masks, helmets and lenses.

I have come to think of Baker’s style, in fact, as a kind of augmented-reality visor – an Oculus Rift of text that enables otherwise impossible precisions of seeing and movement. This is one reason why reading Baker is such hard, unsteadying work. He causes us to lose our usual footings in the world. Landscape becomes surface, unfolding around us as we go. The brain is strained by the dynamic dissonances of his prose, and the eyes by its uncanny geometries. Focal range ramps and flattens unpredictably. Horizons lure and retreat. One ends a reading of Baker – lifts the visor – exhausted and exhilarated.

Peregrines didn’t become extinct in England. Science saved them – and so did literature. In part because of the research of Ratcliffe and others into the link between pesticide use and eggshell thinning in British raptor populations, and in part because of the global impact of Silent Spring, the use of DDT and other organochlorines was restricted. The impact on raptors was massive. Writing in 1991, Ratcliffe noted:

Twenty-five years on from Ratcliffe’s relief, however, and 50 years on from Baker’s book, the “conservation success” story of the peregrine in Britain looks both less and more secure.

Less secure, because raptor persecution in the UK is presently at atrocious levels, in large part as a result of the game-shooting industry. Numerous birds of prey – peregrines among them – are illegally killed each year on and near shooting estates. Most upland populations of peregrines are presently in decline. The Forest of Bowland population has fallen from 18 pairs to zero in eight years.

More secure, because peregrines have now moved into our cities and on to our infrastructure in increasing numbers. Before the 1980s there were few records of peregrine falcons nesting on humanmade structures in Britain, with Chichester Cathedral the oldest known nest site. In 1991, eight pairs nested on humanmade structures; in 2002, 62 pairs. In 2014 there were nesting peregrines on an estimated 180 artificial structures, including churches, radio masts – and the cooling towers of the nuclear power station at Bradwell. Increases have happened in cities worldwide. New York alone now has more than 16 nesting pairs, on bridge girders and apartment block window ledges. Brick, steel and glass, it turns out, provide prime peregrine real estate.

Yes, the peregrine has proved to be an excellent urban adaptor, or what in German is known as a Kulturfolger – a “culture-follower”. The conditions in cities are advantageous for falcon life. High buildings give good vantage points for hunting, and secure locations for nesting. Cities tend to be warmer than open country, and more protected from the elements, thus reducing the likelihood of death by cold among fledglings and adults. Most importantly, cities offer an abundance of prey, chiefly in the form of pigeons (another massively successful Kulturfolger). Falcons even seem to be evolving new hunting and killing techniques among the skyscraper canyons of high-rise cities. The result of these accumulated benefits is that peregrines can breed earlier, more often, and more successfully in cities.

Peregrines have come to my city, Cambridge. For years a pair nested in a steep-sided chalk pit at Fulbourn – the closest thing to a sea cliff you can get in the Fens. Then, in 2013, a new pair came to the Cambridge University Library, a modernist masterpiece of brown brick. They nested on a sixth-floor ledge: blood-spotted pigeon feathers would spiral down to settle at the feet of incoming library users. After two years there, the pair moved to a 19th-century Gothic revival building in the heart of Cambridge, nesting 20ft or so above pavement level. Somehow they fledged a single chick there, amid the ruckus of the street.

The falcons are there still, and have become part of the life of the city in wonderful ways. Each weekday morning for eight months of the year, I pass under the church spires that the falcons like to use as plucking posts. Most mornings I glimpse one of them up there, perched on a curlicue of stone: flint-blue back, barred chest and the bath-duck yellow of eye-ring and feet. The pavement below the plucking post gets spattered with the body parts and feathers of their prey species: mostly city pigeons, but also starlings, woodcock and golden plover.

Once, walking past the church, I was stopped in my tracks by the body of a white dove. It lay bright on its back across a kerbstone, wings outstretched, headless and with its chest opened up and its red guts eviscerated. I looked up and there was the male falcon – the haruspex – on the spire, backlit by winter sun. I squinted at this impossible creature, felt both its closeness and its drastic distance. How did Baker put it? “The hardest thing of all to see is what is really there.”

• The 50th-anniversary edition of The Peregrine by JA Baker is published by William Collins at £12.99. To order a copy for £11.04, go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99.|||

Robert Macfarlane remembers JA Baker’s The Peregrine – a fierce, ecstatic, prophetic account of one man’s obsession that has held readers in its talon-like grip for 50 years