WebRTC was released in 2011 which lets users communicate with real time communication using video, chat, and more. It’s taken the technology industry by storm and it’s set out to change how communication is done online. Many companies started to integrate WebRTC technology onto their website and startups has risen that makes it easier to integrate it in (like mine). It has steamrolled into mainstream corporations, governments, healthcare, and even financials.

In the first two years alone, WebRTC reached over 1 billion endpoints and will reach 8+ billion endpoints by 2019. And as of 2016, WebRTC is top 6% of languages on Stack overflow. Since its release in 2011, it’s one of the few technology released to web browsers that’s ‘real’ and noticeably changing communication standards. So, why isn’t it being by every enterprise and startups out there?

The business world is changing rapidly and businesses are looking for more ways to differentiate themselves from their competitors. Whether it’s social media, banking, education or work collaboration, more and more people consume digital services and go online or on mobile to get things done. Slowly the walking into the store area is fading away, but people still expect that same experience online, especially withe recent rise of video communication social media platforms like Snapchat, Whatsapp video, Facebook Live, Periscope, ect.

And the reasoning behind businesses going more towards video communication is simple.

It drives efficiency. 

Collaborating and completing tasks increases dramatically, while at the same time increasing the engagement level of the business to consumer. Because there’s no more wait time that emails are prone to and no blindness that phone calls are prone to, efficiency rises and gets things done faster.

User Experience

User experience instantly increases in satisfaction for one plain reason. There’s no installation of anything. Everything is one click away. Video, chat, screen sharing, Co-Browsing, everything is one click away. That’s the magic with WebRTC, the user experience is amazing and efficient. Everything is built into the website and done in the easiest manner possible.

Well, the simple answer to that is the fact that WebRTC is just an underlying protocol. Think of it as a camera lense. The camera lense by itself is useless, but attached to an iphone, it’s powerful and capable of doing a number of things. WebRTC is similar. It will let you do everything from video chat to screen sharing, but if the business does not have a way of managing their customers…it becomes a bit messy. And that’s why ThinkRTC exists.

So the problem is that WebRTC is just a technology with capabilities, but isn’t useful unless your business has a way of managing your customer meetings. The solution isn’t VERY simple unfortunately, unless you use some SAAS providers like ThinkRTC.

The first thing you would want to do after you put in the WebRTC infrastructure is set up a way to make sure each ‘WebRTC meeting room’ is specified based on the customer. You will also want to have a way of knowing User A vs User B, so an authentication system will be needed. Because the last thing you want is User A looking at User B’s personal information, so don’t forget about security (luckily WebRTC is VERY secure if you know how to set it up).

Oh, if you’re a real business, you’ll want analytics behind everything. So how many customers your agents helped, their location, time spent in meetings, ect. All these should be recorded so you can learn whether you’re agents are being efficient as possible.

If you want additional features such as recording meetings, file sharing, mobile app sync, ect. You’ll need to do some research on how to build this. The information is definitely out there, but can be a bit tedious to develop if you’re not familiar with WebRTC tech already.

WebRTC is one of the fastest growing technologies out there right now, and is constantly being improved since it’s open sourced. Since it lets businesses collaborate in real time using video chat, screen sharing, CoBrowsing and more, it’s completely changing how businesses online are conducting their meetings with customers.

While WebRTC can provide the technology for a simple video communication within your website, building the management of all meetings and analytics behind it is something you would need to create yourself. Unless you use ThinkRTC (plug plug plug) of course.|||

WebRTC was released in 2011 which lets users communicate with real time communication using video, chat, and more. It’s taken the technology industry by storm and it’s set out to change how…