FREE Download + 500 roses on the appstore: https://goo.gl/HJZc2y



Dine is the first dating app in the US to completely focus on meeting for first dates are restaurants/bars/cafes. All first dates are going to revolve around some sort of food or drink so it's only natural for Dine to speed up the process of a match to a real first date.



Being one of the creators of Dine, I wanted to share with you some tips on how you can increase matches and essentially the amount of real life dates on dating apps.



Check out full blog post here: https://goo.gl/MP86OT



1. Upload high quality pictures of yourself.



I’ve run quite a few experiments on dating apps in my day mostly testing my photos to see which one perform better. Most dating apps will allow you up to 5 to upload. After a lot of reading and A/B testing I found that these 5 pictures are winners and ever since I’ve been using this set, my matches have significantly increased on every single dating app I use.



Why does having a crummy set of pictures hurt you?

People are busy and women have plenty of options on dating apps coming to them regularly. Inconveniently for women though, finding a quality match is a bit harder to score. Because women are considering many different things before they can declare to meet someone IRL, they must weed through the weak (lots of left swipes).

So because a women’s process of weeding out male users is intensive, why should they have a reason to swipe or request someone who has a profile picture of a dog? Not showing yourself in your main picture could even be taken as shady or creepy. As superficial as it sounds, if you want to get some matches going, you have to be competitive on dating apps and that means having a quality set of photos.



3. Your profile description and bio is vague, dull or just plain desperate.



Almost all dating apps these days, Tinder, Bumble, Happn, Coffee Meets Bagel and even my app Dine, to name a few, all require Facebook login for joining the community and making a profile. However, even when importing your Facebook profile details, many men (also women) commonly leave their profiles blank or with little to no information listed.



4. Send a lot of requests!



So if your not using Dine, then in your case it’s probably swipes and not sending requests, but the point is make moves. Although dating apps are superficial by nature and it’s good to be picky, don’t be so hasty to skip someone based off of pictures alone. With that said, it’s not wise to swipe right on every single person you see. The idea is reach out to a lot of people but only to the ones that you are serious about meeting. On Dine, I recommend sending at least 1 request per day to try and get some matches going. Make sure it’s someone you actually want to meet though or your just wasting both of your time!



5. Messaging.



Do not, I repeat, DO NOT, initiate the first conversation with a simple “Hey, what’s up?”. Have you ever seen a girls tinder inbox? It’s lined with that opener and 100 more boring variations.

When you open that conversation up, try to personalize your message. For example, if the user’s profile says something like “I love Thai food”, a clever opener could be something like, “Hey, nice to meet you! I actually know a Thai place on the lower east side that supposedly makes the best pad thai ever. You wanna try it together this weekend?|||

FREE Download + 500 roses on the appstore: https://goo.gl/HJZc2y Dine is the first dating app in the US to completely focus on meeting for first dates are re...