We are pleased to announce the details on how to contribute to the development of æternity blockchain! In the contribution process, AE tokens will be created and distributed to the contributors.

In order to achieve the highest possible security, transparency and simplicity, æternity uses simple smart contracts (multi-signature contracts) on Ethereum in order to collect the ETH contributions and manage them.

Another goal of this campaign is to get the global community involved as soon as possible, in order to foster the growth of the æternity ecosystem. We want to be as decentralized as possible, and don’t want to exclude anybody who believes in the technological proposition of the æternity blockchain, and who wants to support its development. We believe that this is essential for long-term growth.

As a result the contribution campaign will be split into two phases.

Starting on April 3rd, 13:05 GMT and lasting for 3 days [72 hours] until April 6th, 13:05 GMT. During this period, 1 ETH contribution will receive 1000 AE tokens. Anyone can participate!

Launch bonus for phase 1: 100 (hundred) AE bonus per 1 ETH sent in the first 24h!

Launch bonus for phase 2: 50 (fifty) AE bonus per 1 ETH sent in the first 24h!

Direct contributions are possible with ETH and BTC. For contributions with fiat, please get in touch with our partner Bitcoin Suisse. In order to participate, go to wallet.aeternity.com.

All contributions happen in a publicly transparent and tamper-proof way (‘public receipt’) on the Ethereum blockchain. After the contribution campaign, the AE token will be created based on the public receipts. 82% of the initial æternity AE tokens will be distributed to the contributors. 1% will be allocated to people who hold BTC or ETH, accessible when the æternity blockchain launches. This means, that everybody who holds BTC or ETH will also automatically become an AE holder, with a very small amount (technical limits might apply — no dust). A standard multisignature contract on Ethereum, 17% will get allocated to Aeternity Anstalt, the foundation and the founding team. The AE tokens for the team will be time-locked.

For security, please, do NOT send from an exchange account to the æternity contribution account! Use the æternity wallet, which is optimized to make the contribution process as easy as possible. Alternatively, you can use your ETH wallet, just make sure that you are the only one who has access to your private key.|||

Get all the details on how to contribute to the development of the æternity blockchain.