The Samsung S8 is one gorgeous piece of machinery,

But there was just this one thing that was up in everyone’s mind..

Now I’m sure you would have already known by now who Bixby really is,

If not you should then,

However some of us, like you and me, still prefer Google Assistant, soo…

Here’s how you can change the button for instead of calling Bixby, you can call Google Assistant instead.

I know, me neither.

Now that you have installed this app, just follow these few little steps and you’ll soon be fine dining with Google Assistant instead of Bixby.

Step 1:  Go ahead an open the app up, and you’ll have to give it permission to access and modify your accessibility settings.

Step 2:  Alright, once you’re in, swipe over to the left screen where you’ll see the tab for Hard Keys. Select Enable, then Enable All in One Gestures’ Accessibility Service.

Step 3:  Great! Now tap on the Accessibility Settings screen, scroll down to Services and under that you should see All in one Gestures, select that.

Step 4:  Then toggle the OFF radio button to ON to complete enabling All in One Gestures’ Accessibility Service.

Step 1:  You see that Overflow/menu button you’ve got there at the right hand corner? Yeah tap that and you should see Custom Keys, tap that too.

Step 2:  Now you’ll see a dialog asking you to ‘Add Custom Key’. All you have to do is just press the Bixby button on the side of your S8.

Step 3:  You will see that Bixby will pop up when you press the Bixby button but for now just take a step and go back to All in One Gestures.

Step 4:  Now that you’re back, you should be able to see in the Key Field the number 1082.

This number represents the key code that is sent by Bixby whenever you press the Bixby button. 🙂

Step 5:  Just press Add to have the Key Code added by All in One Gestures so that it can listen for and intercept it.

Once you press Add, you should now see that the key code #1082 under the Custom Keys in your All in One Gestures.

Now you can have All in One Gestures launch the app/shortcut of your choice.

Step 1:  Tap on the circle box right next to the Key Code #1082 under Custom Keys to open up a new dialog box.

Step 2:  Now the first screen should be the Action. Go there and select Search in the list.

Once that’s all done, you should now see ‘Voice Search’ under Key Code #1082 in the Custom Keys section inside the app.

From now on whenever you press the Bixby button, you will get Google Assistant like you wanted.

This collection of quality resources and tools are as valuable as what you would expect from a finely crafted watch. I update this collection whenever I find a great product that I myself use for Saint and rightfully deserves its place on this page.

You should save it, refer to it and use it because it’s truly the best of the best.

Learn more about these exclusive resources and tools|||

Here's a quick and simple step-by-step guide (+Screenshots) on how you can use the Bixby button to launch Google Assistant on your Samsung Galaxy S8 and S8 Plus.