TL;DR: We spent a few weeks experimenting in Daydream, and documented our process. Want to see what we built? Download it here.

At ustwo, we like to approach both new ideas and new technologies by getting our hands dirty. Making something tangible means we can really get a feel for the product and test it with real people.

VR and emerging platforms are a priority in the NYC studio. On our downtime between projects, We are constantly trying to push our horizons, teach ourselves and each other, and create reusable assets and processes that enable us to work at a rapid place with these relatively new mediums.

With VR, we’ve learned that tangible prototypes are not only important, but should be at the core of the design process. Validating ideas quickly through real feedback is the best way to understand an idea’s potential without getting too caught up in figuring out all the details upfront.

Keeping this in mind, we started thinking about what we could do with the new Google Daydream VR headset. Spinning off of the success of playful and creative experiences like Tilt Brush and Job Simulator, we wanted to explore how VR could be used to support everyday work at ustwo. This lead us into thinking about creating tools for ideation and collaboration.

The Google Daydream headset enables a higher degree of interaction than its predecessor, the Google Cardboard headset. The main difference between the two is that the Daydream headset allows you to use your hand (via a controller) as an input method rather than simply moving your head around and clicking a button on the headset as one has to while using Cardboard. We wanted to explore the limits of what you could do with this controller, as well as attempt to raise the bar for what types of experiences one can create for the platform.

We wanted to use this experiment to explore the following questions:|||

TL;DR: We spent a few weeks experimenting in Daydream, and documented our process. Want to see what we built? Download it here.  At ustwo, we like to approach both new ideas and new technologies by getting our hands dirty. Making something tangible means we can really get a feel for the product and test it with [&hellip;]