With your Nook tablet you can not only read the content your choice but also you will get many apps to use and you can even set configure the settings of its web privacy and security so that your tablet as well the information that it contains will remain safe. So, let’s check out how you can configure the settings for the web privacy and security of your Nook.

For the sake of your own confidentiality, you need to pay the attention towards the privacy and security settings on your Nook tablet. With Privacy settings, you can clear the web pages, cookies, and history stored on your Nook tablet. The security settings menu will let you control password storage and digital certificate warnings. Your first line of defense will be using tough passwords on any online accounts that you visit and change the passwords from time to time. The second line of defense will be paying attention to privacy settings on the Nook tablet and clear out the personal information. For more information, you can also take Nook Support.

For getting the web privacy and security settings follow these steps or you can also take Nook Help:

• Click on Options menu, which is at the top right of the address bar.

• Go to the option of Privacy settings or web security settings.

• Choose from the given options.

These settings include the following options:

If you will tell your Nook to clear the cache, then it will erase the information about the visited sites. To clear the cache, click on down arrow and then click OK.

For removing the list of recently visited web pages, click on the down arrow and then click OK.

By default, this I turned on. For turning off this feature, clear the checkmark. Some websites send a marker, a cookie, back to your tablet for indicating that you have visited the site and sometimes for indicating choices or specific pages on the site that has been explored by you. In the case of any difficulty, Nook Com Support can be taken.

For clearing all cookies, click on down arrow and then click OK.

Your Tablet can store data that you have already typed into forms such as your name, address, and phone number. By default, this is turned on. For turning off this feature, clear the checkmark.

To clear any stored form data, click on down arrow and then click OK.

This will allow the sites to determine your general location by figuring out the location of wi-fi router that you are using. For blocking this, clear the checkmark.

Click on the down arrow and click on OK for removing the information about your location. In the case of any query, you can take the assistance of Nook Customer Service.

You get the options for web security from the options menu of the browser. You just need to choose between them wisely.

If you click to place a checkmark in the box, the browser will ask you whether you want to store the username and password for the site

Click on the down arrow and then click on OK for clearing all the saved usernames and passwords.

Click for placing a checkmark in the box to be warned if there is a possible problem with the security certificate of the site. In the case of any query, you can navigate to www Nook com.

Configuring The Web Privacy And Security On Your Nook Tablet was last modified: by|||

