Design is a unique subject that traverses all disciplines and boundaries. It is ubiquitous. Not only is Design applicable to every field of study and school of thought, but as a discipline, it also learns and adapts to them all. It imbibes values and systems from various fields of knowledge to help solve problems. That’s why some people like to say that design is problem solving. However, what it truly is, is a way of thinking. In its ideal sense, Design is born at the crossroads of art and science, somewhere between the rational and the intuitive. It’s when the left brain shakes hands with the right brain, and the right brain convinces the left into a synchronized tango.

Whatever your job may be, you are constantly participating in design in your daily life. In fact, it is right to say that everyone is inherently a designer. We might not be aware of it, or acknowledge it, but in essence we are always designing things (tangible or intangible). Our nature as human beings is to plan or to create things in anticipation of the future. From planning a daily routine to ‘inventing’ tools that optimize our lives, we all design things without really knowing that we’re designing. That is so because design remains in disguise while people call it by different names and labels. You may call it planning, inventing, engineering, or such. However, they are all merely different forms of design. So, why not consciously participate in designing then?!

Just like every discipline, design too has it’s own tools, methodologies and processes. Now, it’s another question altogether whether people are using these tools at all, and ending up with good design. And then of course good design is subjective, just like anything else that’s tagged ‘good’. It is relative to the eye of the beholder (Read: Sauron). But having said that, there are certain constant factors that can be agreeable by a vast majority of people; certain things that are undeniable because, collectively and individually we have a predictable human nature and behavior. In other words, the outcomes of our reactions to certain stimuli have been ascertained and standardized. Only a minority would remember their dessert for its bitter taste, right?! So, what constitutes good design is basically good function followed by good form. Usually the function is what works to get the process right while the form or shape either aids the process or simply pleases the senses (infamously referred to as ‘maskara’).

If you still haven’t fallen asleep, this is the part you’re probably thinking, ‘what on earth has function or form have to do with my vacation or dog or my job’. And that’s where you get your good question acknowledged. Well, figuring that out is part of the process. Say you have a task, a resume to write. It has a purpose or objective which is the function. It needs to achieve something. The contents of your resume can be put together to make a desired impact. But that’s only half the impact. The form or the way it appears can assist in delivering a deeper impact. In fact, at times it can be so pivotal that it could literally change your fortunes. You could consider the kind of fonts, colours, images or graphics even. This can set a desired tone and personality to what otherwise could have been an unintended impact that wouldn’t be true to its function. When well executed, the function and form together weave magic. And bam! That’s design for you.

Designers may need a combination of tangible and intangible tools that aid in developing solutions. A Scientist might use the right alloy to build a spacecraft. An Artist may pick the right emotions to capture in a masterpiece. Both might be on opposite sides of the spectrum, but they can use the same ‘design process’ to arrive at a more relevant and holistic answer. The challenge here is that most people look through the lens of separation. A design process is flawed if one indulges in compartmentalization. And oftentimes within our specialized domains, the overarching tunnel vision is what puts blinds on our sides, preventing us from seeing the endless possibilities right in front of us. Some possibilities that at times can be better than the answer a specialized skill could bring.

Being able to see a problem from every perspective, through the lens of every discipline, gives rise to incredibly powerful and effective solutions. This is because it makes observation unbiased and allows the merits of every perspective to have a fair chance. Methodical research and analysis of the observations leads to a clearer understanding of the context of a problem. A significant thing that emerges from this is empathy. When you are in the shoes of the subject, your observations and conclusions are more in context. This is perhaps one of the most powerful tools of design, helping keep the solutions extremely relevant and highly practical to the end user.

Eventually all these observations help the brain navigate towards a strong intent. Clarity of intent is so important to begin with (It could naturally lead you to a desired domino effect). The formation of this intent, purpose or objective is what helps in directing research and analysis and building a strategy. Strategic design is extremely handy when it comes to keeping on track with a process and getting solid results. However, having said all this, the pros of following a design process can be overrated. It can get too far along. Getting too heavy on anything has its cons. Sometimes the answers are far more simple and intuitive and come to the fore by simply dwelling on a problem or living the problem long enough. Sometimes it might require a good balance of both. Like they say, whatever works. Every case is unique. So then, it doesn’t come as a surprise that quotes of wisdom endlessly linger on the thought that one must give it a good thought before executing anything. But then again overthinking is overkill.

This is by no means a manual to think like a designer. Consider it only as a stimulating read for all you non-designer folks wondering what design really means and what role it can play in your life. So, hope this right here gets your curiosity going. Ready to put on your very own design hat?|||

Design is a unique subject that traverses all disciplines and boundaries. It is ubiquitous. Not only is Design applicable to every field of study and school of thought, but as a discipline, it also…