3 Easy Steps To Move Website From Godaddy to Bluehost

In my previous articles, I had touched upon few Godaddy Alternatives if you are kindly of fed up with Godaddy. One of the alternatives that I mentioned there was Bluehost.

Detailed review of Bluehost can be found here.

For all those who are convinced, I will show you here, how to move your domain and website from Godaddy to Bluehost.

Before you start the migration, be sure to create a backup of your website. [Tweet This]

Login to GoDaddy and navigate to Domain Manager

Click on Domain settings for the domain you wish to migrate.

If you’ve got Domain lock turned on, be sure to turn this off.

To complete the domain transfer, you’ll need an authorization code from your existing registrar.

Before you click “Get authorization code”, make sure you have the correct email address updated with Godaddy.

Click on “Get authorization code” to have Godaddy mail you the authorization code and domain information.

The email looks similar to this:

Step 5: Login to Bluehost and enter your authorization code.

The domains option is found under cPanel settings. Click on Transfer domain.

Next enter the authorization code you received via email.

You’ll now receive another email containing a second verification code. Enter the second verification code.

Choose the option to update the name server’s to Bluehost.

The name servers for Bluehost are ns1.bluehost.com and ns2.bluehost.com.

Additionally choose a renewal option, update your contact information and agree to the Terms of Service.

Go back to Godaddy transfers and accept the pending transfer.

Login to Godaddy and navigate to Web Hosting Manager.

Navigate to FTP settings and create an FTP user account.

Also make a note of your FTP address.

Connect to your FTP address with an FTP client and download your website’s files and folders.

Upload the files and folders downloaded from your GoDaddy account into the domain’s directory.

If your website uses a database, you’ll have to migrate it along with your domain and files.

Click on phpMyAdmin to access the database.

Click on Export to start exporting your database.

Keep format as SQL and select the database names to export.

Navigate to phpMyAdmin on your Bluehost cPanel and import the database you exported from GoDaddy.

Step 4: Point your website to the new database

Navigate to Bluehost file manager and open the file that points to the database.

Update the settings to point to the newly imported database.

If you are follow these steps, you can easily move your website from Godaddy to Bluehost. As always, take backup before you start. Let me know if anything is not clear by commenting below.|||

In my previous articles, I had touched upon few Godaddy Alternatives if you are kindly of fed up with Godaddy. One of the alternatives that I mentioned there was Bluehost. For all those who are…