C language possesses such decision making capabilities and supports the following  statements known as c control structure or decision-making statements.

The if statement is a powerful decision making statement and is used to control

 the flow of execution of statements. It is basically a two-way decision statement

 and is used in conjunction with an expression.

The if….else statement is an extension of the simple if statement. The general form is

If the condition is true, then the true-block statement(s), immediately following the if

 statement are executed; otherwise the false-block statement(s) are executed.

The switch and case statements help control complex conditional and branching operations.

 The switch statement transfers control to a statement within its body.

The ? (ternary condition) operator is a more efficient form for expressing simple if

 statements. It has the following form:

if a is greater than b than res has the value a else the res has value b.

break statement is used to exit from a loop or a switch, control passing to the first

 statement beyond the loop or a switch.

With loops, break can be used to force an early exit from the loop, or to implement a

 loop with a test to exit in the middle of the loop body. A break within a loop should

 always be protected within an if statement which provides the test to control the exit condition.

continue is similar to the break statement but it only works within loops where its effect

 is to force an immediate jump to the loop control statement.

Like a break, continue should be protected by an if statement.

The goto is a unconditional branching statement used to transfer control of the program from one statement to another.

One must ensure not to use too much of goto statement in their program because its

 functionality is limited. It is only recommended as a last resort if structured solutions are

 much more complicated.|||

C language possesses such decision making capabilities and supports the following statements known as c control structure or decision-making statements.