Theranos Inc. and its founder pledged to stay out of the blood-testing business for at least two years in exchange for reduced penalties from federal health authorities, in an agreement that resolves a year-long regulatory impasse.

The main lab regulator first had proposed barring Elizabeth Holmes from the medical-lab business for two years in March 2016 after the company failed to correct testing problems at its main lab in Newark, Calif., ones that inspectors earlier had said put patients in “immediate jeopardy.

The development removes a major overhang for the troubled Silicon Valley startup. But Theranos continues to face other challenges, including criminal and civil investigations examining whether it has misled investors, lawsuits by from several investors saying they were duped, and claims from patients saying they received inaccurate test results. Theranos is fighting the suits and cooperating with the probes.

The regulator, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, “continues to protect patient safety which is our highest priority,” a spokesman said in a statement. “As a result of this settlement agreement, Theranos’ current and former owners, operators, and directors have agreed not to own, operate, or direct any clinical labs subject to CMS’ Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment for two years.”

Theranos already had made major changes in the face of regulators scrutiny. After CMS completed its proposed sanctions in July, the company began to shift its focus to a business strategy that involves developing laboratory devices to sell to third parties, rather than doing tests itself.

“As part of the agreement, Theranos affirmed that, consistent with the business plans it outlined last fall, the company will not own or operate a clinical laboratory within the next two years,” it said in a statement Monday. “Theranos exited the clinical lab and retail business last year, and is focusing on its miniaturized, automated testing platforms and related chemistries.”

In late September, regulators also found problems at Theranos’s second lab, in Scottsdale, Ariz. The statement Monday said the agreement resolves “all outstanding legal and regulatory proceedings between CMS and Theranos.”

In October, the company announced plans to completely exit the laboratory business to focus on its planned miniature testing devices, which would need approval by another regulator, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, before the firm can sell them to U.S. customers.

Theranos had once sought to upend the medical lab business by performing low-cost tests on just a few drops of blood taken from finger-stick samples on its own technology. But a series of Wall Street Journal articles raised questions about the company’s laboratory technology and practices.

When CMS inspectors visited the Newark lab in November 2015, they found problems with quality controls needed to ensure lab results are reliable for both tests done on Theranos’ “Edison” proprietary devices, as well as conventional devices.

After CMS imposed the sanctions, Theranos appealed. Both parties have repeatedly agreed to postpone any hearing in the appeal, which Theranos is withdrawing as part of its deal.

As part of the pact, CMS is easing other penalties Theranos might have faced. For instance, Theranos will pay just $30,000 in civil monetary penalties, rather than the $10,000 a day the company would have owed for each day it failed to meet regulatory requirements.

On the litigation front, one of the investors who is suing in a Delaware court successfully sought last week to have a judge there block a deal Theranos was pursuing with its other major investors that would reward them with additional shares in the company in exchange for their promises not to sue.

Those cases, along with one by Theranos’s former retail partner, Walgreens , a unit of Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc., seek to recover around $240 million from Theranos. The company has told investors it had less cash on hand than that at the end of 2016.

Appeared in the Apr. 18, 2017, print edition as 'Theranos Agrees to 2-Year Ban From Blood Testing.'|||

Theranos Inc. pledged to stay out of the blood-testing business for at least two years in exchange for reduced penalties from federal health authorities, the company said, in an agreement that resolves a year-long regulatory impasse.