Lets try to build a simple spell corrector using elasticsearch.

It is a very common behavior for users to make typos while they are searching in the applications. If your application implements search, then it  must detect the typos during search and should try to correct or suggest the correct words. So, how do we do this ? You definitely do not need any machine learning algorithm to do this . You can make use of Elasticsearch’s term_suggester.

Let’s see what term_suggester does for us. Elasticsearch’s term suggester uses the edit distance algorithm to detect the closest correct word and suggest that as a replacement for the wrongly-spelled word. So, how does it know which word is correct ? It actually depends on the data you have indexed into elasticsearch. So, if it finds any nearest word in your data then it tries to suggest as a alternative to misspelled word.

Now, lets try to implement this.

First, lets insert the setting and mapping for indexing data into Elasticsearch.

Lets insert some data into our index. I made a quick search in google for commonly misspelled words and it suggested me a list. I took few of them and indexed the data into our index.

Now we have inserted the data. Lets try to search with wrong spellings.

We searched for “dissapoint” i.e wrongly spelled word  and we get no results. When you do not get any result for your search then you can always assume that there might be spelling mistake from the user and you can use term_suggester to suggest new words for your users.

Now lets see how to use term_suggester.

The above snippet is used to suggest terms that are closely related.  Here I asked the term_suggester to suggest new words that are closely related to  misspelled word “dissappoint” , I called my suggester  mytermsuggester(you can name it anything) and i am telling suggester to suggest from the field my_field. Now, lets see the result of the above query.

Aha! we got the word disappoint as a suggestion and it is present in our index. Now, you can suggest your user with this new word or you can correct the word yourself and show the results for corrected word. The result contains score and freq along with the word. Score is calculated based on number of occurrences of that word in the index  and also how important is that word to your index. Freq is the number of times the word occurs in your index.

There are lot of other options available to use with the term_suggest query and you can refer to elasticsearch documentation here for the same. But some of the important one’s are|||

Lets try to build a simple spell corrector using elasticsearch. It is a very common behavior for users to make typos while they are searching in the applications. If your application implements search, then it  must detect the typos during search and should try to correct or suggest the correct words. So, how do we do…