If you look at the table (re-pasted below), you can see large differences in average pay even within functions. Investment Management, for example, shows a whopping $97K gap (!), but even functions with notoriously standardized compensation packages, like Consulting, show sizable gaps.

As we showed above, just 1/3rd of the MBA gender pay gap came from differences in gender representation across job functions. That means the other 66% comes from differences in pay within each function.

First, we thought maybe men were more likely to negotiate their offers up, but we couldn’t find any evidence of that. Both men and women were equally likely to negotiate, with ~19% of each group saying they attempted to negotiate their offer. The results of successful negotiation were also no different, resulting in about $10K in increased pay for both sexes. (Side note: if appropriate, you absolutely should negotiate your offers…we even built a tool to help you benchmark your offers automatically ).

Where does this difference come from?

We initially thought that the actual positions/titles that men and women go into within these high-level functions might differ. To look at this, we drilled down into Consulting and Investment Management to see if the position titles and their corresponding compensation were different for men and women.

For Investment Management we found two things going on.

Within Consulting, both genders were hired into the same exact roles, but again there were striking differences in compensation, with men making more.

After further analysis, it appears that hiring MBA students into different roles was fairly localized to Investment Management, both because of the scale at which it occurred and because of the absolute dollar difference in pay between these roles. Overall, we estimate this factor to represent $1.3K, or 9%, of the overall wage gap observed.

So what about the difference in pay for the exact same title within the exact same job function? Where does that come from?

We see 3 potential drivers at play:

While it may seem difficult to determine whether women consistently under-report their earnings, we came up with a methodology for doing so. We used data from a set of top consulting firms, which we know to offer completely standardized compensation to MBAs regardless of gender. We looked to see if there was a difference in how women and men reported these offers.

Shockingly, we found that men reported their compensation $8,000 higher than women did. Within salary there was no difference, but on bonus and other compensation (which includes 401K matching and stock) men reported significantly higher wages.

This means that of the $12K wage gap in consulting, reporting differences may explain nearly two-thirds. According our estimates, across industries reporting bias accounts for a whopping 43% of the overall MBA wage gap.

What’s noteworthy here is that offered salary is an objective, immutable number. Performance bonuses and other compensation, however, can be interpreted more subjectively — based on a range candidates are given in an offer letter. Its likely that men are estimating they will achieve higher performance bonuses than women, which leads to a larger reported wage gap.

Next, we wanted to see if women were more likely within the same job function to work for companies that pay lower wages on average. Using the consulting industry for our testing ground for this hypothesis, we looked to see if there was an over-representation of women at companies with lower compensation and vice versa.

Based on our analysis, we did not find that women were more likely to work for companies that paid less. In fact, of the $12,000 wage gap in the consulting industry, we were only able to attribute $63 to this effect — basically nothing.

Okay we’ve been through a lot and if you’re still reading this we appreciate you joining us on this journey. Now that we’ve analyzed a lot of the potential drivers of the wage gap, let’s bring it all together.

Based on the analysis, we were able to identify that the first 3 had a significant contribution to the observed wage gap. We took each of these drivers and estimated the proportion they contributed to the overall wage gap and believe these factors explain roughly 85% of the gap.

While this is just one dataset of a specific group of people, we hope it illustrates the complexity of this issue: even for a very homogeneous population, the drivers of the wage gap are deep and numerous.

Beyond simply identifying these drivers, there are additional questions that need to be addressed. For instance, why do women report differently than men? Why do women and men choose the job functions they do, and is this a problem? If it is a problem, what should we do about it?

It’s clear that women should not be paid less than men for the same work. However, the complexity of this issue makes it difficult to separate when this is actually occurring, due to more nuanced variables that may be driving a gap. Nevertheless, each of these types of issues is a problem — from legal, ethical, and social perspectives — but each deserves understanding and better identification of when problems exist.

This analysis is by no means perfect or even close to it. We hope instead that it brings about further discussion on this topic, and how to develop datasets that can further address and identify problematic wage gaps.

Thank you for reading and for entertaining our attempts at analyzing something very complicated.

Discuss. Share. Give Feedback. Offer to help. We are open to it all.

Note: If you have are interested in doing deeper analysis on the dataset, let me know and I can share a sanitized version with you. We’d love to get better insights and would love your help.|||

Using data from TransparentCareer, we analyzed the factors contributing to the wage gap between men and women. As you have probably heard before, there is a gap in pay between men and women, and it…