This morning, I watched a Startup School Group Office Hour video a few hours after it was posted. They interviewed three groups of founders that are in the same startup school "class" as me (a total headcount of 3000+). I felt relief about the kinds of struggles other startups in the group are having, and not because any of the companies were doing poorly (they were all actually experiencing various degrees of success); I just know is that it's not always easy to be told that you're wrong about something. Every group was given some amount of very helpful advice that was at odds with what they were currently doing. I haven't even released Crowdnote's MVP yet, but I can empathize with the internal battle of sticking to what you believe is best versus what users and mentors are telling you.

The video's topic of conversation was very focused on the value that each startup offered its customers. The interviewers raised questions about what current users are saying, how well services retain users, and what the main value points are that the startups are selling. Each conversation talked at least a little bit about creating value as inexpensively and quickly as possible, all while keeping in close contact with their users along the way.

To fill you in, Crowdnote is currently ready to onboard people and has been for the past few days. However, I'm forced not to do validated learning right now, which is exactly the type of learning that's being encouraged by the interviewers; I'm in the process of getting a lawyer to look at my Terms of Service and Privacy Policy documents prior to any onboarding.

What I noticed today is that, having worked on a few auxillary technical tasks, I was much less motivated and focused on completing those tasks than in days prior. They felt like work to me for the first time since I started the project, and I didn't want to do them very much. I believe I felt that way because it's still too early to determine if those tasks would be beneficial to the users. I don't even know if the existing features are useful, and that's the point: all these secondary tasks are being built before the primary ones have even been validated. They simply feel like a waste of time.

My reluctance to work today was reminiscent of jobs I've done for past clients that didn't have a clear goal driving their decisions. There are times that clients are willing to pay for work, not because it helps learning or helps their existing users (if any), but because their competitors have feature X or feature Z. These seemingly non sequitur additions often resulted in mixed messaging to users, higher bills to the client, and a diminished sense of purpose for me, the developer.

Since I don't understand law that well, or perhaps I don't understand the depths that law is necessary to my venture, I feel that same aimlessness about my time spent on Crowdnote today. The features I'm working on could be considered fairly "standard", but I could honestly do away with pagination by just showing every result on a single page. The combined time saved from tasks like this could instead be spent touring ballroom dance studios and interacting with users, uncovering what Crowdnote is useful for.

In the back of my mind, I know that if I do my job as a founder right, I'll outgrow development work. As a successful founder, I would instead spend all my time with people, listening to what people tell me and coordinating whatever I need in order to make it happen, all while keeping in line with the business's core vision: to provide music for activities.

That's the opportunity cost here, to be able to bring people together for the purpose of bettering the enjoyment of activities like dance. My job is only so interesting until other people are involved.

The first is the ability to control the "unseen" quality of a categorization. This means that for each search result, it will automatically mark itself as "seen" on your behalf when you preview it or vote on it. This is intended to be useful filtering songs by whether you have individually seen them before or not.

Second is pagination for search results. If there are more results than fit on a single page (in this case, 50), then you can browse additional pages of results.

The "unseen" label disappears and reappears depending on user actions. The pagination dialogue appears at the bottom of the results.|||

