Innovations are supposed to drive revolutions! Cloud is rebooting the technology world and open a bunch of opportunities for businesses by embracing digitization. It has already revolutionized the stereotype processes of web application development. Now, its turn of the mobile platform.

Before a decade, developers had to take care of web or mobile app designing, development, testing, and deployment. They had to perform all these processes manually that was obviously too time and effort consuming. The invention of cloud, serverless architecture and virtualization have enabled developers to work less on coding and more on creating an outstanding experience.

Many tech giants are involved in cloud and offering reliable and effective cloud services by following high standards. But, no one can beat the cloud competencies of Amazon Web Services (AWS). Being a market leader, AWS launches futuristic products and services on a regular basis. In this article, we will learn how AWS simplifies and streamlines the processes of development, testing and monitoring of mobile apps.

Essential AWS technologies that are responsible for a quick and competent mobile app development:

AWS has tremendously expanded its offering from web application development to mobile app and Internet of Things. Today, many mobile apps such as Yelp, Netflix, Hike, etc. are successfully running on the AWS cloud. These applications are designed using serverless architecture and microservices so that they are having robust and scalable back-end and marvelous user experience.

Previously, the mobile app development was not so easy. It took months to build an app as developers had to understand the code of all functions and its varied variables that were interlined. To develop and deploy an application, they needed to set up and maintain a physical server that occurred extra costing.

AWS serverless microservices allow developers to be free from all worries and pay their complete attention to the development part. They have the flexibility to divide a large task into small portions and allocate a team of programmers to each small task. Moreover, AWS lets developers perform their tasks individually by sharing the data via SOAP, REST API, and JSON and deploying the code.

Serverless architecture allows to scale and run the storage capacity of an application according to the changing requirements without provisioning and managing servers. If developers have implemented the code on AWS Lambda, then Lambda instructs the servers about the task execution. Along with development, application deployment is equally important. To perform the deployment process effectively, developers can use below AWS serverless microservices:

Amazon Gateway API works as an application front-end. It enables developers to create and publish an API to boost the application performance. Developers can use its features like proxy integration and catch-all-path for HTTP endpoints and Lambda function. Amazon Gateway API manages the tasks that involve processing of traffic management, concurrent API calls, access control, API version management, authorization, and monitoring.

Lambda is a Serverless compute service of Amazon Web Services. It runs the code in response to events and manages the underlying compute resources. Using Lambda, developers can create back-end services that operate at AWS performance, security and scale. It also extends to other AWS services with custom logic. Moreover, it allows to scale the server based requirements. Lambda is powerful enough to manage, provision and scale the servers solely.

Using Amazon Cognito, users can sign-up or sign-in on the web or mobile apps. Amazon Cognito allows developers to create their own user directory in it or they can authenticate the users via social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, and Amazon (with SAML identity solution) or any other identity systems. With Amazon Cognito, you can store data locally on your device and continue to work with the application while devices are offline.

AWS Mobile Hub holds amazing features for mobile app development such as back-end login, content delivery, push notifications, authentication, analytics and data storage. The product enables developers to test their app on real devices and facilitates them with analytical dashboards to track the usage of the app — all from a single, integrated console. Containing innovative enterprise-class features, AWS Mobile Hub simplifies the development of customer or employee-facing mobile apps that integrate varied enterprise resources too.

Based on Amazon S3 and Amazon Cognito, user data storage feature enables programmers to sync and store the various user data such as profiles, photos, settings, game progress, etc.

Cloud Logic enables organizations to create the mobile app without worrying about provisioning and managing servers. Here, all you need to do is upload the code and invoke it using APIs from your mobile apps. Rest of the things will be taken care by AWS. Team AWS runs and scales your mobile app code. Cloud Logic service is based on AWS Lambda and Amazon API Gateway.

The feature is powered by Amazon Cognito where you can add any sing-in and sign-up flows as well as authenticate the users through social media identity providers like Google+, Facebook, and Twitter.

It is a fully managed cloud database that allows to store and query the app data. NoSQL database is an Amazon DynamoDB based feature that offers fast and consistent service at any scale.

With app analytics, developers can collect and visualize user metrics. They can track various important metrics of sessions, custom events or monetization. Amazon Mobile Analytics lets you track the active users and retention.

Store your content and media files in the cloud and cache as well as download them in your mobile app utilizing the app content delivery features. It is an Amazon CloudFront and Amazon S3 based feature. AWS permits developers to distribute their content to the users with high transfer speeds.

Push notifications are the latest trend to improve user (individuals or groups) engagement. The AWS Mobile Hub allows developers to send a few messages and scale to billions of messages a day. The feature is developed using the capabilities of Amazon SNS.

Understand how users use your app and accordingly plan out the user engagement strategies like push notifications. User engagement feature is based on Amazon Pinpoint. The feature carries out campaigns that interact with the app users based on the way you configure the Amazon Pinpoint options. Developers can capture, analyze and visualize the app usage event metrics that unveil how users are using the app.

Create conversational bots and add natural language to a mobile app interface using Amazon Lex. Amazon Lex is an AWS service for building text and voice conversational interface into mobile apps. The service has built-in integration with Lambda.

Amazon Cognito allows B2C apps to create their own fully managed user directory within it and add sign-in and sing-up including multifactor authentication. For B2E apps, developers can use SAML to add sing-in. They can use corporate credentials that are stored in existing corporate user directories.

Amazon Cognito user pool manages the authentication of millions of users securely that is connected with the mobile app. Federated identities require the support of social identity providers and SAML for accessing user information.

Through the inbuilt SaaS application connectors of the AWS Mobile Hub, developers can evolve excellent apps that are connected with other enterprise SaaS applications. In order to access the data from SaaS-based applications, mobile apps call the Amazon Gateway API to connect to Lambda micorservices.

Developers can create custom connectors using the Cloud Logic feature. They can use Amazon API gateway and AWS Lambda to access on-premises resources behind firewalls through a VPC. The mobile app has access to Amazon Gateway API that is connected to the private VPN to fetch the data from the on-premises system of records.

Thus, AWS has transformed the way mobile apps are designed, developed, tested and deployed. Utilizing all these services may increase your cloud cost but significantly decrease your development cost. Applying our comprehensive insights related to AWS, we enable businesses to increase their productivity and decrease their overall cloud spend.

If you liked this article, please hit the ❤ icon below. Thank you!|||

Innovations are supposed to drive revolutions! Cloud is rebooting the technology world and open a bunch of opportunities for businesses by embracing digitization. It has already revolutionized the…