Me again for 2017/04, a "europlus Refurbapalooza Revisit".@yorgleMy plan for this RetroChallenge is to recreate pixel perfect versions of some of Andy Warhol's Amiga works, in their original  file formats, using an Amiga, and/or Amiga emulation.  I will be using Deluxe Paint and GraphiCraft as well as reference images to make the reproductions.Many pieces have been released, but all of them are in non-amiga-native formats, usually PNG, JPEG or as screenshots in videos.  I want to reproduce them as IFF/ILBM in their original 320x200x32 color format.It's a vast departure for me from previous RC's, doing arty stuff instead of hardware-ey stuff, but I've been wanting to do this for a long time now, and this feels like the best opportunity to do so!Yes. the above JPEG is not good enough for me.  ;)(Twitter free)Blog about my recent programming activities:@TRaidnaComputesUsing Altirra the Atari 400/800 emulator complete the following :@semachthemonkeyRecently I picked up a whole load of kit from a company that had no use for it any more.  Roughly speaking it's a custom CP/M machine, a lot of Z80 single board computers, backplanes and a myriad of expansion PCBs.  There's also some Z80 In Circuit Emulators, keyboards, power supplies, empty rack and other yet unidentified items.Throughout April I intend to sort through this.  Primary goal is to identify what everything is and catalogue it all with decent photographs. Getting down and dirty with some of the boards and identifying pinouts, chips used, dumping EPROM contents etc will also feature.  The CP/M machine looks like it needs some TLC, but hopefully I'll bring it back to life. The Z80 ICE's have got documentation with them (which if it isn't already available online means I'll scan it all to PDF), so I'd like to get them up and running, at least to find out if they will be of any use in the modern world.  Finding good homes for some of the kit is also a stretch goal.@_feilipuI have been working on modern Single Board Computer build with retro components over nearly a year. It therefore doesn't qualify for the Retro-challenge as it is a long term project. So the challenge entry is effectively a "sprint" within the overall project, to implement an IDE interface for the YAZ180.The YAZ180 is a combination of the fastest Z80 processor available, running at 36.864MHz, together with 1970's components. Included in the build are the AMD Am9511A-1 APU, Lattice GAL devices, Intel 82C55, and a number of Texas Instruments TIL311s.My intention is to receive the PCB with the designed IDE interface early in April, build up and test the new version of YAZ180 (which is in itself a challenge) and then, using a combination of the code from Paul and ChaN, read and write an IDE PATA drive with FAT32.@minus56bitsMy entry for RC 2017/04 will be a mingle-mangel of several things:The Commodore PET 2001 turns 40 this year and I scored a defective one about a year ago on ebay. Some issues have been fixed already, but the system is still disassembled and has to be tested as a whole. I assume the PET would appreciate to be reanimated at its birthday.The Video Graphics Array (VGA) turns 30 this year. Having a weakness for graphic extensions (see my RC 2015/7 entry) my main entry to RC 2017/04 will be a PET/CBM Color Graphics Extension sending pixels to a VGA display.The Atmel AVR 8 bit architecture turns 20 this year. So I'll use this type of MCU for the graphics board.Celebrating 40 years PET 2001 plus 30 years VGA plus 20 years AVR sum up to 90 years of Retrocomputing. That should comply with the RetroChallenge Rules quite easily.@richardloxley"RetroMatic 2000"I collect 1980s computers. But they are gathering dust in my loft, and I'd prefer they were being used.My project is to build something that will make 1980s computers easier to use in the modern world:(1) connect to an LCD monitor so you don't need an old telly;(2) store files on a USB stick so you don't need mechanical disks, and can transfer files easily.There are some products that already do some aspects of these, but no-one does an all-in-one box that can connect to an old computer and "it just works".I'm making an all-in-one solution (working title "RetroMatic 2000"), in a retro case that befits my old computers :-)I'll be testing it on my EACA Video Genie EG3008, and my Amstrad CPC 464 and 6128. But it should work with most computers of that era, and I hope to eventually use it with my BBC Micro and TI99/4a.I've only just found out about the Retro Challenge but I've actually been planning this for a while! I spent March creating the design, and testing some technology that I'll use.So for the challenge I'll start by blogging about my design process, and then carry on with the actual build, blogging as I go.@rakjabI hope to completely set up a working Vic-20 system for my RetroChallenge. I have many pieces acquired over the years but have not actually set them up or used them for decades.  I have printers, floppy drives, modems, and boxes of stuff that I have no clue what might be in there.  I want to get them out, set them up, see what works or doesn't work and what it might take to get them going again. This is my first RetroChallenge so I will also learn how to blog and share this adventure.@TRC_WMIf my HD63C09 CPUs that I bought from eBay arrive on time, I'm going to design and build a computer with it. I don't be surprised though if it pivots into something completely different.@alangarfI have an old industrial controller from AMX that has a Motorola 68000 I'd like to reverse engineer. It was last produced in 1994 and was used to control lights, audio/visual equipment, access control etc. It was saved from the trash over 10 years ago when a boardroom system was replaced with something newer. I figured it would be an interesting board to play with.I plan to reverse engineer the board. It has two UARTs (one RS232, the other a proprietary serial bus which looks like poor mans RS485), an OKI clock/calendar, battery backed up RAM, a single LED and 8 DIP switches.I'd like to get a ROM monitor running on it, and then progress to BASIC or a Forth interpreter. Ultimate goal is to have all the hardware working and produce a TTY Mandelbrot set.Worst case, even just getting the single LED to blink via RS232 would make me happy. @mattinxMy first laptop was a Victor V86P, which was an 10MHz XT compatible system. There's a little information out there these days, but really not all that much, especially on the technical side. For this Retrochallenge, I'm going to try and gather as much information about the Victor V86P laptop as possible and get it up on-line.  In no particular order:@irrelevant_comOK. Time to try and do this again...But maybe a smaller goal...  I might have a chance of completing it!My rose-tinted-glasses old-tech website www.viewdata.org.uk has been a little dormant for a while. I've been re-building it slowly using wordpress, but need to build some custom plugins and software to cope with showing off files that no modern computer understands.  They don't even have mime-types!Thus, the goal will be to :Write a web-based viewdata browser, and associated server-side code, possibly using ajax, in order to access and browse the various 25+ year old viewdata databases I have available.There is a faint chance I'll actually make the beta website live, if I get all of the code needed done!@acollins22Please book me in for the first of this year's Retrochallenges.I have no idea what I'll do this time around but it will be retro and something of a challenge.|||

