What if big companies could move as fast as start-ups? What if enterprises could increase their developer velocity and rapidly deliver innovative products to their customers?

The world of software is changing and so is the world of enterprise. More than ever, we see incumbents in every sector feeling the heat from much smaller competitors who demonstrate an ability to more quickly respond to customers armed with more information and choices than ever before.

Through our focus on container lifecycle management, Wercker’s mission has always been to enable developers to focus on what matters most: innovating and building great products and applications in a simple, repeatable and reliable way. Wercker empowers organizations and their development teams to achieve continuous integration and continuous delivery (CI/CD) goals with micro-services and Docker. This is brought to life through our container-centric and cloud-native automation platform comprised of our local command line interface (CLI), online SaaS platform and API.

With this in mind, I am excited to share that Oracle today announced that it has signed a definitive agreement to acquire Wercker. Wercker’s Docker-based platform has a strong, rapidly growing user base as companies, large and small, transition to container-based workloads. Developers will now have access to a strong Docker-based portfolio as part of Oracle PaaS and IaaS. We are excited to join Oracle and bring even more value to our customers as part of Oracle’s cloud computing platform.

Trusted by Fortune 500 companies, Oracle is the industry leader in reliability, simplicity and performance. Oracle remains a database pioneer and Java is the most popular programming language in the world.

Pioneers always have their eyes on the horizon, and both Oracle and Wercker recognize a shift in application development highlighted by a move to containerization and micro-services as the main ingredients in helping companies remain competitive in this shifting landscape.

To address this shift, Oracle is building a leading IaaS and PaaS platform as the foundation for a new generation of cloud computing. A leading cloud needs great tooling and adding Wercker’s container lifecycle management to Oracle’s Cloud provides engineering teams with the developer experience they deserve to build, launch and scale their applications. Oracle and Wercker share the view that developers greatly benefit from focusing on building great products and applications. Together, we will democratize developer tooling for the modern cloud.

Joining forces with Oracle means we have aligned with a hyperscale cloud provider that will enable us to bring our vision of Docker-based developer lifecycle management to a broader range of customers and applications, while increasing the pace of innovation for our existing customers. In the near term, our team, free community edition, and relentless focus on the developer experience remain unchanged.

I want to thank our developer community, the amazing Wercker team and our partners for helping us achieve this impressive milestone. We remain dedicated to you and committed to our mission of helping developers move fast and build great things.

As the founder of Wercker, I am 100% committed to our broader mission and I am excited about the future! More information about this announcement is available at www.oracle.com/wercker.|||

I am excited to share that Oracle today announced that it has signed a definitive agreement to acquire Wercker.