Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Imani. Imani was a curious child and loved reading books. She enjoyed visiting the library with her parents because she got to read books and get new ideas. One day while at the library, she noticed a brand new book about tree houses. In the book, Imani saw many different types of tree houses. There were large tree houses, small tree houses, there were short ones and tall ones. There were all kinds of cool looking tree houses in the book.

The book also included many tree house projects for the readers to build themselves. Imani thought to herself, “What a great idea! I would love to have a tree house in my backyard.” Imani started imagining just how much fun it would be to play in the tree house. She could invite all her friends over and they could play all day long.

On the drive back home from the library, Imani had many ideas for tree houses but she was worried about losing them all. As she was reading the book, she noticed that one of the pages in the book included a handmade drawing of a tree house with labels. This was a sketch of a tree house. The labels pointed to the different parts of a tree house which helped her understand the parts needed for a tree house.

“Aha! I’ll sketch!” she thought to herself. “Sketching looks like a great way to save all my ideas.”

As soon Imani came home, she rushed inside. She picked up her pencil and started sketching all the ideas she had in her head. She sketched and explored each and every idea. Time flew by because she was having so much fun. Imani then noticed something amazing happening right before her eyes. Her ideas were getting better and better. The more she sketched, the better they became. The more she sketched the more she realized exactly what type of tree house she wanted. This was magical!

To help her identify the different parts of the tree house, she started labeling them just like she saw in the book. She labeled the roof, the door, the windows, the stairs, the slides, the ladder and the swing. Labeling helped her keep track of all the important parts she wanted to include in her special tree house.

After she was done sketching, Imani rushed to her mom and dad to show them her sketches. She explained to them why she really wanted a tree house and why building it would be a great activity for the whole family. The labels Imani had included in her sketches helped her parents quickly understand all the parts and the design of the tree house. Her parents were very impressed and decided that this was a great family project they all would work on in the summer.

Imani was really happy that her idea was going to become real. Sketching her ideas, labeling them, and presenting her idea to her mom and dad helped her convince them that this was a great idea. Now she would be able to play all summer long with her friends in her wonderful tree house.



The End.

To make sure the children comprehended the story, I asked them these questions:|||

Sketching is an activity which knows no age. Both kids and adults benefit 
from using sketching to bring their ideas to life. Recently I had the 
opportunity to talk about sketching with my kids’ kindergarten class.