As we all are familiar with Amazon, and you will be glad to know that Amazon will provide free Kindles to 100 US school. This step will be useful in promoting the value of literature.

USNewswire/ National PTA and Amazon are glad to award Kindle eReaders to hundred schools and PTAs across the nation to motivate family reading, promote a love of literature and help student achievement. These schools and PTAs were chosen to get the Kindle e-readers for their guidance and commitment to the value of family engagement and core literacy skills for kid’s success/ The donation of e-readers is part of the PTA Family Reading Experience, Powered by Kindle program and was made in combination with National Reading Month.

Laura M. Bay, president of National PTA shared her words, “National Reading Month is a time to celebrate the importance of reading, foster children’s growth as readers and promote a lifelong love of literature,” she also said, “We are thrilled to equip local PTAs and schools with Kindle e-readers during National Reading Month for literacy and family engagement efforts.”

PTA Family Reading Experience, Powered by Kindle is the national program that involves the entire family to help the growth of literacy skills and foster a love of reading. Through a set of enjoyments, educational activities, the program inspires families with information and tools to use at the house and fresh paths to explore reading books together.

Nathan R. Monell, CAE, National PTA executive director said, “Families play an essential role in helping children develop their literacy skills. When families read together, children do better in school and beyond,” he also shared, “we are pleased to continue our collaboration with Amazon to empower families to read together and support children’s growth as readers through the Family Reading Experience program.”

National PTA made the announcement that the donation of Kindle e-readers during PTA Family Reading Experience, Powered by Kindle event at Parklawn Elementary School in Alexandria, Va. Parklawn Elementary School PTA has bestowed a classroom of Kindle e=readers from National PTA and Amazon.

Larry Aiello (Principal) extracted his agitation for the chances these devices will bring to Parklawn Elementary School, uttering, “As technology advances and changes the way readers access books, having effective tools to progress along with this change is vital to schools. This donation will allow us to put more books in the hands of our students and engage them in authentic literacy experiences.”

PTA Family Reading Experience Powered by Kindle was released in 2013. Since joining forces, National PTA and Amazon have provided more than 3,500 Kindle e-readers to students, families, and schools countrywide.

Arthur Van Rest, general manager at Kindle said, “Reading is an essential part of education which is why we, at Amazon, are dedicated to making it easier for readers to get lost in an author’s world and helping kids and families become voracious readers,” he also added, “In celebration of National Reading Month, we are thrilled to again be teaming up with PTA on this program and working together to help inspire a love for reading.”

National PTA includes millions of families, students, teachers, administrators, and business and community leaders keen to the educational achievement of kids and the promotion of family engagement in schools. PTA is a registered 501(c)(3) non-beneficial association that prides itself on being a strong voice for all kids, an applicable resource for families and communities, and a powerful advocate for community education. Those who want to bring any positive change in education, health, and welfare of children are most welcome to be a member of PTA.|||

You will be glad to know that Amazon will provide free Kindles to 100 US school. This step will be useful in promoting the value of literature.