This post is part of my “10 Apps in 12 Months” journey. Follow the tag to keep updated about my progress.

Exactly 7 days ago I’ve released my first ever Android app to the Play store. It is a silly video poker app and to be fair I didn’t have high hopes for it, but I thought it will be a good learning experience for my upcoming projects.

The app itself is a modernized version of a slot machine widely popular in Eastern Europe, so I thought it will do OK in the region’s app store, however I never expected the actual results. Spoiler alert: It is doing REALLY well.

The initial “marketing” push was easy. I do own a Facebook page with over 360,000 likes from Hungary (about 5 years ago I did sort of a media hack, that pissed off some people but a bunch of people liked it, hence the following). So I started off easy, just by posting the app’s web version to the page. Now if you ever been an admin of a Facebook page you must know how much of a dick Facebook is about page posts. Back in the days page posts had full visibility for everyone who liked the page. These days it is not true at all. Lately if you post with your page you are lucky if about 1% of your following see the post. Luckily advertising for Hungarians is cheap so I “boosted” my post for about $50 for a week. In exchange I got over 5,4k post “engagements”. Not bad

If you visit my app’s web interface via an Android device it will redirect you to the Play Store, otherwise you can play the actual game via the browser. If you run out of credits the app offers you to share the game via Facebook to get extra. This turned out to be a vital part of making the game viral. People love free stuff, even if it means spamming their friends.

Within a week I hit almost 10k users (I’m sure by the time I finish this post it will be over 10k)

That is a mix of web users (people who bet at least once) or Android users (people who downloaded the app). Not too shabby at all. And these users are pretty active. The average length of a session in the app is just shy of 7 minutes and the number of screens / session is 9.5 (which is interesting considering I only have 2 screens.|||

This post is part of my “10 Apps in 12 Months” journey. Follow the tag to keep updated about my progress. Exactly 7 days ago I’ve released my first ever Android app to the Play store. It is a silly…