First time ever, Micromax came with a Flagship smartphone. Which is Micromax Dual 5.  So, is it good enough? or its just a bad choice??  Let’s see.

Fasten your seatbelts as Micromax is ready to Revolutionize Photography with the new Dual 5. With its two 13 MP rear cameras and one 13MP front camera, 13.97 cm (5.5) Full HD Super AMOLED screen, and high-end SecureVault technology.

Double the picture quality of your favourite moments, as Dual 5 is equipped with not one, but two 13 MP rear cameras for increased colour vibrancy, depth and focus.Photos taken in low-light conditions are noise-free and crystal clear.

Create a secret dual profile within your phone to store private photos, files and messages, with SecureVault technology- the safest way to hide private data.

The information stays invisible in normal mode protecting it from prying eyes, and can be unlocked only with your unique fingerprint.

Never worry about deleting old photos, as Dual 5 comes with 128 GB ROM. Its memory is further expandable up to 128 GB, thus acting as your personal digital storehouse.

Feel the power of Qualcomm Snapdragon 652 processor & advanced graphic performance of Qualcomm Adreno 510 GPU, along with 4GB LPDDR3 RAM of Dual 5.

Experience 4 times faster-than-conventional charging with Micromax Dual 5’s USB type-C port, which completely revives your discharged phone in 45 minutes.

The arc design of Micromax Dual 5 will impress you at hello. Its all-metal body with chamfered edges and jaw-dropping display gives the phone an unsurpassable finesse and charm.

The Operating System of Dual 5 has stunning features that ensure that your experience is nothing less than wow.

Freezer: This smart feature lets you drag and drop any app to the freezer, to prevent excessive load on the processor or RAM, while limiting data usage.

Speedup: The speedup technology of Micromax dual 5 improves the smartphone’s performance instantly by closing unused background apps and freeing up RAM.

Heart Source: This intuitive feature keeps the temperature of your device at optimal levels, by tracking CPU temperature and overall system temperature.

Smart Key: You can assign a specific function to Smart Button.

Panic Button: To make an emergency call, just press Power button along with Volume down button.

It would be a joke if I say that, this phone is a Original product of Micromax. This phone is Glass Copy of Chinese phone Qiku 360 Q5. Things different between both of them is just price and production company’s name.

At first glance, anyone would think that, Micromax did great job this time by making a flagship phone. But it’s a shame that Micromax created this phone.

Most of the time the reason to buy a Micromax phone is to support “Make in India” concept, but what good that will do, when that product you think as an Indian product is full on copy of a Chinese mobile just with increased price.

Let’s see photos of both phone showing difference between both of them.

Yes, those Logos are the only difference if you compare both phones. If you compare rest of features it is complete copy. As far as design goes, you can see for yourself that both are Same.

So, question in your mind after seeing this will be like, what Micromax did in this phone??

There is a simple answer to it, they just re-branded this phone. Let’s have a look at specifications of both of them.

Cameras: 13+13 Back and 13 Front for both of them.

Rest is same for both too, which you can see under Full Specifications.

There are two things that differ Micromax Dual 5 from Qiku 360 Q5, first as I showed you above, logo and second thing is price.

Micromax re-branded Qiku 360 Q5 with increasing price by 4,829/- INR. Where Micromax Dual 5 costs 24,999/- INR, Qiku 360 Q5 will costs 2,170/- INR.

Ignoring the fact that they just re-branded this phone, you can say that this phone is good comparing to the other products of Micromax.

Everytime, when Micromax comes with their smartphone, they promote it with all they got, and at the end of the day, they just fail to find buyers.

This is not for insulting Micromax, but in my opinion, Micromax should spend more money after their Research and development team than promotions.

Not sure how good this will do for their sales, but one thing is for sure that, doing this will surely improve their image as a smartphone manufacturer by a bit.

Rest will be depended on how their Research and development team will perform.

If we compare this phone to its original model, which is Qiku 360 Q5, then this model is same as that at higher price. So, it would be better to buy Original at lower price, than buying a copied model at higher.

If you don’t take their original model in consideration, then this phone is not that bad, ignoring heating issue, but price is higher for this model.

Which leaves better choices behind at price lower than this, you can check other phones like, Samsung Galaxy C7 Pro at 28K INR, Gionee A1 Selfiestan with Dual Camera at 20K INR and Vivo V5 Moonlight Camera at 18K INR.

Rest is up to you to decide, whether you liked it or not and whether you buy it or not. So, what do you think about this phone? Let us know in comments.|||

First time ever, Micromax came with a Flagship smartphone. Which is Micromax Dual 5.  So, is it good enough? or its just a bad choice??  Let's see. Fasten your seatbelts as Micromax is ready to…