If you know the coding and technical aspects of both frameworks, then you would know for yourself that it’s unfair to perform a one-to-one comparison. They are developed individually to serve a common purpose in a distinct way. PHP Laravel is far more popular these days, compared to Ruby on Rails, it’s highly advocated. But still, one can’t rule out Ruby on rails. Breaking down some key attributes here may certainly be helpful in deciding which framework suits your requisites better. So in this article, we will touch on some common topics and find where both Laravel and Ruby on Rails stands in the comparison. Also, we try to go over the pros and cons of both.

This particular aspect is of paramount importance. After all, it’s your developers, who are the ones developing an application. If they are specialized in PHP, you can choose Laravel over Ruby on Rails, without any second thoughts.

There might well be a situation where you would’ve made your choice and want your developer to systemize that particular choice. Considering that, Laravel is the easiest of the two to learn. Developers will relatively feel comfortable and easy, mastering Laravel. But chances are there, to get carried away by the simplicity of it, giving room for mediocre coding. Whereas, ruby on another hand, proves to be complicated for one to learn. However, there are quality Ruby developers, mostly specialized and dedicated in the Ruby web development streams. Those set of trained developers will generally hold great finesse for web development.

Having talked about the learning curve, it’s necessary to elaborate on the community support offered by the two. Clearly, Laravel has a huge and extended developers community who could help you out with all the framework and application related debriefs. Probably with Ruby, you won’t find as much as an extended community as Laravel. But whatever be the quantity of the support, it tends to be top notch, as most the developers associated with it are highly qualified.

Ruby on rails had a history of scalability related issues. However, fortunately, it didn’t create panic or major concerns among its users. It traces back to a long time. Since then, they have come a long way as far as the ability to scale is concerned. If you forecast such issues happening, there are means to fix that too. A commodity hardware or even cloud space accompanied with modern service can see you overcoming the issue if you ever encounter one. You might face scalability-related problems if you want to scale in excess. Unless and until you don’t own an application which will be accessed by billions across the globe concurrently, you will do fine with both of them.

Looking at the present scheme of things, Ruby on rails requires greater resources in comparison with Laravel. Laravel developers in their beginning stages may find it difficult in eliminating bottlenecks. Whereas for Ruby developers it won’t be a problem at all as they’re seasoned and advanced. For both, the hosting costs may vary depending on the technical specification you’ve stated initially.

Laravel development services and Laravel development companies are overwhelming high, suggesting an increase in the number of users. It may be a popular choice, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that it’s the best choice. Both Laravel and Ruby on Rails can prove to be a great choice. It all comes down to the resources and requirements you have in hand. Ultimately, it’s your developers and their correctness in coding which determines the final outcome.|||

We will touch on some common topics and find where both Laravel and Ruby on Rails stands in the comparison. Also, we try to go over the pros & cons of both.