When it comes to artificial intelligence and robots, the world seems to have gone crazy with the doomsday predictions. Talk of robots potentially outcompeting or destroying humanity. Comments about how the world’s economic systems will go into meltdown with increasing automation. The endless sci-fi films and TV shows where a plucky band of human rebels has to take down an army of machines that’s conquered the world (or gone back in time to conquer the past one).

But while some people will continue fretting about a potential future doomsday, let’s look at something a bit positive. Namely, how to prevent a situation like The Matrix or Terminator ever coming to pass in the first place.

Yeah, it’s pretty obvious isn’t it? The best way to avoid robots overthrowing humanity or causing issues is to minimise the amount of robots in everyday life. Or in even simpler terms:

Not everything needs to have AI.

Your toaster? Let it remain as a plain old, utterly boring toaster. One that toasts bread and absolutely nothing else.

Same with the TV, the video game system, the fridge, the house itself… Just because it can be ‘intelligent’ does not mean it should be. This isn’t the robot equivalent to the Flintstones where every appliance had a tiny dinosaur inside to make it work. Heck, even the Jetsons didn’t act have their technology as all smart mini computers connected to the internet and with a mind of their own inside.

But if you do decide to use robots for something…

4. Limit their ‘intelligence’ to what’s needed for the job

Or in other words, if your robot is designed to make cars… make sure the only thing it can actually do is make cars. Ever wonder why the world’s factory robots don’t rebel?

Well, maybe because they have only enough intelligence to do their job, rather than being the next frontier in human mind simulation technology. They’re also physically restricted to doing one thing, with their machine forms being bolted to the floor and the capability to only use one relevant tool at a time.

And fortunately, most other robot manufacturers seem to be following the same logic. The robot vending machines/shop workers in some experimental shops aren’t trying to replicate literal baristas or waiters, they’re just coffee machine type devices that serve food or drink and can presumably accept some form of credit card payment.

You need a robot that can do a single job well. You don’t need a multipurpose device with all the technology of Mega Man or Inspector Gadget.

Above: Your robot usually doesn’t need to do all this. Image via the Inspector Gadget Wiki.

And if you do need a slightly more capable machine with multiple functions…

Because if you look at ninety nine percent of fiction where machines turn against their masters, it only happens because said machines are far more powerful and heavily armed than they have any right to be.

For example, look at Five Nights at Freddy’s. Having Chuck E Cheese style animatronics that walk around is silly enough, but having them powerful enough to overcome an adult man and shove them into a suit? Why? Why would you design anything to act that way?

Or how about the machines from the Matrix, or the replicants from Blade Runner? They’re supposed to be designed for purposes like doing household chores or keeping people company, yet somehow they’re strong enough to throw adult humans through a brick wall or snap someone’s spine with their bare hands. Again, you don’t need that in a robot built for peaceful purposes. Maybe for a military robot, but then don’t reuse them for civilian purposes.

And for the love of [insert deity here], don’t even try cramming these machines full of high powered weapons and gadgets whose purpose seems to be to take down opposing armies rather than anything normal. Your maid does not need Mega Man’s arsenal:

Your kid’s entertainer robot does not need a flamethrower and buzz saw, like Chortlebot from Wario Land The Shake Dimension:

And it certainly doesn’t need the kind of weaponry used by the golems in Professor Layton and the Azran Legacy, which can seemingly destroy cars and buildings in a single shot:

Making your robots superhuman in their abilities just guarantees it’ll all go wrong sometime in the future. Make them mostly human, with no extra weapons or abilities not granted to normal people. That way, any future rebellion can be squashed like a human one.

But if it all does go to hell…

2. Don’t use small groups of soldiers to fight armies of sentient machines

Seriously. This is the other big problem a lot of fictional world seem to have with robot uprisings. They think dealing them via 19th century tactics is somehow the best way forward. Okay, maybe I’m being too nice there. They usually seem to think hunter gatherer era tactics are the best way forward, the type that assume that the only way to deal with threats is to send small groups deep into enemy territory/the battlefield with a pencil and a water pistol.

It’s a known problem with UNIT in Doctor Who, source of the ever famous quote ‘five rounds rapid’:

But really, the same goes for any sort of sci-fi or fantasy monster attack. Shooting it with small arms while standing around in an open field is not an intelligent way of defeating the enemy hordes. Regardless of whether we’re talking Doctor Who, World War Z or Terminator.

And finally, there’s always a very simple, often overlooked method here…

1. Use robots to fight other robots

You’re already in a world where robots are used in combat and controlled remotely. They’re called drones.

If you’re fighting intelligent robots willing to subjugate or destroy humanity, then you’re also presumably in one where decent remote controlled soldiers are possible with your current level of technology.

So… use them. Don’t ship human soldiers halfway across the planet with a couple of small guns each. Don’t put soldiers inside mecha like in the Animatrix. Just send your own disposable robot army overseas and watch them wipe out the rebels. Worried they’ll rebel? Don’t be, they’re basically drones. Either controlled by a person in a command centre in your territory or designed to wipe out everything that looks like the enemy, without any real brain power so to speak of.

This way, you get a disposable force that can be sent out in large numbers and that doesn’t require you to risk any human soldiers in the process. Something which a lot of science fiction writers seem to badly overlook.

And that’s it! Follow these steps (as necessary), and you can be pretty well assured that the robot revolution dangers warned about by people like Stephen Hawking and Elon Musk won’t come to pass. Design robots so they’re not all powerful, easily manipulated machines that can cause havoc, and voila, you won’t get havoc as a result.

What do you think?|||

When it comes to artificial intelligence and robots, the world seems to have gone crazy with the doomsday predictions. Talk of robots potentially outcompeting or destroying humanity. Comments about…