Malcolm Gladwell’s books have sold tens of millions of copies and changed the lives of people all over the world.

But few people know that Gladwell’s books are deeply inspired by another, lesser-known book:

What’s so amazing about it?

More on what this book has to teach us a bit later.

“We’re adults now, man. I’ve learned to be realistic”

That’s Jarred. We’re at a sushi restaurant in South Florida, catching up for the first time in a few years.

In high school, Jarred made you believe he could do anything. He’d ace all his classes without studying and spend all his time playing around with whatever interested him.

One time, he made a Super Mario game that you could play on your calculator and it spread all over the school — boy was that a nightmare for the math teaching staff.

We all knew he was going to be big.

Jarred’s looking down at his plate now, spreading out a blob of wasabi with his fork.

“It’s a big world out there. Billions of people. What’s the point of doing anything? I’m just one guy, man.”

Call me an optimist, but I can’t agree with Jarred.

Let’s go back Ross and Nisbett’s The Person and the Situation. In it, they introduce a concept that I call the “Mississippi Effect.”

It involves, as you might expect, Mississippi River:

What can one human do against something that powerful, that majestic?

Follow me along for a thought experiment.

Let’s say I bring you the bank of the Mississippi River. I hand you a shovel. “Your job,” I say, “is to change the flow of this river. You are only allowed to use this shovel.”

Could you do it?

Here’s another anecdote about the Mississippi:

This, my friends, is the “Mississippi Effect.”

Small actions, applied in the right place, can have cataclysmic effects.

Here’s a quote from Archimedes of Syracuse, the great mathematician, engineer and scientist:

What can one human do?

Well, if that human has a really long stick and knows where to put it, he can do a lot.

There’s a fundamental truth these analogies are getting at. In life, there are asymmetries. Some powerful actions — like a thousand shovels thrown into the river — have little to no effect. But others, with a single stroke, can literally change the flow of history.

One last asymmetry, perhaps the most powerful.

Here is bestselling author Nassim Taleb on what he calls the minority rule:

I’ll let you judge his argument for yourself, but his main point is not so different from that of the Mississippi Effect — correct application by a small force can have a tremendous global impact.

All it takes, says Taleb, is a few, special people:

We love to talk about equality these days, but let us not confuse equality of opportunity with equality of outcome. Where you start does not dictate where you shall end.

There are lions and there are sheep:

So you’re just one person. And all life gave you was a shovel.|||

Malcolm Gladwell’s books have sold tens of millions of copies and changed the lives of people all over the world. That’s my friend Jarred. We’re at a sushi restaurant in Southern Florida, catching up…