Just before midnight on June 25, 1891, a police detective encountered two women strolling arm-in-arm down Regent Street.  One of the women struck him as being rather odd in appearance.  He approached to investigate, but when he attempted to raise the heavy black veil on the lady’s hat, she firmly knocked his hand away.  It was then that the detective realized that the lady was, in fact, a very elderly gentleman in women’s clothes.  He promptly arrested him.

The elderly gentleman—who stated that his “nom de guerre” was Luke Limner—was taken to Marlborough Street Police Court where he was charged with “being in a public thoroughfare dressed as a woman.”  Initial newspaper reports addressed his behavior with equal parts humor and scorn.  For example, the 27 June 1891 edition of the Aberdeen Evening Express describes him as being “grotesque in appearance.”  While the 29 June 1891 edition of the York Herald labels him “an extraordinary freak of an old gentleman.”

Aged anywhere from 64 to 75 (depending on the report), Mr. Limner presented what many found to be a comical appearance.  He was bald with a bristly, grey moustache and wore a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles perched on his nose.  In every other respect, however, he was dressed as a woman.  As the Aberdeen Evening Express reports:

In addition to this somewhat eccentric ensemble, the York Herald reports that Mr. Limner was also wearing a “mass of artificial fringe” attached to his forehead.”  False hair was quite popular during the late nineteenth century and could be bought in large or small pieces and pinned into one’s existing hair.  Given that he was bald, it is not entirely clear how Mr. Limner adhered his false fringe to his forehead.

When asked to account for his behavior, Mr. Limner told the court that he was an artist and a writer of “one of the most popular works extant.”  He stated that he had “conceived the idea” of writing a book on women’s fashion.  However, he did not feel that he could accurately write about such things without experiencing them himself.  As he enquired of the court:

Mr. Limner went on to describe the history and functionality of each of the items he was wearing.  He stated that the hat he wore was “originally worn by men” and that the cape with Medici collar had been “fashionable in the reign of Henry VIII.”  The Aberdeen Evening Express reports that he then lifted up his skirts to reveal “a pair of slim calves covered with dark blue stockings,” and declared to the court that:

At the conclusion of Mr. Limner’s statement, the presiding judge, Mr. Newton, asked the jailor whether or not it was true that Mr. Limner was a known author.  Mr. Limner replied, “Oh, everybody knows me.  I have written for the ‘Graphic.’”  His claim carried little weight with the court.  As the Aberdeen Evening Express reports:

Was the elderly gentleman in women’s clothing really an author doing research?  It appears that he may have been.  Luke Limner was, in fact, the pen name of John Leighton, a Victorian artist and book cover designer who, in 1891, would have been 69-years-old.  In 1847, he wrote a book on women’s fashion titled Madre Natura or the Moloch of Fashion.  In it, he railed against the excesses of women’s fashions and accused the female sex of stuffing their heads with “flounces and furbelows, ribbons and gauze, exhausting their fine imaginations, instead of diverting them into worthy channels.”

In 1874, the fourth edition of Madre Natura was published.  When arrested, the cross-dressing gentleman purporting to be Limner stated that a fifth edition of his most popular book would soon be released.  Was this a fifth edition of Madre Natura?  And, if so, did Leighton/Limner decide that it was about time he dressed up in women’s clothing and discovered for himself whether or not (as he states in his book) high heels really caused “injury to the Achilles tendon” or corsets really did displace the abdominal organs?  This certainly seems possible.  However, as the 27 June 1891 edition of the Globe so reasonably points out:

**If you would like to learn more about John Leighton and Madre Natura, the following links may be useful:

The Book Cover Designs of John Leighton (The Victorian Web)

Luke Limner, Madre Natura Versus The Moloch Of Fashion (Courtland Institute of Art)

Mimi Matthews is the author of The Pug Who Bit Napoleon: Animal Tales of the 18th and 19th Centuries (to be released by Pen and Sword Books in November 2017).  She researches and writes on all aspects of nineteenth century history—from animals, art, and etiquette to fashion, beauty, feminism, and law.

Leighton, John.  Madre Natura versus the Moloch of Fashion, a social essay by Luke Limner. 4th Edition. London: Chatto & Windus, 1874.

For exclusive information on upcoming book releases, giveaways, and other special treats, subscribe to Mimi’s Quarterly Newsletter by clicking the link below.

You can also connect with Mimi on Facebook and Twitter.|||

Just before midnight on June 25, 1891, a police detective encountered two women strolling arm-in-arm down Regent Street.  One of the women struck him as being rather odd in appearance.  He approached to investigate, but when he attempted to raise the heavy black veil on the lady’s hat, she firmly knocked his hand away.  It…