In a series of 4 articles, we will talk more about Nuveo Products and what we develop to improve results on different companies - and make our world better - XTRACT

This product was the main reason of our existence. Xtract - and Nuveo, for that matter - was born from a project with an NGO ( )

In Brazil, there's a government program that incentivizes people to collect businesses invoices, basically because a lot of companies and small businesses do not print these documents - for tax evasion purposes. Of course, this is illegal and very difficult for the government to track.

The program is called “Nota Fiscal Paulista”, in the São Paulo state. If you ask for your invoice you can donate part of the taxes to an NGO. But you need to give your physical copy to an NGO. You can send to them directly or place these invoices inside any collection boxes, just like this one bellow.

The main problem is that, to get these credits, the NGO needs to fill out online forms with information from that invoice. For this to get done, they need to hire people to manually include that information, therefore diminishing their profit in this process.

With Nuveo Technology, we automatized this process, getting critical information from the image of an invoice using a simple scanner or a picture from a smartphone, and include that information automatically in the government’s website.

Basically, Xtract is a technology that can get critical information from documents (pictures, scanners, etc) like these ones bellow:

After getting that information, we convert it into workable and structured data. After this step, we can create any workflow that simulate a human being working. Our 'secret sauce' lies on working with complexes algorithms that can enhance any image and can interpret any information in real time. This process enables our clientes to work with any legacy of a company.

For this other process, we will talk about Query... but this will come in another article.

Do you see Nuveo running in your company? Talk to us.|||

