One of our client’s operates a p2p marketplace app. We bootstrapped their marketplace by starting Facebook communities. We observed the best feedback (remarkable stories and low CPA’s) from the sneaker community. This then became the niche we focussed on.

The Facebook sneaker community was an outlier. Cost per Facebook like were 5x as low as the average of our test communities [1]. Also, our Facebook ad relevance scores were always around 9.0 [2]. Not because our ads were great, but simply because of the trendiness of the movement. Since then we’ve scaled this Facebook community to 80k.

Meet Skya, who is a fervid sneaker collector [3]. He camped out for 2–3 days at Nike Lab London. He was number 9/400 to get in on the wristband. The wristband gave him a first right to buy VLONE Nike Air Force 1’s. VLONES are limited edition sneakers designed by rapper A$AP Bari (A$AP Mob).

Skya paid £250 (retail price) and could instantly resell them for £1500. That is a 500% price increase. This sounds exceptional, but it’s not. Other limited edition sneakers fetch similar prices. The global resell market for sneakers is >$1 billion (2014, estimation).

One reseller told me his story about buying and selling “Adidas NMD” sneakers. When they came out they were sold by Adidas for £150. He resold them for £300. But the price kept going up until £700 and he felt like he missed out. He should have waited.

Then Adidas re-released more of the same sneaker and flooded the market. The sneaker value dropped to below £200. Buying and selling limited edition sneakers is like playing the stock market.

Two common principles in start-ups are: “focus on a niche”, and “it is better to have 100 people who love your product as opposed to 1.000.000 people who like it”. They are true, but they miss a crucial point: “which niche can truly unlock start-up growth?” and “who will really love it”.

Etsy, who grew to IPO and a $2 Billion Valuation, in the early days appealed to the feminist crafter movement. They rode the wave of the anti-consumerist movement and its ethos. They got a lot of good PR because of that. Are there any similar movements existing today that start-ups can capitalise on?

There is a concept called “newsjacking”. It’s about injecting your idea or brand into a breaking news story. Newsjacking gets you media attention. Cultjacking is a variation of that concept, but applied to early stage start-up growth.

Cultjacking is when a start-up finds a minimum viable segment (MVS) through alignment with a movement / subculture. The start-up engages, learns and adapts (it’s product and ethos) to the subculture. By doing so it can ride the wave of the movement and get more media attention to the start-up.

Kendall Jenner’s Pepsi ad is not cultjacking. They co-opted a resistance movement while showing a privileged, white 21-year-old supermodel as a peacemaker between civil rights activists and police. The difference is in the ethos. It’s about a collaborative approach between start-up and subculture.|||

Meet Skya, who is a fervid sneaker collector. He camped out for 2–3 days at Nike Lab London. He was number 9/400 to get in on the wristband. The wristband gave him a first right to buy VLONE Nike Air…