There's a new feature Instagram added, a carousel designed specifically for your posts, and it's a very good idea. Here's what we know and how to use it.

There are two types of "carousels" that can apply to Instagram, and to forestall any confusion we're going to clear this up right now. Traditional Instagram carousels refer to carousel ads, in which you submit an ad on a platform like Facebook or Instagram that have several different slides or versions, often with the same message and logo. These images are put in rotation in the ad space, which keeps viewers from getting board and allows you to offer more varied visual content to meet the needs of different target audients.

That is not what we're talking about.

There is a new carousel feature that Instagram adopted that allows your posts (not your ads) to function as carousels of rotating, slide-like images or short videos that people can review within a single post.

You can put up to 10 photos/videos in a single swipe-base carousel collection: Viewers will be able to tell if a post is a carousel because it will have a row of blue dots at the bottom that indicates you can swipe to see more.

The goal of a carousel perspective is to tell a better story, to draw viewers more deeply into the experience. That's good news for brands! It means you can layer your posts with a series of pictures that gives far more information about an activity, site, product, project, etc. A single image can be provocative, but it can't say much about a process or a series of steps. A carousel can, and that really opens up the field. You can also tag individual people in each photo while having overall captions and hashtags that apply to the whole rotation.

From a marketing perspective, carousels are also easier to use in many cases. When putting together a post, you don't have to decide on a single best photo/video to use. You can take the several top options and put them all together for maximum effect, without crowding out the news feed.

Obviously there are some things that carousels don't work well for. A single shot of a landscape or environment is usually enough – several similar shots aren't going to add much more. But here are a few considerations for carousel-worthy shots.

Now that you're sick of seeing the word "carousel," we're going to wrap up with a quick look to the future. Instagram is likely to keep this feature while adding more usability: For now only square format images are accepted, but this is likely to expand. Instagram will also be looking at how the carousel affects appearance in the news feed. Will carousels get better placement than single photos? Expect another post when we find out.|||

Four ideas for using Instagram carousel photos to add to your B2B social media engagement include: product DIY, construction sites, data flow and events.