For those of us who live in the United States today is the deadline to postmark your taxes.  When I mailed my taxes I realized that this was one of the only times in the past year I used the mail system.  As a programmer I'm much more familiar with email and slack but their is some interesting technology behind our mail system.

The USPS handles around half of the world's mail by volume.  That is a lot of sorting, sorting can be a time consuming process so a solution was needed.  In the 1960s it was clear that a solution was required.  Enter sorting machines powered by optical character recognition.  By the mid 1980s all of the USPS's mail processing centers had OCR sorting machines which could sort 6,200 pieces per hour compared to the 1,750 pieces per hour that a human can manage.  Now over 98% of all mail is sorted with the use of optical character recognition.

It's one thing to extract the information about where a piece of mail is going, another is to sort it.  The USPS uses hundreds of miles of conveyor belts to combined with thousands of packing trays and hundreds of sorting machines.  Mail in sorting trays is sorted in order of the carriers routes to ease distribution down the pipeline.

Once the mail pieces leave the post office technology is still in the picture.  Mail carriers carry devices called Mobile Delivery Devices for scanning packages and mail items that are tracked by the USPS.  Unfortunately MDDs aren't working out as well as expected.  Carriers report problems with the hardware freezing frequently and rapidly chewing through battery life.  The inspector general found that carriers were not adhering to best practices and in many cases received little to no training.  While I can't find out how much the program exactly cost it appears to have been in the millions of dollars, check out the inspector generals report here.

Perhaps incredibly, the USPS is a profitable arm of the government, it is self funded, receiving no tax dollars.  Something to keep in mind as you mail in your taxes.|||

For those of us who live in the United States today is the deadline to postmark your taxes.  When I mailed my taxes I realized that this was one of the only times in the past year I used the mail...