We have all seen those sci-fi movies, which have left us speechless and have sent us cold shivers. From the nerve crackling experience of walking around the Mars to battling a war, we must admit that each and every virtual event is a heart taking experience for us all. All the credit goes to the virtual reality, which is now trending not just in movies, but in various other sectors such as real estate, hardware, marketing and gaming too.

Along with the leading companies like Google, Facebook , Samsung, and Microsoft ruling over the market of virtual reality, there is still enough space in the room for new startups to make an impact. The global investment on AR/VR technology have been immense according to the data shown by tech advisor Digi-Capital. While the startups are fighting with initial requirements such as infrastructure and network, the industry is blooming with a rapid speed. Here, in this blog we are going to present you 10 virtual reality App developers in India, which are changing the way of human-computer interaction.

Headquartered in Bangalore, GazeMatic was founded in 2015 by Karthikeyan NG & MohanRaj MS. It is a hub of every de-facto company in the Indian startup ecosystem. The company believes that communication in a virtual environment is about to become a new trend to connect with the people at every corner in the world, on this, they have made a new mobile application “The Caller”, which is based on virtual reality. Interestingly, the application is one of its kind, which can teleport the user while she/he is on call with a friend.

The application crossed a mind blowing 5000 downloads in the first month of its release, without spending even a single penny on marketing. It currently has 2000+ experience videos and users have made more than 20,000 calls on it till now. The application is currently available only in Android Play store at free of cost, but the company is all set to introduce its iOS application too and will also make it available on Samsung and Oculus store apps. The major task for the company is going to be releasing the app with live streaming, which will completely make it a teleporting app.

The ‘Grey Kernel’ is one of the country’s first Virtual Reality & Advance Visualization technology startup. Its flagship application “IRA VR” is also one of the most successful Indian Virtual Reality app on Play Store. The application received tremendous response in just a few weeks of its launch and now hosts In house developed content by Grey Kernel.

The company’s first VR demo was for Oculus Rift DK2, which was ranked in top 10 weekly downloads on RoadToVR (a leading International VR e-journal). Most of the VR companies are focused on making 360 degree videos, Grey Kernel on the other hand is completely focused on making Stereoscopic/Interactive VR content & solving engineering/distribution for their clients, which includes Publishing agencies, Marketing agencies and real estate.

Meraki is one of the India’s first Virtual Reality content production studio, which was founded in November 2015 by Arvind Ghorwal, Sairam Sagiraju, Parth Choksi and Agam Garg. They work for creating tourism, 360 degree films for events, advertisements, adventure, sports, real estate, experiential marketing, fiction, weddings, and news.

The core team of the company comprises graduates from IIT Mumbai along with a Filmmaker, which reflects the nature of the Virtual Reality content market ,a combination of technology and creativity. The company has achieved an outstanding milestone in a very short time from inception and has completed six major projects from giant clients including Star Sports, Network 18, Percept Pictures and Channel V.

SAG IPL is a Jaipur based company, which has been providing services in this sector from past two years. The company is blessed with a skilled and creative team of architects, thinkers, filmmakers, photographers, producers, technologists, R&D specialists, and developers, who works in a very efficient way to deliver a new experience within its every offering.

SmartVizX Pvt. Ltd. has been placed at “Startup-of The Week” by NASSCOM and is one of the highest funded startup in VR world. The company offers a wide range of interactive and immersive VR solutions across a variety of devices such as mobile, tablet, laptop, desktop etc.

The company currently provides its service to AEC (Architecture, Engineering and Construction) industry. The company’s current offerings VI-VIZ, ARCH-VIZ, ARCH-VIZ (Mobile) etc., are blessed with some unique features, which includes view of immediate surroundings from balconies and other vantage points, controllable and interactive walkthroughs of entire project actual simulation of sunlight during any particular time of the day etc.

SpectraVR Studios is a Mumbai based full stack Virtual Reality Content Studio, which was founded in 2015 by Rothenberg Ventures, a San Francisco based leading investor firm. The company focuses on storytelling and has arranged an experienced team of skilled and creative directors, designers, technologists and VR enthusiasts to provide a wide range of services in this sector. The company delivers its services as a live experience, creative media, animated 3D virtual reality experiences and games.

The company has already delivered 30 major VR projects since its starting in December 2015 for some of the top brands in India like Mercedes Benz, Kingfisher, Maruti Suzuki, The Deltin Hotels, Standard Chartered Bank, WonderLa Amusement Park, Red Chillies Entertainment for promotion of a song from their movie Dilwale, T-Series Music Company, Times Now news channel for their ‘Amazing Indians’ show with the Hon. Prime Minister Mr. Narendra Modi, to name a few.

Tesseract Inc. is basically an Indian hardware firm, which is the first company in the world that created a 360 degree camera. It works with a vision of making everybody capable of capturing their memories in 360 degree and VR to relive then as if they are in the same time again. It focuses to completely transform the way of recording, consuming, and sharing of content.

The company offered technologies such as Methane 360 VR, which are getting used by companies such as MakeMyTrip, Tistus (leading real-estate firm in Brazil), Solund House (leading real-estate firm in Denmark), Nestaway, Grabhouse and other top travel and real-estate firms in India. The company has also planned to introduce their consumer grade 360 Virtual Reality Camera – ViCAM some time later in this year, which is also the world’s smallest 360 Virtual Reality Camera.

The company was founded in October 2015, and headquarters at the Foothills of Shivalik ranges, Chandigarh. Along with a team of passionate architects, thinkers, filmmakers, photographers, producers, technologists, R&D specialists, and developers, the company works with an aim of going beyond the limits.

Focusing on the next level of storytelling and interaction, the company is currently working for providing highly immersive VR content and applications for tourism, documentaries, real estate, brand story, education and various other sectors.

Trimensions is a Delhi-based award winning UX design and digital services providing agency, which pioneers in both AR (Augmented Reality) and VR (Virtual Reality) in India and fluently crossed verticals including entertainment, enterprise and education. The company aims in developing new approaches to train new people in this sector. It has also ventured into 360 video production, AR for machine maintenance and VR for training simulations.

Trimenssions has been aimed in bringing up new technologies for common citizens of India and emphasises on great design and better user experience. It also offers many end-to-end services such as graphic designing and web designing.

Xenium has been offering its services in this sector from past two years and it believes that VR empowers businesses with new visualization techniques, researchers with tools that accelerate scientific discovery and developers with fresh creative potential. The company had started working over this technology long ago when wireless Headgears like Oculus Rift, Samsung Gear VR were not even available in the Market.

Xenium is the first company in India and fourth company in the world, which have done a live streaming using Virtual Reality. The real-time broadcast was captured via 8 vantage points (i.e. 8 units of 360 Live Shooting Camera) and streaming done over a 10 MBS line on the Telecom Network.

Maybe the Silicon Valley firms are way ahead by any other industry in this sector, India has also started to move further in this field. A report by Goldman Sachs, which was published earlier this year says that the combined virtual reality and augmented reality market is expected to reach anywhere from $80B to $182B in market size, by 2025.|||

