Gone are the days one could only read one book to receive all the knowledge it would ever need. Nowadays, one needs to be in a continuous learning mode. Or risk becoming of little importance due to ones lack of literacy.

That is why I spend an hour a day going through all kinds of ideas. Either by reading books or skimming through newsletters and blog posts.

Although at first it might be hard work identifying the right bulletins to follow. Therefore I’ve listed my favourite ones down below, focusing on online editions that are dropped in my mailbox.

Ever since I opened an account on Medium, I’ve grown to love this community. Especially after Ev got me paying for the platform as well — so far, so good.

However, I do not read everything posted on the thing. Moreover, I only read Medium’s daily digest that drops 3+ post (up to 20) to my inbox per day.

In my case, it varies from top stories in Startup and Business to posts by the CEO of Basecamp. All (somehow) very insightful and enjoyable to read.

I’ve not skipped any Seth’s posts from the time I subscribed to his email newsletter. It’s simply a great way to start a day going through some sane thoughts.

Yup, they do not outright teach me anything about marketing or fundraising. But they do give me a lot of food for thought.

Fred’s another person whose daily thoughts are worth following. Although his are mostly about startups and investing, thus not a perfect fit for everyone.

Still, he has seen a fair share of disruptions to know one or two things about life itself. Sometimes even about marketing and sales.

This is the first “real “curated newsletter on this list, all about top stories in tech.

It’s an initiative jason must have brought alive, though he’s not writing it himself. Thus not sure who’s behind this one, but it’s truly amazing.

Moreover, it’s helping everyone be up to date with all important news in tech as they come.

The Hustle is an email newsletter for savvy forward thinkers interested in business news. They find, explore, and uncover original content on stories that inspire.

This one’s only published from Monday to Friday, and includes 3–4 short and witty summaries of various business news. In particular, I like the humour of it.

Let me know if I missed any of the ones you love…|||

In the age of information overload, one needs to seriously control the sources it is following. Here’s the list of newsletters I follow!