In Card Thief you move through a deck of cards as a stealthy thief. Sneak in the shadows, extinguish torches, pickpocket guards and steal valuable treasures without getting caught. In your thief hideout you can use your stolen goods to unlock powerful equipment cards. Each heist you can use 3 equipment cards to become a skillful master thief.

Card Thief, the official follow up to Tinytouchtales excellent dungeon crawler Card Crawl, attempts to condense the classic stealth genre into a solitaire style card game. The game offers an accessible core gameplay with a deep layer of tactical planning and various risk reward mechanics on top. In 4 different heists you can test your skills against various enemy and trap types. By successfully completing heists you can unlock and upgrade 12 equipment cards each with a unique ability to improve your highscores.

"And that's what I have to recommend with Card Thief, is that you stick with it. It might not click right away, but it will click eventually, and there's so much of a rewarding experience here, with new content to unlock. However you play it, this is a must-play, and a game I don't see leaving my iPhone any time soon. Just be patient." - Toucharcade.com 



 "Visually rich and a real corker of a design, Card Thief is a must-try for puzzle or solitaire aficionados and a good starting point as any for newcomers." - Pockettactics.com 



 "Card Thief is proof that Tinytouchtales’ success with Card Crawl wasn’t a fluke. They really know how to make compelling and thoughtful mobile titles and, like my other favorite creators, I’ll be waiting eagerly to see whatever their twisted minds can come up with next." - Statelyplay.com 



 "I could see Card Thief being a disappointment to those who like Card Crawl's straightforward translation of dungeon-crawling into a Solitaire game. 

But, if you enjoyed Card Crawl and were hoping for a successor that would take its concepts to the next level, Card Thief just might grab a permanent spot in your game folder." - 148Apps.com 



 "It was considered quite difficult to surpass the excellent Card Crawl and yet the independent studio Tinytouchtales has completely accomplished their misson." - Kickmygeek.com 



 "If you were waiting on a successful follow up to the modern classic Card Crawl you won't be disappointed. The core gameplay of risk & reward was perfectly executed once again." - Appgemeinde.de 



 "Card Thief has its heartbreaking moments, but beneath its occasional hiccups sits a fun card game which certainly satiates our hunger for strategy." - Pocketgamer.co.uk 







Follow Card Thief on Twitter or Facebook

Take a look at the Presskit.

Card Thief is designed by TiNYTOUCHTALES.

 Art by Max Fiedler. 

Audio by Oliver Salkic.|||

