According to information researchers at IDC, traditional PCs (desktop, notebook, workstation) totaled 60.3 million units in the first quarter of 2017 (1Q17), a year-over-year growth of 0.6%; the first increase since 2012. It’s been a tough challenge for the traditional PC Market. The IDC explained that longer PC lifecycles and competition from tablets and smartphones have decreased PC shipments down 30% from their peak in 2011.

“Nevertheless, users have generally delayed PC replacements rather than giving up PCs for other devices. The commercial market is beginning a replacement cycle that should drive growth throughout the forecast. Consumer demand will remain under pressure, although growth in segments like PC Gaming as well as rising saturation of tablets and smartphones will move the consumer market toward stabilization as well.”

HP Inc. has reclaimed the top spot for worldwide traditional PC shipments; the first time since their first quarter of 2013. Lenovo is second, experiencing their first decline in the U.S. since their third quarter in 2009. Dell claimed third place and has experienced growth in all regions with their notebook sales. Apple grew 4.1% year over year. Acer regained their fifth-place position. The IDC also claimed that the PC Market stabilized in Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA), remained soft in Asia/Pacific, and recovered in Japan; their first year-on-year growth since 2014.

Market research firm, Gartner, claims PC shipments have declined 2.4 percent in the first quarter though. Verge reported this discrepancy is due to chrome books and window tablets: “IDC’s data includes Chromebooks and excludes Windows tablets, even machines with a detachable keyboard like the Surface Pro. Gartner counts Windows-based tablets as PCs and excludes Chromebooks or any non-Windows-based tablets.” So take these statistics for what they are at the end of the day; it depends on what you count as a traditional PC.|||

According to information researchers at the IDC, traditional PCs (desktop, notebook, workstation) totaled 60.3 million units in the first quarter of 2017.