In the LCD monitor production, there are different types of panel technologies are used. Each technology has its own advantages and usefulness for a particular use. We have seen the comparison of TN Vs IPS panel technologies and found which one is better for gaming in our previous post. Today, we will see the difference of PLS Vs IPS monitors and check their features and specifications. Let us explain the two of the popular LCD monitor panel technologies; PLS panel and IPS panel.

The PLS (Plane to Line Switching) monitor technology is an improved version of an IPS (In Panel Switching) technology. The PLS monitors are produced by Samsung basically and are claimed to provide better brightness, viewing angles, and image quality at lower prices. The technology is also sometimes known as Super PLS Panel.

The IPS (In-Plane Switching) monitors are generally known as the best LCD panel technology in terms of image quality, viewing angles, and color reproduction. The IPS panel technology was developed by LG and feature a higher resolution than most of the other LCD panels. Though the technology was invented by LG, a few other top brands like Dell, ASUS, AOC, etc. also provide a wide range of IPS monitors.

The IPS panels have some iterations like; H-IPS, S-IPS, P-IPS, and e-IPS. Though all of them have similar technologies, the e-IPS panels offer a 6-bit color depth only, and the H-IPS panels have a different pixel structure than others.

Though the basic functionalities of both the panel technologies are moreover similar to each other, the PLS panel has some more minor advantages over the IPS panel.  It can be said as an improved version of the IPS panel technology. Let’s check the quick compare table of PLS Vs IPS monitors.

Generally, people take an interest in the screen size, budget, and resolution while buying a monitor unit. Monitor ranges from a matte finish to glossy finish, from a game-friendly refresh rate of 60Hz to high frame rate of 144Hz, from a USB powered monitor to display with 3D capabilities, etc. But, most of them forget about checking the panel technology used on the screen they are buying and this happens mainly because it is not mentioned in a prominent area.

The fundamental working principle of the different monitor panel technologies is same, but they differ in some specific benchmark to provide a user-friendly experience to meet the needs. The general users do not aware about the LCD panel technology used in their monitors, and it does not make too much difference too. However, if you know the advantages and disadvantages of a particular monitor panel, then you can easily decide which will be the best for your specific demands.

Here we have explained two of the popular panel technologies – PLS Vs IPS and tried to specify their features which can help you to decide your perfect match.|||

In the LCD monitor production, there are different types of panel technologies are used. Each technology has its own advantages and usefulness for a particular use. We have seen the comparison of TN Vs IPS panel technologies and found which one is better for gaming in our previous post. Today, we will see the difference…