You lose your personal information and data once your ISP takes hold of it. This guide will help you hide browser history from your ISP.

Following the controversial ‘sold out’ voting of Congress members in favor of ISPs power to sell subscribers information to the highest bidder, President Trump has signed on the Anti-privacy bill to alter the previous rules set by the FCC. The giant ISPs like AT&T, Time Warner, and Comcast bounded by the rules to ask their customer before selling their information now have the freedom to sell the information without any prior consent. The action has outburst the debate of privacy all over United States between the partisan and the privacy advocates. While the Congress House is divided into two groups the question for us still remains now with more importance that how to protect our privacy?

Whenever we connect our devices to the Internet, they communicate with other networks via data packets. Each packet carry some information about our device and us be it social networking, web surfing, banking transactions, etc. Such sensitive information can be used not only for analytics purpose but also it can be a backdoor to government for deliberately spying on its citizens without going through hassle of hacking techniques e.g. everyone knows about the collaboration of the DEA and AT&T.

The fact of the point is your information is exposed in the wild and you are left with two options. Either you change your ISP to a more privacy friendly one which might be not possible depending on which area you are in, or, you follow the privacy measures to hide browser history and other online activities by encrypting your Internet data packets. This guide on How to Hide Browser History will help you render your ISPs inoperative in tracking your activities on the web.

You can encrypt your Internet traffic to hide browser history and other online activities by using:

If you are looking for immediate solution to this epidemic situation then you should opt for a commercial VPN service. Virtual Private Network or VPN encrypts your Internet traffic with 256-bit AES encryption algorithm which takes 1 billion years to break using brute force attack according to researches made. Moreover, it cloaks your IP address to make it harder for ISPs and third party advertisers to track you on the web.

These two basic functions of a VPN help you hide browser history and overall Internet traffic. However, you should be cautious while selecting a VPN and must check out the privacy policy and payment method as you are turning your information to the VPN provider. Some of the industry leading VPN services trusted by users around the world are NordVPN, ExpressVPN, and PureVPN mainly because:

TOR is a volunteer service and it provides both anonymity and privacy against your ISP monitoring and the TOR network itself. You can connect to TOR network using the TOR browser which works like other browsers and help you hide browser history from your ISP.

However, the anonymity and privacy is limited to the TOR browser only and the rest of your Internet traffic is still exposed. Since, TOR is a volunteer service and different gateways (nodes) to pass your Internet through; therefore it is most of the time slow to browse the web.

If you want to use TOR without the TOR browser, you can opt for NordVPN which provides TOR-over-VPN functionality in its service to completely hide browser history and rest of the Internet traffic.

When BeEncrypted asked Marty P. Kamden of NordVPN about the TOR he said, “We understand the power of decentralized structure and the anonymity that TOR provides.  NordVPN offers a unique solution Onion (Tor) over VPN that encrypts user Internet traffic before entering TOR network, ensuring additional privacy.”

HTTPS browser extension is another feasible option you can use to hide browser history from ISPs. It works by preventing your browser from disclosing any online activity.

HTTPS browser extension protects you from various types of surveillance and censorship by automatically switching many websites from vulnerable “HTTP” to secure “HTTPS” sites. Hence, it encrypts almost every website you visit. Although your ISP would know which site you visited, but they can never gain access to your online activity.

Since the Anti-privacy bill has become a law therefore the urgency of privacy protection is a necessity of time. The subscription of VPN services has spiked and is an immediate solution to hide browser history and overall digital privacy on the web. You must always use HTTPs extension to force websites to provide SSL version of their websites.|||

This anti-privacy bill is just the beginning of the anti-privacy era. That’s the reason why we cannot just simply lay helpless at the hands of the ISPs... Following the controversial ‘sold out’ voting of Congress members in favor of ISPs power to sell subscribers information to the highest bidder, President Trump has signed on the Anti-privacy bill to alter the previous rules set by the FCC. The giant ISPs like AT&T, Time Warner, and Comcast bounded by the rules to ask their customer before selling their information now have the freedom to sell the information without any prior consent. The action has outburst the debate of privacy all over United States between the partisan and the privacy advocates. While the Congress House is divided into two groups the question for us still remains now with more importance that how to protect our privacy? Whenever we connect our devices to the Internet, they communicate with other networks via data packets. Each packet carry some information about our device and us be it social networking, web surfing, banking transactions, etc. Such sensitive information can be used not only for analytics purpose but also it can be a backdoor to government for deliberately spying on its citizens without going through hassle of hacking techniques e.g. everyone knows about the collaboration of the DEA and AT&T. How to Hide Browser History? The fact of the point is your information is exposed in the wild and you are left with two options. Either you change your ISP to a more privacy friendly one which might be not possible depending on which area you are in, or, you follow the privacy measures to hide browser history and other online activities by encrypting your Internet data packets. This guide on How to Hide Browser History will help you render your ISPs inoperative in tracking your activities on the web. You can encrypt your Internet traffic to hide browser history and other online activities by using: Virtual Private Networks - VPN If you are looking for immediate solution to this epidemic situation then you should opt for a commercial VPN service. Virtual Private Network or VPN encrypts your Internet traffic with 256-bit AES encryption algorithm which takes 1 billion years to break using brute force attack according to researches made. Moreover, it cloaks your IP address to make it harder for ISPs and third party advertisers to track you on the web. These two basic functions of a VPN help you hide browser history and overall Internet traffic. However, you should be cautious while selecting a VPN and must check out the privacy policy and payment method as you are turning your information to the VPN provider. Some of the industry leading VPN services trusted by users around the world are NordVPN, ExpressVPN, and PureVPN mainly because: They are outside the jurisdiction of FIVE EYES member countries. Follows strict NO LOG policy (which means as soon as your information is generated on their servers it is immediately sent to /dev/null directory – as pointed out by NordVPN as Black Hole). Encrypts your Internet traffic with 256-bit AES encryption and OpenVPN security protocol. Vast majority of servers to choose from. Security features like Split Tunnel (PureVPN) and Tor-over-VPN (NordVPN). They hide browser history and other Internet activities. TOR Network TOR is a volunteer service and it provides both anonymity and privacy against your ISP monitoring and the TOR network itself. You can connect to TOR network using the TOR browser which works like other browsers and help you hide browser history from your ISP. However, the anonymity and privacy is limited to the TOR browser only and the rest of your Internet traffic is still exposed. Since, TOR is a volunteer service and different gateways (nodes) to pass your Internet through; therefore it is most of the time slow to browse the web. If you want to use TOR without the TOR browser, you can opt for NordVPN which provides TOR-over-VPN functionality in its service to completely hide browser history and rest of the Internet traffic. When BeEncrypted asked Marty P. Kamden of NordVPN about the TOR he said, “We understand the power of decentralized structure and the anonymity that TOR provides.  NordVPN offers a unique solution Onion (Tor) over VPN that encrypts user Internet traffic before entering TOR network, ensuring additional privacy.” Use HTTPS Browser Extension HTTPS browser extension is another feasible option you can use to hide browser history from ISPs. It works by preventing your browser from disclosing any online activity. HTTPS browser extension protects you from various types of surveillance and censorship by automatically switching many websites from vulnerable “HTTP” to secure “HTTPS” sites. Hence, it encrypts almost every website you visit. Although your ISP would know which site you visited, but they can never gain access to your online activity. Conclusion Since the Anti-privacy bill has become a law therefore the urgency of privacy protection is a necessity of time. The subscription of VPN services has spiked and is an immediate solution to hide browser history and overall digital privacy on the web. You must always use HTTPs extension to force websites to provide SSL version of their websites.