Working from home is a dream come true, but Monday will always be Monday. It's the day to get back in the swing of things and focus on the week ahead. So regardless if you enjoyed a relaxing weekend at home binging on Netflix, partying until the wee hours, or just running errands, try these 5 ways to get motivated to work and start off your week right with some Monday Motivation.

If you stayed home most of the weekend, you may need a change of scenery and with an office on the go, here’s what I often do:

Gather your laptop, agenda, notebook, and any other pertinent items of your daily routine and head out the door. With so many coffee shops with wifi, it's easy to find a place to work remotely, and depending on the noise levels, here are some alternatives. Try a quiet cafe, set yourself up at a table and maybe a healthy breakfast and settle in. I enjoy both the atmosphere and the food at Panera. Another one of my favorite offices on the go would be the Capital One Cafe. They have many work spaces as well as beverages and light snacks available and if you are a Capital One cardholder, you are given a substantial discount.

If you spent most of your weekend out of the house, settling in for a productive day at your home office is just the thing. Start the day with a Hot cup of coffee or Tea and make a list of the day's necessities. Keep an optimistic outlook and sometimes it helps to have your favorite inspirational quote on your desk.

If you have meetings or appointments out of your home, plan for a positive day. Check the weather to be sure you’ll be dressed warm or cool enough. Be sure to have a good meal before heading out, you don't want to snack on fast food and bring your energy levels down during the day. And be sure to use a GPS App to avoid heavy traffic and delays. One of my favorite is Waze as it will guide you to alternative routes.

One of the most motivating facts in work is to get positive feedback on a job well done, or get advice from others, however when you're working from home and you are your own boss, giving yourself a pat on the back or constructive criticism isn't always the same. When you need motivation or advice have a friend, relative, or colleague that understands your business and run your thoughts and ideas by them. You could get just the feedback you need.

Lastly, whether you are at home, on the go, or working remotely, completion of tasks is key to motivation. Always have a daily task list, and at the end of the day, be sure to mark off what was accomplished and if you were unable to complete everything, assign those uncompleted tasks to another day. There's a feeling of accomplishment and productivity to a simple checkmark.

So wherever your work takes you, have an amazing Monday and week ahead!|||

Learn how you can get motivated to work from home even if you just want to snuggle in bed. Try these 5 ways to get motivated for the week ahead.