When you’re considering implementing a search engine optimization (SEO) strategy, choosing the right person to optimize your site is crucial.

Conducting an audit and coming up with a plan to optimize your site for each of Google’s 200 ranking factors could result in a list of thousands of potential SEO tasks. Some will be worth the time and effort of implementation, and some won’t.

Mistakes in prioritization can be costly. Focusing on the wrong tasks can require tremendous effort that—in the end—yields sub-par returns. And ineffective, expensive results aren’t even the worst possibility.

If Google interprets your optimization tactics as black-hat SEO, you could be removed from search results altogether.

Good SEO requires time, effort, and expertise. Exceptional SEOs are experienced and learned. They’ve spent years implementing SEO strategies, have gained valuable insights from their successes and failures, and have taken the time to review studies and gain insights from other industry experts.

Over 120 SEO agencies are listed on Hubstaff Talent . . . and you can hire them with no fees

Finding the right SEO provider takes time, research, and effort. But when the decision could result in either increased traffic or a complete loss, it’s worth the upfront investment.

When considering adopting an SEO strategy, you have three main options. You can try to do the work yourself, hire a full-time SEO specialist, or work with an SEO company or agency.

Here are the pros and cons of each.

Doing SEO yourself may work. Especially if you’re just getting started online or if you manage a small website. It’s certainly possible to learn the basics of SEO and use what you learn to optimize your content for keywords or build backlinks. It’s also the most affordable option.

However, the low cost of DIY SEO is a trade-off. You’ll avoid the costs of hiring a professional. But you’ll also forego a lot of expertise. And that could potentially result in lost revenue. Professional SEOs can optimize your site in a way that guides true business growth.

Additionally, effective optimization is time-consuming. If you divide your time between running your business and optimizing your site, you’ll inevitably end up neglecting important tasks in one of the two areas.

Another option is to hire a full-time, in-house SEO specialist. The advantage of this option is—if you’ve hired the right person—your specialist will have the expertise required to identify and prioritize tasks appropriately. They’ll also be able to dedicate 40 hours a week to optimizing your site.

Having a dedicated SEO specialist certainly has advantages over doing the work yourself. But it can also be costly. By hiring in-house, you’ll take on the expense of a full-time salary and benefits. And you’ll incur those expenses whether there’s valuable optimization work to do or not.

Like in-house specialists, SEO companies and agencies bring the advantage of experience. In fact, SEO agencies likely bring more experience than specialists.

Agencies that neglect new optimization tactics and trends rarely stay in business for long. SEO agencies operate on successes and referrals, so they have a vested interest in knowing their trade inside and out.

The other major advantage of hiring an agency is that you only pay for work completed. Reputable SEO companies will conduct an audit of your site and provide a proposal for recommended tasks, reasons for their recommendations, and the cost of completing those tasks. You pay for the work you want to have completed, which can be less expensive than keeping someone on staff.

The cost of working with an agency can be daunting. However, make sure to consider the potential revenue growth that effective optimization will drive over time, and compare the cost of hiring an agency short-term to the ongoing costs of hiring in-house. Comparing the long-term costs of the three different options will help you make the best decision.

The services an SEO agency provides depends largely on the type of agency you choose.

Some SEO companies are full-service digital marketing agencies that offer SEO as an option. Others are boutique or niche agencies that specialize in a specific aspect of SEO. They might be experts in link-building or local SEO, for example.

Additionally, some SEO agencies will simply recommend tasks, while others will recommend tasks and perform the changes.

Before you start the process of looking for an SEO agency, you should understand the different types of SEO services available so you can get a feel for the services your business needs:

In addition to these SEO-specific services, many SEO companies—especially large agencies—offer related services like content marketing, social media marketing, email marketing, asset and ad design, website design, and website development.

The first two steps in choosing an SEO company to optimize your site are

Next, you need to decide on a budget. Determine how much you can afford to invest in SEO upfront as well as on an ongoing basis. Figuring out what you can afford to spend on SEO before researching your options will help you eliminate potential providers that exceed your budget limitations.

With these three steps completed, you can begin compiling a list of potential providers. Your initial inclination will likely be to conduct a Google search and see who pops up. The best SEO companies will likely be those that appear in top results, right? Not necessarily.

The reality is that SEO companies that rely on search traffic are often those that are unable to secure clients through referrals. The best SEO providers usually don’t need to find clients through search. Their existing clients refer new clients frequently, so they grow their client base through word-of-mouth advertising.

There are a few alternative resources you can use to find reputable SEO companies:

Review the websites of the companies you’re considering, and choose a few that you want to investigate further. Once you have a shortlist, you’ll be ready to set up consultations with the companies you’re considering.

We recommend vetting between three and five agencies. The consultations will help you narrow down your list even further.

The costs of SEO services will depend on several factors. Things like the types of services you need and the size of the company you choose will influence the cost. So will the amount of work that needs to be completed. As will the reputation and location of the agency.

Well-known agencies operating out of Silicon Valley will inevitably be pricier than smaller regional shops with fewer clients.

However, there are some general guidelines you can reference to set expectations for what you can expect to pay.

Most SEO providers will charge an upfront fee to conduct a site audit. From there, a number of pricing models may be available.

For a small business website that needs just a few SEO services, you may be able to find an agency for as little as $9,000 annually ($750 monthly retainer for 12 months). That doesn’t include the upfront costs of a basic or detailed audit.

Mid-sized or e-commerce websites will be looking at higher annual costs. Possibly more along the lines of $60,000 (a $5,000 monthly retainer for 12 months).

Comparatively, the average salary for an SEO specialist is $42,535, and the average salary for an SEO manager is $63,795, according to PayScale. To compare the cost of an agency to that of an in-house SEO, combine both the average salary and the cost of employer-paid benefits to determine which model offers the best value.

One final consideration is hiring an SEO consultant. This is a compromise between hiring in-house and going through an agency.

Consultants are independent SEO experts who offer individualized attention like an in-house SEO. But they’re paid as contractors rather than full-time or salaried employees.

Pricing for consultants will likely be similar to that of agencies, but a consultant may be in a position to offer more detailed attention and provide more personalized recommendations.

One scenario where a consultant could be a preferred option is if you have the resources on staff to perform the work, but you don’t have the SEO expertise to know what work to do. You could bring in a consultant on contract to conduct an audit, help you prioritize tasks, and teach your team how to optimize for search on an ongoing basis.

Keep in mind, though, that SEO usually takes at least four months before you begin to see results. In some cases, it could be up to a year.

If you bring in a consultant for three months, he/she may be long gone before you see the outcome of optimization efforts. If you make a poor hiring decision, you could incur a huge expense for underwhelming returns and zero recompense.

Launching an SEO campaign is no small initiative. DIY SEO is rarely effective, and making a poor decision when hiring an expert can be both expensive and detrimental.

Google takes harsh action against companies that engage in black-hat SEO tactics. They’ll apply manual penalties, which will plummet your rankings and potentially remove your site from search altogether.

Finding the right SEO provider takes time and effort, but due diligence up front pays off in the end with increased rankings and revenue.

Have you paid for SEO services in the past? What advice do you have for people looking for an SEO contractor? Share your experiences and thoughts in the comments below!|||

SEO services can provide a huge boost to your website. Hit the link to find out what you need to know before hiring an SEO agency or consultant.