Did you know 71% of all online time is spent over a mobile device in the US? Geofencing targets those on their mobile phone with your ads in a specific area – such as your business location or your competitor’s business location.

People today walk, sit, and drive with their phones in their hands, and most of these people stay within arm’s length of their phones every moment of every day.  That same device is giving businesses the opportunity to find their target audience exactly where they are. Geofencing is known as the most targeted form of advertising, especially from the geographic perspective.

Just about every phone out there has a GPS tracking chip in it. Because of this, businesses can send their message to a person’s phone once they’ve entered a geo-fenced area. These fences can be as small as a sidewalk or as large as a state – depending on the goals of the advertising campaign.

Here are the top ways to make geofencing work for your business

Most businesses have returning customers who go to the same location more than once. When you draw out a fence around a competitor, you can target both new and these returning customers with your brand’s message. When they enter the invisible “fence” and see your ad that contains a special offer to drive them to your location, you can essentially take foot traffic from a competition location. This works especially well since these customers already have a real interest in purchasing the product or service you offer.  With a special promotion running, the chances are high that they will give your location a shot.

Knowing who’s entered your own stores and being able to target them is a great way to grow repeat visits. Also, being able to find people a few miles around your store can drive new walk-ins.  Raising awareness with a special promotion for your store and sending people to your location can greatly increase the chances of success for a new product or launch.  It can be hard to let everyone out there know you exist, but when you’re able to let only those that really matter in your area know you exist, the impact of advertising is massively increased.

If there are any important trade shows, events, or groups that meet in your industry you can target everyone who attends them. After drawing out the geofence you can target those who enter the fence for up to 30 days and send them your message. In addition to this, you can also geofence relevant businesses. For example, if you’re an urgent care center, you might want to target hospitals in your target area. All the business that are related to your product or service can draw in prospects that are relevant to your business who can become new customers to your business.

We help companies conquer the world of geofencing every day. Learn more about geofencing here.|||

Did you know 71% of all online time is spent over a mobile device in the US? Geofencing targets those on their mobile phone with your ads in a specific area – such as your business location or your comp...