Utility modules for interacting with CouchDB2.0/Cloudant using Nodejs. It retries requests and generally tries to keep things clean.

Build a model that describes your database. You must set a on it.

A new account has been created in the database, and an instance of returned. There are quite a few similar modules like this one.

You can incorporate your own directly into your model, as an example this performs a lookup of instances.

It is likely you want to maintain a few databases, for testing, or development and keep them separate. Couch Recliner automatically postfixes your provided with the current environment. If you ran through the examples on this page you will likely see databases named and created for you. Possibly you'll see and too.

But what about database location?

Set the attribute on your model. It should be a key value pair indicating where you want Couch Recliner to communicate with your database.

For more uniform reuse of shared database instance information, create a Couch instance yourself and pass it as above instead. With a couch instance you can access more methods.

Your comes with a set of static and instance methods included by default.

You can use these or always choose the longer version.

Buffers and strings can be uploaded to your database individually by means of the specialised module, or it can be done in bulk within your document.

Manipulating the object in your document in this way will trigger a multipart request. You can add attachments, overwrite them, or remove them entirely by setting . All attachments can be unilaterally deleted by setting .

The library is in it's early stages, it should be easily extendible. More help is welcomed warmly in the form of pull requests, questions, comments, feature requests, in the contributions section on github.

Please see the ./docs directory for more detailed information about available modules.

If you like what you see please feel encouraged to get involved report problems and submit pull requests! As of the time of this writing the project has one maintainer.|||

Utility modules for interacting with CouchDB2.0/Cloudant using Nodejs