While it was a weird question, it was something that Hannah had thought about before. Her grandfather loved to talk about the relationship between colors and emotions, always looking for the next popular design for his rugs. “I dunno...yellow I guess.”



Just then the phone hung up. She looked again at her screen. Her timeline showed no record of the call ever being taken. She wondered what kind of weird prank hack this was. Then, her head was snapped around by the sharp sound of screeching tires.



Out of the building’s front windows, she could see the steady line of pods quickly swerving in unison, like a swarm of baitfish avoiding an incoming tuna. Through the parted herd appeared an old Land Rover. She had never been a pistonhead, but she recognized it from her early trips to Africa with Baba. The white car sped down the centerline of the road, its sharp corners a stark contrast from the aerodynamically smoothed pods it displaced. As it got closer the car took a took a hard left through an intersection and headed straight for her building. The tinted window was lowered just enough for a hand to stick out, showing its proud middle finger to the dozens of violation cameras feverously taking pics of the misdeeds.



After the car had come to a hard stop in the parking lot outside the bay windows, the traffic on the street resumed its normal plodding pace as if nothing had ever happened. Quickly, the door flew open and a short, brawny guy with a buzzcut stomped in through the door. He had on overalls, hiking boots and what looked like a surfer’s long sleeve rash guard.



“Y’all know where I can find Hannah?” he said in a thick southern drawl.



“I’m her,” Hannah said, still trying to compute the chaos of the last few moments.



“You got a sensor network set up in this building?”



“Oh, you are here about the listing?”



“Cuz I tell you what, I ain’t giving one more goddamn byte of data to those suits at Workly. Not one.” 



“Oh, no I haven’t set up any monitoring yet. Don’t you get fined for driving like that?”



“Yeah, but it is not worth my time waiting behind these slow ass pods. I worked a deal with the city where they give me a discount if I auto-deduct my coins. Guys like me are the only thing paying the deduction administrator's salary, so they want to play ball.” As he spoke his eyes locked on her grandmother, roasting coffee beans in a pan as she had learned to do growing up in Ethiopia's capital, Addis Ababa. He walked towards her slowly, showing his excitement more with every step.



“Tena yistilign.” He said to her grandma who was surprised as Hannah by his flawless pronunciation. 



“How do you know when the beans are ready?” he asked inquisitively.



“Mmmm, I dunno,” her Grandma said. “I just can sense it over all these years. It is the smell mostly, but also a little by the sound.”



“Amazing!” he said as he spun around, taking in his whole surroundings. “This is real. Authentic. Human! I love all these colors! To hell with the damn sterile tech aesthetic.”



“Who do we have the pleasure of speaking to?” Hannah asked politely, but directly.



“Not who, no one gives a damn who. It is what I am that matters,” he replied.



“Ok, then what do I have the pleasure of speaking to?” she said, sarcastically.



“Well, ma’am, I’m Skeptic, but my friends call me Skip.”



“Oh, ok, nice to meet you Skip,” Hannah said as she extended her hand for a shake.



“You’ve never heard of me?” he asked. Hannah sensed disappointment in his voice.



“No, is that bad?” she said, watching for possible anger.



“No, that's great! I love this place! As long as she comes with it,” he nodded in her grandma’s direction. “I’ll take about 60,000 square inches at dot oh three five coins per hour. Deal?”



Hannah knew that .02 coins per hour was her starting point based on her interest coefficient. She tried not to show her enthusiasm at getting nearly double that at .035. “Sure, that works, when do you want to move in?”



“Now.” Skip was already using his hand scan on his screen, canceling his old lease no doubt. “Now, that we are settled, y’all think I can try some of that coffee she’s fixin’?”|||

Explore a vision of the future where commercial real estate and the latest technologies intersect seamlessly—and where people might fit in that intersection.