The future of the healthcare industry is here! AI is the future, and it is already transforming healthcare with its precision medicine approach, preventive care and effective disease management.

It was in early 1950s that Artificial Intelligence came into being and stirred some excitement. However, it wasn’t until the 1980s that some real action started as Machine Learning started to flourish. After 2010s, Deep Learning started to drive the AI boom. As per a Stanford Study, AI is set to have a deeper impact in certain industries, which are healthcare, public safety and security, education, transportation, entertainment and low services communities.

Experts feel, unfortunately, that the number of diseases are increasing as the world’s population is growing. For a long time, there have been views that Artificial Intelligence (AI) can effectively address the growing challenges of the Healthcare Industry.

Unlike what many people believe, AI cannot replace doctors and surgeons. AI can instead help provide an operational environment so that the world-class healthcare practitioners can give their best. Though it may sound unexciting compared to all the excitement that AI can enable, it helps provide a better operational environment and reduces the cost of healthcare services. All the changes that AI are expected to bring about in the healthcare industry will take place sometime soon. Already, there are a number of leading hospitals which are able to save time and reduce cost for the patients using AI.

With an increasing adoption of AI in the healthcare industry, both doctors and hospitals will experience a number of benefits. AI can take care of issues that require standard procedures and help free up time of healthcare professionals to focus on more critical, complex and unique issues. For example, GE Healthcare and the University of San Francisco are working towards putting digital health into action by developing a library of deep learning algorithms that will improve efficiency, speed and accuracy for clinicians to interpret scans and diagnose patients faster.

Reduced medical errors, more consultation time for doctors, easy healthcare delivery and better utilization of healthcare practitioners’ time – well, the expectations are many and will be fulfilled in the next couple of years.

If you wish to discuss the future of AI in your industry, it’s time to give us a call.

Tags: Artificial Intelligence, Artificial Intelligence (AI), cognitive agents, cognitive computing, cognitive insights, Deep Learning, disease management, future of AI, future of the healthcare industry, GE Healthcare, machine intelligence based cognitive agents, Machine Learning, medical treatment plans, medicine solutions

This entry was posted on Monday, April 17th, 2017 at 3:03 pm and is filed under Artificial Intelligence, Technology. You can follow any responses to this entry through the RSS 2.0 feed. You can skip to the end and leave a response. Pinging is currently not allowed.|||

There are various thought leaders who believe that we are experiencing the Fourth Industrial Revolution, which is characterized by a range of new technologies that are fusing the physical, digital and biological worlds, impacting all disciplines, economies and industries, and even challenging ideas about what it means to be human. I am certain that healthcare will be the lead industrial area of such a revolution and one of the major catalysts for change is going to be artificial intelligence.