Sun is at peak now that could cause sunburns and tanning if your skin is sensitive. Do you know that sunburns are preventable if you keep a few facts in mind such as: 

 

 Look before you go out: Sun rays of the highest intensity fall between 10am to 4pm so try to stay inside. But if you have urgency to go out, try to walk in direct sunlight.

Choose right clothes: When you are going out in sun, choose sun-protective clothes for example cotton long sleeved shirts, pants, broad hat etc.

 

 Put Sunscreen- Do not forget to apply sunscreen in summer. Cover every possible exposable area such as face, neck, arms and legs with sunscreen that will protect you from UVA and UVB rays. Choose sunscreen of sun protection factor(SPF) 30. Apply the sunscreen 30 minutes before you go outside. Use sunscreen even during cloudy days because UV rays can penetrate even clouds. If still, you suffered from sunburn, take showers as many times as possible to relieve pain. After shower, gently pat yourself dry and leave water on your skin. Apply a moisturizer to trap water in your skin that can soothe dryness.



 

 Care for babies and kids: Use sunscreen with SPF minimum of 15 for kids. If your baby is of 6 months old, try your best to not to get them in direct sun and wear a hat and clothes that can protect them from UV rays. Do not cover baby in blankets or heavy clothes. Infants cannot tolerate heat because of their underdeveloped sweat glands.

Drink a lot of water: Sunburn extracts body fluids so make sure to a lot of drink water as per your capacity to prevent dehydration. Some people sweat more than others so ofcourse they should intake more of fluids during hot and humid days.

Avoid beverages and alcohol: Do not drink alcoholic beverages or fluids with caffeine because they cause faster fluid loss.

Do not use tanning beds: Because ultraviolet light can cause skin cancer and wrinkles. If you are using a self-tanning product use sunscreen too.

 

 Consult with your dermatologist: Contact your dermatologist to have a complete body scan within 12 months.

Exercise tips: Do not exercise hard during the hot times of the day but run, jog or exercise during the cool time of the day. If temperature is reaching 82oF and the humidity is high, try to do abbreviated exercise.|||

To protect yourself from the killer summer, you need to follow some easy tips that are very useful like wear cotton clothes, drink water and use suncscreen