Redfin Compiled Median List Prices, U.S. News and World Report Ranking, Tuition Cost and Fees and Walk Score® Data to Find the Top College Towns to Buy an Investment Property

Seattle, WA – April 14, 2017 (BUSINESS WIRE) Investing in a home near a college has some undeniable perks–rent prices are typically stable and there’s always a new pool of tenants looking for rentals. Redfin (www.redfin.com), the next-generation real estate brokerage, narrowed down the most affordable college towns near schools that offer low tuition, a high-quality education and walkability. Redfin’s methodology includes median list price for homes near the school, tuition cost and fees, the most recent U.S. News and World Report ranking and data from Walk Score®, a Redfin company.

“It’s always great to invest in a location where there is a large pool of tenants, which is exactly what you get when you invest in a property near a school like Georgia Institute of Technology,” said Redfin real estate agent Rory Haigler. “The pool of potential tenants is also stable with new students coming in every year, so a property owner really doesn’t have to worry about where they will find the next tenant. I’ve had a lot of clients looking to invest in property near Georgia Tech, but the problem is that because it’s such a hot market, homes aren’t listed often.”

Here are the 20 best college towns to buy an investment property:

To read the full report, complete with more information on each city, please visit: www.redfin.com.

Redfin (www.redfin.com) is the next-generation real estate brokerage, combining its own full-service agents with modern technology to redefine real estate in the consumer’s favor. Founded by software engineers, Redfin has the country’s #1 brokerage website and offers a host of online tools to consumers, including the Redfin Estimate, the automated home-value estimate with the industry’s lowest published error rate. Homebuyers and sellers enjoy a full-service, technology-powered experience from Redfin real estate agents, while saving thousands in commissions. Redfin serves more than 80 major metro areas across the U.S. The company has closed more than $40 billion in home sales through 2016.

For more information or to contact a local Redfin real estate agent, visit www.redfin.com. To learn about housing market trends and download data, visit the Redfin Data Center.|||

