NEW YORK—On Friday, we revealed our picks of this year's New York International Auto Show. And perhaps surprisingly, our very favorite new vehicle on display was Ford's new Ford Police Responder Hybrid Sedan. And as you'll see in the video above, Stephen Tyler, Ford's police marketing manager, was kind enough to give us a quick tour of the new machine.

Pity the life of the average police car. Driven in shifts, it might easily hit 20,000 miles (32,000km) in a year. And if that's not enough, a car driven two shifts a day might spend up to ten hours a day idling. That's tough on the car, but it's even tougher on the planet thanks to all those pollutants, and it's even tough on the taxpayer's wallet. After all, gas isn't free.

So the idea of a hybrid police car is an enticing one. And while a few departments around the country may have experimented with modifying current hybrids for some needs, PDs can be a conservative business with fleet managers sticking to trusted offerings. That should give Ford a bit of an advantage with the Police Responder Hybrid Sedan. To prove its bona fides, the car spent plenty of time testing with the Michigan State Police and Los Angeles Police Department, getting pursuit-rated.

Based on the Ford Fusion Hybrid, the Police Responder Hybrid Sedan uses a 2.0L, four-cylinder Atkinson-cycle engine under the hood, coupled to a hybrid system (although we don't have the exact specs of that yet.) It's capable of up to 60mph on electric power alone, and, at 38mpg combined, the hybrid cop car is twice as efficient as Ford's (conventionally powered) Police Interceptor.

While that in and of itself is an impressive gain in fuel efficiency, the fact that the car doesn't need to keep its engine running at idle to power all the lights, radios, and the rest of the electrical equipment that's usually packed into a police vehicle is what Ford is counting on to draw the interest of police departments. In fact, Tyler says that even though the hybrid is more expensive than a Police Interceptor, it should break even within a year for a vehicle that's driven 20,000 miles a year, runs two shifts, and idles about 10 hours a day. (Ford even has an online calculator to help departments work out how much they'd save with the hybrid car.)

To cope with a life on the mean streets, the Police Responder Hybrid Sedan gets some extra cooling under the hood and in the trunk. It also gets massive 17-inch (432mm) front brakes behind those steel wheels—to put that in context, even a hypercar like the Bugatti Veyron makes do with brakes that are a mere 15.8-inches/401mm. The suspension is beefed up to cope with driving over 8-inch (203mm) curbs, and the car rides 0.5-inches (12mm) higher. Ford also says it can cross railway tracks at up to 30mph (48km/h) and can ford water 10 inches (254mm) deep at 40mph (64km/h).

The changes extend to the inside. Forget about Apple CarPlay or Android Auto—the infotainment system is the same minimal version found in rental cars. But the center console has 12V and USB ports, and plenty of room to mount a rugged laptop within reach of the driver. The gear selector has moved to the center stack, and the main instrument display has new police-specific displays on the two LCD screens and an officially calibrated speedometer.

The floors are vinyl for easy cleaning, and the front seats are trimmed with a hard-wearing fabric. Those seats have also had their bolsters much reduced so that officers wearing heavy-duty belts festooned with equipment can more easily get in and out.

The backs of those seats also contain heavy-duty anti-stab plates to prevent a miscreant in the back from trying to reach out and touch someone. The hard plastic rear bench seat and partition that are common to many police vehicles are an aftermarket addition; as standard the Police Responder Hybrid Sedan gets a vinyl rear bench seat. The door cards for the rear are altered, so there are no cubbies or anywhere to hide contraband, and the car can also be specced such that the window and door can't be opened at all from the inside.

It would be naive to expect every department to run out tomorrow and replace their current fleet with hybrids, and there are still applications for which other vehicles would be better (like SUVs for rural areas or K9 teams). But the fact that Ford—which has 63 percent of the US police market—now has a hybrid offering for them makes us hopeful that the thin blue line might also get a little green.|||

Beefy suspension and brakes, 38mpg, and stab-proof seats. What's not to like?