What is your first association with the word ”bug”? Nature, right? At this very moment, you probably have the picture of insects of all sort in your mind, pretty like a ladybird or revolting like a flesh fly, those useful to the environment and those which are not. However, there is also a different type of bugs in our closest surroundings, probably even more annoying than abominations such as mosquitoes, ticks or cockroaches.

That group consists of errors and issues which occur in software. Sounds familiar? Hell, it does! Who have not at least once in their lives experienced frustration when the used program just turned off out of itself or has frozen for an intolerably long time. It gets even worse if the project that we are working on with our team decides not to work and we are not able to establish the reason why it is happening. Such occurrences have damaged the reputation of many software providers and depleted the budget of many companies, discouraging customers from prolonging the use of the provided services.

 Fortunately, Bug Tracking Software comes to aid of such suppliers here. Check out our list of tools that will significantly help you with tracking bugs:

Who is the platform dedicated to? Its potential purchasers are web developers. What is the app capable of? It facilitates getting an annotated screenshot of bugs and then sharing it with either the team or with third-party developers, colleagues, clients, or/and quality assurance personnel. Moreover, Usersnap gets rid of communication friction between developers, thanks to which they work more efficiently and productively in their work.

The tool is based on cloud computing and it is directly rooted in the bug reporting and feedback loop, which in turn makes it possible for users to automatically send annotated screenshots of bugs and issues complete with the details, like browser information and operating system data. Who is the receiver of those screenshots? The developer. who gets them via email or checks the inbox as they go directly to his/her system.

What is it? Planio is a Redmine-based bug tracker. Managing software projects can be done through the use of Agile methodologies, for instance, Scrum. One has the opportunity to respond to customer support tickets using the CRM tool. Linking to issues in found by Planio is possible thanks to tight integration with GIT or SVN.

Stryka is a powerful management tool made by Plutora, which aim is to make the high-quality software able to support multi-disciplined testing practices at an enterprise scale. It is designed to help either with single projects or hundreds of them. It supports waterfall, agile, and hybrid development approaches.

The key feature characterizing this product is a wide range of test capabilities, like the automated test execution, requirements management, defect management, test plan design, and functional test execution. Besides offering the aforementioned, the app engages stakeholders and drives collaboration between teams with the best-in-class analytics, metrics, and reporting capabilities.

Finally, Stryka is highly customizable. One can easily adapt it to individual project teams, System Integrators (SI), as well as Testing Center of Excellence (TCoE) teams. It is crucial to mention that available as a stand-alone test management solution or as part of Plutora’s enterprise DevOps platform, the recommended product fixes one up with control and visibility across all the releases, test environments, and tests assets within enterprises.

Are you looking for a handy tool that would help to get rid of errors damaging reputation of your software and, consequently, your business? Bugzilla is exactly what you need. the app is considered to be a leader among bug tracking tools and has been widely used by a great number of organizations for quite long time now. Bugzilla is very simple to use, web-based interface. the app has all the features of the essence, convenience, and assurance. It is completely open sourced and is free to use.

Have you any problems with the software you provide to your customers? Customers are dissatisfied with it and discouraged by mushrooming errors? Lean Testing, a free bug tracking and test case management software, is the answer to your prayers. It is worth recommending even more since it has been designed by testers. It is equipped with a browser extension to report bugs on websites. The system does it quickly and easily. Furthermore, it has in-app reporting tools to allow users to report errors directly from within mobile apps.

In short, Lean Testing has everything you’d expect from a bug tracker and test case manager. It seems only appropriate to mention that the software supplier made sure that everything is intuitive and easy to use. Lastly, Lean Testing is web-based and requires no installation.

Laymen may ask: what is this Jira-something? Atlassian JIRA, known mainly for being an incident management solution, serves also as a popular tool to track issues. It offers the complete set of recording, reporting, workflow and other convenience-related features. Jira integrates directly with the code development environment. This, in turn, makes it a desirable also by developers.  What is more, being able to track any and all kinds of bugs, Jira is not necessarily concentrated only on the software development industry. The tool renders itself quite efficiently to help desks, leave management systems and so on. Furthermore, it supports agile projects. Finally, the bug-tracking app is a commercially licensed product with many add-ins that support extensibility.

The one who wishes to find a good app to track bugs doesn’t have to look for a long time for it. Mantis is the solution they seek. However, it is easy to be deceived. Why? Its simple exterior may discourage one from giving it a chance. It can freely be said that the tool is a king among bug tracking products, only in disguise. Mantis possesses every facet one can hope for. The tool not only comes as a web application but also has its own mobile version. Additionally, it is implemented in PHP and it is available for free. Being hosted demands money, fortunately, not too much.

Some of its key features:

Software that does not work is a nightmare to both its suppliers and customers. Fortunately, there is a tool which can help to eliminate all sorts of mischievous errors. Do you want to know more about them? Check the list provided above.|||

