I've been thinking a lot about the social graph for awhile now: aggregating the graph, decentralization, social network portability, etc.

If you've seen me at any conference recently, I probably talked your ear off about it. I've gotten good at my verbal/visual presentations, showing my slides, pictures of graphs, and adapting my delivery to you based on your background, facial expressions, questions, etc. This is all a lot harder to do in a blog post where the audience is so diverse, so I've been lazily putting it off. I was also afraid that if I left anything out, I'd get flooded with comments like But what about __________? Clearly then all you say is wrong. But it's time I braindump this, so here goes....

First off, before I explain what I've prototyped so far, and what I want to build (or see built) next, let me declare the problem statement, as I see it, and the underlying assumptions I've been making:

There are an increasing number of new "social applications" as well as traditional application which either require the "social graph" or that could provide better value to users by utilizing information in the social graph. What I mean by "social graph" is a the global mapping of everybody and how they're related, as Wikipedia describes and I talk about in more detail later. Unfortunately, there doesn't exist a single social graph (or even multiple which interoperate) that's comprehensive and decentralized. Rather, there exists hundreds of disperse social graphs, most of dubious quality and many of them walled gardens.

Currently if you're a new site that needs the social graph (e.g. dopplr.com) to provide one fun & useful feature (e.g. where are your friends traveling and when?), then you face a much bigger problem then just implementing your main feature. You also have to have usernames, passwords (or hopefully you use OpenID instead), a way to invite friends, add/remove friends, and the list goes on. So generally you have to ask for email addresses too, requiring you to send out address verification emails, etc. Then lost username/password emails. etc, etc. If I had to declare the problem statement succinctly, it'd be: People are getting sick of registering and re-declaring their friends on every site., but also: Developing "Social Applications" is too much work.

Facebook's answer seems to be that the world should just all be Facebook apps. While Facebook is an amazing platform and has some amazing technology, there's a lot of hesitation in the developer / "Web 2.0" community about being slaves to Facebook, dependent on their continued goodwill, availability, future owners, not changing the rules, etc. That hesitation I think is well-founded. A centralized "owner" of the social graph is bad for the Internet. I'm not saying anybody should ban Facebook, though! Far from it. It's a great product, and I love it, but the graph needs to exist outside of Facebook. MySpace also has a lot of good data, but not all of it. Likewise LiveJournal, Digg, Twitter, Zooomr, Pownce, Friendster, Plaxo, the list goes on. More important is that any one of these sites shouldn't own it; nobody/everybody should. It should just exist.

David Recordon has announced that he's going to SixApart, largely to work on this sort of stuff. Plaxo is also doing interesting stuff in this regard. Eventually companies will build free and paid services atop this data, like trust/reputation APIs, which will help Movable Type & Wordpress bloggers with identifying comment spam (once you have an OpenID-authenticated comment, you have a node, but then use the APIs to find out if that node is ).

In any case, a lot of people are working on this lately, and taking different approaches. It's quite likely that multiple groups will converge to work on this together, similar to how many groups got together to work on OpenID.

You run a social networking site and have some node/edge (user/friend) data, or want to beta test some of the APIs? Get in touch... join the Google Group.

End-user who wants to try out the non-techy website and tools? You're here early. :) Limited beta access for testers will be announced later, by whoever ends up building this.

I'm excited about this. Start thinking about how you can take advantage of stuff like this. It's going to be cool.

Leave your comments on this post, if you'd like. Or join the Google Group, which David created.|||

