Host your code online in as many public and private repositories as you want. Free for 5 users.

Companies love delivering their applications using Docker. According to Forrester, 30% of enterprise developers are actively exploring containers, and Docker is the dominant tool, with 35% of organizations adopting it, according to a recent RightScale survey. Docker provides a painless method of building and deploying applications as a set of independent microservices, which are scalable and resilient.

We developed Pipelines to all teams to test and deploy their software , using Docker containers to manage their build environment. Teams save and headaches by avoiding manual build server configuration, choosing instead from the enormous range of publicly available containers on Docker Hub, or bringing your own Docker image for a custom build environment.

We’re thrilled to announce support for building Docker images and Service containers in Bitbucket Pipelines.

, you can build your application as Docker containers, benefiting from the portability and minimal overhead of containerization. No need to install an additional plugin or run your own Docker service – just enable with 2-lines in your bitbucket-pipelines.yml and it just works.

This seamless Docker integration facilitates a whole new set of workflows for Bitbucket teams, including:

Bitbucket is now the only tool your team needs to code, build, test and deploy your applications in the cloud, covering the full lifecycle for teams building with microservices.

Setting up integration testing with a database or other dependency on your build server is usually a mess of configuration files. You might even need to configure additional agents or build Amazon AMI images to get the dependencies up and running for your build. Docker has the potential to make that so much easier, with thousands of pre-built images for commonly used software like MySQL and Redis, and standardized configuration through environment variables.

Today service containers for Bitbucket Pipelines, bringing the power of Docker to your test environment configuration. You can now run up to three background services in your pipeline, in addition to your build container, using your own Docker images or any of those available on Docker Hub. This makes it a breeze to set up integration testing with databases like MySQL or PostgreSQL or run other common services like ElasticSearch or memcached.

There are several benefits to how service containers work in Pipelines:

We talk with many companies who are still using legacy build servers like Jenkins and struggling with three big challenges:

With Bitbucket Pipelines, there’s no need to switch to another application, no need to juggle permissions and access, or set up build servers – and thanks to our cloud infrastructure you get unlimited concurrent builds.

If you haven’t given Bitbucket Pipelines a try, we’ve extended free build minutes for Pipelines so you can try for free. As always, please tell us what you think of this feature by tweeting .

Have more specific questions about this post? Reach out to us on Twitter to get the information you need.|||

