We are pleased to share the release announcement for Aspose.Slides for .NET 17.3. We have added some long awaited features in this release along with resolution of issues incurring in API.

We have included the long awaited support for getting absolute position values for chart Plot Area in this release. With this feature in service now, you can use it to overlap other shapes inside chart area with respect to actual absolute Plot Area coordinates on slide that was not possible earlier. For more about requested support, please visit documentation article, Getting actual position of chart Plot Area. If chart inside presentation has external workbook as chart data source, you can now get the path of chart external workbook data source. Please visit the documentation article, Getting chart external Workbook path. Now, you can also get the actual maximum value for vertical value axis for chart. Please visit the documentation article, Get actual Max value of vertical axis on a chart.

We have also improved the external fonts loading support in this release and now you can load the external fonts inside a byte array in your application. For more details and working example, please visit the documentation article, Managing fonts externally. We have also improved the verification of loaded file format and included support for identification of PowerPoint 95 files format. Please visit documentation article, Verifying file format for more details. The support for export of presentation to HTML has also been improved and now you can export a presentation with embedded audio and video to HTML with audio and video data respectively. For more about supported feature, please visit the documentation article, Exporting presentation with embedded audio and video to HTML.

We have resolved the issues related to presentation access and saving which earlier resulted in different exceptions. We have also addressed the issues related to charts elements, tables, images, text rendering and improper fonts in this release and have resolved certain issues incurring in product. The issues related to wrong animation and slide transition effects inside saved presentations have also been rectified in this release.

We have made several enhancements to the new API. Please refer to Aspose.Slides for .NET 17.3 Release Notes for further reference.

To download Aspose.Slides for .NET 17.3, please visit the download page.|||

We are pleased to share the release announcement for Aspose.Slides for .NET 17.3. We have added some long awaited features in this release along with resolution