With summer just around the corner, we are here to tell you that it is about that time to get your pool party planning underway. Consider us your pool party fairies if you will, ready to get you amped and filled with summer party ideas so that this celebration can be as smooth and flawless as ever. Pool parties are a great way to relax and unwind, splashing around with your friends and neighbors and soaking up some summer sun. But throwing the right pool party doesn’t need to take exorbitant amounts of work! Take a look at a few of our pool party themes and ideas to get you started.

There is no better way to celebrate the end of one chapter, and the beginning of summer, than with a backyard pool party. Gather together your loved ones and have a pool party/cookout that blends the outdoors, a nice swim, and some delicious barbecue all in one shot. Whether your child is graduating from elementary school or from high school, a graduation pool party can be an awesome way to celebrate together and welcome warmer days, too.

Everyone loves a good luau party, right? We’re talking tiki torches, flowered leis, and fresh coconuts galore. A luau is one of the most enjoyable pool parties you can throw, especially because the decorations are so darn festive. Jazz up your backyard with balloon palm trees, make sure your guests wear their best floral or Hawaiian shirts, throw on your Blue Hawaii album, and dance the night away! There are so many different ideas for tropical cocktails and luau-inspired foods, the planning and decorating options are a’plenty.

Another fun way to send pool party invitations with a theme is by throwing a nautical pool party! This theme is especially great when you are looking to combine a child’s birthday party with a poolside splash, and need some festivity to go with it. You can decorate in red, white and blue, fit with anchors, boat regalia, and life preservers everywhere. A summer nautical party is a great kid’s theme that will provide endless amounts of seasonal fun.

If you’re looking for the ultimate 4th of July party idea, then how about a throwing a pool party? Combine this fabulous holiday with some refreshing fun right in your own backyard. Fourth of July brings together family and friends to celebrate the Independence of our country, and with a backyard pool party, the fun and festivity stays right in your home. Put out some sparklers, light up the grill, and get your swim trunks on. This 4th of July party will be the most memorable to date.

Here at Polka Dot Design, we carry summer party invitations in abundance. Summer is one of our favorite seasons, simply because it allows most people the opportunity to cut loose and enjoy the outdoors. If ever you need a few more pool party ideas of your own, don’t be afraid to drop us a line!|||

With summer just around the corner, we are here to tell you that it is about that time to get your pool party planning underway.