Join a small team of elite hackers pulling off a complex series of data heists in Hacknet Labyrinths, a major expansion for critically acclaimed terminal-based hacking simulator, Hacknet.



Adding a new 3-4 hour chapter to the game, Hacknet Labyrinths sees you recruited by the mysterious Kaguya to join a small team of elite hackers on the hunt for powerful new tools and programs.



But working with the best isn’t going to be easy. And as the series of heists increases in complexity and danger, you’re going to need to use everything at your team’s disposal to get in, get the job done, and get out without being caught.



Featuring new tools--such as the Memory Analyzer, capable of performing memory forensics on RAM--new programs, new networks to explore, new UI themes, new secrets to uncover in the original game, and a full new soundtrack, Labyrinths delivers more of the gameplay you loved in Hacknet along with some surprising new twists.



 

A whole new chapter. Hacknet Labyrinths adds a thrilling new 3-4 hour chapter set within Hacknet’s main story arc. Play it as part of the original game, or as a new opportunity to delve back into your Hacknet experience and explore new secrets.



New tools and programs. Obtain new, more complex hacking tools and programs to break into systems and networks. For example, perform memory forensics on RAM and uncover secrets with the Memory Analyzer.



Work as a team. No longer hacking alone, you’ll be completing missions as a team, communicating through IRC and working towards joint goals.



Daring and perilous data heists. Network systems are more complex, and it’s going to take a lot more than simply “kicking down the door” to complete the mission. Explore, adapt, survive!



Killer new soundtrack. Hacknet Labyrinths comes with a killer new soundtrack full of Outrun-style music, featuring artists such as Remi Gallego (of brutal heavy metal/electronic act 'The Algorithm') and synthwave superstar 'OGRE'



 How to find the Labyrinth 

Labyrinths takes place before the end of the base game. You can access it from two points within Hacknet - as a mission from Entropy after you've completed a few contracts there, or from CSEC. You can also access it from CSEC if you have a save file that's completed the game, or if up to that stage of the game already.|||

