There’s an iconic scene in The Karate Kid in which the protagonist, Daniel Larusso, discovers the method to his instructor’s seeming madness. For several days, Mr Miyagi has summoned Daniel to complete a series of repetitive household chores, from cleaning the car to painting the fence. Frustrated, fatigued and convinced he is being used as a ‘goddamn slave’, Daniel is prepared to quit altogether.

Then comes the reveal: Mr Miyagi throws a series of punches and kicks Daniel’s way, which the unsuspecting student is able to instinctively block thanks to the muscle memory he has built up through those menial chores. It’s a spine-tingling moment.

Parents the world over had Mr Miyagi to thank for the sudden willingness of children to take up household tasks. They could also thank him for the resulting disappointment: karate is only learned this way in Hollywood.

I once lived with a real-life karate kid (that is, a seasoned black belt) who assured me that it takes much more than drills to develop the craft. Drills play their part, but karate requires regular practice in putting together different combinations of punches, kicks and blocks. No karate training program is complete without these sparring sessions.

School maths too often follows the Miyagi model of instruction. The curriculum is densely packed with mathematical knowledge that students are expected to consume, memorise and repeat. This knowledge is presented as a series of discrete facts and procedures, often drilled without mercy, and at the expense of understanding.

In contrast, students have precious little space to tackle substantive maths problems (reinforcement of set procedures, commonly found on worksheets, do not count). Yet problem solving is to maths what sparring is to karate — a vital, precious opportunity to creatively apply knowledge in novel settings. It should never be marginalised.

There is a delicate interplay between knowledge and problem solving. We need background knowledge to make sense of a maths problem. The more fluently we can recall that knowledge, the more space we have in our working memory to craft a solution. But knowledge alone is rarely enough, however fluent: problem solving also relies on a complex of tools and strategies.

Consider the time an eight-year-old Gauss (maths’s answer to the Karate Kid) was asked to sum the first 100 integers. The background knowledge — recognising numerical symbols, computing basic addition and multiplication — was minimal. The essence of Gauss’s solution was not in rapid recall of number facts, but in how he folded the integers to produce 50 copies of 101. It required a conceptual leap that knowledge alone does not account for.

Gauss’s solution inspired a deeper understanding of summation problems, giving rise to the arithmetic progression formula (that, ironically, high school students the world over now have to commit to memory).

The mindset of knowledge-heavy approaches is that higher-order skills like creativity and problem solving should be deferred to a later, unspecified time when students have acquired enough knowledge. But Gauss showed emphatically that these higher-order skills can spring even from a scarce knowledge base. Knowledge constraints are often a great fertiliser for creativity and problem solving. At the other end, expecting knowledge-saturated students to seamlessly transform into problem solvers is just indefinite optimism.

Of course, shunning knowledge altogether and setting students loose on problems unprepared is futile. Learning mathematics involves a tight coupling between acquiring knowledge and applying it to solve problems.

This will sound familiar to computer scientists, who routinely deal with such trade-offs. Algorithms to Live by is a joyous take on how these decisions seep into our everyday lives. Some examples:

In each case, a balance should be sought between gathering new information and applying it. Gather too much or too little and the payoff suffers.

Maths educators would be well advised to resolve their own trade-off: let’s call it Acquire/Apply. An excessive focus on knowledge acquisition deprives students of the payoffs of problem solving — deeper understanding and enjoyment of mathematics.

School maths often rests on the blind hope that creativity and problem solving automatically follow from drills. Life is not so kind; it is cruel and unusual to expect students to produce a Karate Kid moment when faced with a maths challenge. Problem solving requires dedicated time and focus, alongside knowledge acquisition. If we want students to excel in maths, there is a simple approach we haven’t tried enough of: let them at it.|||

There’s an iconic scene in The Karate Kid in which the protagonist, Daniel Larusso, discovers the method to his instructor’s seeming madness. For several days, Mr Miyagi has summoned Daniel to…