​Today AMD (NASDAQ: AMD) introduced the Radeon™ RX 500 series, a new line of graphics cards featuring a powerful combination of improved game performance, higher clock speeds1, and a refined 2nd generation Polaris architecture, giving PC gamers the best reasons yet to upgrade their graphics. The Radeon RX 500 series was designed specifically for system upgrades, catering to the 9 out of 10 PC gamers today who are hindered by outdated technology and aren't able to enjoy optimal experiences in modern games, smooth VR experiences, or the latest display technologies.2,3  Radeon™ RX 500 series graphics cards feature a variety of the most compelling new technologies and features including:

"Radeon was built on the promise that all gamers can enjoy the most advanced graphics technologies in their favorite games. Our launch today of the Radeon RX 500 series doubles down on that effort. With higher performance, revolutionary gameplay capture software, latency-reduction technology, Day 0 driver support for game launches, open and affordable standards like Radeon FreeSync, and innovative features like Radeon Chill, we know gamers who have been patiently waiting to upgrade will have more than enough reasons to now," said Scott Herkelman, corporate vice president and general manager, Radeon Technologies Group.

A wide range of Radeon™ RX 500 Series cards will be available to meet the needs of the overwhelming majority of gamers:

Radeon RX 580 and 570 graphics cards from major AIB partners are available from retailers and etailers around the world starting today*, and the Radeon RX 550 graphics card is expected to be available April 20th. Radeon RX 560 graphics cards are planned for release in May. For more information on where to buy, visit https://www.amd.com/en/where-to-buy/radeon-rx500.

For more than 45 years AMD has driven innovation in high-performance computing, graphics, and visualization technologies ― the building blocks for gaming, immersive platforms, and the datacenter. Hundreds of millions of consumers, leading Fortune 500 businesses, and cutting-edge scientific research facilities around the world rely on AMD technology daily to improve how they live, work, and play. AMD employees around the world are focused on building great products that push the boundaries of what is possible. For more information about how AMD is enabling today and inspiring tomorrow, visit the AMD (NASDAQ: AMD) website, blog, Facebook and Twitter pages.|||

Radeon, AMD, Radeon RX, 580, 570, 560, 550, Vulkan, 1080p gaming, Chill