The first step of our work was to develop platforms that could sustain tissue-level function for the length of the human menstrual cycle (that is, 28 days). The Solo-MFP and Duet-MFP systems are based on pneumatic actuation technology, by which the individual systems are supplied with positive and negative air pressures via a system dock that is connected to a five-channel pressure controller manifold (Fig. 1a,b, refer to Supplementary Table 1 for nomenclature). The pressure of individual channels is switched between a vacuum or pressure source using an electromagnetic three-way valve controlled via a personalized pump programme created in LabVIEW using a computer interface. The Solo-MFP and Duet-MFP systems use a universal pneumatic plate that distributes positive and negative air pressures to specific valve or pump membranes clamped between the pneumatic and fluidic plates. Sequential application of pressure and vacuum to valve and pump membranes creates a peristalsis-like stroke that enables fluid to move through individual microfluidic paths within or between modules. Four valves arranged in North, South, East and West positions that are oriented about a central pump chamber create a four-port pump structure, enabling multiple bi-directional flows in each fluidic circuit. The fluidic plates are specifically designed for either the Solo-MFP or Duet-MFP module configuration. Solo-MFP systems consist of four replicates of a fluidic circuit with two connected modules: a coupled donor/acceptor module and a module for tissues (Fig. 1a). Duet-MFP systems consist of a single set of four modules: a donor module, two modules for tissues, and a separate acceptor module (Fig. 1b). Pneumatic actuation manipulates the membranes, generating pressure-driven flow in the fluidic paths, in order to transport fresh media from the donor to tissues, remove older media and secreted factors to the acceptor, or (in the case of Duet-MFP systems) move fluid from the upstream tissue to the downstream tissue to enable in vitro communication between cultured tissues.

To integrate five tissues in a single system, a more practical and scalable approach was used for microfluidic control of tissue interaction (Fig. 1c). This was accomplished by embedding electromagnetically actuated micropumps within the platform, termed the Quintet-MFP, obviating the need to supply the platform with independent air lines for each pneumatic actuator (Fig. 1d). This design approach allowed each of the 60 actuators of the Quintet-MFP to be individually controlled, thus enabling precise flow control over a wide dynamic range. Modules included flow ports to permit recirculation within each module, ensuring that the system was well mixed and enabling homogenous exposure of cultured tissues to factors within the media. In addition to recirculation within individual modules, the fluidic path design allowed for whole-system recirculation (Fig. 1c). The combination of whole-system and intermodule recirculation enabled a well-mixed system within and across all modules of the Quintet-MFP. Each fluidic path between modules was controlled by two sets of pump actuators. This redundancy acted as a fail-safe in the event of actuator failure. A total of twelve modules, including one donor, one acceptor, five tissue-specific modules, and five blank modules (for increased tissue capacity in future work) were developed for the Quintet-MFP (Fig. 1c). As with the Solo-MFP and Duet-MFP systems, the modules were secured on a fluidic plate that contained the microfluidic flow channels. The fluidic plate was placed atop the actuator plate that contained the electromagnetic actuators, and the two plates were separated by a Viton membrane. A fan-cooled heat sink was also added to the system to remove excess heat from the actuator plate. The actuator plate was connected to a computer and controller box via two ribbon cables. This controller box acted as the intermediate between the Quintet- MFP system and the PC running the custom LabVIEW pump programme.

For all Solo-MFP and Duet-MFP experiments, the empirically derived nominal through-system flow rate was set to 40 μl h−1 to create physiologic concentrations of oestradiol and progesterone as determined by mathematical modelling of system pharmacokinetics. The average through-system flow rates across 28 days is shown for each system in Fig. 2a,b. For Quintet-MFP experiments, the empirically derived through-system flow rate was set to 100 μl h−1 to create a physiologic profile of oestradiol and progesterone as well as to minimize the concentration lag between sequential modules (Supplementary Figs 1–3). The average through-system flow rates across 28 days for the Quintet-MFP are shown in Fig. 2c. The through-system flow rates for all three systems were found to consistently pump within close range of the target values for the entirety of 28-day experiments, and in the case of the Quintet-MFP, for periods of more than 100 days. In addition, the stroke volumes (that is, the fluid volume displaced in a single pump stroke) were found to exhibit little variation across all pump pathways during a month-long pump cycle (Fig. 2d).

The status of actuator function was periodically evaluated in situ by monitoring the voltage pulse using an oscilloscope (Fig. 2e). The actuation time is defined as the amount of time required to completely open the actuator after the application of current to the electromagnet of the actuator (Fig. 2f). From empirical data, actuation times within the range of 250–625 μs were considered indicative of long-term stability of mechanical function; actuation times below the lower limit indicated incomplete opening of the valve while actuation times longer than the upper limit indicated that the actuation distance may be too long for reliable actuation. In situ actuator monitoring together with daily flow measurements enabled consistent pumping over month-long studies. The timelines for these studies, including microfluidic platform setup and tissue preparation and culture, are shown in Fig. 2g.

In vitro follicle growth is a well-established model to study ovarian function19,20,21. To test whether the microfluidic system supports follicle growth, we initially performed experiments in Solo-MFP systems using primary mouse follicles (Fig. 3a). Mouse gonadal tissue from 12-day-old CD-1 mice was used throughout these studies because healthy ovaries are never removed from women, except under extraordinary circumstances such as in the case of a sterilizing cancer diagnosis22. As has been demonstrated previously, murine and human primary follicles behave similarly in static culture21. For our microfluidic cultures, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) was provided at a concentration of 10 mIU ml−1 through the first 14 days (day −14 to day 0) to mimic follicular phase gonadotropin levels (Fig. 2g). To phenocopy the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge, we created an algorithm called ‘surge-purge’ that generated peak human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) on day 0 (Fig. 2g). Hormones were then brought to baseline for the remaining days of culture (day 1 to day 14; Fig. 2g). All data are presented with the hCG surge as day 0 to permit comparison of follicular and luteal phase patterns to phases of the human menstrual cycle (Fig. 2g). Follicle architecture and the spatial relationship of germ cells and their supporting somatic cells were maintained in the Solo-MFP. Moreover, follicle growth was supported from primary/early secondary stage to antral stage (Fig. 3a). After hCG stimulation, follicles released metaphase II (MII) oocytes with barrel-shaped bipolar spindles and tightly aligned chromosomes, which was termed MFP ovulation (Fig. 3a). Once MFP ovulation occurred, the granulosa cells differentiated into luteal cells as indicated by the granulosa cell hypertrophy and the significantly reduced number of cell nuclei in a defined area (Fig. 3b, P<0.05 analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s range test). These results demonstrate that the microfluidic environment of the Solo-MFP was capable of supporting individual ovarian follicle growth, maturation, MFP ovulation, and granulosa cell luteinization.

Follicle hormone secretion was next examined within microfluidic culture. Following the establishment of microfluidic support and development of ovarian follicles, follicular hormone secretion was investigated. During the follicular phase, 17β-oestradiol (E2) production gradually increased and peaked on day 0 when follicles reached maturation (Fig. 3c). During the luteal phase, the progesterone (P4) concentrations were markedly increased and peaked two days after hCG treatment (Fig. 3c, P<0.05 ANOVA with Tukey’s range test). Compared to steroid hormones secreted in static culture, follicles exposed to dynamic flow had significantly higher E2 and P4 production (pg per follicle per day; Fig. 3e,f, P<0.05 ANOVA with Tukey’s range test). Next, we examined two peptide hormones, inhibin A and inhibin B, that are known to be secreted in the follicular phase to assess non-steroidal patterns of follicular function. Inhibin A, is a member of the TGFβ superfamily exhibited a secretion pattern similar to that of E2, peaking when follicles reached maturation and subsequently decreasing, remaining low during the luteal phase (Fig. 3d). The secretion of inhibin B gradually increased until day −2 of the follicular phase, then decreased and remained low in the later stage of the luteal phase (Fig. 3d). Taken together, these patterns of inhibin A and inhibin B, as well as E2 and P4, are consistent with healthy ovarian follicle performance23,24,25. These human-like patterns were entirely controlled by exogenous FSH and LH. These data show what has long been suspected; that pituitary hormones set the tempo of each reproductive cycle, both in vivo and now in microfluidics.

Based on the success of follicle cultures in the Solo-MFP, we then used our microfluidic systems to culture ovarian explants. Ovaries were collected from 12-day-old CD-1 mice; these tissues included follicles from all classes (primordial, primary, and secondary). Ovaries were quartered and two pieces were placed in a single cell culture insert and cultured in either the Solo-MFP or Duet-MFP for 28 days. The treatment strategies for the pituitary hormones, FSH and hCG, were the same as those used in the follicle microfluidic cultures (Fig. 4a,b). Both the Solo-MFP and Duet-MFP supported follicle growth from primary/early secondary to multilayer and antral stages within the ovarian explants (Fig. 4c). After hCG stimulation, mature follicles displayed cumulus-oocyte complex expansion and released MII oocytes. Additionally, granulosa cells differentiated into luteal cells (Fig. 4c). Both steroid (E2 and P4) and peptide (inhibin A and B) hormones exhibited secretion patterns similar to those seen in the microfluidic follicle cultures (Fig. 4d–g), suggesting that ovarian tissue is a sufficient proxy for individual follicles in our systems, and that the Solo-MFP and Duet-MFP support each of the follicular endpoints described above.

To generate a hormonally coupled ex vivo female reproductive tract, we cultured murine ovary human fallopian tube, endometrium, ectocervix, and liver tissues for 28 days in the Quintet-MFP; this combination of tissues within the system was subsequently termed EVATAR. This system maintained the consistent pituitary hormone circulation and recapitulated the pituitary hormone control of relevant tissue function, effectively mimicking a 28-day human menstrual cycle (Fig. 5a). E2 and P4 peaked in the follicular and luteal phases, respectively (Fig. 5b). However, the absolute concentrations for both steroid and peptide hormones were significantly decreased compared to hormone concentrations in both the Solo-MFP and Duet-MFP (60-fold decreased for E2, 10-fold decrease for P4, 20-fold decrease for inhibin A, and 60-fold decrease for inhibin B, P<0.05 ANOVA with Tukey’s range test; Fig. 5b,c). Since all materials used were the same between microfluidic platforms, and no hormone binding to the materials was observed (Fig. 5d), these data suggest that the integration of multiple tissues altered the upstream ovarian hormone expression patterns and/or that downstream reproductive tissues consumed ovarian hormone secretions.

A static co-culture system of murine follicles and human fallopian tissue has previously been established in our laboratory26. Our work confirmed that the cultured human fallopian tube epithelium, including ciliated and secretory cells, could be regulated by exogenous steroid hormones secreted by co-cultured ovarian tissues. Specifically, cilia length, cilia-beating status, and oviduct-specific glycoprotein 1 (OVGP1) secretion provided hallmarks of the functional changes in the human fallopian epithelium during the menstrual cycle27,28,29,30. In the current study, fallopian explants were incorporated into the Quintet-MFP to facilitate a more complex co-culture environment beyond simple static cultures. After 21 days of culture, tissue viability was confirmed by histology and cilia beating was still observed (Fig. 5e and Supplementary Videos 1 and 2). Moreover, the thickness of the fallopian epithelium on day 0, prior to hCG stimulation, was greater than that of tissues on day 7. Additionally, OVGP1 expression was higher on day 0, following follicular phase E2 stimulation, than on day 7 (Fig. 5e).

Human uterine endometrial tissue explants do not survive in culture long term. We developed a 3D culture system consisting of endometrial cells grown in decellularized uterine scaffolds, which were then placed in static and microfluidic cultures (Fig. 5f). Stromal and epithelial cells within the recellularized scaffolds were delineated by immunohistochemical staining of vimentin and cytokeratin, respectively (Fig. 5f). The stromal cells stained positively for Ki67, and expressed estrogen receptors (ER) and progesterone receptors (PR) at the end of the 28-day culture, indicative of active cell proliferation and uterine stromal cell characteristics (Fig. 5f).

To model hormone response in human ectocervix tissue in vitro, 3 mm biopsy punches of human ectocervix explants were cultured without hormones for 2–5 days before integration into the Quintet-MFP. Tissue was harvested at regular intervals throughout the entire 28-day cycle for histological analysis. The cultured ectocervix maintained its stratified squamous epithelial tissue architecture with proliferative potential as assessed by histology and Ki67 immunoreactivity, respectively (Fig. 6a). At the end of the follicular phase, when E2 concentrations peaked, the ectocervix explants prominently expressed PR in both the epithelium and stroma, while this receptor was undetectable at the end of the hormone cycle (day 14), when E2 concentrations decreased (Fig. 6a). These findings suggest that ectocervix tissue responded to E2 secreted from the upstream ovarian tissue in this microfluidic culture system.

Human liver microtissues were also included in the Quintet-MFP to explore non-reproductive tissue stability within our microfluidic culture system and because this organ will be an important tool in future metabolic studies. Over 28 days of microfluidic culture, liver microtissues retained their structure, as measured by the tight cellular contacts and nuclear staining before and after hCG stimulation (Fig. 6b). In addition, albumin secretion was stable throughout the 28-day culture period (Fig. 6c).

A variety of other factors are made at constitutive levels by reproductive tract tissues that are not hormonally controlled. We examined two such cytokines, interleukin 8 (IL8) and vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) in the Quintet-MFP. IL8 and VEGF-A peaked in the follicular phase and remained relatively constant through the end of the luteal phase (Fig. 6d), suggesting that the integrated system supports both reproductive and non-reproductive secretions throughout extended culture.

As an alternative approach to studying reproductive tissues in our microfluidic systems, we asked whether we could prolong luteal phase function using the physiological cues associated with pregnancy in an attempt to prolong luteal phase function. Briefly, once ovulation occurs, the mature egg is released into the fallopian tube where, if sperm are available, it will be fertilized before moving into the uterus for implantation. The fertilized embryo and newly developing placenta produce and secrete hCG and prolactin at high levels, which rescues the corpus luteum (CL) to support an ongoing pregnancy31. We mimicked this ‘pregnancy’-like state and maintained the CL for the full 14 days of the luteal phase following MFP ovulation in the Quintet-MFP (Fig. 6e). Moreover, the ‘pregnant’ luteal tissue produced significantly higher levels of P4 compared to the ‘non-pregnant’ system (Fig. 6f, P<0.05 ANOVA with Tukey’s range test). This experiment demonstrates the power of the integrated EVATAR in the Quintet-MPF to elucidate fundamental mechanisms of reproductive function, opening the door to new approaches to drug discovery and toxicological studies.|||

The female reproductive tract constitutes the ovary, fallopian tubes, uterus, and cervix, but it is challenging to engineer this systemin vitro.