Tokens built on the Ethereum blockchain platform will give gentlemen access to contact with XXX stars Kenna James, London Keyes, and Kat Dior in a closed club in Las Vegas. Millions of Google users are waiting for Esperanza Gomes, Madison Ivy, Asa Akira, Brandi Love and the other adult models of Bangbros to be added to the project as well.



The gentlemen’s club will accept its own cryptocurrency from its members.

The new tokens, called Legends (LGD), will be available for buying on the Bittrex cryptocurrency exchange starting from April 18, 2017. LGDs are ERC-20 compliant tokens built on the Ethereum blockchain platform. Other examples of ERC-20 type tokens are ETH from Ethereum, REP from decentralized prediction market platform Augur, Digix's DGD (following the real world gold price), and Maker's Dai (followed by a few dollars in their own way).

Bill Shihara, CEO of Bittrex exchange, commented to Coinidol.com world blockchain news outlet about the reason his exchange supported the project:

“We are always looking for innovative ways to use blockchains and a membership token is a great mainstream use case for it. I don’t know of any other competitors. To my knowledge, no one has successfully integrated a token into a brick and mortar business this way. There are solidity developers involved in the project to build more than just the tokens.”

But other blockchain experts think that it’s not a single example of tokens for porno industry.

Steven Nerayoff, advisor at Ethereum during the early days, is sure that “there are several in the works right now. They are based on the micro payments type of system with some twists.”

Adrián Calvo , organizer of workshops Ethereum Madrid , co-founder of the company Icofunding, Lead Blockchain Developer at Grant Thornton, commented to Coinidol.com:

“There were a couple of projects at the ether.camp hackathon related to that. One to give sex consent and the other one to protect the copyright of adult movies. I don't think there have been any successful projects on Ethereum yet. Bitcoin have been more successful on that, as it's more widely used as a currency. Some adult sites accept it.

 With the introduction of ZK-SNARKS we are probably going to see more "obscure" use cases, and that's fine.”

“There are also crypto celebrities, who are members of the club, though I’m not at liberty to disclose them yet. I visited the old club before the venue was changed and got to meet the people involved in the business. I have not gone to the new club but I do plan to visit in May,” commented the founder of Bittrex exchange to Coinidol.com.

The founders of the club claim that their clients are celebrity businessmen and even a notable female executive from the venture capital world.

While the main room of the club will be available for public access, VIP private members will gain exclusive access to private appearances by professional athletes, celebrities and adult entertainment stars, including Kenna James, Kat Dior and London Keyes. In addition, members can monetize their access to The Legends Room through a unique “timeshare” model, which allows non-members to enter the private area by renting a membership. Bookings will be managed through the The Legends Room mobile app.

Club’s membership as a provable asset on a blockchain with smart contract capabilities

Nick Blomgren, co-founder of The Legends Room said:

“The exclusive private gentlemen’s club has been a highly sought after membership in world capitals like New York, London and Tokyo. Now it’s time for Las Vegas to join this exclusive club, and as a 21st century city, it’s only fitting that this most prestigious club be launched with a unique cryptocurrency that allows for timeshares and proof of membership,  For the first time, club membership will be a provable asset on a blockchain with smart contract capabilities.”

Legends Room members will receive special perks and exclusive experiences at the Las Vegas establishment. The Legends Room will take over the former StripTease location at 3750 South Valley View Blvd, Las Vegas, with a scheduled opening date in late May.

What will be the role of Kenna James, Kat Dior and London Keyes in the crowdsale?

“The adult stars all have memberships on Bittrex, have made promotional videos for the token, will accept digital currency for dances and merchandise at the club, and are all very interested in adding bitcoin as a payment method for their personal websites and mobile businesses,” stated Nick Blomgren, co-founder of the new xxx club to the world blockchain news outlet Coinidol.com.

“Kenna James, Kat Dior, and London Keyes have been filming promotional videos for the club and have already exposed the club to their social media followers.”

Here are examples of the promotional videos .

Coinidol.com asked Nick Blomgren, co-founder of The Legends Room, if Esperanza Gomes, Madison Ivy, Asa Akira, Brandi Love and other adult models from Bangbros are to be added to the project as well. Nick commented:

“We are working with a number of adult stars and will be adding more in the near future. We can offer them Penthouse Pet of the Year Kenna James and the next rock star in adult Kat Dior.”

Coinidol.com world blockchain news outlet asked top managers and founders of Ethereum about their attitude to this use case of their software for the xxx industry.

“The protocol is free and open (and should and will stay that way). Whether the Ethereum foundation agrees/supports the XXX industry or not shouldn't matter, that's the beauty of it. The protocol can be freely used by anyone. I don't think it's gonna matter to be honest. Tech lore has it that the porn industry played a crucial role in the battle against VHS vs Betamax. I'd say it's rather promising. ;-)”

The unofficial position of another founder of Ethereum: “I think the porn industry will speed up / advance the adoption of Ethereum. There are plenty of opportunities for the porn industry to explore in terms of Ethereum (not merely in the sense of "payment").”

Steven Nerayoff , Advisor at Ethereum during the early days confirmed the opinion of other team members of Ethereum, but stressed that it’s his personal point of view:

“I doubt it would affect Ethereum’s reputation. People didn't think less of VHS bc porno used it (and that was the primary use) or many other example on the internet as the porn industry has become recognized as a leader in new tech.”

Derick Smith , Chief Operating Officer at Ethereum Labs commented to Coinidol.com that paper money is more dirty:

“One can argue cash has never suffered reputational damage, but has had to subject itself to some pretty serious controls as a result of its use in dodgy industries.”

Fabian Vogelsteller , Lead Ðapp Developer at Ethereum from Germany, commented to Coinidol.com about the cost to use ERC-20 tokens:

“Ethereum is a permissionless blockchain and it can be used by anyone who pays the gas fee. I think any adoption is good adoption, but have personally no opinion on a porn crowdsale.” 

|||

Tokens built on the Ethereum blockchain platform will give gentlemen access to contact with XXX stars Kenna James, London Keyes, and Kat Dior in a closed club in Las Vegas. Millions of users are waiting for Esperanza Gomes, Madison Ivy, Asa Akira, Brandi Love and the other adult models of Bangbros to be added