Anyone who has been part of a large institution has been forced to use a piece of software that isn't to our personal taste.  To avoid insulting a future employer i'll steer clear mentioning any products in particular.  Everyone is familiar with this class of software.  I was talking with a friend over coffee about why bad software is so pervasive in big organizations who presumably have the budget to source a more efficient solution.  As two guys who are interested in starting companies in the near future we felt it was an important topic to look into.

Imagine this, its 2 am on New Years Day and you've just received a ping from your up time monitor that your mail service is down.  Would you rather have to go in to troubleshoot it yourself or call someone at IBM Lotus or Microsoft Outlook or Google?  Startups are great but they are likely to not have a team standing by to troubleshoot and debug at all hours of the night.

From an operations perspective it is expensive to build a team that will maintain a self hosted solution.  Plus if you're using an in house platform or an open source solution that team will likely be building new features, maintaining and securing the solution.

Have you ever noticed that mattress stores seem to cluster in the same area around town, often across the street from each other or even next door?  Firms will re position themselves in response to their competitors movements until there is no advantage to making another change.  We see the same type of phenomenon in the software business.  The big players use product X, your competitors use product X, what will you be missing if you don't adopt it as well?

There is an inherit risk in switching products when one dominates the market place.

Consider verticals like education, government and health.  There are federal laws, state laws and institutional regulations about how information must be stored and protected.  If you're dealing with institutions that are publicly funded they are often required to have a bidding process for contracts.

Checkout the front page of sam.gov, the System for Award Management.  Try signing up for an account, you'll be greeted by a multipage sign up form requesting IDs that take weeks to obtain.  Go hire a flotilla of lawyers to make sure you're in bounds.  Build a proposal to submit.  Now sit back and relax for 6 months to a handful of years to hear back on whether or not you've earned the contract.

This is a good exercise to think about when building software.  If you are creating a new software start up you need to address these concerns in prospective client's minds up front.  Consider devoting resources to building out a team that will support your product around the clock.  Make sure to highlight the competitive edge they can expect to receive from switching products and possibly more importantly, what they stand to loose if they stay with the dominate player.  Compliance is a more difficult issue to approach.  This can be somewhat mitigated by targeting a specific region and branching out as resources become available.

If you like this kind of content, sign up for my weekly email update!

|||

Anyone who has been part of a large institution has been forced to use a piece of software that isn't to our personal taste.  To avoid insulting a future employer i'll steer clear mentioning any...