Here's why Allan Lichtman, the man who correctly predicted the last nine presidential elections, calls Donald Trump "more vulnerable to impeachment than any early president in the history of the nation."

Way back in September, when most pundits were gleefully speculating about whether the Republican Party would ever recover from the Electoral College shellacking in store for then-candidate Donald Trump, one man had a very different guess about how things would shake out. Allan Lichtman, a history professor at American University in Washington, D.C., declared Trump to be the favorite, relying on an election prediction methodology he had developed some three decades earlier and used to correctly predict every presidential election since. Lichtman was, of course, extremely correct—an accomplishment that earned him a personal note from the president-elect just a few days after the election. "Professor—congrats," wrote Trump in a letter to Lichtman. "Good call."

Around that same time, though, the vindicated prognosticator already had another fearless forecast ready to go, one that the president-elect would presumably not appreciate as much: Trump, Professor Lichtman asserted with confidence, will become only the third President of the United States to be impeached. He makes his case in a new book, The Case for Impeachment, and we spoke to him last week about how the country got to this point, and why he feels just as confident about this prediction as he was with the last one.

Allan Lichtman: By paying no attention to the polls, or the pundits, or the day-to-day events of the campaign—the things that led most forecasters to arrive at erroneous conclusions. Instead, I used my system, the “Keys to the White House,”, which I first developed in 1981 and have used to correctly predict the nine presidential elections since. The basic thesis is that you have to keep your eye on the big picture of the strength of the incumbent president’s party. This time, the Democrats had many vulnerabilities irrespective of who their candidate was, or anything that either side did during the campaign. The party took a pasting in the 2014 midterms; the sitting president couldn’t run again; they endured a contentious primary fight; they didn’t follow up the Affordable Care Act with a big policy initiative during President Obama’s second term; and so on. A presidential election is, at its core, a referendum on whether the party in power should get four more years in office.

My impeachment prediction is not based on a formal methodology—after all, we’ve only had two impeachments, or three, including President Nixon’s resignation. But it is based on a deep study of history, including Trump’s parallels to his impeached predecessors; a study of the process of impeachment; a study of Trump's vulnerabilities, particularly those that have arisen over the course of his business career; and a look at the early weeks of his tenure in the White House. I identified eight separate grounds on which Trump is arguably susceptible to impeachment or removal, and I believe he is more vulnerable than any early president in the history of the nation.

But I’m not aiming to scrutinize the day-to-day events of the presidency. Instead, I wanted to provide a road map in the event that he does cross that line—because impeachment is a political process that occurs outside of the courts. It is responsive to the people, and if impeachment is going to take place, it will be because the American people demand it. All these protests and demonstrations and energy directed against the Trump presidency will be like smoke through a chimney unless, eventually, they are directed at achieving a specific political end.

Yes, if the transgressions are serious enough, and if they relate to the presidency in some way. The most obvious example of pre-election conduct that could be impeachable collusion with Russia during the campaign. That didn't happen during the presidency, but is obviously directly related to the election that gave Trump the White House. There is still a lot of smoke around the campaign’s Russia links—Carter Page, Paul Manafort, Roger Stone, Jeff Sessions, and General Flynn, among others. I think there could be some fire there.

The argument for impeachment is much stronger if the conduct includes both things that happened before the presidency and conduct that occurred after the president took office. For example, if the House were to determine that Trump exploited illegal immigrants who worked on his construction projects, that could be relevant to his presidency and therefore impeachable, because a crackdown on illegal immigration was a cornerstone of his White House campaign. This behavior could then be linked to related potential abuses of power while in office—for example, with respect to the travel ban.

Conflicts of interest. The White House makes numerous decisions that are going to impact the profitability of Trump's businesses around the world, and although he might not be running them anymore, he knows in broad terms what policies would impact them and generate profit for them. Nonetheless, he refused to fully divest himself of his business interests before taking office. I understand that doing so might be complicated, and that he might take a financial hit in doing so, but no one forced him to run for president. He holds the most powerful position in the world, and if he has to make sacrifices to hold that position honorably, so be it.

There are specific constitutional provisions and laws that his conflicts of interests may violate. There has been a lot of discussion of the Emoluments Clause, which prohibits the president from taking things of value from a foreign power or their agents—even if the president gets nothing in return. For example, Trump recently obtained trademarks in China that had previously been held up there for a very long time. To what extent is his administration's China policy being influenced by those trademarks? We don’t know how his private interests are intertwined with the national interests, and that’s exactly what the Emoluments Clause was designed to guard against.

Johnson was very stubborn and always believed he was right, even when he was wrong. He didn’t listen to others and resented the so-called “establishment,” and it was those characteristics that ultimately led to his impeachment. Trump exhibits some of those same qualities, and he would be wise to learn from Johnson that, as president, you have to take a broader view of things than whatever is inside your own head.

The parallels to Nixon are, I think, quite chilling. Trump is very thin-skinned and considers the media be his enemy. He believes in being on the attack at all times, and in the importance of getting even with people. He has a penchant for lying and for deflecting controversy instead of meeting it head-on. Finally, like Nixon, Trump seems bereft of any guiding principles, other than doing what is best for himself. This lack of guiding principles, for a president, is very dangerous.

The process is difficult, and would only be invoked in very serious circumstances. It requires that the majority of the president’s cabinet and the vice president agree that the president is unfit to serve, and if the president objects, he or she can be removed only by a two-thirds vote of both legislative chambers. Frankly, the chances of it happening are remote. But Trump has the ability to launch, in a brief period of time, enough warheads to end human civilization, and there are perilous areas of the world right now that require cool and considered judgment—particularly North Korea. I think there are fair questions as to whether Donald Trump is capable of making those cool, considered judgments.

And remember, Republicans in Congress love Mike Pence. He’s a down-the-middle, predictable, standard-issue conservative Christian. They would love to have Mike Pence in the White House! And if he were to become president, he gets to appoint his vice president, which means you could, in theory, have a Mike Pence-Paul Ryan White House—the ultimate dream team for Republicans. Assuming Democrats are on board, it would only take about two dozen Republicans to deflect from their majority to secure enough votes to impeach.|||

We spoke with Allan Lichtman, the professor whose model correctly predicted the last nine presidential elections, and who believes impeachment is up next.