The CEOs of Uber and Snapchat have come under fire for insensitive remarks lately.  Kalanick came under fire after making some fairly insensitive remarks to a driver who was concerned about the direction of the service.  Spiegel disparaged India as a "poor" country.  You would think that leaders of multi-billion dollar companies would know to keep their mouths shut and that people are always recording what you're saying.

I think these two incidents reveal some uncomfortable truths about start up companies.  Growth is so important that building a company with a environment where engineers participate in a House of Cards style race to the top.  Gig employees are mistreated, underpaid and lied to.  Start ups worship at the altar of growth.  It makes sense, investors care about growth, the value of the company increases with growth.

However when we talk about value in these context we are talking about monetary value.  Value as far as employee well being and societal value is ignored.  While I count myself as a libertarian and would never argue in favor of regulations that force companies to improve employees or community values I would argue it is an important part of building a good business.  Think about the Maslow's Hierarchy of needs.  Satisfying the basic requirements like providing an office to work in and tools to do the job is the lowest step on the pyramid.  Work can be done.  As in life however, when mental needs are not met you can't live your best life or do your best work.

Founders can fall into the trap of surrounding themselves with yesmen who reinforce the idea that the company's mission is the most important objective.  This type of tunnel vision isn't new.  We've seen it in firms on Wall Street that engage in illegal activity to make perform better.  Theranos portrayed its diagnostic technology as a revolutionary leap that would save lives, when in fact they were knowingly producing inaccurate diagnostics and lying to evaluators.

Uber has been caught charging its customers one rate and paying their drivers a smaller rate.  Snapchat has been accused of lying about user metrics to protect their IPO, even attempting to hire Facebook engineers to gain inside knowledge of the company's products.

Profit and growth are great, but dishonest gains are unsustainable.

Bringing it back to Kalanick and Spiegel, i'm reminded of a segment from the Start Up podcast.  Gimlet founder Alex Blumberg was talking with an executive coach about his performance as CEO of the company.  The coach issued a warning about building company culture.  If you aren't careful about curating your cultures, one will still develop around your shadowed qualities as a leader.  In the case of Kalanick and Spiegel we see two people who have built cultures of greed and blind competition.

Build a business that is longitudinally viable by building a culture that treats employees well and represents itself honestly to investors.  You may experience drawbacks in the short term, but the payoff is in the long term.

If you like this kind of content, sign up for my weekly email update!|||

The CEOs of Uber and Snapchat have come under fire for insensitive remarks lately.  Kalanick came under fire after making some fairly insensitive remarks to a driver who was concerned about the...