Lately Im having problem implementing Eslinter on Sublime Text for my team that has support for React/JSX and ES6 syntax following some tutorials on the interweb... So I decided to share the steps here as others might have the same problem. I find this extremely helpful in our team as it provides uniform formats and style guides all throughout the code base.

If your new to Eslint please follow the link to their documentation. What this is all about is to outline the errors/issues within your JS/JSX code within Sublime Text Editor. So let’s dive in. :-)

Make sure you have the new build of Sublime Text Editor installed. The latest build is 3126. I haven’t tried this on the previous versions.

I used Babel-Eslint for our parser. You can have a different parser for this purpose. It can be configure in y0ur eslint config file. Will get to that later.

Install React Plugin for Eslint. We’re gonna be using this to define our React rules within eslint config.

I choose to install the above eslint plugins globally as I will be using it every time I start a new reactjs project. You can also choose to include it in your dev dependencies (It’s a good practice… :-). Just add — save-dev.

The best way to install Sublime Packages is through the Package Manager.

We need to install SublimeLinter and sublimelinter-contrib-eslint packages. So…

You can configure sublime linter manually or you can copy and paste the settings below:

Again, you can do this manually. It only involves few clicks.

3. Here, you can choose your Mark Style. I like having it as “Outline” for no apparent reason… :-)

At the root of your ReactJs project. Add your Eslint configuration “.eslintrc”. You can refer to Eslint documentation to create your own eslint rules. But for the purpose of this writing, copy and paste the code below. It has all the configurations and rules for ReactJs and ES6 and some other good practices. It is based on “Airbnb” style guide, but I modified it to suit our needs. Feel free to use it.

You should see something like this if all is working:|||

Lately Im having problem implementing Eslinter on Sublime Text for my team that has support for React/JSX and ES6 syntax following some tutorials on the interweb... So I decided to share the steps…