A valuable lesson to learn is how you can keep up an accelerated pace without experiencing burnout.

The Learning how to learn: Powerful mental tools to help you master tough subjects course by Dr. Barbara Oakley was a catalyst for this.

Though the summary below is no substitute for the course itself:

Initially, you will feel a lot of anxiety and discomfort when tackling a tough topic — feelings my brain actively fights by switching my focus to strategic plans, client threat models, Internet puppies or Netflix shows.

A lot of Information Security Fundamentals can be tedious to master.

In the long term, much like dieting, the discomfort goes away and satisfaction returns in its place. Learning can be a positive experience!

You will learn about different thinking modes. Letting your thoughts wander (diffused-mode) and concentrating on things (focused-mode) at the right time.

It teaches you the importance of taking the time to rest after your studies, then coming back to them and recalling what you learned. You simply can’t cram knowledge into your brain all day and expect it to stick. Make remembering easier by using the free flashcard app Anki.

Daily physical exercise and maintaining a vibrant social life helps your brain produce needed neurons. Sleep hygiene is equally important, as brains sweep themselves clean of toxins during sleep. It is even better to sleep right after your studies to fully benefit from your brain in diffused mode.

A few examples of what you will learn:

Chunking, memory recall, the illusion of competence, procrastination, routines, memory techniques, deliberate practice, perseverance, taking responsibility and effective test taking are a few of the topics you will add to your mental toolkit as you proceed on your journey.

What works for me may not do well by you, but I submerge myself in a particular domain for six months — and use the knowledge gained for every project.

You will never finish exploring the mysteries of any Science. Focus on the underlying fundamentals and get ready for the future!

I aspire to maintain a 6-day a week learning routine (~1250 hours/year). Books, blogs, wikis, podcasts, video courses and plenty of practice with hands-on Virtual Machine & VPN labs.

For myself, this involves tackling that challenging 700+ page book while distracting my body with the gym’s elliptical. I have had reasonable success reading a few pages at a time on my Kobo H2O in between “recall” laps in the pool.

Having different tutors repeat the same fundamental principles in their own way has proven to be very helpful in making them stick. Building out a Wiki/knowledge-base of those lessons for later review has been a game changer — especially looking back over time.|||

Learn how to become an Ethical Hacker and Cyber Security Professional. Free resources, books, cheat sheets, mind maps, CTFs, frameworks, vocational training, university degrees, eLearning, and certs!