LinuxKit uses the tool for image builds, and the tool for pushing and running VM images.

Simple build instructions: use to build. This will build the tools in . Add this to your or copy it to somewhere in your eg . Or you can use .

If you already have installed you can use to install the build tool, and to install the tool.

Once you have built the tool, use to build the example configuration, and to run locally. Use to terminate on the console.

You can use to execute the image you created with . This will use a suitable backend for your platform or you can choose one, for example VMWare. See .

Additional, platform specific information is available for:

We'll add more detailed docs for other platforms in the future.

The test suite uses To install this you should use .

This will run the tests and put the results in a the directory!

Run control is handled using labels and with pattern matching. To run add a label you may use:

To run tests that match the pattern you would use the following command:

To customise, copy or modify the to your own or use one of the examples and then run to generate its specified output. You can run the output with .

The yaml file specifies a kernel and base init system, a set of containers that are built into the generated image and started at boot time. It also specifies what formats to output, such as bootable ISOs and images for various platforms.

The yaml format specifies the image to be built:

For a more detailed overview of the options see yaml documentation.

There is an overview of the architecture covering how the system works.

There is an overview of the security considerations and direction covering the security design of the system.

This project was extensively reworked from the code we are shipping in Docker Editions, and the result is not yet production quality. The plan is to return to production quality during Q2 2017, and rebase the Docker Editions on this open source project.

This is an open project without fixed judgements, open to the community to set the direction. The guiding principles are:

There are weekly development reports summarizing work carried out in the week.|||

linuxkit - A toolkit for building secure, portable and lean operating systems for containers