It may come as no surprise that tech and physician jobs pay six-figures, but for the average American job hunting, it may be even more important to know where they can work that pays highly. The good news — many companies are offering top dollar for skilled talent.

Glassdoor’s latest report reveals the 25 Highest Paying Companies in America for 2017. In addition to ramping up hiring, all of these companies are offering employees, on average, six-figure paychecks. This report is based on each company’s median total compensation, compiled by looking at salary reports at companies in which employees have anonymously and voluntarily shared both their base pay and other forms of compensation (i.e. commissions, tips, bonuses, etc.) over the past year*.

Which companies offer the biggest paychecks? Check out the complete results:

So why do consulting and tech companies dominate this list?

“This report reinforces that high pay continues to be tied to in-demand skills and higher education, which in part, is why we see several companies on this list among the consulting and technology industries,” said Dr. Andrew Chamberlain, Glassdoor chief economist. “Salaries are sky-high at consulting companies due to ‘barriers of entry’ in this field, which refers to employers wanting top consultants to have personal contacts, reputations and specialized skills and knowledge. In technology, we continue to see unprecedented salaries as the war for talent is still very active, largely due to the ongoing shortage of highly skilled workers needed.”

Where are all of the healthcare employers, considering it’s such a hot industry?

Our report on the 25 Highest Paying Jobs in America for 2017 highlighted six roles in the healthcare industry, but because this report takes into account all roles and salaries for a company, there are several healthcare jobs that pay moderate salaries, thus no healthcare companies cracked the top 25 this year. The data shows us that physicians and pharmacy managers are still among the highest paying jobs in America, but overall, taking into account all job titles at a company, A.T. Kearny and Strategy& continue to be the highest paying companies, on average, just as they were on last year’s report.

EMPLOYERS: It can be challenging to prepare for conversations around salary, whether or not you can pay top dollar for top talent. With Glassdoor’s Guide to Salary Conversations, you’ll never dread the compensation conversation again.

*Methodology: Glassdoor’s 25 Highest Paying Companies in America report identifies companies with the highest median total compensation package (including base salary and other forms of compensation, such as commissions, tips, bonuses, etc.), as reported by U.S.-based employees on Glassdoor over the past year (3/2/16 – 3/1/17). Companies considered for this report must have received at least 50 salary reports in U.S. dollars by U.S-based employees during the timeframe. When sharing a salary report on Glassdoor, employees share base salary and have the option to include other forms of compensation. In cases where companies have the same median total compensation, the company with the higher median base compensation receives the higher rank. Subsidiaries of companies were considered for this report if they met the methodology, and have their own distinct job listings and profile on Glassdoor.|||

