USA, Plano, Texas, December 1, 2016- Tavisca Solutions, a leading travel technology products and solutions provider, exhibited at the Phocuswright Conference held from November 14-17, 2016, at Los Angeles, California.

Tavisca Solutions’ focus was centred on showcasing, how we help travel companies transform themselves into technology-driven market leaders and leading travel brands. Our visitors had access to demos of our innovative products like clarifi (real time hotel content standardization system), World Switch – a single API access to global hotel properties, beats (DMC agent productivity tool) and more.

“We’ve successfully leveraged the remarkably evolved travel technology to the benefit of our clients in the travel industry. At this year’s Phocuswright Conference, team tavisca was focused on discussing how we can help travel brands distribute content through APIs in North America markets and extend our technology solutions to others in the travel sector to address their pain points,” said Mahendra Yadav, CEO, Tavisca Solutions.

At Tavisca Solutions, we continue to strengthen our relationship with partners, clients and prospects, and remain extremely committed to helping travel companies overcome technology challenges to harness the full growth potential that the burgeoning travel industry holds.

If you are interested to know more about our products and solutions, visit http://www.tavisca.com or send your message at beacon@tavisca.com or sales@tavisca.com or call us at (952) 737-3531 or +91 20-67083105.

For more than 20 years, the travel industry’s most influential leaders from around the world attend The Phocuswright Conference – visionary thinkers and innovators with powerful, ground-breaking ideas among them.

The Phocuswright Conference consists of four days of activities and sessions. They include The Travel Innovation Summit, Centre Stage, workshops, exhibitor and innovator showcase, networking breaks, lunches and cocktail receptions.

Tavisca Solutions, a travel technology products and solutions provider that works with travel companies (B2B, B2C, and B2B2C) across the globe and helps them enhance their online business. With the vision to build future-focused technology building blocks that solve key challenges in online travel business, tavisca® offers a versatile suite of cloud-based SaaS products, deciphering every aspect of customer and agent-facing online booking engines, travel mid & back-office agency operations management system.

Established in 2008, tavisca® has emerged into a team of travel technology specialists with over 200+ dedicated personnel and state-of-the-art development centre in India, and the sales and marketing office in the U.S.|||

Tavisca Solutions, a leading travel technology products and solutions provider, exhibited at the Phocuswright Conference held from November 14-17, 2016, at Los Angeles, California.