There is some confusion about the definitions of Red, Blue, and Purple teams within Information Security. Here are my definitions and concepts associated with them.

The purpose of a Red Team is to find ways to improve the Blue Team, so Purple Teams should not be needed in organizations where the Red Team is functioning properly. I equate it to hiring a waiter-like person to work in a restaurant where their whole job is to pick up food from the kitchen and bring it to tables.

When management is asked why they hired this extra person to do this instead of having the waiters do it themselves, the answer was, “The waiters said it wasn’t their job.” This is the same as a Red Team hacking and not sharing their knowledge with the defense.

If you have this problem, the solution is to fix the Red Team, not to create a separate team to do their job.

Red and Blue teams ideally work in perfect harmony with each other, as two opposing sides of the same coin.

Like Yin and Yang or Attack and Defense, Red and Blue teams could not be more opposite in their tactics and behaviors, but these differences are precisely what make them part of a healthy and effective whole.

Red Teams attack, and Blue Teams defend, but the primary goal is shared between them: improve the security posture of the organization.

Purple Teams are arguably an artificial addition to this pairing. They exist to ensure that observations and lessons from both teams make it to the other so that continuous improvement can occur. Without this crucial bridge, each team discovers key insights but doesn’t share them with the other.

For example, the Red Team might learn ways they could have been stopped but not share this knowledge with the Blue Team. Or the Blue Team may be aware of gaps in their controls but not share them with the Red Team.

Some of the common problems with Red and Blue team cooperation include:

Organizations that suffer from one or more of these ailments are most likely to need a Purple Team to solve them.

A key point in the understanding of Purple Teams is that it should be thought of as a function, or a concept, more than as a separate entity. This can come in the form of an actual, named team that performs this function, or it could be part of the Red/Blue teams’ management organization that ensures that the feedback loop between them is continuous and healthy.

Having the Purple Team function occur as part of security management may be ideal so that it does not appear as if the Purple Team is a peer with the other two, or that the Purple Team is the only way the Red and Blue teams will communicate with each other. This breakdown can perpetuate the negative adversarial aspects (which include reluctance to share information) between the Red and Blue teams.|||

There is some confusion about the definitions of Red, Blue, and Purple teams within Information Security. Here are my definitions and concepts associated w