Google’s I/O and Apple’s WWDC may dominate the headlines but they are not the only great events around to explore new ideas and connect with like-minded people in tech. If you’re struggling to get invites for these conferences or just feel like broadening your horizons to discover other events, read on to find where designers and developers are flocking to.

Bringing together the UX community to discuss practical user experience, this conference is focused on case studies and workshops. The events this year talk about rapid prototyping, usability testing, extreme UX with bomb detection etc.

UX Immersion is focused on designing techniques and methods for interaction design with 2 full day workshops and a day of featured talks. There are discussions about optimizing design visions and making collaboration across stakeholders more functional.

When: May 8–9 (Training & Tutorials), May 10–11 (Conference)

An annual conference to discuss developments in current and upcoming open source software. There are numerous presentations and workshops including speakers from Google, Microsoft, IBM, the Mozilla Foundation and the Linux Foundation. Topics to be covered include Open source: From Consumer to Contributor, The Business of Open source, architecture, security, performance and leadership.

Attendees include UX designer, developers, product managers, writers and even marketers. There’s loads of inspiration going around with lots to be learned. See what the community is looking at for the future at one of the most popular UX conventions.

While not a hardcore design or developer conference by nature, there’s lots going on at Tech Crunch Disrupt to cover both those areas and more. Network with some of the brightest entrepreneurs and meet exciting early stage start ups, see development teams create a product in its entirety in 24 hours at the Hackathon, and watch new entrants in Start Up Battlefield — it’s alumni include Dropbox, Yammer and Mint to name a few.

ApcaheCon has developers from the open source community come together to discuss and collaborate on open source technologies in the categories of databases and servers, big data, cloud computing and virtual machines. There are presentations from the Apache Incubator, which has ongoing projects in areas such as micro finance, data science and embedded systems.

Claiming to be “Europe’s leading tech festival”, The Next Web (TNW) brings together entrepreneurs, developers, marketing managers, CEOs and policymakers. There are four platforms for start ups to showcase what they’re all about — Bootstrap, Boost, Scale and Impact — depending on what kind of visibility they want. This year’s lineup of speakers includes founders and CEOs from Tumblr, Product Hunt, Glossier, Hubspot, Trello, GitHub, 9GAG and Sketch. There are also product designers, software engineers, experience designers, UX specialists and even DJ Hardwell attending the event.

A 4-day event featuring talks and workshops. The focus is on hands-on learning with over 80 hours of workshops that help with practical work. Themes of these workshops include design sprints, UX strategy blueprint and content-first UX design. Not to mention all this in the sunny retreat of Lisbon!

UX London is organised by the strategic consultancy and design studio, Clearleft. Each day of the 3-day event is dedicated to a specific theme of UX — Product, Service and Design. There are morning talks followed by afternoon workshops. The speakers and presenters at the event are from a diverse background including NIKE, Google, Uber, InVision and even independent consultants.

There’s practical learning, full-day workshops, dedicated Q&A sessions for problem solving and sharing of real life projects — quite a bit going on at Smashing Conference. This year’s workshops focus on IoT, Atomic Design, responsive UX design patterns among other topics. Speakers come from diverse fields including front end developers, information architecture specialists, UX consultants and art directors.

This one is exclusively aimed at designers and content strategists, but there’s people coming from all around the industry to understand how to shape experiences and tell stories. There’s one day for workshops and two days for presentations and talks.

Open Source Summit is the umbrella event for LinuxCon, ContainerCon, CloudOpen and the Community Leadership Conference. Apart from open source developers, programmers and professionals, attendees also include system administrators and architects, IT professionals in the business and legal domain, and avid open source participants.

The International Conference on Human Computer Interaction (HCI) is being held in the Eastern hemisphere this year among the hustle and bustle of Mumbai. Researchers and practitioners in the field of HCI will be gathering to discuss the latest developments in human computer interaction and present their findings. There are workshops for two days too along with field trips.

The developer conference for all things Java, tracks that will be covered are the core Java platform, the latest in Java Virtual Machines, improvements in the Java Development Kit (JDK), emerging languages such as Ceylon and Clojure, cloud and server-side development, and embedding Java technologies into intelligent systems such as those for smart homes and health services.

World Usability Congress covers the topics of usability, user experience (UX) and customer experience management (CX). Other specific topics that will be covered at this year’s conference are eCommerce, IT & smart factory, automotive and aviation, and virtual and augmented reality. Speakers come from enterprises such as Uber, Google, Intel, Walmart Labs, Rolls Royce and HTC Vive. It is part of a wider UX World Tour that will also visit China, Japan, India, Singapore and UAE.

Design conference to discuss intersection of design with the domains of business, technology, human sciences and communication.

The west coast edition of the popular event, featuring all the usual offerings of startup battlefield and hackathon.

Discussing every aspect of Big Data, upcoming applications, the growing market and impact in the future.|||

Google’s I/O and Apple’s WWDC may dominate the headlines but they are not the only great events around to explore new ideas and connect with like-minded people in tech. If you’re struggling to get…