DockerCon ‘17 is right around the corner and coming to the beautiful city of Austin starting April 18th. It feels like yesterday when the Docker community celebrated a 1.0 release in June 2014 at the first DockerCon in San Francisco with the slogan “Containers Are the New Virtualization” and Solomon Hykes stating “we can upgrade the internet”. In 3 short years the conference has grown from 500 attendees at the first DockerCon to over 5,000 expected attendees this year!

We’ll be keeping a keen eye on the announcements from Docker this year. The Netsil team will be there and we’d love to meet you. You can schedule a meeting with us (we’ve got an iPhone 7 Red to giveaway!) but for now let’s sit back and look at some of the interesting talks from DockerCon ‘16.

Delivering the advantages of virtual machines without the overhead has been the driving force behind the wide adoption of containers. A thought that was echoed during the keynote by Solomon Hykes — “The best tools allow us to do powerful things in a simple way… Making things simple is hard.”

Let’s revisit his keynote talk where he talks about the importance of having a tool that just works. When you need to fix something critical at 4am you don’t want something you hope will work, you want a tool that will let you do powerful things in a simple way. Extra “buttons and dials” are fine but they should be optional. Simple can be powerful.

Different companies have different definitions of Microservices and, quite often, different engineers on the same team in the same company can also have different definitions for Microservices. What is your definition of Microservice? Michele Titolo, Lead Software Engineer from Capital One, defines a Microservice as noted above.

Just having a Microservices based architecture is not enough. The Microservices that run your application should also be friendly. They should come with really good documentation to make them helpful to use. Autogenerated documentation of historical records of when things changed and why they changed is extremely helpful for Ops.

Integrated monitoring tools in large interconnected systems help prevent system wide failures. This, of course, leads to the problem of having a monitoring tool that can work across languages and frameworks. Logging all of the requests and responses in staging or test environment might work but not in a production environment. Your services will occasionally go down and planning your monitoring and troubleshooting strategy helps reduce downtime.

Working closely with Ops is imperative to creating a healthy Microservices ecosystem. Mapping out dependencies helps the Ops teams a lot because they need to deal with increased traffic because of a new dependency that you may have created. Microservices communicate with each other and people running Microservices need to communicate with each other.

You can see the rest of her talk below that talks in detail about how to make Microservices friendly and work for you.

What do you need to run a Docker app in production? Developers want agility, faster and easier app deployment; IT Ops looks for standardized and secure workflows in a way that is easy to manage in a scalable environment; and business teams require that all of the code works across all heterogenous environments. In this talk by Vivek Saraswat and Evan Hazlett we learn how Containers as a Service (CaaS) helps developers get the tools that they want and IT Ops gets secure and standardized workflows.

Vivek then touches on the monitoring considerations for containerized applications running production. He goes on to talk about the importance of monitoring cattle vs pets. If a single instance goes down then you don’t necessarily care about a single instance but what you care about is the application as a whole.

Vivek’s talk is followed by a deep dive and a technical demo by Evan. You can watch it here:

Docker has facilitated a huge ecosystem and containers have allowed faster dev cycles and standardized deployment and operations.

We can’t wait to see what DockerCon ’17 has in store. We will be in Austin and would love to show you the Netsil Application Operations Center (AOC), leveraged by DevOps and SREs around the globe to deliver reliability, health and performance for their business critical applications.|||

“Containers are the new Virtualization” — kicked off the first DockerCon back in 2014. The conference has grown rapidly and here we look back at some of the interesting talks from DockerCon ‘16.