I think that there’s a lot of institutional knowledge in our field, especially about what makes for a productive engineer. But while there are a good deal of books in the management field about “expert” roles and responsibilities of non-technical individual contributors, I don’t see too many modern books or posts that might shed light directly on what makes for a good senior engineer. One notable exception is of course Kate Matsudaira, who has been posting quite a good deal recently about the cultural sides of engineering.

Yet at the same time, a good lot of successful engineers whom I have known all remember the mentor who taught them what it meant to be “senior”.

I do, however, agree 100% with my friend Theo’s words about being “senior” in his chapter of the Web Operations book by O’Reilly:

He’s right: this field of web operations is still quite young. So we can’t be surprised when people who have a title of ‘senior’ exhibit unsurprisingly immature behavior, both technical and non-technical. If you haven’t read Theo’s chapter, I suggest you do.

Having said that, what does it actually mean to be ‘senior’ in this discipline? I certainly have an opinion of what it means, given that I’m charged with hiring, supporting, and retaining engineers whom are deemed to be senior. This notion that there is a bar to be passed in terms of career development is a good one, but I’d also add that these criteria exist on a spectrum, as opposed to a simple list of check-boxes. You don’t wake up one day and you are “senior” just because your title reflects that upon a promotion. Senior engineers don’t know everything. They’re not perfect in their technical knowledge, and they’re OK with that.

In order not to confuse titles with expectations that are fuzzy, sometimes I’ll refer to engineering maturity.

I’m going to gloss over the part where one could simply list the technical areas in which a mature engineer should have some level of mastery or understanding (such as “Networking”, “Filesystems”, “Algorithms”, etc.) and instead highlight the personal characteristics that in my mind give me indication that someone can influence an organization or a business positively in the domain of engineering.

Over on Quora, someone once asked me “What are the attributes (other than technical ability/experience) that makes a great VP of Technical Operations?”. The list of attributes that I mentioned in the answer came with the understanding that they are perpetual aspirations of my own. This post is similar to that answer.

I might first argue that senior engineers in web development and operations have the same characteristics as senior engineers in other fields of engineering (mechanical, electrical, chemical, etc.) in which case The Unwritten Laws of Engineering are applicable. Again, if you haven’t read this, please go do so. It was originally written in 1944, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. A good excerpt from the book is here.

While the book’s structure and prose still has a dated feel (“…refrain from using profanity in the workplace…” or “…men should pay particular attention to shaving habits and the trimming of beards and mustaches…”), it gives a good outline of the non-technical expectations, responsibilities, and inner workings of an engineering organization with respect to how both managers and mature engineers might behave.

All posts that attempt to give insight to aspirational characteristics must have an over-abundance of bullet points, and the field of engineering has a fair share of them. Therefore, I’m going to give you some, some mine and some pulled from various sources, many from the Unwritten Laws mentioned above.

Mature engineers seek out constructive criticism of their designs.

Every successful engineer I’ve met, upon finishing up a design or getting ready for a project, will continually ask their peers questions along the lines of:

This is because they know that nothing they make will ever only be in their hands, and that good peer review is what makes better design decisions. As it’s been said elsewhere, they “beg for the bad news.”

Mature engineers understand the non-technical areas of how they are perceived.

Being able to write a Bloom Filter in Erlang, or write multi-threaded C in your sleep is insufficient. None of that matters if no one wants to work with you. Mature engineers know that no matter how complete, elegant, or superior their designs are, it won’t matter if no one wants to work alongside them because they are assholes. Condescension, belittling, narcissism, and ego-boosting behavior send the message to other engineers (maybe tacitly) to stay away. Part of being happy in engineering comes from enjoying the company of the people you work with while designing and building things. An engineer who is quick to call someone a moron is someone destined to stunt his or her career.

This also means that mature engineers have self-awareness when it comes to their communication. This isn’t to say that every mature engineer communicates perfectly, only that they have some notion about where they could be better, and continually ask for a gut-check from peers and managers on how they’re doing. They aim to be assertive, not passive or aggressive in how they get their ideas across.

I’ve mentioned it elsewhere, but I must emphasize the point more: the degree to which other people want to work with you is a direct indication on how successful you’ll be in your career as an engineer. Be the engineer that everyone wants to work with.

Now this isn’t to say that you should shy away from giving (or getting) constructive criticism on the work produced by engineering (as opposed to the engineer personally), for fear of pissing someone off. There’s a difference between calling someone a moron and pointing out faults in their code or product. In a conversation with Theo, he pointed out another possible area where our field may grow up:

See also below #2 and #10 in The Ten Commandments of Egoless Programming.

I think this has a corollary from the Unwritten Laws (emphasis mine):

Be careful about whom you mark for copies of letters, memos, etc., when the interests of other departments are involved. A lot of mischief has been caused by young people broadcasting memorandum containing damaging or embarrassing statements. Of course it is sometimes difficult for a novice to recognize the “dynamite” in such a document but, in general, it is apt to cause trouble if it steps too heavily upon someone’s toes or reveals a serious shortcoming on anybody’s part. If it has wide distribution or if it concerns manufacturing or customer difficulties, you’d better get the boss to approve it before it goes out unless you’re very sure of your ground. This of course underscores the dated feel of the book, but in the modern era, I still believe the main point to be true. Nothing indicates that you have a lack of perspective and awareness like a poorly thought out and nonconstructive tweet that slings venomous insults. It’s a junior engineer mistake to toss insults about a piece of complex technology in 140 characters. I certainly (much like Christopher Brown mentioned in his keynote at Velocity London) pay attention to those sorts of public remarks when I come across them so that I can note who I would reconsider hiring if they ever applied to work at Etsy. Mature engineers do not shy away from making estimates, and are always trying to get better at it. Promises, schedules, and estimates are necessary and important instruments in a well-ordered business. Many engineers fail to realize this, or habitually try to dodge the irksome responsibility for making commitments. You must make promises based upon your own estimates for the part of the job for which you are responsible, together with estimates obtained from contributing departments for their parts. No one should be allowed to avoid the issue by the old formula, “I can’t give a promise because it depends upon so many uncertain factors.” Avoiding responsibility for estimates is another way of saying, “I’m not ready to be relied upon for building critical pieces of infrastructure.” All businesses rely on estimates, and all engineers working on a project are involved in Joint Activity, which means that they have a responsibility to others to make themselves interpredictable. In general, mature engineers are comfortable with working within some nonzero amount of uncertainty and risk.

Mature engineers have an innate sense of anticipation, even if they don’t know they do.

This code looks good, I’m proud of myself. I’ve asked other people to review it, and I’ve taken their feedback. Now: how long will it last before it’s rewritten? Once it’s in production, how will its execution affect resource usage? How much so I expect CPU/memory/disk/network to increase or decrease? Will others be able to understand this code? Am I making it as easy as I can for others to extend or introspect this work?

Mature engineers understand that not all of their projects are filled with rockstar-on-stage work.

Getting things done means doing things you might not be interested in. No matter how sexy a project is, there are always boring tasks. Tedious tasks. Tasks that a less mature engineer may deem beneath their dignity or their job title. My good friend Kellan Elliot-McCrea (Etsy’s CTO) had this to say about it:

Mature engineers lift the skills and expertise of those around them.

They recognize that at some point, their individual contribution and potential cannot be exercised singularly. They recognize that there is only so much that can be produced by a single person, and the world’s best engineering feats are executed by teams, not singularly brilliant and lone engineers. Tom Limoncelli makes this point quite well in his post.

At Etsy we call this a “generosity of spirit.” Generosity of spirit is one of our core engineering values, but also a primary responsibility of our Staff Engineer position, a career-level position. These engineers spend the time to make sure that more junior or new engineers unfamiliar with the tech or processes we have not only understand what they are doing, but also why they are doing it. “Teaching to fish” is a mandatory skill at this level, and that requires having both patience and a perspective of investment in the rest of the organization.

Therefore instead of: “OK, move over, lemme just do it for you”, it’s instead: “Ok, let’s work on this together. I can show you how I’m writing/troubleshooting/etc. Then, you do it so I can be sure you know why/how we’re doing it this way, etc.”

Related: see below about getting credit.

Mature engineers make their trade-offs explicit when making judgements and decisions.

They realize all engineering decisions, implementations, and designs exist within a spectrum; we do not live in a binary world. They can quickly point out contexts where one successful approach or solution could work and where it could not. They know that one cannot be both efficient and thorough at the same time (The ETTO Principle), that most projects engineers work on exist on an axis of optimality and brittleness, and that whether the problems they are solving are acute or chronic.

They know that they work within a spectrum of ideal and non-ideal, and are OK with that. They are comfortable with it because they strive to make the ideal and non-ideal in a design explicit. Later on in the lifecycle of a design, when the original design is not scaling anymore or needs to be replaced or rewritten, they can look back not with a perspective of how short-sighted those earlier decisions were, but instead say “yep, we made it this far with it and knew we’d have to extend or change it at some point. Looks like that time is now, let’s get to work!” instead of responding with a cranky-pants, passive-aggressive Hindsight Bias-filled remark with counterfactuals (e.g.. “those idiots didn’t do it right the first time!”, “they cut corners!”, “I TOLD them this wouldn’t work!”)

Many pithy quotes exist that shine light on this notion of trade-offs, and mature engineers know that there are limits to any philosophy-laden quotes (including the ones I’m writing here):

The tl;dr on trade-offs is that everyone cuts corners, in every project. Immature engineers discover them in hindsight, disgusted. Mature engineers spell them out at the onset of a project, accept them and recognize them as part of good engineering.

The scenario where someone will stand on ceremony as an excuse for not attempting to understand how his or her code (or infrastructure) could be touched by other parts of the system or business is a losing proposition. Covering your ass sends the implicit message that you are someone willing to throw others (on your team? in your company? in your community?) under the proverbial bus at the mere hint that your work had any flaw. Mature engineers stand up and accept the responsibility given to them. If they find they don’t have the requisite authority to be held accountable for their work, they seek out ways to rectify that.

An example of CYAE is “It’s not my fault. They broke it, they used it wrong. I built it to spec, I can’t be held responsible for their mistakes or improper specification.”

In complex projects, there are usually a number of stakeholders. In any project, the designers, product managers, operations engineers, developers, and business development folks all have goals and perspectives, and mature engineers realize that those goals and views may be different. They understand this so that they can navigate effectively in the work that they do. Being empathetic in this sense means having the ability to view the project from another person’s perspective and to take that into consideration into your own work.

Goal conflicts are inherent in all engineering work, and complaining about them (instead of embracing them as requirements for success) is a sign of a less mature engineer.

Instead, they express judgements based on empirical evidence and bring with those judgements options for solving the problem which they’ve identified. A great manager of mine said to never go to your boss with a complaint about anything without at least one (ideally more than one) suggestion for a solution. Even demonstrating that you’ve tried working the problem on your own and came up empty-handed is better than an empty complaint.

This isn’t to say that every mature engineer needs to have a degree in psychology, but cognitive biases are what can limit the growth of an engineer’s career at a certain point. Even if they’re not aware of the details of how they appear or how these biases can be guarded against, most mature engineers I know have a level of self-awareness to at least recognize they (like everyone) are susceptible to them.

Culturally, engineers work day-to-day in empirical evidence in research. Basically: show me the data. The issue with cognitive biases is that we can be blissfully unaware of when we are interpreting data with our own brains in ways that defy empirical data, and can have a surprising effect on how we get work done and work on teams.

A great list of them exists on Wikipedia, but some of the ones that I’ve seen engineers (including myself) fall prey to are:

There are plenty of others, all of which I find personally fascinating and I can get lost in learning more about them. Highly suggested reading, if you’re at all interested in learning about how you might be limiting your own effectiveness.

Appropriate, even if old…I’ve seen it referenced as coming from The Psychology of Computer Programming, written in 1971, but I don’t actually see it in the text. Regardless, here are The Ten Commandments of Egoless Programming, found on @wyattdanger‘s blog post on receiving advice from his dad:

Now I generally don’t follow too much on knowledge acquisition as a research topic, but I do believe it’s hard to get away from when talking about the evolving nature of a discipline. One bit of interesting breakdown comes from a paper from Dreyfus and Dreyfus called “A Five Stage Model of the Mental Activities Involved in Directed Skill Acquisition” which has laid out characteristics of various levels of expertise:

The paper goes on to state:

I don’t necessarily subscribe to the notion of such dry lines being drawn between skill levels, because I think that there is a lot more granularity and facets of expertise than just those outlined above, but I think it’s helpful to be aware of the unfortunately over-simplified categories.

How people feel about technologies, technical decisions, and technical directions is just as important (if not more) than the facts about the details. Mature engineers know this, and adjust accordingly. Again, being empathetic can help you understand how another person on your team feels about a technical decision, even if they themselves don’t have an easy time articulating why they feel that way.

People’s confidence in software, architectures, or patterns is heavily influenced by past experience, and can result in positive or negative reactions to using them. Used to work at a mod_perl shop that had a lot of mystifying outages? Then you can’t be surprised to feel reluctant to use it in a different company, even if the supporting expertise and use cases are entirely different. All you remember is that mod_perl = major headaches, so you’re going to be wary of using it in any context again.

Mature engineers understand this phenomenon when making a case to use technology that carries baggage, even if it’s irrational. Convincing a group to use tools and patterns that they aren’t comfortable with isn’t a straightforward task. The “right tool for the job” maxim also has (sometimes unquantifiable) comfortability as a parameter.

For an illustration of how people’s emotions drive technical decisions and opinions, read any flame war about anything, ever.

This quote is commonly attributed to Harry S. Truman, but it looks like it might have first been said by a Jesuit priest in a different form. In any case, this is another indication you’re working with a mature engineer: they hold the success of the project much higher than the potential praise they may get personally for working on it. The attribution of praise or credit can be the source of such dysfunction in an engineering-driven organization, and I believe it’s because it’s largely invisible.

The notion is liberating, and once understood and internalized, a world of progress and innovative thinking can flourish, because the engineer isn’t overly concerned with the personal liability of equating the work to their own career success.

I’m at the moment blessed to work with a number of mature engineers here at Etsy, and it’s quite humbling. We are indeed a young field, and while I think we can learn a great deal from other fields of engineering on this topic, I also think we have an advantage. The web is inextricably tied to the notion of publishing and sharing information, globally. We need to continue pointing out what it means to be a “senior” and “mature” engineer if we have a hope of progressing the field into a true discipline.

Many thanks to members of the Etsy Operations team, Mike Brittain, Kellan Elliott-McCrea, Marc Hedlund, and Theo Schlossnagle for reviewing drafts of this post. They all make me a more mature engineer.|||

