Microsoft announced late Friday that it had already fixed a number of Windows security vulnerabilities before they were revealed last week by the Shadow Brokers — a group that has released several leaks about the inner workings of the National Security Agency.

The Shadow Brokers alleged in a leak Friday that the NSA had known about several vulnerabilities in Windows operating systems that allowed for various computer systems to be taken over remotely. The leak also contained details about NSA tools that allowed the agency to tap into a financial messaging network, SWIFT, that is used for money transfers. The NSA didn't respond to a request for comment.

[Hackers have just dumped a treasure trove of NSA data. Here’s what it means.]

But Windows consumers should not be at risk to the vulnerabilities that were revealed as long as they've downloaded the latest security updates — within the past month or so. In a company blog post, Microsoft said it had addressed all of the vulnerabilities either on or before March 14. Desktop users who allow auto updates or who regularly check for updates on their computers should be covered.

If you're still sticking to older versions of Windows, however, you could run into a problem. Microsoft said the patches have been fixed for anyone running Windows 7 and beyond — meaning that if you're a Windows XP holdout, you are vulnerable. That's still about 7.4 percent of the world, according to the analytics firm NetMarketShare. Those running versions of Exchange older than Exchange 2010 also are not protected.

“Customers still running prior versions of these products are encouraged to upgrade to a supported offering,” Microsoft said in its post.

The leaks from last week shared information about “zero-day exploits,” or vulnerabilities that are exploited on the same day they are discovered. Security researchers initially feared that the release of information about these insecurities would lead to a spike in hacks while Microsoft scrambled to patch the problems after the disclosure.

But those worries were unfounded. Microsoft appears to have been notified about the problems ahead of the release — security experts said the company could have been informed by the Shadow Brokers or by the NSA itself, Ars Technica reported.

Microsoft did not respond to a request for comment.|||

If you're running newer versions of Windows and are updating your systems regularly, you should be in the clear.