In our last post on the sentiment indicators, we saw how we can use sentiment indicators like Put/Call ratio, Arms Index or Short term trading Index (TRIN) for trading and formulate a strategy around such sentiment indicators. In this post, we will explore more such sentiment indicators and illustrate different strategies that can be devised using these indicators.

VIX is a trademarked ticker symbol for the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) Volatility Index. It is a measure of the implied volatility over the next 30 days, of the S&P 500 index options.

We will take contrarian positions based on VIX. Taking a contrarian position refers to ‘buying’ when the market falls drastically and ‘selling’ when the market rises irrationally. A contrarian profits from the theory that when there is certain positive or negative crowd behavior regarding a security; it leads to mispricing of the security due to the prevailing bullish or bearish sentiment.

Another strategy could be to be ‘short puts’ that is being delta positive and vega negative. Delta positive means, as the stock price rises so do the option price and a negative vega is a position that can be benefited from falling implied volatility.

A regular cash account allows you to buy securities worth the amount of cash available in the account. For e.g. If you have $5000 in your account and you want to invest in ABC Corporation’s shares which are trading at $100 on the exchange, then you can buy ($5000/$100) 50 shares of ABC Corporation. But if according to your analysis, ABC Corp is undervalued and you expect a rise in the stock’s value in the near term, you can capitalize on this opportunity by asking your broker to lend you money in order to buy securities in your account. To do this, the broker would require you to open a margin account. A margin account is an agreement between you and your broker such that the broker agrees to lend you a proportional amount of money only to buy financial securities (stocks, bonds, and other financial instruments). The collateral for this loan would be the financial securities purchased (ABC Corp stocks in our e.g.). However, there would be a few prerequisites before you purchase these securities on loan and sign the margin account agreement.

Mutual funds hold a substantial amount of all the investable assets present in the market.

Always remember, when you trade, do not use these sentiment indicators in isolation. Use indications from more than one sentiment indicators and try to understand the fundamentals and rationality behind such patterns, but be brave enough to take up the contrarian position and capitalize on the fear or greed of other investors.

To learn more about strategies and creation of multi-strategy portfolio you can register for our upcoming webinar, “Multi-Strategy Portfolios – Combining Quantitative Strategies Effectively”  which will be held on Tuesday 16th May, 10:00 PM Beijing Time | 7:30 PM IST | 10:00 PM EST. This one-of-a-kind webinar will explain how to combine different quantitative strategies to create a multi-strategy portfolio, learn portfolio optimization and the benefits offered by such portfolios. Register Now!

To understand sentiment indicators like Put call Ratio (PCR), Arms Index or TRading INdex (TRIN) and Volatility Index (VIX) in more detail and to learn how to code an algorithmic trading strategy in Python beating the S&P 500 returns and backtesting it on 2 years data, check out the course Trading Using Options Sentiment Indicators.|||

This article explains how to use CBOE Volatility Index (VIX), Margin debt, and Mutual Fund cash position as sentiment indicators for trading in markets.