We all know that sense of fear we have when we realize that either our wallet or pocketbook is missing. I’m sure you guys are like me where your life is in there. Money, debit and credit cards, you name it, then it’s more than likely in there. Welcome back to Cops Court and Coffee…I’m Darnell Eason. 



Now if you been in a situation where you’ve lost that wallet or purse then you know it’s not a good thing…but if you’ve recently lost your property or you just want to know what to do in case you do, then here is my top 5 things for you to do to help keep your valuable information safe and to make reporting…a lot easier. 

 

#5 Go to Your Local DMV to Report Your Missing Driver’s License. Everyone I know keeps their driver’s license in their wallet or purse, and it’s something that can be used in identity theft and fraud. So you want to go to your local DMV as soon as possible to report the loss.  



#4 Report the Loss or Theft to your local law enforcement agency. Don’t underestimate your loss as something that the police don’t have time to deal with. The reason for this step is to provide evidence in your favor should you becomes a victim of identity theft or fraud. 



#3 Call the Issuers of Your ATM & CREDIT Cards. Now, many people will tell you to cancel your cards immediately, but that’s not actually what you want to do. Cancelling the cards puts could leave you in a tight spot, especially with your credit score. What you actually want to do is report the cards as lost or stolen. This is different than canceling, and every card issuer has a procedure that will suspend those numbers to keep your accounts safe.  



#2 Put a fraud alert on your accounts immediately. There are three major credit-reporting agencies — Equifax, Trans Union, and Experian. These agencies need to be notified as well and need to know about your loss right away. With a fraud alert in place, any creditor will have to verify your identity before approving any new credit 



And the number 1 thing you should right now…this very moment, is to photocopy everything thing that is of importance to you. Every card you have should be photocopied on the front and back so that you will have all the important numbers to call and you’ll have your account or identification numbers readily available. And please make sure you lock those photocopies in a safe place. Well that’s it guys, I hope you found this information useful and if so please give this video a thumbs up. Thanks for watching guys and remember, no one cares like I do and Ill see you guys in the next video. 

 

Lost Wallet



Support The Cops Court and Coffee Channel:

https://shop.spreadshirt.com/copscour...



Subscribe To Cops Court and Coffee:

https://www.youtube.com/copscourtandc...



Like Us On Facebook:

https://www.facebook.com/copscourtand...



Follow Us On Twitter:

https://twitter.com/Copscourtcoffee



Check Out The Blog:

https://www.copscourtandcoffee.com|||

We all know that sense of fear we have when we realize that either our wallet or pocketbook is missing. I’m sure you guys are like me where your life is in t...