So with this in mind, I’ve been thinking about the concrete effects it could have on our economy. The rest of this article will consist of me prognosticating; you should take it as seriously as you take any other so-called “think piece” about the future, that is, with a large grain of salt.

This seems to split into three natural periods: the adoption phase, in which telecommuting starts to penetrate more industries, over the next 10–15 years; the economic shift phase, in which local economies react to having entirely different pressures, maybe between 2025 and 2035; and the long-term phase, where those changes in turn start to affect culture and society. Note that these changes aren’t instantaneous, and they will happen hand-in-hand with generational change; that’s going to have important effects as well. (And all of them, of course, depend on the hypothesis that there will still be a modern world by then. Inshallah.)

The toolchain for telecommuting isn’t complete yet (notably absent: a distributed whiteboard that doesn’t suck), but by 2017 it’s already suitable for a range of jobs. However, companies aren’t going to change their behavior overnight; even a shift to telecommuting being acceptable tends to take about five years once a company has decided to do it, and it does require changes in all sorts of details of how people do things.

Furthermore, not every company or industry will start at the same time. Unsurprisingly, this has started from two directions: at the very high end (e.g. software engineering), where telecommuting is a perk that attracts top talent, and at the very low end (e.g. telemarketing), where telecommuting lets employers avoid paying for a physical plant.

Industries with a deep mythology of the value of “the personal touch” will likely adopt this more slowly. To be honest, these aren’t industries which literally require a personal touch, such as child care; these are largely industries where older people in the field have a stronger grip over the culture, and want things to keep working the way they do. This will likely persist well into later phases, when new generations start spinning up businesses and not caring about those established norms. The existing business owners will be furious. But ultimately, any industry which can adopt telecommuting likely will, because it gives workers more flexibility and employers less costs.

What’s interesting about this is that this creates a new economic axis which separates industries, much like “blue-collar” and “white-collar” did in the early 20th century: location-dependent (LD) and location-independent (LI) jobs. Jobs are generally location-dependent if they either involve operating a specific physical plant (manufacturing in a factory, agriculture, running a datacenter, working in a retail store) or physical interaction with people (child care, medicine). The set of location-dependent jobs would change over time, both because of industry adoption, and because changes in various industries may make things less location-dependent, as has been happening in retail.

What’s interesting is that this means some big, and potentially positive, changes for local economies.

Say we’re in the year 2035. By now, gen X is retiring, Millenials and gen Z are the senior people in offices, and the generation after Z — today’s toddlers, let’s call them gen A — is entering the workforce in large numbers. Jobs which were LD just because of slow adoption of telecommuting by X’ers and Boomers are now LI; the remaining LD jobs are either tied to physical plants, or to people.

Physical plant LD jobs, though, are likely to be much smaller in number. These are precisely the jobs which have been most effectively automated in past decades; a modern factory or dockyard requires a small number of highly skilled workers, not a large number of low-skilled workers. By 2035, it’s likely that most other plant management jobs, from warehouse management to agriculture, will have done the same. So even though these “LD/plant” jobs will be localized, they won’t be a huge part of most local economies, since they just won’t employ that many people.

Contrast this with LI jobs. As more and more of the tasks we need to do become LI, these will become the large majority of jobs, at all skill levels. These have an interesting economic difference from location-based jobs: there’s no reason that any single employer would become the dominant local employer in most places. Rather than a company dropping a lot of jobs in one place, LI companies are dropping a small number of jobs in a lot of places. This means that industry economic cycles, and collapses of individual employers, no longer also mean the collapse of local economies, which can trigger the collapse of local infrastructure (social and physical), and ultimately make places even less suitable for companies to land. An LI-dominated economy is likely to have fewer geographically-localized disasters.

Now consider the third category, LD jobs which are LD because they involve people. These jobs will always be LD; you can’t change a diaper or administer an IV over videoconference. Their economics are determined by local demand and ability to pay, which in turn means local population density and overall local economic health. But if the rise in LI jobs means that local economic health becomes less variable, that means that these “LD/people” jobs are mostly economically tied to population density, which controls both supply and demand and changes slowly. That gives them more economic stability as well.

For some jobs, it’s hard to tell which category they’ll land in, but this three-way division still seems to work. For example, retail was entirely LD in 1990, but in sectors where depth of stock really matters (like books), there’s already been a shift to location-independence. Even clothing, which used to be based entirely on trying things on in person, is becoming more reasonable to buy online, thanks to improvements in shipping logistics. Groceries are likely to be among the last to move, because they’re bulky and often require refrigeration. But since demand for these types of retail is entirely local (for the same reason!), grocery jobs are tied to local population, and behave more like LD/people than LD/plant. Generally, any LD jobs which remain such because their consumers must be local behave like LD/people jobs — even subsistence agriculture.

Some jobs may even split up. Consider elementary and secondary education: teaching today is really a fusion of two jobs, teaching and child care. The former is potentially LI; the latter is firmly LD. But the separation of these jobs into two different things is already being pioneered by home-schooling co-ops. It’s quite possible that we’ll see these grow in popularity, and turn into a larger industry, and the skillset of teachers split into the two groups. This will be a very slow change, of course, since its impact on the profession is so profound; teachers essentially remain LD/people until such a time as this happens. (At which point, we’ll likely see a great deal of hand-wringing about the two different “classes” of teachers, their different social status and pay, and so on.)

To summarize the economic transition: Between roughly 1930 and 1990, the industrialized world was dominated by LD/plant jobs. Offshoring made many of these jobs location-independent from the employer’s perspective (you can manufacture things anywhere and ship them), but not from the employee’s perspective (you still need a factory to work at). This was just a transition to automation, however, where low-end LD/plant jobs were replaced by machines, and LD/plant jobs are increasingly specialized jobs held by a small number of people. This led to LD/people jobs like the service sector becoming the dominant employers. But with the rise of warehouses, online trade, and telecommuting, we’re moving into a world where most of the jobs are LI, and the second-most are LD/people — jobs which are location-dependent because they have to be next to their customers. LD/plant jobs, jobs location-dependent because they have to be next to specialized equipment, are becoming more specialized and a smaller part of the total employment picture.|||

There’s a common theme in news analysis about the economy: it tells you about how some new development will prove excellent for the rich, terrible for everyone else, and help bring about the decline…