There are many classic tech debates, and the question of what to formally call web addresses is one of the most nuanced. The way this normally manifests is someone asks for the “URL” to put into his or her browser, and someone perks up with,

The response to this correction can range from quietly thinking this person needs to get out more, to agreeing indifferently via shoulder shrug, to removing the safety clasp on a Katana. This page hopes to serve as a simple, one page summary for navigating the subtleties of this debate.

As the image above indicates, there are three distinct components at play here. It’s usually best to go to the source when discussing matters like these, so here’s an exerpt from Tim Berners-Lee, et. al. in RFC 3986: Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax:

Wikipedia captures this well with the following simplification:

So we get a few things from these descriptions:

So let’s look at some examples of URIs—again from the RFC:

Those are all URIs, and some of them are URLs. Which are URLs? The ones that show you how to get to them. Again, the name vs. address analogy serves well.

So this brings us to the question that brings many readers here:

Based on the dozen or so articles and RFCs I read while researching this article, I’d say that depends on a very simple thing: whether you give the full thing or just a piece.

Well, because we often use URIs in forms that don’t technically qualify as a URL. For example, you might be told that a file you need is located at . That’s a URI, not a URL—and that system might very well respond to many protocols over many ports.

If you go to you could conceivably get completely different content than if you go to . And this type of thing is only getting more common. Think of all the different services that live on the various Google domains.

So, if you use URI you’ll always be technically correct, and if you use URL you might not be.

But if you definitely dealing with an actual full URL, then “URL” is most accurate because it’s most specific. Humans are technically African apes, and dogs are mammals, but we rightly call them humans and dogs, respectively. And if you’re an American from San Francisco, and you meet someone from Sydney while in Boston, you wouldn’t say you’re from Earth, or from the United States. You’d say California, or—even better—San Francisco.

So until something changes, URI is best used when you’re referring to a resource just by its name or some other fragment. And when you’re giving both the name of a resource and the method of accessing it (like a full URL), it’s best to call that a URL.|||

There are many classic tech debates, and the question of what to formally call web addresses is one of the most nuanced. The way this normally manifests is