Today Nvidia announced that its deep learning platform is now available as part of Baidu Cloud’s deep learning service, giving enterprise customers instant access to the world’s most adopted AI tools. The new Baidu Cloud offers the latest GPU computing technology, including Pascal-based NVIDIA Tesla P40 GPUs and NVIDIA deep learning software. It provides both training and inference acceleration for open-source deep learning frameworks, such as TensorFlow and PaddlePaddle.

Baidu and NVIDIA are long-time partners in advancing the state of the art in AI,” said Ian Buck, general manager of Accelerated Computing at NVIDIA. “Baidu understands that enterprises need GPU computing to process the massive volumes of data needed for deep learning. Through Baidu Cloud, companies can quickly convert data into insights that lead to breakthrough products and services.”

NVIDIA’s deep learning platform is the world’s most adopted platform for building AI services. All key deep learning frameworks are accelerated on NVIDIA’s platform, which is available from leading cloud service providers worldwide, including Alibaba, Amazon, Google, IBM and Microsoft. Organizations ranging from startups to leading multinationals are taking advantage of GPUs in the cloud to achieve faster results without massive capital expenditures or complexity of managing the infrastructure.

Our partnership with NVIDIA has long provided Baidu with a competitive advantage,” said Shiming Yin, vice president and general manager of Baidu Cloud Computing. “Baidu Cloud Service powered by NVIDIA’s deep learning software and Pascal GPUs will help our customers accelerate their deep learning training and inference, resulting in faster time to market for a new generation of intelligent products and applications.”

Organizations are increasingly turning to GPU computing to develop advanced applications in areas such as natural language processing, traffic analysis, intelligent customer service, personalized recommendations and understanding video.

The massively efficient parallel processing capabilities of GPUs make NVIDIA’s platform highly effective at accelerating a host of other data-intensive workloads, from AI and deep learning to advanced analytics to high performance computing.

Interested in learning more? You can save up to $360 on registration for the GPU Technology Conference through April 21 with code GMAPRW20.

Sign up for our insideHPC Newsletter|||

