Hello everyone! My name is Alex! I am a global analyst at test4startup and today I would like to tell you about the problems small business will face in 2017.

The world is changing: the course of events, things, technologies, and economy — all the parts of the single picture are interrelated. Business and technologies have intertwined so closely that it is now possible to talk about a new synergy concept in the form of “technobusiness”.

Any path of development means overcoming obstacles, solving tasks. At the moment we don’t know what small business will look like after going through 2017 and its problems.

Since the policy of the USA towards all other countries in the world has a well-known influence, antiglobalist Tramp coming to power creates quite big problems. Perhaps, small business will react to the innovations with forced increase of prices for services, firing of employees or even cessation of activity. It is a step backwards for the USA on the path of unification in the whole world.

In general, it may seem that the world economy is undergoing a kind of upswing. But the truth is that such countries as Japan, for example, continue with their economic activity, but other countries, like Russia, India, Brazil, have slowed down and need breakthrough solutions for the current state. The inflow of the capital decreased even in the developing countries, and stock market indexes are crumbling down. Will the collapse in Europe (unending growth of debts) be balanced by the upsurge in China?

The governments of different states use crude methods for artificial money supply limitation. Do you remember how Uber acts if there are no free cars? “We have increased the prices to find you a car…” The same thing here — credit limitations, taxes and interest rates going up — is it really a good way to decrease inflation or is it just becoming worse?

The problem with investments is a global one. The markets are becoming more stable and investors are searching for business models that can prove their strength. The owners of the companies have to foresee the slowdown of growth and hold their expectations back. This way money won’t flow to new startups as freely as before. Crowdfunding still remains a unique tool for testing your idea, which allows you to enlarge the client base and fund the project at the same time.

“Cases of the internet of things and hackers” bring the IT sphere to the urgency of reviewing the issues of the innovations safety. New standards are required, as well as an approach that will consider possible DDos-attacks, which can be quite powerful, as 2016 showed.

There is a talk about the real lack of proper specialists on key positions in companies. It is difficult to find a person who has personally experienced the reality of technologies, but at the same time is capable of a flexible approach to the management strategy tasks in the IT sphere. Moreover, “brains” turn away from companies in favor of personal projects or the opportunity to work as a freelancer on different projects.

At the same time companies should realign themselves towards the business model “on demand”. Those who are unable to do it will condemn themselves to the oblivion.|||

Hello everyone! My name is Alex! I am a global analyst at test4startup and today I would like to tell you about the problems small business will face in 2017. The world is changing: the course of…