I woke up around 8:45am, caught the 10:15am train into Manhattan, and made my way over to Pier 94. I had a notepad and some Crowdnote postcards with me and nothing else.

Tech Day NYC was a typical conference with booths and displays set up everywhere. I'm not used to conferences, so it felt like a giant farmer's market to me. In fact, a good number of booths had some kind of food prize or sweets lying around. I really had nothing to lose, so I talked to anyone who would give me the time of day. I probably interacted with about one quarter of all the booths, as well as a handful of fellow wanderers along the way.

The Room Zoom team and I with Beyoncé!

In the beginning, I started conversations by introducing myself as a "software developer who was working on a project." I knew it made my startup sound dumpy the moment I called it my project, and whoever I was talking to would merely regard it as such. That got old fast, and by my fifth introduction I was a "founder working on a website that categorizes music for activities." Conversations were more fun when I put it that way.

Throughout the day, I would approach people that didn't look busy and introduce myself by name, shake their hands, and then ask them what brought them to the conference or about the product they're selling. What I found is that most people were excited about what they were a part of and seemed to genuinely believe in their own products. You can tell because they're actually happy to be talking to you. That might seem simple and obvious, but it's really easy to pick out the people who don't care about the product behind their pitch, because they subtly avoid talking to you.

I can really only think of two booth reps that alienated me throughout the whole day. The first one was selling his product like you might see a street vendor do it; he was like one of the newsies selling the morning paper. It's the kind of behavior that makes sense on a street of hurried passersby, but here, it felt distant and dispassionate. It tells us "what could we possibly learn from you?"

The other person who I couldn't connect with was an older gentleman who was in very corporate-looking booth compared to others nearby. Its branding was looked out-of-date, lacking the sleek simplicity of other brands in the conference hall. In our conversation, there was a lot of missed eye contact and "powering through" of thoughts, rather than a relaxed, confident exchange. I felt bad for him, because he didn't seem to believe that he belonged in that hall, which was a feeling I was able to pick up on.

Everyone else was a pleasure to talk to. I asked lots of questions about the challenges companies are facing, and people were more than happy to share. Sometimes I had very specific questions for companies that were in Crowdnote's scope of interest, and I was able to get very informed answers.

My favorite conversations, though, were the ones where I wasn't a good fit as a target customer and both of us were comfortable recognizing that. I'm predisposed to expecting people to try selling me on things that I don't want, and being able to turn the conversation towards something we could both take interest in was very fulfilling. We weren't using each other cheaply; it was a conference full of like-minded founders, and most people treated each other as such.

When I got home afterwards, I went through all my flyers and business cards one by one, visiting websites and sending emails. When I got done, all the information I wanted to keep was stored digitally and I was able to toss 95% of the paper I'd collected throughout the day. I'm not sure which connections will pan out, but I did get a lot of experience meeting people and talking about my own startup with confidence. Ballroom dancers are hard to come by at tech conferences, apparently, so I only handed out 2-3 branded postcards to people. And that's fine; my audience just wasn't there.|||

