“I was only following corporate algorithms” < Testimony given at a future war crimes trial (riff on the Nuremberg defense)

United Airlines forcibly removed a man from an “overbooked” flight. The incident was captured on video by other passengers and the story went viral on the social networks. United flubbed its response to incident, adding fuel to the anger. The story went global overnight, sparking massive outrage (hundreds of millions of views in China, an important market for United). The next day, United stock gets hammered, losing ~$1.4 billion off its stock price by midday. What happened? This incident is a pretty good example of how rigid algorithmic and authoritarian decision making can create corporate disasters in an age dominated by social networking.

Here’s how the algorithmic decision making created the incident on United.

Here’s how authoritarian decision making (common on modern air travel) made things worse. Note how this type of decision making escalates the problem rapidly.

What this means for Organizations

As you can see, United was designed to fail in a world connected by social networking and they are not alone. Let’s recap. United employees blindly followed the decision making of algorithms up to the point of telling seated passengers to deplane. The authoritarian decision making that followed was just as rigid and unyielding. Disobeying orders of the flight crew led to the police. Disobeying the police led to forced removal. Finally, the public failure of this process led United’s CEO to praise employees for their rigid adherence to algorithmic and authoritarian decision making. The entire process was inevitable. It’s also not a unique situation. We’re going to see much more of this in the future as algorithms and authoritarianism grow in America. Here’s how organizations are likely to respond:|||

“I was only following corporate algorithms” < Testimony given at a future war crimes trial (riff on the Nuremberg defense) United Airlines forcibly removed a man from an “overbooked” flight. The…