I'd like to propose that we as a community put a moratorium on the use of the term "functional programming". It has been widely used in the last 5-10 years and the effects are devastating. I don't want to deny that for some people the use of this word is invigorating and has lead to great sharing and learning of interesting and important technique, but to too many others it is divisive and painful.

The pain stems from human nature and our desire to play identity politics, but its foundation is based on a simple fact.

To be more clear, phrases like the following are completely meaningless

They're not marketing terms, or even shibboleth. Using these terms like this is at best a signal: if you already understand the author's meaning then you recognize what functional is a stand-in for. At worst, they're cargo-culting. They're reading the words of a spell flat and empty when you don't know how to put the magic inside.

There are many cultures of "functional". A speaker with only the will to communicate and share might use "functional" as I mentioned above in order to signal to the listener that they're speaking of a particular culture of functional which they would like to talk about—but notice that to make this work it requires that the speaker is known and the listener aware of the game.

The cultures of functional are wonderful. I'll associate them with languages now, but first I'll disclaim that these cultures exist independently of language and within a language there may be many cultures—some wildly different and many only small variations of one another. It's exactly the same as what we're used to with culture and language already.

Finally, please note that I'm telling a story here—you probably have your own experiences with these cultures and your experiences may differ. We could have an argument about my characterizations or just accept that any written account of a culture is at best a half-truth.

I'm painting a different concept of "functional" so as to smash the existing dangerous one. I'm painting it as almost a heroic story or folk myth because these are powerful tools for discussing culture.

But let me be clear about what I am not doing. These things are false:

On the other hand, these things are true:

As with any culture, there are ways of speaking which serve not only to share information but to create commonality between two people who choose to belong to that culture. This is shibboleth. Outsiders, when faced with shibboleth, can become confused and feel ostracized as they do not know how to use the second meaning of these words. Open cultures have speakers who help outsiders by disarming the shibboleth and showing it for what it is.

Shibboleth cannot be banned or dismantled—though honest speakers might wish to do so. It's the nature of a group working together for a long time to create shibboleth.

Jargon is like shibboleth and often even becomes shibboleth, but it is not shibboleth exactly. Jargon arises from searchers who discover new things and need to find names for them. Within a culture these words become powerful and take on the nature of shibboleth so long as they are not shared with other cultures.

Cultures that share jargon build bridges for sharing other things, but to do so the defensiveness of shibboleth needs to be dispensed with. This is not easy to do.

How can you tell the difference?

If you agree with my moratorium and reconception of a multicultural world then we can discuss what practices are healthy for an individual who interacts with and may even belong to many cultures all at once.

This is an ongoing research project, however. The Age of Near-Ubiquitous Near-Telepathy has changed many of the rules of culture. Here's a partial list:

My moratorium mentioned in the first paragraph exists to serve this kind of multicultural health. It denies the existence of a concept which defines the walls of this culture. It leaves us with a need to discuss culture first and technique second as we've lost the convenience of assuming culture away.

What else can we do to promote multicultural health online?|||

