Smartphones are capable of some spectacular things these days. They've replaced cameras, planners and, in some cases, personal computers.

These little machines can tackle a lot. So much, in fact, you probably don't even know the power of the device in your pocket. This is especially true if you have a Moto G smartphone from Motorola.

These phones are not only incredibly sleek and attractive, they're also the Swiss Army knife of mobile technology.

The two models – Moto G5 and Moto G5 Plus – each have their own benefits, but they're equally impressive.

And you'll never have to pick and choose which features you want with these smartphones. All the things you'd want your phone to do, these ones are capable of.

Here are just a few of the essential features that come with the fifth generation of this amazing phone, ensuring that you'll never have to compromise on these necessities again.

There's almost no limit to what you can get done using these phones. With powerful processors, 4G LTE speed and four gigs of RAM, you can do everything from streaming the newest Bollywood movie or the big cricket match, to looking up info for that big presentation you have to give.

No one ever wants to be without their phone. That's why Moto G phones make sure you have enough juice in your device to get you through even the toughest days.

Both the Moto G5 and Moto G5 Plus have all-day battery life, so you can rely on them to stick with you through it all.

But when you do need a charge, you won't need it for long. The Moto G5 has Rapid Charging, and the Moto G5 Plus is capable of a 15-minute Turbo Charge, which will give you six hours of battery life.

Rapid focus capabilities exist on both of these models, so you can kiss blurry photos goodbye. The 12 megapixel camera on the Moto G5 Plus has Dual Autofocus Pixels. This makes the camera so quick, the autofocus happens in the blink of an eye. It's the first phone in its class to have this capability.

Additionally, the five megapixel front camera on the Moto G5 phone is ideal for taking group selfies.

You won't have to worry about storing these photos, either. Motorola and Google are running a promotion in which users will get two years of storage, without having to decrease the quality of your photos.

Controlling your phone is literally as easy as waving your hand.

There are a variety of hand gestures and motions that allow you to navigate your lock screen and activate other features. For example, you need only flip your phone over to set your phone to "Do Not Disturb" mode.

You can also unlock your device with the built-in fingerprint reader, which stores up to five of your fingerprints.

In the Moto G5, with a Single Sign-On capability, you'll only need one login to access all of your Amazon apps.

The Moto G5 is an Amazon Alpha device – the first in India, in fact.

These phones come with a suite of pre-installed apps, like Prime video and the Kindle app. This means that you can take your favorite entertainment with you anywhere. And because of that three gigabytes of RAM, you know your show won't be interrupted because of a slow machine.

There is also a "Deals" widget for those who consider shopping their favorite form of entertainment. This widget shows you the best deals available on Amazon.

Whether you're using it for work or play, these Moto G phones can help you tackle anything that comes your way.|||

No more settling for second-rate when it comes to smartphones.