If you follow my tutorials often, you would know that i always like you to know more about the discussion before commencing.

Writing is a medium of human communication that represents language and emotion with signs and symbols. In most languages, writing is a complement to speech or spoken language. Writing is not a language, but a tool developed by human society.



 In this guide we have two types of writing: Writing what you know about and what you totally don't know about.



 This is a question i was asked by a young blogger:



 Blogging seams to be a good idea, but what should i write about?



 I didn't know what to tell the young blogger at that time, as i was speechless so i had go direct him to some of my tutorial links.



 Now, the good and best answer for that is this:- You can either write and teach in something you are an expert about or you can read and learn something you are not an expert on, then write on it.



 I later sent the real answer to him on whatsapp and he couldn't really understand it clearly, so i decided to write this article. Can you know see how we sometimes get ideas to write about.



 So when i write about blogging tips and tricks, i am teaching you what i am an expert on. And when it comes to other topics, i read, understand, put together and write.



 While blogging, if you don't want to fall into the category of those that blogs that at some point get stocked in the pit of lack of blogpost ideas, just create a list where you can add topics anytime you think of come across suitable ones for you.



 Sometimes when your trying to add to your knowledge, you go to websites and source for information which Google search sometimes directs you to, isn't it?

Now after reading trough the page and getting your information, there are always some side bar's like Popular, Recent Posts and so on.



 Now, if you are wise enough, you can look at all the topics and choose the ones you can write on or that you would love to write on, and copy the topic to your list.

Create a list either in pdf format or on a piece of paper 📰 where you will be able to edit anytime and input new topic ideas for the future posts so you don't forget.



 Have in mind that you can write on any topic as long as you do the required research and read enough on that topic. Don't believe that other bloggers are better than you in writing.



 I always tell myself and people who come to me for blogging advise one thing, that you never know what your fingers can do until you start writing.



 Anytime people ask you questions or you see questions online or on social media, try to put it into writing and you get ab awesome blogpost.



 I myself writing INFO Retweet tutorials, never taught i could write great unique contents as long as this.



 Also, as a token of appreciation to INFO Retweet  for this tutorial, please share by clicking the below social media buttons. Thankyou|||

Guide To Know What To Write Or Blog About.
how did they know what to write in the bible
how do i know what to write about
how do journalists know what to write about
how do writers know what to write about
how do you know what to write a song about
how do you know what to write about
how to know how to write chemical formulas
how to know to write exempt on w4
how to know what genre to write in
how to know what key to write a song in
how to know what kind of book to write
how to know what point of view to write in
how to know what to write a book about
how to know what to write a song about
how to know what to write a story about
how to know what to write about
how to know what to write about in a book
how to know what to write down when taking notes
how to know what to write in a blog
how to know what to write in an essay
how to know what to write next
how to know what you should write about
how to know write english
i don know what to write about myself
i don't know how to write a poem
i don't know what to write about
i don't know what to write about anymore
i don't know what to write about for my essay
i don't know what to write for my college essay
i never know what to write about