A complete guideline to prepare for angular interviews. Also, you can use these questions to verify your expertise in angular.

The most important step is knowing how you compare to other job seekers. Pinpoint areas where you are weaker, and spend the time necessary to make improvements. Google is your friend.

Do yourself a favor—Google the interviewer. Look at his/her Linkedin profile. Check his/her youtube videos, crappy old blog that hasn't been updated in years, and github profile. After your research, try to put the interviewer in one of the following categories:

Researching relevant team members on LinkedIn and github can be useful as well.

At this level an interviewer wants to know whether the interviewee is a coachable self-learner. Hence, he/she might ask questions about basic terminology, your ability to build a simple app, and your comprehension of basic concepts.

To be in the intermediate level, you have to build at least one medium sized angular app. You have to have familiarity with routing, https, different built process, unit test, etc. here are the questions you could expect.

You are a Rockstar in angular. You can teach other. You can lead a team of angular developers.

Sometimes interviewer gives real coding test. Most of us suck on those and feel ashamed of ourselves and then continue to work in the current job. I don't want you to saty in that miserable job. Hence, take the following coding challenges and master them.

This test has three level

This coding test will judge your ability to use services, component, routing, data visualization, external module, observables, etc.

This test has three levels

This coding test will judge whether you can pass data and events between components. Also, whether you are leveraging directives and understand difference between component and directives.

This test has three levels

This coding test will judge your understanding of architecture for a large application. Your ability to think and implement module, lazy loading, asset management etc.

On a press release, God expressed HIS apologies to send the author of this repo to a non-English speaking country and creating weekends.

Few questions are inspired by Yonet, codeProject|||

angular-interview-questions - Most extensive Angular interview questions based on your level.