“Sapiens — A brief History of Humankind“ by Yuval Harari, professor of History at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, is a relatively large book (466 pages), but equally large are the ideas in it. The point of the book is to cover the ascent of Man — the ascent of the Homo Sapiens — from being “just one monkey among many” all the way to today’s multicultural world with roughly 7 billion Sapiens, cars, planes, skyscrapers, computers, the internet, international financial markets and all that. In short “Sapiens” is a conceptual bird’s-eye view of human development starting at the very beginning. All the big stuff gets covered — why Sapiens won over other apes, why we settled into agricultural communities, the emergence of spoken language, writing, art and later on mathematics, the rise and fall of empires and the sustained ascent of money, trade, commerce and capitalism, the apparent dominance of males and the role of religion and science. And that is just to name a few of the big topics that get covered. It really is so much fun and throughout the 466 pages there is not a single point at which the book becomes a drag. The writing is informal and humorous. One can see this by looking at some of the titles of chapters and sub-chapters: “Memory Overload”, “Purity in America”, “It’s for your own good”, “Silencing the Lamps” are a few. At the same time Harari never harasses the reader with annoying, unnecessary detail. Your brain won’t get littered with the intricacies of Celtic mating rituals or the procedures that early Germanic tribes applied to the task of hut building. If I had to criticise the book, I would criticise it’s very last chapter named “The End of Homo Sapiens”. In that chapter the book strays from exploring and explaining history to extrapolating genetic engineering, bionic life and other such trends into the future. That creeped me out a good bit, as I’m rather sceptical of Sapiens efficacy at predicting the future. After all I still don’t have a flying car. Yet overall, a tweet I wrote whilst reading the book captures my overall sentiment towards it:

I hope you’ll enjoy it as much as I did, and let me know any thoughts you may have. For the interested ones, here is the relevant link to Amazon: Sapiens — A Brief History of Mankind. Note: I feel that north of 20$ is a bit much, have a look for older versions, E-versions etc.|||

“Sapiens — A brief History of Humankind“ by Yuval Harari, professor of History at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, is a relatively large book (466 pages), but equally large are the ideas in it…