"Enough. There has to be a better way.”

We uttered these words after a hard disk failure on our Nexus instance wiped out over a year of our software development artifacts. As we were already using Nexus, an artifact repository, we immediately decided to implement its high availability solution which involved a single write master and multiple read replicas.

After provisioning a total of five machines and setting up replication, we realized that we had significantly increased our operational complexity and would have to train even more people on the new setup. Disaster Recovery Plan? Basically, our plan was to cross our fingers and hope that a disaster would never happen. Anyone who has been in the industry for more than a couple of years knows how that type of plan usually works out.

With a high volume continuous integration system publishing hundreds of artifacts a day and a personal appreciation for Murphy's Law we knew it was just a matter of time before a hardware failure threw a wrench into our development process. Ever seen a team of developers idly sitting around because they can't publish or retrieve their artifacts? We have, and we realized that it's a major hidden cost in running an in-house Artifact Repository.

It wasn't until recently that Nexus began to offer a high-availability solution, but the downsides still remain: It wasn't fully managed so we'd have to maintain the hardware, operations, and any type of recovery due to hardware failures. In addition, their pricing starts at 1200/year. Add in hardware costs for hosting Nexus, as well as the salaries for a team of system administrators to maintain it, and you're looking at tens of thousands of dollars in annual costs simply to store your artifacts.

"Enough. There is now a better way.”

That brings us to why we're here today. We knew there had to be a better way, so we built it.

Our Goal: Build the world's first 100% cloud based Artifact Repository.

Let us quickly tell you what we believe CloudRepo has to offer:

We're the new team on the block and we are excited to announce our initial release of CloudRepo. You'll find that we don't have all the bells and whistles that our established competitors offer. However, we do offer extremely competitive pricing and solid, core, functionality that developers require: publishing and retrieving artifacts. If you find that we're missing something, please let us know so that we can do our best to make CloudRepo work for you.

With all that said, please give CloudRepo a try with a free 14-day trial. No credit card is required and signup is quick and easy.

As a special bonus, if you provide us with feedback, we'll extend your free trial out to 30 days just to show our appreciation.|||

CloudRepo: A Cloud Based Maven Artifact Repository