Today marks an evolution of Wunderlist. We’re excited to announce the Microsoft To-Do Preview, which would not have been possible without the support and input of our Wunderlist fans. To-Do is an intelligent task management app that makes it easy to plan and manage your day. We'd love for you to come on this journey with us as we—with your help—continue to evolve and improve how you plan and manage your day. Say hello to your Preview of Microsoft To-Do!

We built To-Do because you told us how much you loved the feeling of completing your to-dos, ding! But, you told us that it was sometimes difficult to manage your ever-growing lists. So, we asked ourselves, what if we could make an app that intelligently helped you find the most important tasks that you need to get done, every single day? Our answer is To-Do—it represents the product that we've always envisioned.

Whether you're planning for work, home projects or just your groceries, you can create lists for anything in To-Do. Better yet, you can color-code and personalize each of your lists with a range of colorful themes. You can access your lists from anywhere with apps for iPhone, Android phone, Windows 10 devices and the web.

Managing your to-dos and lists can sometimes take as much effort as completing them. To-Do helps you focus and plan your day from the moment you open the app. Every morning, your My Day list starts with a clean slate. It removes the stress of seeing your other to-dos and tasks, just tap the lightbulb and let To-Do's intelligent Suggestions find all the other tasks that you should add to My Day.

Every day, To-Do's Intelligent Suggestions looks at your tasks across all your lists, and then prioritizes the most important ones for you. Just tap on the lightbulb in the top right-hand corner of My Day and you'll see anything from yesterday, what's due or upcoming, and more helpful suggestions. Just review and plan your day by quickly adding the tasks you want to work on to the My Day view. Now, you have a simple and achievable daily to-do list that you can start ticking off.

At the end of the day, My Day will clear, ready for you to start afresh the next day. Don't worry if you didn't get to finish all your to-dos; they're all still safe in your lists and will show up again in Suggestions the following day.

To-Do's My Day and intelligent Suggestions might be our biggest improvements, but we've also added many of your most requested features to To-Do. It's easy to keep track of those recurring to-dos with To-Do's more flexible reminders that can be set to recur on weekdays only, or be fully customized to match your scheduling needs. And it's easier to find those to-dos thanks to improved search and sorting that includes finding all your completed to-dos. This is just the start for To-Do. As we're in Preview, we're still working hard on adding more features such as list-sharing. With your feedback, ideas, and suggestions it will get even better.

Speaking of getting better, if you use Outlook you'll be excited to hear that your Outlook tasks already sync across to To-Do. It's the first of a whole list of integrations we want to build, so be sure to tell us what you'd like to see on To-Do's UserVoice.

When we joined Microsoft in 2015, we saw how we could use the incredible expertise, technology and scale available to us, to help make everyone more productive. The whole Wunderlist team has been working hard on To-Do, and are just as dedicated as before to helping you get stuff done. That said, Wunderlist and Wunderlist Pro will eventually be retired, but not before we incorporate your valued feedback and the best elements of the Wunderlist experience into To-Do.

There won't be any new features brought to Wunderlist and Wunderlist Pro but we will continue to prioritize the security of your experience. In addition, we have built an importer to help you easily transfer your to-dos from Wunderlist or Todoist to To-Do.

Can't wait to try To-Do? Just click below to get your hands on the app.

We have big plans for To-Do. In the coming weeks and months, we'll bring you more features such as list sharing, apps for Mac, iPad, and Android Tablet, as well as more integrations with other Microsoft services.

Today's Preview would not have been possible without the help of our incredible beta testers and their invaluable feedback—thank you! Speaking of feedback, we'd love to hear your thoughts and ideas on what you think would make To-Do even better. Tell us in the comments below, on Twitter or Facebook.|||

