Comcast (NASDAQ: CMCSA) today introduced Xfinity Mobile, a new wireless service designed for the way people use their phones today, with the internet and data at the center of the experience. Up to eighty percent of smartphone data traffic in the U.S. travels over Wi-Fi,1 not cellular networks, making Wi-Fi a key solution to today’s mobile data consumption. Xfinity Mobile uses America’s largest, most reliable 4G LTE network along with Comcast’s 16 million Wi-Fi hotspots to provide consumers with a better wireless experience, for less money, on today’s most popular devices.

"We’re doing mobile differently by bringing our customers the best networks and a product designed to save them money in an increasingly data-driven world," said Greg Butz, president of Comcast Mobile. "Mobility is more important than ever to consumers, so we’ve designed Xfinity Mobile the way mobile should be – a simple solution for internet and entertainment in and out of the home."

Xfinity Mobile benefits customers by bundling wireless service with Comcast’s other Xfinity experiences. With Xfinity Mobile, customers only pay for the gigabytes they use, with the flexibility to easily switch back-and-forth between data options using the Xfinity Mobile app at no cost.

The end of the data bucket is near with two straightforward data options available that will save most Xfinity Internet customers money when they add Xfinity Mobile: 



Unlimited –  Consume all the cellular data you want for one set price for up to five lines.2 $65 per line on up to five lines with no usage limits, or $45 per line for our customers with our best X1 packages. By the Gig – $12 per GB of cellular data across all lines on an account each month. Seventy percent of U.S. wireless customers use less than 5 GB of cellular data per month3, so families can share their data across devices and will only pay for what they use. Flexibility – Families can mix-and-match on an account so that each person can choose the way to pay for data that makes sense for them. No Penalties – Easily switch back-and-forth between data options at no cost. If customers find that they’ve used more data on a "By the Gig" option one month, they can switch to "Unlimited" for that month, then switch back the next month with no penalties. 



With Xfinity Mobile, you will be able to select from the most popular mobile devices, including iPhone 7 and iPhone 7 Plus – including the new iPhone 7 and iPhone 7 Plus (PRODUCT) RED Special Edition – iPhone 6s and iPhone 6s Plus, and iPhone SE.

Xfinity Mobile will also feature the best devices from Samsung and LG.

Sign up here to receive more information when Xfinity Mobile soon becomes available. For additional details, visit http://comcastcorporation.com/mobile. To view the investor presentation, visit www.cmcsa.com.

Xfinity Mobile is the nation’s first wireless service combining America’s largest and most reliable 4G LTE network with 16 million Xfinity WiFi hotspots to deliver a better wireless experience, for less money, on the most popular devices. With Xfinity Mobile, customers can choose to pay only for the gigabytes they use with the flexibility to easily switch back-and-forth between data options using the Xfinity Mobile app at no cost. For more information on Xfinity Mobile, go to www.xfinitymobile.com.

Comcast Cable is one of the nation's largest video, high-speed internet and phone providers to residential customers under the XFINITY brand and also provides these services to businesses. Comcast has invested in technology to build an advanced network that delivers among the fastest broadband speeds, and brings customers personalized video, communications and home management offerings. Comcast Corporation (CMCSA) is a global media and technology company. Visit www.comcastcorporation.com for more information.|||

Comcast designed Xfinity Mobile to provide consumers with a better wireless experience, for less money, on today’s most popular devices. Xfinity Mobile uses America’s largest, most reliable 4G LTE network along with Comcast’s extensive WiFi network to give customers access to the best Internet connection wherever they go.