Tuesday, 18 April 2017 saw the first day of Facebook's F8 2017 Developer Conference.The conference is held annually.

Facebook CEO, Mark Zuckerberg, opened the conference to talk about "how technology can help us build stronger communities — from the local level, up to the global level".

Below are some of the key highlights from the first day.

A suite of open creative tools to give the Facebook community "the power to create a full spectrum of effects for the new Facebook camera".

The Camera Effects Platform includes two products: Frames Studio and AR Studio. Frames Studio is an online creative editor, now available globally, that allows you to design frames that can be used either as profile picture frames or in the new Facebook camera. The AR Studio, now open for beta applications, can be used to create masks, scripted effects, animated frames and other AR technologies that react to movement, the environment or interactions during Live videos.

Facebook Spaces is a new VR app where you hang out with friends in a fun, interactive virtual environment as if you were in the same room. Facebook Spaces is launching in beta for Oculus Rift today.

With Facebook Spaces users can view Facebook content with friends in VR, including 360 videos and photos that can transport you to new places. You can draw in the air with a virtual marker to create anything you can dream up, from a decorative hat to a handmade tic-tac-toe board. Facebook Spaces lets you easily phone a friend in the real world with Messenger video calling, so you can bring even more people into your VR space. They can answer your call on their phone to instantly open a window into your virtual world. Of course, there’s a selfie stick too. Use it to take photos of your experience and share the memories you create in VR with your friends on Facebook.

Places Graph provides free access to data on over 140 million places around the world. These places range from restaurants and parks to retail stores and local businesses, and the data includes place names, addresses, photos, Facebook consumer ratings and more. Apps can use this data to create location-aware experiences that help people learn more about where they are so they can make informed decisions about where to go and what to do.

A new Discover tab that allows people to find the bot for Messenger they're looking for in an intuitive and thoughtful way, right from the home screen in Messenger. Also we’ve enabled discovery in the physical world with new parametric Messenger codes. This gives people the option to scan Messenger Codes through the Messenger camera and link to their favorite brands and businesses.

Chat Extensions, which allow multiple people to chat with the same business at the same time. People can now add in a bot directly in a group thread and share the conversation and experience.

Messenger’s AI assistant, M, now offers the ability to order food through delivery.com. For instance, if you're chatting with friends about what to grab for dinner, M will suggest placing an order. The whole experience can be completed in Messenger, including group ordering and payment.

New rich game play in Messenger including game bots and much more.

Smart Replies, which help Pages to respond to the most frequently asked questions that small businesses receive, such as business hours, directions and contact details.

Hand-over Protocol, a new way for businesses to work with multiple developers for different experiences on Messenger.|||

