If you use Pandora but have never heard of the Music Genome Project, you should check it out.

In brief, the MGP is how Pandora recommends songs to listeners so well. The founders of Pandora set out to capture the essence of music at a fundamental level and created 450 different variables they can use to describe a piece of music. Pandora’s ability to describe music so precisely meant their recommendation algorithm operated on a higher level than anyone else’s – particularly in the early days.

If devising a system to categorize music at that level sounds hard, it is. Pandora needed statisticians and musicologists and programmers and other specialists to do it, and they’re still tweaking the algorithm close to twenty years after they began.

While it’s not always that dramatic, successful products and companies often have to tackle some kind of big, dirty job upfront that makes the business possible. In fact, it’s usually it’s the stuff customers take for granted.

At UserMuse, for example, we needed a database of thousands upon thousands of enterprise products for experts to review, which we had to compile one by one. A better-known example would be how the founders of Airbnb went door to door taking photos of apartments to build the early user community in New York. Or think about how before Zillow could take off they first needed to somehow get all of the real-estate data to power their UI in one place.

Hell, just last week Bloomberg ran a story about a guy who painstakingly built a proprietary database of homicides from hundreds of police departments to catch serial killers.

One of the themes you find in many of these origin stories is the importance of a proprietary data set that’s tailored to the exact needs of the business. The perfect data for your business probably doesn’t exist in nature, which means you have to build it yourself.

I think of a company’s proprietary data belonging to two buckets: data you have to create, and data you’ve already got but aren’t fully leveraging.

Collecting the data to power your customer experience is all about working backward from product vision. The Pandora team decided that making the best music recommendations in the world required breaking music down to its core elements like no one had before. They could have instead gotten a ton of users and taken a collaborative filter approach instead (i.e. “people who liked A also liked B“). But they saw an advantage in understanding why people liked pieces of music, and they didn’t compromise on the vision.

Now, collecting the data that will drive your customer experience may take partnerships, money, manual effort, lots of time, or all of the above. It may require long-term investment that you never fully complete. But if it really is the home run option, don’t compromise until you’re sure you’ve exhausted every possible angle to get it. Odds are your competitors gave up too.

In the meantime though, you can also usually make a faster impact in parallel by capitalizing on under-used data the business already has.

If you’ve been working for a few years, you may have experienced the frustration of working on something only to find out later that someone else had already done it. This happens because, (a) most of the big questions you can ask about the business have been asked by others at some point, (b) it’s easy for companies to lose track of what they know, and (c) departments usually aren’t good at sharing with each other. The upshot is that there’s a good chance there’s lots of valuable stuff just lying around.

The following sources in particular can be treasure troves of information just lying around:

Pay special attention to the information that is the hardest for others to digest – it’s likely to have gone under-utilized. Categorizing the unstructured data you come across can be a . Not only do these sources contain valuable insights, but because people can’t easily absorb them they often go under-utilized. It’s amazing how much information at big companies goes unused because it’s in an inconvenient format.

Creating a valuable data set can be a dirty job, so just embrace that fact and go get whatever it is that’s going to help your product succeed.|||

