The last few weeks have seen Tesla become the most valuable U.S. automaker by market cap. It exceeded both Ford and , two powerhouses of the industry for over a century. Many think that this is just another sign of irrational exuberance in the stock market. Mike Jackson, the CEO of Inc., America’s largest car dealer, concluded last week that Tesla is “either one of the great Ponzi schemes of all time” or will eventually succeed for investors.

As a car company, Tesla’s actual value should not be anywhere near its current levels. Only as a battery maker might it hold promise, but its batteries do not currently justify such a valuation.

As a car maker, Tesla has not shown the financial success to warrant such a valuation. The company does not reliably turn a profit. Tesla is also assisted by a multitude of government regulations and financial benefits in the U.S., including loan guarantees, local tax breaks for its factories, tax credits specifically targeting Tesla’s customers, and zero-emission vehicle (ZEV) credits which it sells to other manufacturers. In fact, the ZEVs were the main explanation for Tesla’s surprise profit in 2016 Q3. Tesla has penetrated a niche market of high-end cars, but it does not—and cannot—compete with Ford and GM and their diversified automobile and truck sales.

Maybe we are categorizing Tesla in the wrong industry; we should think about Tesla as a battery business and not a car business. Right now, there are no batteries that satisfy the main criteria for most transportation needs: mileage range, long-term power storage, and durability. Tesla’s batteries are not sufficiently better then others to warrant the current valuation, even on optimistic foresight. But in the future, perhaps they could be.

In August 2016, Tesla announced a new car battery with a reported range of only 315 miles. That means that for a trip from Chicago to St. Louis, two large Midwestern cities 300 miles apart, a driver would not be able to complete the trip on a single battery charge under typical circumstances.  Factors such as traffic, battery life, air-conditioning use and destination within the cities would necessitate that the commuter stop along the trip, find a charging station, and wait while the car charges. The same driver, in a typical gas-powered sedan, could make the trip non-stop with less than one tank of gas. That same typical sedan can be left for months at Chicago’s O’Hare Airport with a tank of gas and the gas will not noticeably dissipate or degrade. However, batteries today—including Tesla’s—do not hold their charge long term, so the Tesla is in danger of requiring a recharge after long periods of idleness. Moreover, with proper maintenance the engine of that typical sedan can last well over 100,000 miles and more than a decade. Even Tesla’s batteries, on the other hand, lose their ability to hold a charge, so that a battery will suffer a decreased range over years of use.

Some day, someone will create battery technology that can store a significantly greater amount of power for a much longer period of time with satisfactory durability. Transformational battery technology is the hidden treasure of the energy industry . When found, it could mean the end of oil, the success of solar and wind and the primacy of nuclear energy.

If Tesla someday invents transformational batteries, then it will cease to be a car company and will become a battery company. The value the company creates will be in the battery, and the exoskeleton of the car will be superfluous and interchangeable with those of other car makers. Tesla is not the next GM or Ford. Investing in Tesla is really a bet that the company can transform battery storage, not a bet on its future success as a car maker .

Ellen R. Wald, Ph.D. is a historian and scholar of the energy industry.  She writes and consults on the intersection of geopolitics and energy.|||

As a carmaker, Tesla's financial success does not warrant its current valuation. But as a battery maker, Tesla just might be transformational someday.