In 2017 there are many new and revamped data science tracks that are much more comprehensive for beginners than ever before. The tracks are designed to give you the skills you need to grab a job in data science, and some even have a job guarantee.

Back in my original data science courses post, which was aggregated in 2015, there were already a ton of data science courses and bootcamps available.

Recently, there have been many new and revamped data science tracks that are much more comprehensive for beginners than ever before. The tracks below are designed to give you the skills you need to grab a job in data science, and some even have a job guarantee.

Even though a lot of the platforms below aren’t new, I’ve collected all of the updates and changes make that make these the best options for learning data science online.

Springboard (re-branded from SlideRule) is one of the most impressively built data science online bootcamps. They have two options, Career Tracks and Workshops.

The career track is the brand new addition, so I’ll detail that below. The main differences between the Data Science Career Track and the Foundations of Data Science Workshop that they’ve offered for a while are:

The Python-focused career track comes with a job guarantee, so if you don’t get a qualifying job offer within 6 months of graduating, you’ll get your tuition refunded. There aren’t many platforms (or even universities for that matter) that are willing to back up their curriculum to that extent, but with that comes a heftier price tag to join.

The more beginner friendly Foundations of Data Science Workshop

I’m sure a lot of readers have heard of DataCamp, but just recently they’ve reorganized and added additional content to their platform to create Career Tracks.

DataCamp used to be stronger with R for data science, but now they’ve boosted their Python courses up to an equivalent level, and are still expanding. At $29/month for all of their courses and tracks, DataCamp is the best bang-for-the-buck for beginners that just want to get started fast.

If you can’t decide if you want to start the R or Python data science tracks, see this R vs Python post. There’s no stopping you from taking both!

You can be an absolute beginner with Python and start taking this track right away. DataCamp begins by teaching you the Python skills needed for data science, then you’ll start working with machine learning, visualization, and statistics and data storage with the language. You’ll end this series with a very strong foundation of doing data science with Python.

Similar to the previous track with Python, but now you’re working with R and you have about 4 more hours of content. Here, you’re also getting the full intro to the language so you don’t need to worry about knowing R beforehand. After getting comfortable with R, you’ll be digging deep into data analysis, machine learning tools, and visualization tools. Everything you need to start doing data science with R.

This series is a neat variation of the Data Science with R Career Track, where you’re still learning the basics of R, but the curriculum has a financial focus. You won’t be getting into machine learning as much, but it’s definitely a great way to expand your practical R knowledge and have fun doing it.|||

