Consumer apps and Enterprise apps are different from each other. However, stating their differences is a difficult task. Consumer apps are small, compact and kind of self-contained. They help consumers to interact with any kind of online businesses. But enterprise apps, on the other hands focuses on tracking and improving work performance. From a mobile app development perspective, enterprise apps are more focused on getting their development part rather than designing.

Consumer Mobile Apps or simply mobile shopping apps are getting popular among users for utilities and entertainment. Most of us like the convenience of paying bills, shopping, socializing, watching movies and much more with smartphone apps.

These apps are all utilitarian in nature and helps you to improve productivity in terms of numbers but not much in terms of quality.

These apps help businesses to grow. Businesses need to establish their contacts day by day to flourish in the industry. With such apps, a company can get up-to-date sales and stock data. This can prove to be very helpful to people especially while they are out of the field. Tasks can be done comfortably at any place with these apps. Enterprise mobile apps are custom made for each organization.

1. Consumer apps are accessed by consumers to buy something or to get other works done

 2. Enterprise apps are meant for businesses to keep in touch with others

 3. Consumer mobile apps are C2B (Consumer-to-business) – This means that consumers create the value and businesses consume that value

 4. Enterprise mobile apps are B2B (business-to-business)– This is the exchange of products, information and services between businesses

 5. Consumer mobile apps are designed in an attractive and simple way

 6. Enterprise mobile apps are meant for official business and the design is not given much importance.

Consumer apps need to be designed perfectly and uniquely. They must include something that would force the consumers to stay back within the app for more time.

The features each app has depend on the specific solution it’s attempting to rectify. Satisfying millions is what makes a Consumer app profitable and famous. For the revenue side, Consumer apps can make use of ads and include gamification tactics to push in-game purchase subscription for more downloads. Consumer app development takes less time and prices are comparatively lower than Enterprise apps.

1) Consumer apps can be downloaded from Google’s Play Store, Apple’s App Store

 2) These apps mainly aim at revenue

 3) Examples of consumer applications include social networks, games, productivity tools, publisher software and utilities

 4) Consumer apps focus more on the design but enterprise apps focus on business required features.

How are Enterprise Apps Different?

These days, even small companies operate in different locations and work with different industries. This can bring in several challenges related to the requirements, currency, language etc.

With the growth of the organization, even the tracking of all information around will get difficult. In such situations, the best method is to introduce enterprise mobile apps that can cope with all the tasks in a timely manner.

1) Enterprise applications being software systems can help organizations to run businesses smoothly

 2) Helps to carry out tasks such as planning, data analysis, and data management quickly and conveniently.

 3) Can easily integrate and process data from different areas

 4) Provide information to the user in a timely manner, which helps the organizations to optimize their operations

 5) Used exclusively in business settings

 6) Integrate information processing in companies, but also cater to a wide range of different customer groups

 7) Successful enterprise applications have to allow parametrizations and create industry-specific solutions

 8) The development process of an enterprise app is complex

 9) Enterprise apps should have long-term success, great user adoption, high-performance, simplification, adoption and a design that suits the easy working of an organization

These factors differentiate enterprise applications from other business apps.

The recent survey by Forbes compared the income earning potential of enterprise mobile apps with that of consumer apps. The major results are shown below:

•  Almost 43% of organizations that participated in the survey reported more income than that of the consumer app owners

•  Enterprise app developers are making more than $100,000 per month, compared to the consumer app developers

•  There has been a 25% increase in the number of enterprise mobile app developers in the last 6 months

Based on the need of your business, you can develop an enterprise app which can deliver maximum profit with definite growth. This not only helps you to increase employee engagement, but also boosts customer satisfaction, improves working methods, provides competitive advantage and enhances productivity.

Enterprise apps based on their business needs

1) Enterprise Resource Planning App: This helps you to bring all systems of your company together to access data whenever required. With the use of ERP apps, it becomes easy for the management to make up-to-date decisions and processing

2) Content Management: Includes managing content-product information, documents, presentations etc. This has become common in most present-day organizations.

3) Customer Relationship Management: CRMs help in maintaining better relations with present and potential customers with the help of data. The main focus of such systems is customer retention, which leads to improved sales.

4) Order Management App: Helps to keep track of orders from the start to the delivery point. It streamlines the order management process and helps business owners to resolve issues such as order delivery delay and confused delivery.

Other types of enterprise apps used by organizations include: Export Sales App, Billing App, Human Resource Management (HRM), Financial App etc.

From the above, it is evident that enterprise applications are created to perform a wide range of tasks and process data compared to consumer apps. Developing a customized enterprise app needs a precise strategy to help your organization to overcome challenges in business. With an apt design and development plan, and correct conceptualization, you can make your app innovative and thus help in swift growth.|||

Consumer apps and Enterprise apps are different from each other. However, stating their differences is a difficult task. Read more difference here.