The idea was born on my way home from the office. In Cologne, as in every major city, the streets are lined with nice and ugly stickers. After some very technical projects I was looking for something different which could build easily as MVP. So i got inspired by sticker art at the traffic lights. I don’t know anymore how I came up with the idea of sausage stickers but it immediately seemed very funny to me.

The same evening I bought the domains wurststicker.de and sausagesticker.com. On the next day I set up the site at Shopify, connected my account to the Stripe API and Paypal and uploaded some nice looking product mockups. I also wrote the product description in several minutes without too much hesitation and created some mockups of the very first products. The shop went live on Oct 02, 2015 after only two days from the initial idea.

Shopify is really nice if you need to set up a shop in a few hours and validate your product idea.

The really difficult part was to market the site. The biggest issue, as with every project, is to get attention. If there was a chance that people really like the idea of some crazy stickers I need them to visit the site. Buying ads was no option because it was not foreseeable how well the idea will turn out. The only way for me was to get featured on some blogs or news sites with similar topics. So I wrote a short email with a personal touch describing the product in simple words.

Unfortunately, I have not created a list of all the recipients I wrote to. But it must have been more than 200 emails. Most of them didn’t reply to me but some seemed to be really interested. One of the first Bloggers who published an article about my little project was Marc from testspiel.de. His site drove some traffic and brought the first sales. This was really impressing to me because I did not think that I could get the first sales in that short period of time and with that less effort.

What happened then was really amazing. Marc’s article began his journey to the www. Many different sites also started to write articles about the sausage stickers and people on Facebook shared my site and informed their friends about the project. This peaked on Oct 4, 2015 with nearly 4,000 page views and an revenue of €298.00.|||

Are you sick of seeing the same hipster stickers everywhere? You attached countless stupid stickers of unknown bands? You finally want to demonstrate your love for salami and co to everyone around…