A case in point is project management software. A number of project management tools are available on the market. While some organizations require a more robust solution than others, most services organizations only need to manage their projects against their budgets. Project managers in those organizations just want to be able to track the following aspects of their projects:

Tracking this information doesn’t require complex resource allocation across various work groups. It requires a simple project management solution that your team can use and for a reasonable cost.

Many different project management applications are available, including Crowe Project Management add-on designed for Microsoft Dynamics® 365 (formerly Dynamics CRM). So why should you consider Crowe Project Management? One word: simplicity. Crowe Project Management is focused on providing only the features you need to easily manage your projects.

Crowe Project Management fully integrates with Dynamics 365. If your team uses Dynamics 365, your project data is already in the system your team uses every day. Make that data work for you in your project management.

But isn’t project service automation (PSA) included in the new Dynamics 365 licensing?

It’s true – Dynamics 365 includes PSA functionality in Plan 1. However, you may find that the Microsoft® PSA is more than you require. Instead, you can use an inexpensive Dynamics 365 team member license with the Crowe Project Management tool add-on.

In addition to money saved on licensing, Crowe Project Management makes sense in terms of implementation costs and user adoption. The Crowe Project Management tool is easy to use, requires minimal installation, and because of its integration with Dynamics 365, requires very little user training. The Microsoft PSA tool, on the other hand, includes such robust functionality that you will need to invest a considerable amount of time to set it up, and you could very likely be paying for features you will never use.

Whether you hire a Microsoft Gold Certified Partner to implement and maintain your project management solution or ask your IT team to do it internally, there is more effort involved with a larger, more complex tool than with a simpler project management tool.

On the other hand, when you use Crowe Project Management, all you have to do is click to start a new project, add tasks, and you’re ready to go.

Many companies don’t require complex project management solutions. For your project management needs, why not pay less for a tool that fits your requirements perfectly and that you can start using right now?

Your project team is busy. Instead of asking team members to implement, learn, and maintain a complicated project management system, allow them to focus on what is truly important to your business: serving your customers.|||

The Crowe Project Management tool designed for Microsoft Dynamics 365 offers a simple, efficient solution for your project management software needs.