United airlines faced a worldwide bashing last week after allegedly forcing a passenger out of their flight by pulling and dragging him all the way from his seat to the door. Apparently, they were overbooked and wanted volunteers to get out of their flight based on the history of their relationship with United Airlines. Even though the officials have apologized for this raging activity, the world does not seem to be convinced which is evident from various social media memes, troll videos and the recent addition to this list an android game.

Remove Airline Passenger is a new game added to the Android Play Store this week and it already has thousands of downloads and a rating of 4.7 showing its popularity. The appearance of the gameplay is designed to look like classic 8-bit games like Pacman that appeared during the beginning of the month on Google maps which was an is a new game added to the Android Play Store this week and it already has thousands of downloads and a rating of 4.7 showing its popularity. The appearance of the gameplay is designed to look like classic 8-bit games like Pacman that appeared during the beginning of the month on Google maps which was an April fools day prank from Google.

The game is similar to numerous endless running games out there where the user constantly keeps running in a dynamically changing environment facing various obstacles throughout his way. But to add to the fun, the game allows you to throw the passengers out of the airline where you are running. You have to tap on the passengers who are seated on both sides of the plane while you are running to throw them out and the longer you run the more intense and difficult the game gets.

The game also keeps track of your high scores and lets you share them with your friends. Even though the game is highly fun and entertaining I am pretty sure that the officials at the United Airlines would disagree with me. Well, it is definitely Game Over for them. Happy throwing!

You can watch the gameplay video right here!|||

