The growing inclination towards customer experience (CX) has increased the need for organizations to rethink their customer management strategy. While it is not just a necessary measure of the strategic performance of a firm, CX is also turning out to be the sole competitive differentiator in the current business scenario.

Most companies are calibrating their business processes to meet the unique demands of their customers as well as the prospects to be in total control of the entire customer experience. Having arrived at the conclusion of the first quarter of the year 2017, it has become all the more important to examine the significant industry trends.

One of the ways to address the customers’ issues is to put technology to the right use, and Smart Diagnostics is an ideal way to do it. Product based companies, especially the once dealing in home appliances, are continually infusing innovative technology in their products in a way that could revolutionize the method of solving the customer’s issue.

For instance, a major washing machine brand is utilizing the Smart diagnostics, where the machine would be able to communicate with customer’s phone, which in turn would send out the exact issue to the support team instantaneously.

Firstly, this would eliminate the need for an engineer to visit the customer’s house just to understand the issue. It will ensure a thorough diagnosis of the product from an expert team, enabling the problem to be solved much more efficiently. Secondly, Smart Diagnostics would also bring down the overall cost of the support, as the cost of customer support could be reduced significantly.

In the prevailing scenario, this cost is usually passed over to the customers in the form of price, which if eliminated, would mean more affordable products and relatively hassle free experience for the customers. The year 2017 could see Smart diagnostics being utilized by many more product-based firms, and with much more intent, which could translate to superior CX.

The paradigm shift in the way customers communicating with the companies after the advent of Smartphone is quite apparent. The ubiquitous accessibility to Internet has driven the customers to engage with companies in different ways such as social media and live chats. Micro-blogging channels, especially Twitter, have been extensively used by a customer to interact personally with firms, allowing the companies to deliver superior customer experience. Also, live chats are being efficiently utilized to brands to influence the buying decisions of the customers as well as to tackle the issues of the existing customers.

These improvements in technology are bound to make a huge positive impact on the quality of service offered by the companies. While it’s encouraging to see that more and more companies are already increasing their investments in technology, even the overall attitude is now turning much more customer-centric, which promises to get even better in a few years from now.|||

Trends in these technologies are bound to make a huge positive impact on the quality of customer service offered by the companies.