A reprimanded former Batavia teacher landed a seat Tuesday on the school board with ease — a move he calls his "final civics lesson."

"I feel like I should've run for pope," said John Dryden, who taught social studies for 21 years at Batavia High School. "I feel like the community really understood how and why I was treated the way I was treated. They knew I was willing to serve students in a different capacity, and they enthusiastically supported it."

Dryden led the Batavia Public School District 101 race of eight candidates by almost sixpoints, winning 22.2 percent of the vote, according to unofficial totals from the Kane County clerk's office and Aurora Election Commission. The other two open seats were filled by incumbent Cathy Dremel, who received 16.5 percent of the vote, and newcomer Christopher Lowe, who received 16.6 percent of the vote.

The five remaining candidates included incumbent Melanie Impastato and newcomers Ellen Knautz, William "Bill" Gabriel, Ron Rechenmacher and Michelle Olache.

In May 2013, Dryden was reprimanded by administrators for telling his students the Fifth Amendment's protection against self-incrimination applied to a one-page questionnaire with students' names printed on top and 34 personal questions.

The survey was given out after a rash of suicides, and aimed at identifying students who might pose a risk to themselves, school officials said. The survey questions inquired into students' drug and alcohol use, though officials maintained they had no intention to punish students for their answers.

Officials responded to Dryden's warning to students by suspending him for a day without pay.

In the fall, when Dryden decided to run for school board, he mentioned his reasons included several arguments with administrators over controversial teaching material, which he viewed as necessary for students' critical thinking. At one point, Dryden said he was suspended without pay for three days for teaching an "unauthorized lesson," and was since forced to submit lesson plans for approval.

In October, the school board gave Dryden the option to retire, telling him they would drop his suspension if he did, Dryden said. He was then promised a last day of Oct. 31, which he planned to use to explain to his students he was leaving because of the rift with administrators rather than his lack of devotion to students, he said.

On the morning of his last day, though, Dryden received a call telling him he wasn't allowed on school property. Dryden said the school principal told his students Dryden was sick.

A district official in November said Dryden's retirement was handled through a union association representative, and that the district never directly spoke with Dryden.

With his election win April 7, Dryden said he is eager to put the rift with administration behind him.

Dryden said the biggest supporters of his win are his former students, who were the first in line to vote for him, many participating in their first-ever election. He's also excited about the "million of emails" he's received congratulating him on his win.

Some issues Dryden hopes to address while on the board include analyzing administrator payroll and reducing the number of administrators to create a bottom-up model that focuses on teachers rather than a top-down model focusing on administrators.

He also hopes to trim the budget and reduce costs where necessary.

"A lot of people are treating my election as the community's response to the distrust they have for the administration," he said. "I really think I was the 'protest' vote. I keep hearing 'Give 'em hell, give 'em hell.'"

Dremel, the current school board president, said she looks forward to working with Dryden despite the controversy, and that a diverse group of opinions on the board is what's best for the students.

As for her own goals, she hopes to continue focusing on long-term benefits for Batavia schools.

"The more we focus on education for the students the better," she said. "I believe there's a very distinct economic benefit to the job. If people want to move to our town and be part of our community, we have to have really good schools."

Lowe said that he, like Dryden, wants to repair trust between residents and the school district.

"I think our town is small enough that, if a citizen wants to become involved, they should be able to come to us," he said. "We're approachable. There's no reason we can't have honest discussions about the concerns they might have."|||

