From the established fortune 500 companies to new startups, now thousands of companies are using React Native in production. If you are too curious to know what can be accomplished with React Native, check out this page.

Application developers were once specialist for one platform and making use of the traditional approach, building iOS application using objective C/Swift as well as building android application using Java and that too with a consistent look and user friendly functionality was quite a burden for the software programmers. However, Android as well as iOS developers need to move in the tandem and it slows the project down as “quickly” was not happening.

Fortunately, back in 2015 when Facebook open sourced React Native, a JavaScript framework for writing real, natively rendered cross-platform  applications it was a huge game changer. As software programmers have a tool to produce fast and clean mobile applications and that too ease of a familiar framework as well as using a single JavaScript code base. And considerably React Native becomes a preferable choice for the next mobile application development project.

React Native is a new JavaScript based framework that is developed by Facebook and Instagram. It helps you build native applications in JavaScript while still delivering a real native user interface, allowing reuse of code across the web and mobile.

One of the first and foremost things that surprises software engineers about React Native is actually Native, as it is a component that describes its own appearance. React also handles the render for you. There is a clean abstraction layer, which separates these two functions. In order to render components for the web, React uses standard HTML tags. This abstraction layer is commonly known as “bridge,” that facilitates React Native to display the rendering API on iOS and Android. So, in the iOS terminology React Native components render to real UI Views however on Android it will render to native views.

React Native is transforming the entire mobile app development industry and bringing in speed as we as efficiencies

One of our valued clients recently approached us to develop an email marketing tool to analyze emails generated from the corporate mailbox so he can easily categories most recent notifications, schedule emails as well as categorize client lists. We implemented React Native JS and found that it facilitated fast and efficient cross-platform development, facilitating our programmers to create new native apps with full computability without increasing of developing two separate applications. Our software programmers appreciate the fact that they immediately notice the change on screen instead of developing the whole application first.

If you are planning to develop mobile application using React Native, then you have landed on the right page. Using React Native we can help save your loads of time and bunch of money. React native also helps to bring apps to market sooner than the traditional route of developing iOS app as well as android app separately.

We are available To contact our React.js development team and discuss about our services, expertise and how we can help you, please contact us on solutions@bacancytechnology.com or call +1 848 482 3868 Note:- We have a team of expert React.js developers who do all the work by their own, so we need no to offshore or outsource anything. Your work will be confidential as per our term & policy. Request a Quote|||

Hire experienced code based React Native mobile app developer for fast & successful mobile app development. Get Cost-effective React Native resource solutions from Bacancy.