Kink Is More Popular Than You Think OkCupid data shows BDSM is trending, with over 50% of daters today saying they’re into bondage

Over the weekend, we released a poll on Twitter asking “What percent of OkCupid members do you think say they’re into bondage?” 85% of respondents guessed less than half — officially confirming that nobody has any idea what’s hot in bed. To be fair, people don’t talk about the dirty details of sex out in the open too often, so perceptions of what’s trending are liable to be off. But according to our sample of 400,000 OkCupid members, 71% say they’re into kink. What’s more, over half say they’re into bondage or rough sex, and nowadays BDSM is a bigger turn-on than ever. We found that 75% of men and and 62% women say they like rough sex. Turns out, “Do you prefer sex rough or gentle” is one of the most agreed-upon sex questions on all of OkCupid. Of members we asked the question “Do you prefer sex rough or gentle,” 75% of men and 62% of women replied either “rough” or “I enjoy both equally.” The rest said they preferred gentle or skipped the question. BDSM is also in vogue, with 64% of men and 51% of women responding they’d either like to “be tied up,”“do the tying,” or “sometimes be tied up, sometimes do the tying” (from a sample size of 600,000). When we asked about “Would you rather…,” 64% of men and 51% of women said they either wanted to “be tied up during sex,” “do the tying,” or “sometimes be tied up, sometimes do the tying.” The rest said “avoid bondage altogether” or skipped the question. We’ve been watching daters express a growing interest in bondage and rough sex over the past five years — members today are 23% more likely to say they’re BDSM than they were in 2013 — but we noticed a spike this past Valentine’s Day, the same weekend Fifty Shades Darker hit theaters. Coincidence? We think not.

After we realized that more than half our members express an interest in bondage, we became curious about which members those were. Was everyone just as likely to be into BDSM, or were there pockets of members who were crazy about it, and others that found it a total turn-off? So we sliced up the data, first by gender: what are men into that women aren’t, and vice versa? What men and women like in sex The chart above compares what men and women like in bed. Points farthest to the left and right are the most “gendered” — men prefer them significantly more often than women, or vice versa — while points near the center are more “gender neutral” with a near equal spread of both men and women being into them. One we found interesting was that men liked to hear derogatory terms more than women (57% versus 42%). And if you’re wondering what “derogatory terms” means here, members commented they could be anything from “call me your little slut” to “hit me and tell me how little I’ve accomplished compared to my brother.” [Editor’s note: We can only assume that the latter was requested by a middle child.] On the flip side, a roughly equal percent of men (36%) and women (34%) said they want “some” or “lots and lots” of pain in sex. On the whole, men and women’s sex preferences were more similar than we expected, but we still noticed something of an asymmetry. Men were more likely to say they were into BDSM/pain/rough sex than women, and we wanted to know why. So we broke the numbers down further still, this time by ideology. How, we wondered, would political beliefs and religion affect what people want in bed? It turns out that conservative and religious members are less into kink than liberals and heathens, despite what sites like christiannymphos.org (Married Sex: Spicy, the way God intended it to be!) might suggest. Shocking? Maybe not. But what’s interesting is how ideologies affect men and women differently.

When we look at liberals of both genders, for example, men and women report a similar interest in bondage (only an 8 percent difference). But for conservatives, this discrepancy doubles: conservative women are 17 percent less likely to report an interest in bondage than conservative men. Men and women also report similar views on bondage when they’re not religious (8 percent difference), but we see a larger difference between the two when they are religious (13 percent discrepancy). When we look at liberal, non-religious daters, on the other hand, we see that men and women are actually pretty similar in the sack. It’s perhaps not so surprising that daters today are more sexploratory than they were before. But discovering just what our members are into, and who is into what, was definitely an educational experiment — and a bit of an empowering one. So remember next time you’re itching for something not-so-vanilla, you’re in better company than you think.|||

Over the weekend, we released a poll on Twitter asking “What percent of OkCupid members do you think say they’re into bondage?” 85% of respondents guessed less than half — officially confirming that…