Up until this point, we’d been quite relaxed about locking in exact dates for the roll out of the Dashboard due to the complexities involved. Having completed more of the research and mock up stages we felt better about being able to put together more of a robust timeline for rolling out the project, with the caveat that we were always going to be at the mercy of the other team’s priorities who needed to support us technically - the Data Team being a prime example of this.

The official launch was set for October 2016.

Once we had a good idea of how the dashboard would work and the data it would contain we had the necessary discussions with our Legal Team regarding the data we would be disclosing. Sharing the dashboard with them there were no immediate issues which they flagged with this as it was all going to be for internal use only and we were only displaying aggregated data as opposed to specific employee data.

What we failed to do at this stage, which we missed, was submitting a Privacy Impact Assessment for the storage of this type of data on Redshift with our Security Team. This came back to haunt us after launching the dashboard.

We wanted to make sure that the Dashboard was as watertight as possible before we released it to the wider organisation.

So, two weeks before we planned to unveil the dashboard we invited members from our Workplace, Internal Comms, and People Team to access the Dashboard. We felt this was a safe, but robust, environment for the soft launch.

We then had time to receive feedback on any bugs, typos or general confusion (mainly on wording) which helped draw our attention back to the details which became easy to overlook having been so immersed in the project for such a long period of time.

Picking the channel which would create the most awareness on the Dash’, we decided to launch this at the company's bi-weekly, Demo, which is held in our Berlin HQ and streamed to all of our other offices (and available to watch again). This provided us with the best opportunity to reach a large audience to drive home the significance and impact the dashboard would have on our organisation. This happened at the end of October 2016.

We also followed up with an email to the whole company which then linked to a blog post on our internal wiki page providing context on the Dashboard and how it could be accessed.  This also served as a great reference resource and help guide people through the process of accessing and making sense of the insights.

Before officially launching the Dashboard we were aware that we would be doing so with something that was still a work in progress. However, at the risk of being too perfect, we felt okay with the approach of rapid iteration and feedback sessions to tighten this up.

Even now upon reflection, we feel this was the best decision to make, as producing a piece of work as complex as this throws up so many challenges that there has to be a line drawn somewhere with regards to a minimal viable product (MVP) versus striving for first-time perfection.|||

SoundCloud has the largest catalogue of audio on the web - over 135 million 
tracks and reaches 175 million unique users monthly. It’s not hard to 
imagine how much data we have and the insights our Data Team are able to 
glean from this. Data is at the heart of our decision-making process as an 
organisation and that sentiment is also core to how we work in the People 
Team. What better way of putting data at the heart of our decision making 
than to also put the data and insight needed to have an impact at the 
businesses fingertips - a company-wide People Dashboard. The nice thing 
about this story is that this wasn’t our intention back then. Back then we 
had much more modest ambitions: just a simple report on recruiting 
activity. The good thing is that we didn’t just stop there. We didn’t stop 
at the first hurdle, or the second, or third (when the enormity of the data 
privacy requirements became apparent). For us, this story is very much 
about the journey as it is about the outcome.