United Airlines messed up, there’s no doubt about that. But the issue with United Airlines is not that its employees physically abuse customers. This most recent viral incident involved a Chicago airport security officer dragging a passenger off the flight, not any UA employees. But people are boycotting United Airlines, not airport security, and it’s no surprise why.

Let’s face it, we were all excited to pounce on and express outrage at an airline that has notoriously bad service, and then use this as a soapbox for equality and class warfare. But that’s not the underlying issue.

Back in the ‘70s, flying used to be a luxury. We were all treated like kings and queens, and weren’t nickel-and-dimed for luggage, food, and drink. But flying was also exorbitantly expensive and inaccessible. Today, to stay competitive, prioritization is a necessary evil. That doesn’t mean customer service needs to suffer because of lower costs though; in fact it’s more important than ever that service remains an absolute priority.

Prioritization Doesn’t Have to Equate to Poor Customer Service

Prioritization is a fact of life, and it’s a necessity that boils down to the most basic principles of economics: scarcity, supply, and demand. Airline priority status allows airlines to stay competitive because they can differentiate themselves based on factors like routes, pricing, and (yes!) customer service, and consequently win over loyal passengers that pay them a lot.

Business consultants that fly cross-country every Monday and Thursday are much more vital to the viability of an airline’s business model than the occasional holiday traveler. So airlines do what they can with ‘passenger status’ to keep those repeat customers.

Equal ‘status’ for all airline passengers would be great, and we can and should strive for it.  But that’s not reality right now— airlines simply do not have the margins to be able to give all passengers first class food and drink included in the price of an economy seat. So by ‘equalizing’ service, they’d have to lower the quality of service for everyone (and lose out on loyalty), as opposed to being able to raise it across the board with the additional revenue from higher-paying customers.

It’s not about equalizing service, but raising the bar of customer service for everyone.

A really good start would be to promote respect for customers and employees alike.

Lack of respect is the underlying problem, because with lack of respect there is a lack of employee autonomy, and thus no room for action based on understanding and empathy. There are few scenarios more frustrating than trying to explain a serious problem or need to an agent, only to receive a systematic, canned and unhelpful response.

This is what United Airlines has overlooked, and what needs to change at the leadership level by empowering employees to respect and to be respected. Empowering them to be human, to think for themselves, and to not just follow ‘protocol’ without considering unique circumstances.

The United Express incident serves as a great example: employees had to seat additional crew members after the passengers already boarded. This is probably not unheard of, but also not routine. But that’s what happened, and what prompted employees to call security to remove the extra passenger.

We Don’t Want Humans Acting Like Robots

The United Airlines employees on board had options: they most certainly didn’t have to call security to remove the designated passenger. They could perhaps have offered additional compensation, or explained the doctor’s situation to the other passengers and once again asked for volunteers (also with increased compensation). The point is that there are off-the-cuff, human options, but options that are tough to execute with a company culture that doesn’t support employee empowerment.

If employees can only go by-the-book, they are basically acting like programmable robots. There is a place for robots, or at least automation, in the airline industry and even in customer service. But when dealing with individuals, with individual problems, a robotic interaction is the exact opposite of what we want. We want humanity—human interactions— and employees that can make educated, ad-hoc decisions based on unpredictable circumstances, that should in-part be driven by empathy for the customer.

For a society that often articulates fear of the rise of robots, we should at the very least not be trying to emulate them in our person-to-person interactions. By keeping empathy and humanity as integral components of support, there may still be hiccups, but your customers will be more inclined towards an empathetic response too.|||

