When you sit back and focus on the numerous possibilities that Mobile Push Messaging offers today, you will be extremely careful while building, wording and targeting those campaigns. Remember, technology is a double-edged sword. While it has the potential to be disruptively beneficial for your business revenue, its misuse or deployment negligence can cost you not only financially, but it will also tarnish the image that your brand has worked so hard over the years to build.

There is nothing more personal in 2017 than the mobile device that is obviously an extension of your physical self. It is the same for your customers. In fact, they trust it so much that at times, their subconscious mind drives them to believe everything they see on their screens, to be true and necessary. It’s that channel that is most customized to user preferences as has never happened before. Thus, in this day and age, you’d be better off being highly personalized, contextual and extremely customer focused. In contemporary marketing strategy, you will need to:

Let us see the types of mobile push messaging available to us as marketers:

Currently ‘the’ buzzword in the marketing domain, a push notification is a message that pops up on a mobile device. App publishers can send them at any time; users don’t have to be in the app or using their devices to receive them. A highly popular medium for mobile marketing nowadays, most marketers use it often because it’s an easy-to-implement industry standard. With an average open rate of well over 80%, push notifications do not even cost a fraction of what an SMS does. So if you are a business with a large number of customers, it makes sense to use push notifications, but wisely. Also, the opt-in / opt-out dynamic is a huge plus with push notifications, in case we have uninterested users in the database.

The bottomline is that users have total control over who sends them notifications, and are also in a position to specify which types of notifications they want to receive. This is one of the reasons that push notifications are so popular. They are less spammy than SMS messages due to the user’s control over their arrival and frequency. Additionally, push notifications increase app engagement and also enhance user retention rates. This has a direct and positive impact on your engagement, app traffic and consequently, on your revenues. Push notifications enable multiple benefits for your business. With push notifications, the return on investment for a small business is absolutely mind-boggling.

A more targeted version of push notifications, in-app messaging is surely on its way to becoming the future of marketing, if it isn’t already. In-app messages are those notifications that are displayed while the user is active within the app itself — these notifications are also referred to as native app content. In-app messages create a structured nurturing process and prolong session time. They are highly contextual messages and rooted in analytics for minimum margin for error, and can be triggered based on user interactions.

In-app messaging typically receives 8x the direct response rates of push notifications. Moreover, when combined with push notifications, in-app messages receive an average engagement rate of 26% for medium-performing apps. High-performing apps (those in the 90th percentile) receive a read rate of 44%, so the opportunity for engagement through in-app messages is high. In-app messages are an ideal way to communicate with them on the latest relevant points of interest when they open your app. As with push notifications, good app messaging techniques are crucial to marketing success with in-app messages. Ultimately, it is the technology you adopt, that will eventually make a difference.

Which one is right for my business?

So now that you know the difference, which of the two do you feel is right for your business? Well, actually both are. Like most modern marketing technologies and techniques, push and in-app messaging are most successful when used together as part of a larger marketing strategy. Employing both techniques in tandem ensures that your app meets different needs through appropriate means.

At Gamooga, we offer you the best of both and that too, backed by a powerful predictive analytics engine for high accuracy. Using our intuitive, easy-to-use Customer Journey Builder, you can get more done in a highly targeted manner and with maximum impact. Speak to us to know more!|||

When you sit back and focus on the numerous possibilities that Mobile Push Messaging offers today, you will be extremely careful while building, wording and targeting those campaigns. Remember…