In this post, I will cover how easily you can publish your static website with HTTPS and Cloudflare caching (Despite its very limited in the free tier and Cloudflare is mostly used for security purposes). You don’t need to buy any extra server or SSL certificate. You can easily serve static HTML, CSS as well as client-side scripts with AWS S3.

Why S3

 Amazon S3 (Simple Storage Service) gives cloud storage at low cost. In fact, you can host any static contents. It has nice support for hosting the static website with routing support.

Free Tier of AWS S3 supports 5GB storage, 20,000 Get Requests. Just get an account.

My most favorite DNS service is Cloudflare. Their free tier is really super cool. It has some super feature including FREE SSL certificate and caching. It also hides your IP as well as helps you from the DDoS attack up to a certain level in free tier.

CloudFlare can detect DDOS, Spam and other attacks to a site and it automatically blocks those attacks. Not only block, it bans from the entire CloudFlare network.

Here, we will serve the static contents by S3 and  HTTPS with caching by Cloudflare. BTW, I want to mention one thing specially that Don’t consider Cloudflare as CDN service. In order to speed up further, you can use AWS CloudFront with S3. It costs around $0.10-$0.19 per gigabyte but you don’t need to add this service right away. My focus on this blog post is mostly publishing the static website with the minimal cost and resources and without a server.

This is really a handy solution for the designers, markup developers, personal website as well as company landing page or marketing site.

Now navigate https://ofra.in any of browsers in your PC. You will get your static contents.

In case, you want to serve your static contents with www. Then, create another bucket with the name: www.ofra.in and create a Cname at the Cloudflare for www in the same way as above. You can put all the contents in www.ofra.in bucket and set a redirection in ofra.in bucket as follow. Done. Your static HTML contents are online with SSL certificate and caching without any VPS or physical server. Soon, I will add another tutorial on CloudFront. Stay tune still then.|||

Serve static site with SSL certificate by AWS S3 and Cloudflare without any VPS or physical server at very low cost