With over 1400 apps in the Shopify App Store, finding the best Shopify apps to enhance the selling abilities of your online store is not an easy task.

If you search for a feature in app store search, let’s say “email popup”, there might be hundreds of apps showing up. How to pick up the best quality apps that provide the exact function you’re looking for, at the best pricing, with the best customer support to back you up?

In this article, we hand-pick 15 best Shopify apps worth your try, which we have ourselves tested and assessed based on comparison with other similar options. Especially, all apps in this list are either free forever or starting from free version for you to try at no cost.

Dig into the list to discover how these awesome Shopify free apps can help you build a successful yet cost-effective online business, in every way you can imagine.

Most business owners seem to neglect Google Image Search as a potential traffic channel. This simple app helps you optimize ranking of product images on top of search result on Google, by automatically generating ALT text for every single product image.

Instead of manually editing ALT text for each image every time you import new products into the store, you just need to create a template for SEO Image Optimizer, then it will save your time by updating ALT text for all new images instantly.

With over 4,200 reviews on Shopify App Store, this free app is a great go-to option if you’re seeking tools to improve SEO for your online store.

A free tool to create 100% customizable coupon popups, Better Coupon Box app is one of the best Shopify free apps that aim to help Shopify merchants engage first-time visitors to become email subscribers and social followers.

Unlike other popup builder tools, Better Coupon Box proves to be a superior solution with many valuable features:

Receiving nearly positive 2,000 reviews from Shopify merchants, this app is a must-have app for any Shopify sites that wish to have a largely growing email list and social fan base to sell to.

Another marketing app that thousands of Shopify shop owners love is Happy Email – a brilliant idea to engage first-time customers with brands right at first sight.

When installing the app, a carefully pre-written email template is already ready with your name, your shop name, like this:

Every time a new customer signs up for an account or finishes their first purchase, the app will automatically sends out this warmly welcome email from your email address after 30 minutes, just like you, as the founder of the store, personally writes to thank your customers.

Imagine how surprised your customers can feel when they receive a personal message from you the store owner? They might know how busy you are with running a business, but still find time to personally thank you via email.

This unique free email marketing app makes your customers feel special, taken care of, and become loyal to your brand.

Leveraging the power of social proof, Yotpo app – one of the best Shopify apps of all time – helps you generate reviews from real customers after purchasing products from your shop.

After customers successfully make a purchase, the app will send them a follow-up email with review request form where customers can directly submit their review within email. Optimized fully for mobile, Yotpo helps you increase product reviews by making review writing so easy and instant with 1 click for your customers.

Still selling a product even when it is out of stock? Here is how Pre-Order Manager app works to make this possible for you.

When a product goes out of stock, the app will replace the normal “Buy Now” button with a “Pre-order Now” button, that lets customers go through the regular purchasing process.

Pre-order Manager app proves an excellent strategy if you have a lot of hot items that quickly sell out, or if you want to test new products before actually stocking inventory.

Functioning just like the product recommendation engine on Amazon.com, Personalized Recommendation app boosts add-to-cart rates by suggesting personalized products to customers based on their browsing behavior and interests on your store.

Easy to install, quick to set up in a few clicks just in the first time and requiring no coding skills Personalized Recommendation makes the seemingly impossible task of recommending the right products each individual customer is highly likely to buy totally possible and even effective.

Not a totally free app, Personalized Recommendation is no brainers for business owners, as it does not charge you a fix subscription fee every month or year. The app pays for itself by taking only 4% of the extra sales it generates in a month. This app is a wise investment for those who don’t want to spend a fixed fee without knowing the exact ROI.

Made to improve the shopping experience, Quick View app gives shoppers a quick access to product preview in one click without reloading the whole page. Shoppers can view product details instantly without leaving the catalog navigation. Products can also be added to cart right from the Product Quick View page.

If you have a lot of products for customers to discover, having Quick View can reduce the browsing and shopping time for customers, enhance the shopping convenient and improve conversion rate as a whole.

Every time you list a new product on your store or publish a new article on your blog, Social Autopilot will automatically tweet them on Twitter or pin them on Pinterests to shout out to your social followers. (It used to work with Facebook as well, before Facebook prevents third-party apps from automatically posting on people’s Facebook accounts.)

Made by Bold Commerce – a very popular and trusted app partner on Shopify app store, Social Autopilot is their only forever-free app. This app is designed to make your life as a store owner easier by taking some work off your plate each day: promote every single new product on your social media to boost engagement, traffic and sales.

Promoting your store on social media is one of the most time-consuming jobs. With Social Media Marketing Automation app by Around.io you can easily post/schedule your product listings on all your connected social platforms to boost social traffic and sales in your store. Here’s all you can do with Around.io:

Shopify merchants like this app because they can “leave it all to the app”. This app designs social media posts for their stores, and then shares these posts across all the social channels – Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, Tumblr, Instagram.

You can set the number of days and frequency of sharing. And, you do not have to design any creatives, the app does it.

It also runs sales, daily deals and promotes coupon codes. Layouts created by this app can look as beautiful as this:

The better you sell online, the more burdensome shipping management becomes as a liability. Aftership app imports tracking of all your shipments into one place, making management so simple, hand-free, and time-saving.

In Aftership tracking dashboard, you can view delivery statuses of all your orders easily. The app automatically detects the correct couriers and gets the latest status from couriers (it supports 360+ couriers worldwide). Knowing your delivery performance quickly beforehand, you can take actions before it is too late.

By sending email or SMS delivery status updates, Aftership also helps to improve customer satisfaction and their trust on your brand.

For stores that have hundreds of products in stock, repetitive editing work is painful when you want to, let’s say, discount all products by 20% for 3 days.

Bulk Product Edit app is made to bulk edit product’s price, compared at price, tags, inventory, title, vendor, product type, weight, description, SKU…You can target products to edit by collection, product type, vendor, tags, title, and keywords.

If you want to run storewide promotions on specific days, you can also schedule bulk product edit tasks to run on any future date, or on daily/weekly bases.

If you are running a dropshipping with AliExpress business, Oberlo is a must-have Shopify apps that makes fulfillment an easy seamless process for your store.

Oberlo imports hundreds of products from AliExpress.com directly into your store in minutes, has your orders fulfilled and shipped directly to your customers 100% automatically, and makes sure your inventory and prices are always up to date.

Used to have no free plans, Oberlo recently becomes completely free for those who just start out until they have 500 successful orders.

The only Customer Service app on Shopify app store that has nearly 2,000 reviews (the second popular one has less than 400 reviews), Quick Facebook Chat is absolutely loved by thousands of new and current Shopify merchants.

Straight from its name, the app presents a way for your customers to reach you on Facebook Messenger for direct support.

No more agents in shift, no more emails. With Quick Facebook Chat, you or your customer support agent can be anywhere, anytime chatting with customers via Messenger inbox.

By providing instant support via Facebook, you can build long-term relationship with each customer, promote new products to interested one via chat window with them, and even predict what they will probably like by following their Facebook activities.

Compass is by far the best reporting app in Shopify app store. The app gives you a single view of 30+ important ecommerce metrics, with industry’s benchmarks and insights.

Think of it like having an Amazon-like team of data scientists at your disposal to help you make sense of all statistics in eCommerce and give you recommendations you need to make decisions for your business. By knowing where to allocate your resources, you’ll save thousands of dollars in marketing and sales.

Here’s what their customers have been saying:

“Compass is awesome! Powerful off-the-bat visualization and analytics that are actually actionable.”

“We love Compass! it helps us to set our monthly goals, identify problems and support critical decisions.”

For brands that go global, Best Currency Converter helps to decrease customer frustration and cart abandonment by letting customers confidently shop in their local currency.

Supporting 170+ currencies including Bitcoin, this app converts prices instantly, on any devices, any Shopify theme smoothly. The app can also detect each customer’s location and automatically selects the currency for them. They can also change currencies manually from the Currency Switcher.

Quick Announcement Bar app enables you to build header banner to promote news, promotions, events to customers right on the store. It wouldn’t be a noteworthy tool here without these advanced features that makes Quick Announcement Bar a helpful app for Shopify merchants:

15 Remarkable best Shopify apps in all categories in Shopify app store have been revealed and reviewed in details for you. Why waiting while you can try them at no cost?

Check them out and leave your comments here to let others know how these awesome apps work on your store.

If you find any Shopify free apps that we should put in the list, please comment so we can review and update our list to the best!

Check out all our best Shopify apps review articles:|||

We have tested and compared hundreds of apps on Shopify App Store to find out these best 15 Shopify free apps to help you sell more, save cost, and succeed.