In the beginning the journey of marriage can seem like a fairytale romance for some people. Until the bliss is over and your spouse's true self is exposed. All their flaws are brought to the surface, and their spouse wonders whether or not he or she made the right decision. There are infidelity issues, quarrels, financial issues, and various other issues that develop during the course of marriage. And the people on the outside looking in wonder why those individuals continue to stay together when the love is lost. Nevertheless, one should not be judgmental. Instead we should try to be open minded to certain situations and actions that may go against our own beliefs.

However, for some reason I have difficulty trying to comprehend why some people even bother to get married. Especially when they know they are not mentally and physically ready to make that kind of commitment. Marriage is hard work and it is not for everyone. We simply cannot rely on love alone because there are other elements that are vital in maintaining a strong marriage, such as patience, trust, commitment, and a mutual level of respect along with other factors. Marriage is not a fairytale; it is something that should be taken seriously.

Unfortunately, sometimes people tend to rush into marriage without thinking things through. They fall so deeply in love in such a short span of time. The intensity of their love can cause them to get caught up in their emotions; where they do not even take the time to get to know each other as individuals. And they lose focus of the potential problems that lies ahead for them as a married couple.

Inopportunely, when they finally realize that marriage isn't what they anticipated it to be there are regrets. Some couples blame each other for their marriage not working out; instead of taking responsibility for their own actions which caused the disconnection in their marriage.

Several psychologists believe the satisfaction with marriage tends to decline with time. Although, I believe that is one of many factors why some marriages do not last. I also believe that sometimes the expectation of marriage is set too high. The attentiveness has changed. Your spouse is not coming home to rub your feet every day, massage your back, and cater to you on a consistent basis anymore. The mentality and values have changed.

In addition, some people tend to fall in and out of love more frequently than they did many moons ago. So most people are not surprised to hear about the infidelity issues which occur in some marriages; but they do not dare to form an opinion. The individuals who have the courage to voice their opinions are usually accused of the unthinkable, and that is they want their lives. They are even accused of being jealous of the couple's relationship.

As human beings we cannot help but feel sympathy for individuals who are struggling with facing the reality of the real world of marriage. There will always be the dilemma of trying to do the right thing. But sometimes it is best to listen and be there as a friend or family member than to voice your opinion.

There are situations where couples are so desperate to try to save their marriage and they willingly invite other people into their marriage. There is nothing good that can come out of those relationships. Because there is usually one person in their relationship that tends to get emotional attached or obsessed with the incoming partner. Those individuals are only there to fill the void that was lost in their marriage a long time ago. The individuals are there for one purpose and that is to excite, hold and balance a struggling marriage. For me three is a crowd, and four is just too much. The consequences can be just as dangerous as the excitement. It never fails it is either the husband or the wife who wants to spend more alone time with that individual. So in the end nothing was really resolved, the issues were just put on hold during the excitement. In spite of the challenges I believe marriage can be beautiful when people marry for the right reasons, and are true to their situations with no regrets.|||

The article is about the misapprehensions of marriage, and the reality of marriage. The article also expresses how some individuals tend to fall so deeply in...