That’s probably something I’ve been feeling these past months. Noticing there’s a fragment of me seeking excitement. Something I’ve not let myself experience.

Presumably, I’m not the only one that has buried oneself under high workload. Thinking it’s wise to make short term sacrifices for long term pleasure.

Even if this might be the right thing to do on the way to success, one shouldn’t stop experiencing stuff. Unless they want to collapse under the burden.

Thus, I’ve now taken up a challenge to experience something new everyday.

Ever since I started building my first startup, I’ve been canceling a lot of plans on a frequent basis. Always finding an excuse why skip a ski holiday, or the next house party.

Mostly, it’s been the same story over and over again:

All in all, others go have fun while I’m taking a meeting or doing other kinds of work.

For example, that’s why I’ve not been accompanying my parents on any of the ski trips to Austria. Or why I’ve maybe missed your birthday party.

Although I’ve not been able to say no to my mom, when she’d been insisting me to join. Thus, I’ve celebrated her birthday in Italy and welcomed the new year in Belgium.

Yet, it’s been hard to justify most non-work-related trips, which is why I’ve cancelled many of them.

This kind of behaviour has also led me to sometimes miss activities only to read a book or write a post. Just because it seems to be hardwired into my brain.

It should be noted I’m not complaining. Rather, I’m telling as it is, while of course enjoying every bit of this hustling. Moreover, as a workaholic, I’d never have it in any other way!

So why am I writing about it at all? Because I’m finally aware of this behaviour, while understanding it doesn’t always have to be like that.

This brings me to the challenge I’ve set for myself.

New experience doesn’t always have to be travel-related. All the more so when one’s living on a tight budget.

However, there’s so much more one can experience while still getting things done. Such as ordering a new type of ice cream or hitchhiking, for a change.

It only takes a decision to always go out for the new thing. Taking a leap of faith and seeing where it takes you.

In the worst case, one would be left with a great story to tell. Which is exactly what I’m looking for. New stories!

Let me know if you’re able to help me with any of them. Also, when you’ve got any interesting ideas I should add to this list, please share ‘em!

Meanwhile, will you also take part of this challenge? If so, what 10 things you’d love to experience first?|||

Most people go through life doing same things over and over again, leading to a boredom with a constant itch. But I’ve taken up a challenge!