Oracle today announced that it has signed an agreement to acquire Moat, the fastest-growing digital measurement cloud company. Moat will join Oracle Data Cloud, which uses data and analytics to enhance media for leading marketers and publishers. The combination of Oracle and Moat will connect data to consumer attention for better media experiences and business outcomes.

Moat will remain an independent platform within Oracle Data Cloud, providing trusted measurement, analytics, and intelligence to the world’s largest brands including Nestle, Procter & Gamble, and Unilever, and leading publishers such as ESPN, Facebook, NBCUniversal, Snapchat, and YouTube. Moat’s enterprise client base and industry-leading attention analytics and intelligence suite provide a strong complement to Oracle Data Cloud’s audience targeting and measurement solutions.

“I am thrilled to welcome CEO Jonah Goodhart and the entire Moat team to Oracle Data Cloud,” said Eric Roza, SVP and GM of Oracle Data Cloud. “Moat has grown its attention analytics business by over 100% in the past year, providing actionable insights around viewability, brand safety, non-human traffic, and ad creative to over 600 publisher, brand and agency clients. With the Moat acquisition, Oracle Data Cloud now offers brands and publishers a full suite of targeting and measurement solutions to improve the outcome of virtually every type of digital advertising campaign.”

“It is with great enthusiasm that we join forces with Oracle Data Cloud,” said Jonah Goodhart, CEO and Co-Founder of Moat. “When Oracle approached us about working together, we began to see the huge potential to jointly drive innovation. At our core, we believe there is an opportunity to fundamentally improve marketing and storytelling by brands and publishers through better data and analytics.”

More information about this announcement is available at www.oracle.com/moat.

Oracle is currently reviewing the existing Moat product roadmap and will be providing guidance to customers in accordance with Oracle’s standard product communication policies. Any resulting features and timing of release of such features as determined by Oracle’s review of Moat’s product roadmap are at the sole discretion of Oracle. All product roadmap information, whether communicated by Moat or by Oracle, does not represent a commitment to deliver any material, code, or functionality, and should not be relied upon in making purchasing decisions. It is intended for information purposes only, and may not be incorporated into any contract.

Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements

 This document contains certain forward-looking statements about Oracle and Moat, including statements that involve risks and uncertainties concerning Oracle’s proposed acquisition of Moat, anticipated customer benefits and general business outlook. When used in this document, the words “anticipates”, “can”, “will”, “look forward to”, “expected” and similar expressions and any other statements that are not historical facts are intended to identify those assertions as forward-looking statements. Any such statement may be influenced by a variety of factors, many of which are beyond the control of Oracle or Moat, that could cause actual outcomes and results to be materially different from those projected, described, expressed or implied in this document due to a number of risks and uncertainties. Potential risks and uncertainties include, among others, the possibility that the transaction will not close or that the closing may be delayed, the anticipated synergies of the combined companies may not be achieved after closing, the combined operations may not be successfully integrated in a timely manner, if at all, general economic conditions in regions in which either company does business may deteriorate and/or Oracle or Moat may be adversely affected by other economic, business, and/or competitive factors. Accordingly, no assurances can be given that any of the events anticipated by the forward-looking statements will transpire or occur, or if any of them do so, what impact they will have on the results of operations or financial condition of Oracle or Moat. You are cautioned to not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this document. Neither Oracle nor Moat is under any duty to update any of the information in this document.|||

