At Rock Content, we believe that the Brazilian startup ecosystem could develop a lot faster if companies shared more about their flaws, challenges and success stories. On March 15th 2017, we celebrated 4 years of existence, and the amount of things we learned during this period was absurd.

We admire how companies such as Moz, Groove and Buffer share their advancements and stumbles. We love to consume this type of content and learn more about how these companies are growing and evolving, always with transparency.

Because of this, we decided to take a slightly risky step in the opposite direction of the classic Brazilian way of entrepreneurship, which tends to keep things more discreet and more to themselves. We wanted to be a bit more exposed and to share our challenges and the story of how we reached $6.4 million in recurring revenue in December 2016.

If you enjoy reading this article, please share it and feel free to comment and reach out to us with questions and ideas. We'd love it if this article inspired more startup founders to join us in telling everyone about their stories and challenges!

This story has more than one writer (Diego, Edmar, Matt and Peçanha), and the goal of this article is to explain the major changes and milestones that we lived in the past 4 years. We hope you get good insights from it :).

Rock Content was effectively born in 2013, as a result of a pivot of two startups that were having a hard time getting traction. While Diego and Ed were struggling to develop an SEO software focused in the U.S. market, called EverWrite, Peçanha was in Startup Chile with TextCorner, a project for a marketplace of freelance writers.

None of those two companies was doing well, and both us and our angel investors, Manoel Lemos and Luciano Tavares, were worried (Update: according to them, they weren't hehehe).

So the three of us (Ed, Diego and Peçanha) joined our strengths, but our situation wasn't ideal yet since the company didn't have a lot of cash. That's when we decided to pivot the two projects we had going on, and start again.

We had a simple goal: we would either reach the 100-clients mark in 2013 or we would close our doors for good. There were no other options.

That's when Rock Content's MVP emerged: a product that would help companies create and develop their content marketing strategies, with a simple and scalable offer.

With a lot of team effort, and still with a product that was extremely immature, the 100-clients goal worked and we reached it in the first 6 months.

At the time, our blog was starting to get some traction, we brought in our first sales reps (Rico and Jimmy) and went from a team of some guys in a garage to almost 12 people. By the end of 2013, we already had 100 clients and some revenue. It was less than $256,000 in ARR (Annual Recurring Revenue), but it was already a sign that we had found a real issue that companies were willing to invest to solve it.

The truth is, our product wasn't ideal or fantastic, but little by little we iterated it and escalated, thanks to our clients' feedbacks. We learned a lot and helped many companies take their first steps in the content marketing world. We made great friends and attracted customers that had amazing results with content marketing (some great examples are Project Builder, GuiaBolso, QiNetwork and We Do Logos).

By the time we reached 2014, we started to feel a more predictable traction. Our product was slowly evolving, taking steps that were smaller than what we had in mind, but we were increasing our ability to help customers get good results and execute their content marketing strategies.

We closed that year with a revenue of $768,000 in ARR and a team of almost 50 people. It wasn't a smooth year, we lacked resources for engineering, marketing and sales, but we overcame our goals and were able to keep growing and searching for the infamous Product Marketing Fit.

Being able to reach our revenue goal in 2014 was something very powerful for our team: we were extremely motivated and had the opportunity of bringing in fantastic new team members to Rock Content.

In 2015, we brought in our VP of Sales (Matt), our CFO (Freitas) and coached one of our former team members, Rita, to become our leader of Operations. Our core team of rockstars was well equipped and this allows us to reach our product market fit.

We proved that we were capable of selling our product in a repeatable and scalable manner, and of growing consistently. Yay, we were reaching all of our goals and things were moving forward!

In addition, we also proved to the Latin American that content marketing is a real market in Brazil, with lots of potential. We obtained investment through a venture round that had the participation of e.Bricks Ventures, Digital News Ventures and Grupo Abril. This is what allowed us to launch a new, more mature version of our software and to invest in marketing and sales.

The prototype of our marketing and sales machine was ready, and this would get us ready for a year of escalating. We went from a 50-people team to 105, and more than tripled our revenue, reaching $2.6 million in ARR. It was awesome!

And that's how we arrived in 2016...

For the year of 2016, we made a more conservative projection. The premise was simple:

If we didn´t look out for new resources in the market (A.K.A. venture capital, loans, etc.), we´d have to close the year being lucrative and doubling our revenue.

At the time, we believed that closing the year with $5.1 million in ARR was rather challenging, but we were ready to face it and decided to go after this goal, even without looking for outside resources.

In 2016, our demand generation was going at full speed. Both marketing and sales performances were yielding results that were 25% above our projection of doubling the revenue. Our CAC and the relation between the CAC and LTV were more promising than what we had expected.

On top of that, our lead generation costs were stable and the lead gen growth even reached the 20% mark some months. All these factors got us asking ourselves if doubling the company's size was a loose goal, and whether we should reconsider this goal we had set.

We need to sit down, analyze and develop a plan to accelerate a little bit more.

As we watched our results rise above the projection, we were also concerned with the costs that would arise with the increasing goal (hiring more sales reps, accelerating lead generation, investing more in customer success). So we started to think if we should capture another venture round or even make a bridge round to be able to accelerate more.

We had a pretty low burn rate and numbers that were better than planned, but on the other hand we needed to have some extra cash in case the acceleration plan didn't work out or we made a mistake.

We decided to accelerate. After talking to our investor, we promptly closed a bridge round of approximately $960,000. We recalculated the goal to grow 2.5x instead of just 2x. And it got hard! From that moment on, we were pursuing $6.4 million in ARR, not just $5.1 million!

The year had begun with our partner and VP of Sales, Matt Doyon, hungry to hire even faster. He had done a great job the previous year quadrupling the sales team, but the man was still after us wanting to hire even more reps.

However, if in the previous plan we were delivering over the goal, now with the bridge round closed it was time to recover lost ground. We weren't quite sure where we would get the additional $1.3 million in ARR we need to hit the new goal. We needed to operate a lot faster and be more categorical.

There was a need for more sales reps, customer success managers, customer support, community management and operations. To make things worse, in addition to needing more team members, we didn't know where to allocate these professionals to maximize our results.

The need of having a deep understanding of our business' growth lever and the unit economics of each customer segment came up. Due to that, our Q2 challenge (second quarter) of 2016 became the following:

To speed up sales, increasing our customer retention rate. In order to achieve this, we had to analyze our business in a segmented manner to understand its growth levers for each group of customers.

Since 2015, Rock had already begun organizing its marketing and sales team in 4 main segments:

However, up to that moment, only our customer acquisition strategies were segmented. Sales reps were split between the segments, but not the customer success, customer support and operations teams.

We started to partition the company and to treat each part as its own business unit, with individual acquisition costs, lifetime value, churn and NPS. This was a turning point for our business.

Beyond segmenting, we also put a lot of focus in setting up an efficient process for recruiting and training professionals. Before that, we didn't have scalable training for our teams, but little by little we things started to settle.

If changing one of the vectors had already been hard, imagine how complicated it was for us to tackle retention (churn) and speed up acquisition at the same time? In order to achieve this, we had to take several measures at the same time. It was very, very hard work! But some of the main changes we deployed were:

By the end of the second quarter, we already had a prototype of the segmentation working in the entire company, in addition to some growth hypothesis. We changed a lot of things inside each team and made small advances. The full migration to the new model only happened in the end of Q3. Little by little, with more segmentation and specialization, we were able to have clear, predictable revenue and retention goals for each segment.

From the second semester on it seemed like the magic was happening and things kept moving forward according to plan.

On the acquisition side, the sales time carried on reaching their goals and producing consistently. We were managing to find and coach talents with the speed that we needed.

On the retention side, large steps were taken, first with the creation of the Success Milestones, that involved the whole company, then with the establishment of the Professional Services team. We listened to our customers and had to adapt in order to deliver better services. A lot of it was inspired by the experiences of our friend Gui, from Resultados Digitais (which he shares in this amazing article), and we were able to achieve expressive results. Our average global churn reached 3.8% (compared to almost 5.5% in Q1). Today, in segments such as Mid Market and Enterprise, for instance, we have practically zeroed our churn and have a state of the art NPS.

We know there's still a lot to improve, but quarter after quarter we were making progress: new client cohorts that were increasingly better, and we kept improving repeatedly.

In addition to the recruiting, training and segmenting efforts, in 2016 our product also made a great progress to adapt to our clients' needs and demands.

We doubled the number of developers working on our content marketing platform and were able to speed things up considerably.

Legenda da imagem: Rock Analytics´ dashboard, a feature that showcases the results of the articles produced for Rock customers (pageviews, social interactions, best time of day to publish articles, best weekday to publish articles and optimum number of words per article).

We delivered several new features, such as:

If we wanted to guarantee results for our customers, we needed to deliver them 2 things:

Since we know that a good quality content generates more traffic and leads, we focused on finding ways of constantly increasing our content quality.

The first challenge was to create an efficient tool that could measure the quality of a content. We wanted to give our clients an Uber-like experience, so that he could evaluate the quality of the content delivered and give us data to project future improvements.

Our MVP was up and running in Q2 and, with constant iterations, we were able to get increasingly higher ratings for our content and four freelance writers. Several steps were taken in this process:

All these efforts combined had a huge impact. As wells as retention gains (reduced churn), the average ratings for our clients' contents went from 3.8 (out of 5 stars) to 4.2 stars. If before 8% of each client's content were delivered late due to reiterations, this number dropped to 1%.

Our combined efforts paid themselves and we were able to reach the 2.5x growth goal, with slightly over $6.4 million in ARR in December 2016. All of this work also contributed to our team's growth. We closed the year with 195 professionals, and today (March 2017) we have almost 210 - and counting!

Even better than all of this is the fact that we managed to end the year generating revenue and with the money from the bridge round still untouched in the bank. Wow, this was really cool!

We're already well into March and close to $7 million in ARR. Things have never been easier, and that's why we're also going to share some of our challenges for this year:

With a total lead volume close to 30K new contacts per month, and an average of 600K visitors on our blogs, we see a bright future ahead. Our sales team now has 56 members and we plan to have close to 80 by the end of the year. If everything goes well, the company will have over 300 employees in December 2017. We hope to write an update for this saga in 2018, so send us your best wishes!

Oh, and we're hiring:

Legenda do vídeo: We’re a very cool company and are hiring. Come work with us!

If you enjoyed this story, don't hesitate to get in touch with us:

Oh, and if you've read this article so far and felt that its content was at least useful for you, we'd like to ask you a favor: please share this article and send whatever question, suggestion or comment you might have. Also, if you have cool stuff to share about your startup and your challenges, feel free to send it our way!|||

