Optimizing the path to product purchases is critical for the increased sales. The inclusion of unnecessary elements distract users and decreases conversion rate – this where Multi-Vendor Marketplace extension for Magento 2    stands out.

The path to purchase is the most critical design aspects of any e-commerce business. And for marketplaces where the product quantity and diversity is rich, optimized path-to-purchase become even more important.

Here are the pages of “Path to Purchase”

Almost every other website has all these pages, but there are certain attributes attached with each of the pages that remain untouched and can be used to best utilize to create more impact.

Home page reflects your brand identity and your understanding, and is your premium real estate, therefore must be utilized to yield maximum benefit.

Also, customers stay only for seconds before moving to another page, therefore it becomes all the more important to direct customers to the next step of the sales cycle.

Since home page is the coherent point of various sales cycle, all the best attributes are utilized in the Multi-Vendor Marketplace extension for Magento 2:

Self evident from its name, Catalog page lists all the products of certain category either in Grid View or List View and tells about the brief about the product and usually has small images.

It gives visitors a brief of the products. And those who are already apprised of the product features can directly add products to the cart and proceed for check out.

Moreover, banners, videos and keyword-rich descriptions can used to create more appeal, instant recognition and connect with buyers. The main call out points are:

This is an indispensable part of any buyer journey. Without inclusion of search and filter functionalities, buyer journey simply can’t be optimized at all and this is what you get in Multi-Vendor Marketplace extension for Magento 2.

There are two type: Search and Advance Search. The search also accepts synonyms and common misspellings of the desired word.

Well well! Product page is the ultimate page for any of the items sold on the website. All the necessary and relevant information must be fulfilled in order to portray all the meaningful data associated with items.

There are several parts to it among them High Resolution images catches the attention of users first. Then there is price, availability and other important aspects.

The Multi-Vendor Marketplace extension for Magento 2 by Cedcommerce has all the relevant call outs:

It is the final step in the buyer journey and your last step to upsell and cross sell the relevant products.

Also, this is where final cost is described, all the applied coupons and discounts. More importantly, it’s the best place to show your reputation and badges of honor.

The noticeable call outs in this Path-to-Purchase page are:

These pages, if carefully, crafted and collated increases the conversion rates and awards you for the marketing efforts you put in.|||

Optimizing the path to purchase is directly proportional to the conversion rate and cedcommerce Multi-Vendor Marketplace extension for Magento 2 has it all.