Tinker Board features an ARM-based RK3288 SoC and is equipped with four cores to enhance multithread application performance. It operates at frequencies of up to 1.8GHz, improving performance across all applications. This increase in CPU core count, along with an increase in processor frequency, helps to enable significantly faster performance across a wide range of applications, extending and enhancing project capabilities. As a result, typical PC tasks are faster and more responsive.

Tinker Board's GPU is based on the Mali™-T764 GPU. It offers up 16 cores and a 600MHz clock speed. When compared to competitor SBC GPUs, Tinker Board offers better GPU computing and GPU acceleration performance.

Tinker Board offers dual-channel DDR3 which delivers better memory bandwidth versus competitor devices that offer only a single-channel DDR2.

Tinker Board has a microSD slot for onboard expandable storage. It supports the SD 3.0 standard, so it can use higher capacity microSD cards that offer significantly faster read and write performance.



 ．Read speeds: up to 89% faster

 ．Write speeds: up to 40% faster



Tinker Board features gigabit Ethernet, which offers significantly improved throughput versus competitor SBCs that are equipped with 10/100 Ethernet.



 ．Transfer/receive speeds





Tinker Board's dedicated controller and non-shared bus design ensure superior packet delivery and reception. LAN performance remains the same on the Tinker Board during USB transfers versus LAN performance of competitor SBC's which experience up to an 18% reduction in speed during USB transfer.



 ．LAN performance with USB transfer



Tinker Board offers superior read and write performance with external storage drives, allowing quicker read and write speeds. This improves workflow, copying, backups and overall file usage.



 ．Read speeds: up to 154% faster

 ．Write speeds: up to 6% faster

Tinker Board Wi-Fi performance is more robust than most competitor devices, allowing for improved signal reception.|||

