This tool provides end to end support for generating datasets and validating object detection models.

The tool supports the following features:

Run the app by launching the "VOTT" executable which will be located inside the unzipped folder.

Please note that installation of CNTK and FAST-RCNN dependencies are optional for tagging and are only required for CNTK model review and training.

Configure CNTK-Config.json (which resides in the '\resources\app' directory of the tagging tool) with the following properties to enable the model review feature:

Follow the setup instructions of the CNTK Fast-RCNN tutorial (Note: Fast-RCNN currently only supports Linux python version 3.4 and not 3.5).

Install CNTK (Note: currently the tool only supports the full installation method (non pip) of CNTK).

Load an MP4 video file either by dragging it into the app or clicking on and selecting it.

Configure the tagging job and specify the settings in the screenshot below: Frame Extraction Rate: number of frames to tag per second of video



Tagging: click and drag a bounding box around the desired area, then move or resize the region until it fits the object Selected regions appear as red and unselected regions will appear as blue . Assign a tag to a region by clicking on it and selecting the desired tag from the labeling toolbar at the bottom of the tagging control Click the button to clear all tags on a given frame Navigation: users can navigate between video frames by using the buttons, the left/right arrow keys, or the video skip bar Tags are auto-saved each time a frame is changed Tracking: new regions are tracked by default until a given scene changes. Since the camshift algorithm has some known limitations, you can disable tracking for certain sets of frames. To toggle tracking on and off use the file menu setting, or the keyboard shortcut Ctrl/Cmd + T.

Export video Tags using the Object Detection Menu or Ctrl/Cmd + E Note on exporting: the tool reserves a random 20% sample of the tagged frames as a test set. Specify the following export configuration settings: Export Format: What framework to export to defaults to CNTK

|||

VOTT - Visual Object Tagging Tool: An electron app for building end to end Object Detection Models from Sample Videos.