Scrum is a practical framework to build products, provided you identified in advance what to build. But even after a successful product discovery phase, you may struggle to make the right thing in the right way if your product backlog is not up to the job. Garbage in, garbage out – as the saying goes. The following article points at 28 of the most common product backlog anti-patterns – including the product backlog refinement process – that limit your Scrum team’s success.

First of all, let’s have a look at the current issue of the Scrum Guide on the product backlog refinement:

“Product Backlog refinement is the act of adding detail, estimates, and order to items in the Product Backlog. This is an ongoing process in which the Product Owner and the Development Team collaborate on the details of Product Backlog items. During Product Backlog refinement, items are reviewed and revised. The Scrum Team decides how and when refinement is done. Refinement usually consumes no more than 10% of the capacity of the Development Team. However, Product Backlog items can be updated at any time by the Product Owner or at the Product Owner’s discretion. Higher ordered Product Backlog items are usually clearer and more detailed than lower ordered ones. More precise estimates are made based on the greater clarity and increased detail; the lower the order, the less detail. Product Backlog items that will occupy the Development Team for the upcoming Sprint are refined so that any one item can reasonably be “Done” within the Sprint time-box. Product Backlog items that can be “Done” by the Development Team within one Sprint are deemed “Ready” for selection in a Sprint Planning. Product Backlog items usually acquire this degree of transparency through the above-described refining activities. The Development Team is responsible for all estimates. The Product Owner may influence the Development Team by helping it understand and select trade-offs, but the people who will perform the work make the final estimate.”

Source & Copyright: ©2016 Scrum.Org and ScrumInc. Offered for license under the Attribution Share-Alike license of Creative Commons, accessible here and also described in summary form.

Based on the Scrum Guide, a typical process looks as follows:

Despite being a relatively straightforward, the process of creating and refining a product backlog often suffers from various anti-patterns. I have identified five different categories for product backlog anti-patterns:

Even in the case, you have successfully identified what to build next, your product backlog, as well as its refinement process, will likely provide room for improvement. Just take it to the team and address possible product backlog anti-patterns.

What product backlog anti-patterns are missing? Please share with us in the comments.|||

The article points at 28 product backlog anti-patterns – including the refinement process – that limit your Scrum team’s success.