Cloudera let some air out of its own planned IPO. That could be a poor omen for the large roster of other richly valued tech companies now considering an exit strategy.

It is a big group: According to The Wall Street Journal’s tracking, 152 privately held companies are sitting on valuations at or above $1 billion in the nonpublic market, granting them so-called “unicorn” status. Their ranks have swelled by about 60% from this point two years ago. Cloudera, which provides “big data” analytics software services to businesses, will be the fourth such company to go public this year, following Okta , MuleSoft and Snapchat parent Snap Inc.

None of those four companies are generating earnings or, for that matter, positive operating cash flow. Yet the market has been more receptive to riskier plays this year than last, when investors sought safer ground. Since the end of 2016 the Nasdaq Internet Index has jumped 14% while the BVP Cloud Index has added more than 10%. Meanwhile, the biggest gainer among large-cap technology-related companies so far has been Tesla —hardly a risk-free name.

But Cloudera’s reduced valuation is another sign that public investors are rightly wary of cashing out private companies whose valuations have soared through the abundance of private capital. Cloudera was last valued at $4.1 billion three years ago, putting it in the top quartile of the so-called unicorn field. The company’s updated IPO terms from Monday imply a valuation closer to $2 billion now.

A lower valuation will likely ensure a better debut, at least as far as optics go. All of the tech IPOs so far this year have generated a satisfying pop on their first day above their offering price. But for the bulk of investors who don’t have access to those early allotments, these stocks have been disappointments. Snap and MuleSoft shares now are trading below their first-day opening prices while Okta is up just 2% from that starting point since its April 7 debut. Yext, a smaller tech company that listed last week, is down 4% from its first-day open.

A seemingly endless supply of private capital has allowed many tech startups to stay out of the public limelight for a longer period while pursuing a growth-at-all-cost strategy. Now that public investors are getting a look at those continuing costs, though, many are understandably hesitant to pick up the tab.

Appeared in the Apr. 19, 2017, print edition as 'A Worrying Signal for Tech IPOs.'|||

Cloudera is cutting its last private valuation to sell its IPO, which bodes ill for other tech unicorns.