Dreaming is for everyone. In fact, we all have our own dream. Some people dreams of being simply, to become a good person, some dreams of being an artist, a pilot, a doctor, a successful entrepreneur, etc. But whatever your dream may be, you can never achieve it if you will just sit and watch the clock stop. Dream can come true if you motivate yourself, put a little effort and take things into action.

In the business field, entrepreneurs dream of having a big profit. Before they start, they foresee what they want their business to achieve. But not all business becomes profitable enough because they don’t have a vision, they don’t have creativity, they don’t know how to introduce their business and much more failures. They just want their business to be profitable, not thinking what their goal is, how it can be successful and how can it become big. Setting a vision, having a motivation, keeping what they dream about when they started their business, accepting help and ideas can be some of the best points to keep in mind to have their business successful.

Today’s featured author is an entrepreneur, a recognized graffiti artist, and a philanthropist and he wrote one of the bestselling books, The Spark and the Grind: Ignite the Power of Disciplined Creativity. He has been featured as a TED presenter and has lots of big company clients. He has become a known speaker, sharing his experience as an entrepreneur, pursuing innovations in the business field and helping entrepreneur like him as well as those people who lacks confidence and needs a little bit of advice. His book, The Spark and the Grind: Ignite the Power of Disciplined Creativity, is one of the bestselling books in Self-Help Creativity category as well as Motivational and Self-Investment category.

We won’t make this long, as we always say. Please share this with your friends, make them realize the true meaning of “help” and be inspired, be motivated, be who you want to be! Grind your life and make it Spark!

Favorite gadget:

 – Paintbrush. Although I don’t know if that has enough moving parts to qualify as a gadget.

 – My iPhone. Although I very rarely use it to talk on the phone. I use my iPhone as an idea journal. A diary. A memoir. I take pictures and write notes all throughout my day as a way of capturing and connecting thoughts real time. It is my most valuable art and entrepreneurial gadget.

Hobbies:

 Film. I study filmmaking. Choreography, cinematography, acting, directing, production, musical scores, screenplays. I love everything about the medium of film to express ideas and art.

I write every single day as a discipline. I reflect, project and curate my thoughts thru the introspective process of writing. As I continued to explore and do live presentations about the discipline of creativity – I realized the marketplace was hungry for this book. I HAD to write this book. It was a book that could not NOT be written.

Prepare yourself mentally, physically and spiritually for a journey that is immersive. The process of writing, editing, publishing and distributing a book is a herculean task. You are essentially giving birth to an idea that you are excited to share with the world. It is a labor of love. But you have to love the process or it will become very stressful.

3. If there’s one chapter in your book people should have read, which one should it be, and why?

The first chapter. Because my hope is that the content and the style are so compelling that you can’t put it down. I wrote it as a mystery that unfolds and builds on the last chapter, not an instruction manual.

4. If you could give one piece of financial advice to our readers, what would it be?

Invest in yourself, then invest in yourself again.

If you really want my perspective on where the greatest short-term upside is for the financial markets….. Move a portion of your portfolio opportunistically to cash. We are due for a sizeable correction and the most strategic move right now is to be ready to pounce once everything goes on sale. It is a very exciting time.

5. As an author, which book made the most impact on you?

The War of Art by Steve Pressfield

6. What would you like to ask the next author being interviewed?

Did you enjoy the process of publishing your book?

Bonus question from Andrea Waltz: What was the most challenging part of writing the book?

Far and away without a close second is distribution. I love writing. I love editing. I really don’t enjoy marketing, selling or distributing my books. I just want to keep writing and let the distribution fall where it may. I love to create. I don’t love to sell.

There we go! We hope you enjoyed reading this interview, and most important of all, we hope we inspired every one of you! To Mr. Erik Wahl, sir, thank you very much for the opportunity you gave us and for accepting our interview request. We are very honored that a great author, a known artist, and a very nice person like you.|||

