We are always trying to stay up to date with the latest research and publications around the world. This includes browsing the raw ArXiv listing (or the saner Arxiv Sanity Preserver), staying up to date with our nerd Twitter feeds and plenty of other sources (mostly /r/MachineLearning)

But some things can’t be transmitted via the interwebs, that’s why we like to attend conferences and talks whenever we can. This year, like the year before, there are a record amount of conferences about Machine Learning worldwide. In order to try to choose which ones we would like to attend, sponsor or submit talks to, we decided to create a structured summary of them. We try to focus on ML conferences but are also including some Data Science conferences and others which may have another main topic but overlap a lot with our subjects of interest.

For some conferences we added tags, comments and notable speakers. Please let us know in the comments if we are missing something or to add some information we may be missing.

Even though it is clearly a hardware centric conference, the role of GPU’s in Deep Learning and the impact of Deep Learning in GPU’s are both huge.

The 1st Workshop on Neural Machine Translation sponsored by Google is taking place with talks, panels and brainstorming sessions.

It’s the conference on Computational Natural Language Learning. This year it’s colocated with the ACL back to back, making a trip to Vancouver double worth it.

Last year we went to the 2016 version of this same conference. We wrote a nice write-up of the whole experience.

This blogpost was written in collaboration with Pablo Soto, Agustín Azzinnari, and Alan Descoins.|||

We are always trying to stay up to date with the latest research and publications around the world. This includes browsing the raw ArXiv listing (or the saner Arxiv Sanity Preserver), staying up to date with our nerd Twitter feeds and plenty of other sources (mostly /r/MachineLearning)
But some things can’t be transmitted via the interwebs, that’s why we like to attend conferences and talks whenever we can. This year, like the year before, there are a record amount of conferences about Machine Learning worldwide.