Editor's Note: Long before, many people love to buy movies on physical media. But later they start to enjoy the benefits that come from having an electronic version of the movie. Then people are getting started to rip Blu-rays to MKV files. Ripping Blu-Ray videos to MKV is not as straightforward as doing so with DVD videos cause Blu-ray has more complexed copyright scheme. For starters, there's no free solution that I'm aware of. Some Blu-ray Ripper make you convert Blu-ray to MKV with watermark in the export videos or the Blu-ray to MKV Converter is limited to use in certain days. But it is still good that you can test it before buy. Today, we reviewed top 5 best Blu-ray to MKV Converter for Mac and PC to rip and convert Blu-ray to MKV easily for the starters and advanced users.

If you often download videos from torrent sites or get video files from some places else, there is a high chance that you will come across MKV files. MKV files are not an audio or video compression format. In reality, MKV files are actually multimedia container formats. In general, containers concern how video and audio data is laid out and what supplementary information is used to describe those A/V streams. Containers can also include data that complements A/V streams, such as the title, languages of the audio streams, subtitle or caption tracks, fonts for those subtitles, images, chapter information, and menus. MKV is a highly flexible format that supports many of these container features.

MKV is best suited for high definition media players. It is also suited for HDTVs, PS4, PS4 Pro, Xbox One S, Xbox One, Kodi, VLC and the media players and devices that support MKV are rapidly growing. Even if your video player doesn't support MKV, you can enable your video player support MKV by downloading the appropriate codecs.

Pavtube ByteCopy for Mac can rip Blu-ray disc, Blu-ray folder and Blu-ray ISO images to MKV with 1:1 lossless quality. The video frame and quality are fully preserved in the exported MKV container. Pavtube ByteCopy for Mac is a free-to-try video conversion program with the ability of backing up Blu-ray/DVD collection to multi-track MKV, ripping BD/DVD movies to MP4 and MOV with multiple audio streams, and converting BD/DVD from hard discs to virtually any popular video and audio format. As for MKV, Pavtube ByteCopy for Mac outputs 11 MKV results including SD MKV, HD MKV, Lossless MKV, WD TV Live MKV, HEVC MKV, HD Media Player MKV, 3D SBS MKV, etc. Through configuring video audio encoder, bitrate, frame rate, channel, you can get the best MKV files for your video player and devices.

MakeMKV allows you to convert your owned video discs into a digital file format that can be played anywhere. The software supports DVDs, Blu-Rays, AVCHD discs, and more, capturing the video contained within and transcoding it into a non-proprietary format stored within an MKV file, without losing or changing information. The MKV file can store several audio and video tracks, as well as preserve chapter markers and other metadata.

Pavtube BDMagic for Mac allows you to convert your Blu-ray files to MKV format, it comes with a built-in media player and some video or audio adjustments that you can make. It is a useful software solution that allows you to convert not only Blu-ray files but also DVD to H.264 MKV, H.265 MKV, HD MKV, 3D MKV format. It comes with some preset profiles that you can use in order to make some changes to your files. You can clip, crop, edit frame effect, add watermark and subtitles to your videos.

Leawo Blu-ray to MKV Converter for Mac is designed to rip and convert Blu-ray to MKV without quality loss, and at the same time all original subtitles and audio tracks can be well preserved. DVD content is also supported as input by this professional converter. Blu-ray/DVD disc of any kind, be it regular or commercial, can be easily ripped and converted with the help of Leawo Blu-ray to MKV Converter for Mac.

DVDFab Blu-ray Ripper is a software solution that enables you to rip the contents of a Blu-ray disc to your computer for backup purposes or to have an alternative means of watching them, besides on your TV. It has only few digital formats to output but it can convert Blu-ray to MKV format. With the added advantage of having a well designed and intuitively created graphic user interface, DVDFab Blu-ray Ripper enables you to load the disc, select the device to rip to, its format and with a final click, converts the content.

Even though Pavtube ByteCopy for Mac is not the cheapest Blu-ray to MKV converter, it still the most economic one.

Input Supported: It can rip Blu-ray and DVD to MKV without needing to pay extra.

MKV Ouput: It outputs the most MKV files inluding SD MKV, HD MKV, 4K MKV, H.264 MKV, H.265 MKV, 3D SBS MKV, 3D TB MKV, 3D Anaglyph MKV, Multi-track lossless MKV, HD Media Player MKV, WD TV Live MKV, etc.

Blu-ray Copy: It can 1:1 entire disc copy Blu-ray and main title directly copy Blu-ray without needing to pay extra.

Good A/V Sync: ByteCopy export MKV files from Blu-ray without video audio out of sync issues.

Standalone Codec Ecosystem: ByteCopy re-encode BLu-ray and DVD to HEVC/H.265, H.264/AVC, MPEG-4, MPEG-2, DivX, XviD, WMV1, WMV2, WMV3, etc codec video without needing to add other codec pack and disturb your computer's codec environment.

Blu-ray Audio keeping: When ripping Blu-ray to lossless MKV, you can keep the original Blu-ray's audio: Linear PCM (LPCM), Dolby Digital 7.1/5.1, Dolby TrueHD, DTS Digital Surround and DTS-HD Master Audio.

Easy-to-Use: Import Blu-ray -> Choose MKV -> Start. As easy as ABC to rip Blu-ray to any MKV file.|||

Today, we reviewed top 5 best Blu-ray to MKV Converter for Mac and PC to rip and convert Blu-ray to MKV easily for the starters and advanced users.