Did you ever hear of TeleKansas I and II, the plan to wire Kansas high schools, colleges, universities and hospitals with fiber optics, starting in 1994? This was on top of the hype by now-AT&T to bring fiber optic wires to homes and businesses, especially in rural areas, replacing the aging copper wires. And did you know customers were charged in multiple ways for these upgrades via state laws that were changed multiple times as part of TeleKansas? And maybe you haven’t heard that FCC Chairman Ajit Pai comes from rural Kansas and never mentioned any of this, as far as we can tell, ever.

But there was a catch; the commitment to upgrade to fiber went along with “profit deregulation”, meaning that while the company may freeze ‘basic service’, every other service could go to market prices and have obscene profits. An example: In 1999, Call Waiting cost $4-6 dollars per month; it cost less than a penny to offer, while “touchtone” (yes, they charged for touchtone as a ‘competitive’, optional service) could be $.50-3.00 a month, though it cost literally nothing by the 1990’s.

These plans, of course, do not mention that the wires are part of a state utility, that they should have already been upgraded, that customers paid for these upgrades, over and over, and that shutting off the copper wires will not ensure that these customers will be better served in the future. This, then, is just Fake History being updated by either ignorance or design. The incumbents can’t be trusted to do anything like suddenly change course and give fiber to rural areas. And Pai’s ‘priority to help rural areas’ is embarrassing. If he wanted to actually fix this mess, he’d start by auditing the books and getting the overcharging back as no state we examined ever went back and lowered rates or gave refunds for failed fiber deployments – so this overcharging is built into the current rates.|||

Did you ever hear of TeleKansas I and II, the plan to wire Kansas high schools, colleges, universities and hospitals with fiber optics, startin...