ClientJS is simple. It is for finding device information and generating digital fingerprints. 

 What Is This? ClientJS makes use of many different native JavaScript functions, methods, and opensource resources to find information about the client. ClientJS easily lets you create a client object to find out as much useful information as you can about what devices are connecting to your site and your product. You can ask specific questions like, “does the user have an iOS or Android device?” or better yet, “is the user's device an iPad?” ClientJS even lets you produce browser/device fingerprint IDs. 

 Why Use It? Gathering information from different browsers and devices makes it difficult to handle cross compatibility. We take care of the hard stuff so that you can easily get the client info you need. 

 ClientJS attempts to solve the problem of making client data more easily available. Good data is necessary for good analytics that help you make better business and tech choices. Do you have good informative data about how your users connect to your site? Do you know their average screen size? ClientJS can help you collect data and make good decisions for your application and business. 

 How To Install It ClientJS is available via npm. 

 ClientJS is available as a bower package. 

 

 Just visit our github page at https://github.com/jackspirou/clientjs and download the minified production JavaScript! 

 Just include the 'client.min.js' library in the beginning of your project and you can start testing for mobile devices, installed fonts, calculate browser/device fingerprints, and more! 

 

 How To Use It After you have ClientJS installed, using it is simple! The first thing you need to do is create a client object and then start calling some methods. See how easy that was! Now how about we execute some methods? Let's see if we have a mobile device and if so is it an android or iOS device? If it is not, lets check if Java is installed and its version. alert('We Got Us Some Android!'); }else if( ){ // Check For iOS alert('We Got Us Some Apple iOS!'); if( ) { // Check If Java Is Installed We can can get much more info with ClientJS, but for now lets just calculate our users device/browser fingerprint. Again, these are just a few examples of what you can do with ClientJS. Read about more features below:

Find out the name and version of the client browser. 

 Get Browser. Return a string containing the browser name. 

 Get Browser Version. Return a string containing the browser version. 

 Get Browser Major Version. Return a string containing the major browser version. 

 Is IE. Check if the browser is IE. 

 Is Chrome. Check if the browser is Chrome. 

 Is Firefox. Check if the browser is Firefox. 

 Is Safari. Check if the browser is Safari. 

 Is Opera. Check if the browser is Opera. 

 Is MobileSafari. Check if the browser is Mobile Safari.

An operating system (OS) is a collection of software that manages computer hardware resources and provides common services for computer programs. 

 Get OS. Return a string containing the OS. 

 Get OS Version. Return a string containing the OS Version. 

 Is Windows. Check if the OS is Windows. 

 Is Mac. Check if the OS is Mac. 

 Is Linux. Check if the OS is Linux. 

 Is Ubuntu. Check if the OS is Ubuntu. 

 Is Solaris. Check if the OS is Solaris.

A mobile browser, also called a microbrowser, minibrowser, or wireless internet browser (WIB), is a web browser designed for use on a mobile device such as a mobile phone or PDA. Mobile browsers are optimized so as to display Web content most effectively for small screens on portable devices. 

 Is Mobile. Check if the browser is on a mobile device. 

 Is Mobile Major. Check if the browser is on a major mobile device. 

 Is Mobile Android. Check if the browser is on an android mobile device. 

 Is Mobile Opera. Check if the browser is on an opera mobile device. 

 Is Mobile Windows. Check if the browser is on a windows mobile device. 

 Is Mobile BlackBerry. Check if the browser is on a blackberry mobile device.

iOS (previously iPhone OS) is a mobile operating system developed and distributed by Apple Inc. 

 Is Mobile iOS. Check if the browser is on an Apple iOS device. 

 Is Iphone. Check if the browser is on an Apple iPhone. 

 Is Ipad. Check if the browser is on an Apple iPad. 

 Is Ipod. Check if the browser is on an Apple iPod.

An electronic visual display for computers. The screen monitor comprises the display device, circuitry and an enclosure. 

 

 Get Color Depth. Return a string containing the color depth. 

 Get Current Resolution. Return a string containing the current resolution. 

 Get Available Resolution. Return a string containing the available resolution. 

 Get Device XPDI. Return a string containing the device XPDI. 

 Get Device YDPI. Return a string containing the device YDPI.

In computing, a plug-in (or plugin, extension) is a software component that adds a specific feature to an existing software application. When an application supports plug-ins, it enables customization. 

 Get Plugins. Return a string containing a list of installed plugins. 

 Is Java. Check if Java is installed. 

 Get Java Version. Return a string containing the Java Version. 

 Is Flash. Check if Flash is installed. 

 Get Flash Version. Return a string containing the Flash Version. 

 Is Silverlight. Check if Silverlight is installed. 

 Get Silverlight Version. Return a string containing the Silverlight Version.

An Internet media type is a standard identifier used on the Internet to indicate the type of data that a file contains. The identifiers were originally defined in RFC 2046, and were called MIME types because they referred to the non-ASCII parts of email messages that were composed using the MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) specification. They are also sometimes referred to as Content-types. 

 Is Mime Types. Check if mime types are installed. 

 Get Mime Types. Return a string containing a list of installed mime types.

A computer font (or font) is an electronic data file containing a set of glyphs, characters, or symbols such as dingbats. Although the term font first referred to a set of metal type sorts in one style and size, since the 1990s it is generally used to refer to a scalable set of digital shapes that may be printed at many different sizes. 

 Is Font. Check if a font is installed. 

 Get Fonts. Return a string containing a list of installed fonts.

Web storage supports persistent data storage, similar to cookies but with a greatly enhanced capacity and no information stored in the HTTP request header. There are two main web storage types: local storage and session storage, behaving similarly to persistent cookies and session cookies respectively. 

 Is Local Storage. Check if local storage is avaliable. 

 Is Session Storage. Check if session storage is avaliable. 

 Is Cookie. Check if cookies are avaliable.

Additional details about the compiler we use, ClientJS dependencies, known issues, and our software licence. 

 The 'client.min.js' file is created by running the source code through the Google Closure Compiler. Instead of compiling from a source language to machine code, the Google Closure Compiler compiles from JavaScript to better JavaScript. It parses your JavaScript, analyzes it, removes dead code and rewrites and minimizes what's left. It also checks syntax, variable references, and types, and warns about common JavaScript pitfalls. 

 ClientJS is completely written in JavaScript. It has no Adobe Flash, Java App, or Silverlight dependencies, but it can tell you if those browser plugins are installed and their version numbers! ClientJS is also written in pure or native JavaScript, so that it does not rely on jQuery, MooTools, underscorejs or any other JavaScript library. This does not mean ClientJS has no dependencies at all. ClientJS does rely on multiple other open source pure JavaScript libraries, projects, and snippets. Don't worry though! All of that dependent code is hidden inside the ClientJS minified code, ‘client.min.js’ so you don’t have to include more silly stuff. The file ‘client.min.js’ has everything you need to execute any ClientJS method or calculation! :-) ClientJS is built upon and owes credit to the great work below: 

 There are quite a few known issues at the moment. We are working on trying to solve them instead of listing them as this project is so young. Please help us out by checking us out at github! Contribute To The Code On Github Just visit our github page at https://github.com/jackspirou/clientjs! 

|||

