Here’s an interesting question — How many of you read an app’s description before downloading?

Less than 2% , apparently. And obviously, only a fraction of those read it completely. Since users are not interested in reading the description of your app, what other aspects of your store listing can you use to attract potential users? Simple, app screenshots. All one needs to do before downloading an app is to look at the screenshots, read the first few lines of the description without clicking on ‘More’ and decide.

Since App Store screenshots play an important role in getting new users to try your app, lets’ take a look at some ground rules which will help you make your screenshots perfect.

Both iOS App Store and Mac App Store allow you to upload a maximum of 5 screenshots for an app. However, many developers, especially on the Mac App Store do not utilize all the screenshot slots that are available. In most cases, one cannot represent everything their app can offer in less than 5 screenshots. So, it’s always advisable to use all the screenshot slots Apple provides you.

Pick the screenshots of your app in action, not mocks or edited ones. Screenshots you use on your store listing should look natural. They should be a virtual walk-through for anyone who is evaluating whether or not to download your app.

Most apps have a signature feature/s that differentiates itself from other apps. App Store screenshots are probably the best place to showcase these features. Make sure that at least a couple of your star features are showcased in the set of screenshots you upload.

Imagine a comic strip in which all the talk bubbles are empty. Even if it might be one of the greatest comic strip in the world, no one would get it. The same applies to App Store screenshots too. Use crisp text that describes your screenshots concisely. Choose background colors which suit your app’s appearance.

If you have an Android app, you get an added advantage of A/B testing your screenshots. This gives developers a chance to see which screenshots are working for their target audience. You can choose the split ratio i.e if you want to do a 50–50 or a 60–40 A/B. Below, you can see the result of an A/B we have carried out where we implemented some of our learnings. You can clearly see that the ‘New SS’ variant outshines the other.

Though the App Store does not have this option, it is recommended that you change and evaluate your screenshots from time to time till you are satisfied. Track metrics like Product Page Views to Downloads to see which screenshots are performing better.

At Newton, we have been following this approach for a long time. We have been testing our screenshots on all three stores (iOS, Android and macOS) and have got a lot of learnings for increasing downloads by experimenting with our screenshots.

Below are a couple of screenshots which we used a while ago and the ones we are using right now. You can clearly see the difference.|||

Less than 2% , apparently. And obviously, only a fraction of those read it completely. Since users are not interested in reading the description of your app, what other aspects of your store listing…