I made it! And I’m here to share my journey of moving from Vancouver, BC, Canada down south to sunny San Francisco, California, USA. I am a Canadian citizen and working in tech industry. Yeah, sounds pretty standard, but my nomad immigrant story doesn’t start here at all, and I’ll save a post about running away from Mother Russia for later.

When I started my move, I had plenty of unknowns and had a whole lot of anxiety about the process due to the lack of any sort of control over the situation. Starting with having to check “Sponsorship required” checkbox on job applications to waiting for a decision on TN status being made AT THE AIRPORT with my whole life packed into two suitcases.

I did a lot of research online trying to find a good source with tips, read one too many articles and forums posts, until it started melting my brain.

So let’s begin. Back in November 2016 I have attended a Tony Robbins seminar where I made a decision to step up my game and pursue my next professional and personal chapters in the land of opportunities. My vision was to become another hot shot in San Francisco Bay Area/Silicon Valley, while being a project manager in a Vancouver small tech company.

I did NOT want to quit my job and move to the most expensive city on Earth to nothing, living off of Canadian money (30% less after conversion) for unknown period of time. So I’ve been applying, and applying, and applying, and checking the option for sponsorship required, until one day I decided to redesign my resume, remove my address from it, and begin using my friend’s local Californian address on applications with option “I don’t require visa sponsorship”. Because for Canadians, we simply need a job offer, and it’s not as complex as for those requiring H1B visa. I wanted to get the HR managers to notice ME and my skills first, instead of pushing me to the pile of rejects just based on the non-local status. At least, I thought, that would give me a chance, even if it meant to “waste” some time on interviews where helping with visa is not an option at all.

I applied to many jobs, but only after editing my resume to a specific format (I literally Googled “Silicon Valley resume template” and changed the layout keeping all my content the same) I started getting from ZERO to TONS of callbacks to the point where I had a few interviews scheduled per day for two weeks and had to stop new applications and focus on existing “pipeline”. Negotiation is a big part of it, and I realized it was important to ask how much time I need before starting a job and how much relocation help I’d want. Some didn’t offer any; some did quite generously.

In the end, I found an amazing company that kept me updated throughout the process, followed up quickly between the scheduled interviews and took really good care of me. I was first contacted just before Christmas and had four interviews over the Internet and phone with several people up the hierarchy (although the organization has a pretty flat hierarchy, it’s still a large organization) and eventually they invited me to come over the office to meet the whole team and have a final round of interviews with them. They paid fully for my trip, offered me to stay for a few days in a hotel to explore the area. I could only come for a day, however, as I still had a job at that time in Vancouver and I didn’t want to skip too many days. The very next day I got an offer with amazing relocation package, perfectly timed for the future starting date and a competitive compensation with benefits and all the “standard” Bay Area perks! And holy, that’s not at all what I’ve been used to until now.

Instead of packing up all the stuff in boxes and shipping/driving it all the way to SF, especially without knowing exact destination or having actual visa on hands, I decided that new life = new things, and sold everything through Craigslist and friends and donated to local charities. I thought it’s a better use of my relocation money to simply buy brand new stuff once I settle in a place and have basic things figured out instead of dragging all the baggage with me.

So with 2 suitcases and a backpack, I showed up at the airport.

Once I passed the security checkpoint, the next is the passport control at the US border which is conveniently located in Vancouver airport. You stand in line to the CBP booths and there and then tell them you need to obtain TN status. They let you go into a secondary inspection area where the interview takes place. I’ve been asked to name the company, position, and responsibilities that I’d be performing at the new job, also confirm the salary and citizenship. My employer used an immigration attorney to prepare the documents for the interview, so I had a solid folder of papers with letters in support of my case and company earnings. All that was reviewed carefully by the immigration officers (yes, several, it was 5AM on Monday morning, and I was alone sitting in front of 4 sleepy officers). I paid the processing fee and after about 30 minutes of anxiety and sweating, I was approved and on my way to the boarding area.

I came 2 weeks before my job started to give myself time to get the basics taken care of. I landed, took an Uber pool to the temporary Airbnb style place I found, got something to eat, unpacked and relaxed.

4.1 SSN is the number one thing you need to take care of before you can do anything else, really. The very next day I came at 8:30am to the SSN office in San Francisco on Mission street. There was already a big line outside it waiting for the doors to open at 9. You’ll need to provide an address where they will mail your card within 1–2 weeks. Before you have that card, you can’t do much, so super important to get it ASAP. Bring your passport and self.

Local phone number was next on my list. It is another thing you can’t fill out any other application forms without, although I did use my Canadian number in the first 2 days. Be aware of high roaming charges or get a package from your Canadian provider if you plan to use it before switching to a US number.

Without SSN, however, you cannot apply for a data plan or get a phone for less than a full price. On top of that, if you haven’t lived in the US before, you would, like me, have no credit history, and they won’t transfer your Canadian excellent or bad history over (more on that below). So it could be a good, or a bad thing. In my case, none of those years of maintaining excellent credit paid off, as I got rejected to get AT&T Next on Apple iPhone, and had to get a prepaid plan with a promotional cheap phone they had with a nano sim card.

Later that day I was able to buy off my old iPhone locked with Rogers, and get it unlocked for about $200 (depending on your plan and usage, it may be higher or lower, check with your mobile provider). So I ended up using the prepaid sim card in my old iPhone.

I did a whole lot of research about different banks in San Francisco, and ended up with two options: 1) go with a big bank that would be convenient to start with if you’re new in the country but pay lots and lots of fees, or 2) go with a credit union that’s local and small, has a lot of free services but may not be so handy when you’re moving around.

So I opened both. Having an account in a big bank — Bank of America — turned out to be very good, because they are literally everywhere, and secondly they have a partnership with my Canadian Tangerine bank, so I can use their ATMs and withdraw money with no fees. Having an account in a credit union — San Francisco Fire Credit Union — is a good use for primary needs without the risk of being exposed to unexpected fees, like overdraft or monthly usage fees, while you’re still not settled in yet. They helped me with an unconventional request to write up a letter to AMEX confirming my address, which BofA couldn’t provide me with. So that brings me to the next point…

None of the banks offered me a normal credit card. First, because I still didn’t receive SSN in mail, and second, because they didn’t trust me yet, all tied of course to having no credit history. The only option I had is to open a secured credit card with minimum $500 locked in savings account and having a $500 limit credit card. Usually secured cards don’t have any rewards attached to it and/or have an annual fee on top of that. Another option — and this is something to do in advance — is to have a Canadian American Express credit card. If you’re preparing to relocate, I’d advise you to open an AMEX card while you’re in Canada as far in advance before moving as possible. AMEX has a different system of their own, which doesn’t rely on banks and since they’re available in many countries they have access to your usage history anywhere.

Once you have your SSN, you can apply for a Global Transfer. https://www.americanexpress.com/global-card-transfers/

You still apply for a new card, but using your existing AMEX account. Since SSN took about a week to arrive, and AMEX application usually takes at least 3–4 weeks, make sure you’ve got some money to use before that arrives. I’ve been asked to confirm my address on a bank letterhead by a bank representative which was something most banks won’t do. However my credit union was able to do this for me, and that’s awesome.

I relied heavily on my Canadian credit cards, and simply withdrawing money from Canadian checking accounts and depositing money into American checking accounts. A good thing is they usually give you a debit Visa card to use your money with which can be used just like a credit card for automated payments and online purchases.

The jokes and rumors about it are all true.

If you’re applying for a Californian drivers license for the first time, you have to make an appointment first at https://www.dmv.ca.gov/portal/dmv

Without appointment you can show up and apply for a Californian ID only after standing in a HUGE non-appointment line. I came to DMV 3 times and learned the hard way a few things. Make sure to bring the I-94 form which you have to print beforehand by filling out your passport information here: https://i94.cbp.dhs.gov/I94/ I made a mistake by thinking that passport stamp with I-94 admission number was enough. They actually need you to bring the print-out, which is not given at the border upon approval of the TN visa. Another important thing to bring is proof of address with your name on it: they require 2 utility bills letters or lease agreement confirming your name and address. I didn’t have those the first day I came, but luckily within my first week of being here I received my new debit card in the mail and a letter from AT&T with my credit score.

Depending on the day, without having an appointment, if you try coming 30 min before opening (8–9am), you will get admitted between 30–60 minutes, otherwise if you show up mid-day, it will take over 2 hours guaranteed. And depending on the day again, the only time they can tell you that you’re missing some documents is when it’s your turn to check-in, so you can waste a lot of time just to be told to bring additional documents next time and go home.

It’s been 4 weeks now at my new job and I must say that being in tech in San Francisco is quite a different world. I do work harder, technology is fascinating, perks and benefits are probably the best in the world, but most of all — people. Fun, friendly and very intelligent, they create an amazing community and many sub-communities that anyone can find something close to their heart, and if not, create one. Not to mention all of the networking opportunities and events of all kinds where anyone can find something of interest or never even thought of and now compelling to give it a try!|||

I made it! And I’m here to share my journey of moving from Vancouver, BC, Canada down south to sunny San Francisco, California, USA. I am a Canadian citizen and working in tech industry. Yeah, sounds…