When we talk about game engines, there are only two major players, Unity 3D and Unreal Engine. If you are updated about the  gaming world, you might already know that Unity 3D has 4.5 million subscriber &  a 48% market share whereas Unreal Engine is standing at 13%. However, this doesn’t say all. Both have their unique offerings and decision depend upon your requirements. This brings us the topic Unreal Engine vs Unity 3D Games Development: What to Choose?

Before we start discussing about Unreal Engine vs Unity 3D, its important to decide what kind of game are you trying to build. May be you are trying to build 3D, 2D or something that mixes both. You may want to keep your first game pretty simple but interesting like word puzzles or shooter games. It can be something that has a high requirement of revenue generation with high quality graphics. Are you trying it for personal use or planning to launch in app stores? You need to decide all these factors before you come up choosing the right game engine.

Now that you have your plan ready, let’s discuss a few deciding factors to choose your gaming engine.

The first factor comes to mind is pricing. Both the engines have some of the parts free and some chargeable.

The full version of Unreal Engine 4 can be free of cost if your game revenue is less than $3,000 /quarter; if more, 5% of your income will be charged.

For Unity 3D, if your yearly business revenues are less than $100,000, it’s free with some limited stuff. With the paid version, you can get some important features, such as  creating Asset Bundle or replacement of the standard splash screen. For professional version the price is $1,500  or  a subscription worth $75/ month. Apart from that, there are separate charges for game development in iOS or Android.

Hence, you can see if you are planning something big then developing with Unity 3D can be a good choice. However, if you have a simple or experimental plan then Unreal Engine can be a savers.

To build a highly secure and scalable game that needs less code, programming language is important. Unreal Engine 4 uses C++ for coding and Unity 3D uses  JavaScript or c#. Deciding which program is better is your personal preference and should be considered as per the skill sets. If you prefer any of these programming languages over the other then the decision may be quite easy for you.

Both Unity 3D and Unreal Engine 4 have their own asset stores. There you can get ready-to-use 3D models of characters, textures, environments,  and even such things as sounds and particle systems. However, Unity 3D clearly comes out on top because of the number of assets in its store. It has everything, from animation and GUI generators to extensions for AI control and ORK Framework for creating RPGs. Hence, with a better asset store, you can build awesome games with unity 3d.

The more platform access you have, the more you increase your customer base. Let’s see which engines offers you what.

Unity 3D:  iOS, Android, Windows Phone 8, Tizen, Android TV and Samsung SMART TV, as well as Xbox One & 360, Windows PC, Mac OS X, Linux, Web Player, WebGL, VR(including Hololens), SteamOS, PS4, Playstation Vita, and Wii U.

It seems Unity is the winner in this case.

Unity 3D is known for it’s easy to use interface where new developers can start making games easily. Though Unreal Engine made many improvements in the latest update, they still take second place behind Unity 3D in terms of user experience.

Both interfaces are quite similar, with toolbars and settings within resizable & movable windows. Unreal’s user interface is  quite bloated and complex. It takes more time than Unity 3D in many aspects. Assets take a long time to import and save, and simple tasks require extra steps. Unity 3D is fast, and the interface is quick and responsive. It’s light and it can run on Windows XP (SP2), while UE4 needs at least Windows 7 64-bit. Though the final product can look nicer in Unreal than in Unity 3D, it can take more efforts especially for beginners.

Unreal Engine 4 has Blueprint visual scripting. A node-based scripting method right inside it. Technically you don’t need to write code. This is great for quickly prototyping levels, and you can even create entire games using the Blueprint. If you are not a programmer then you can build games with some limitations.

However, this facility is not available with Unity 3D and that’s a drawback.

When it comes to graphics, Unreal Engine 4 is way ahead from Unity 3D. From complex particle simulations systems to advanced dynamic lighting Unreal Engine has it all.  Unreal Engine 4 has the capabilities to really create any kind of visual style that you want in 2D or 3D. It’s always good to be able to have the option to push the graphics further if you choose to do so. However, with the upcoming Unity 3D version 5, it is expected to be near to Unreal Engine.

Both engines are amazing game creation tools, and similar in many ways. According to the parameters we discussed now you can easily decide which one to choose. However, as they are almost free,  you can download them both, try  out, and let us know in the comments.

We at ValueCoders, know how to develop games with Unity 3D. So if your are planning to hire Unity 3D developers, we can provide you assistance at low cost.|||

When it comes to game development engines you are mostly left with two choices. Here we will help you to choose discussing about unreal engine vs unity 3d