ASP.NET Core MVC is a very fascinating framework, most times developers love to stick to the tools they are already used to, which is great because it saves time and makes it easy to reuse some of your codes and components. With the coming of ASP.NET Core MVC there is a very good reason to upgrade, not just because the framework is cool but extremely easy to design modern applications with less complexity. ASP.NET Core MVC offers you a platform that is heavily extensible, the ability to twerk the framework to your desire yet with tight control over HTML and HTTP that gives you total control to decide the type of experience you want your user's to have.

Below are some of the great features that make ASP.NET Core MVC unique.

:  ASP.NET Core MVC is a very clean framework, it provides neat, standard - compliant markup output with it's inbuilt tag helpers and because you have tight control over HTML, ASP.NET Core MVC provides you a neat platform to craft simple and neat markups. ASP.NET Core MVC also makes it extremely easy to use most popular client side libraries like jQuery, Bootstrap and AngularJS. ASP.NET Core MVC has tight support for this libraries, and this makes development with this libraries not only neat but also very intuitive.

ASP.NET Core MVC also gives you tight control over HTTP, this tight control over the request that passed through the browser and server, makes it easy to decide not just how to improve the application performance but the overall user experience.

.NET Core is an open source framework, you can download the source codes and extend it's functionality to suit your project, but such cases are rare except in situations you're developing a very unique applications that requires some unique components and features. Also you can easily extend the default functionality of ASP.NET Core MVC component to suit your project or change the entire component with your own build. Because ASP.NET Core MVC are built on many independent components that can satisfy a .NET interface or that are built on abstract base class, this means that key components can easily be replaced with any of your implementations.

: Because ASP.NET Core MVC supports and encourage deep abstraction and separation of applications concerns , this makes it extremely easy to build a maintainable and testable application. ASP.NET Core MVC by default separates different application concerns into independent pieces. And also each part of ASP.NET Core MVC framework can easily be isolated and replaced for testing.

Before now ASP.NET is a window specific platform, meaning it can only be developed and deploy on only windows platform, this sets lots of limitation, but the emergency of .NET Core Framework changed that, .NET Core Framework support fully other platforms like Linux and OSX/Mac OS, both for development and deployment. .NET Core  makes it not only possible to deploy on cloud Containers like Docker but also easy.|||

