Every year at DockerCon, we expand the bounds of what Docker can do with new features and products. And every day, we see great new apps that are built on top of Docker. And yet, there’s always a few that stand out not just for being cool apps, but for pushing the bounds of what you can do with Docker.

This year we had two great apps that we featured in the Docker Cool Hacks closing keynote. Both hacks came from members of our Docker Captains program, a group of people from the Docker community who are recognized by Docker as very knowledgeable about Docker, and contribute quite a bit to the community.

The first Cool Hack was Play with Docker by Marcos Nils and Jonathan Leibiusky. Marcos and Jonathan actually were featured in the Cool Hacks session at DockerCon EU in 2015 for their work on a Container Migration Tool.

Play with Docker is a Docker playground that you can run in your browser.

Play with Docker’s architecture is a Swarm of Swarms, running Docker in Docker instances.

Running on pretty beefy hosts r3.4xlarge on AWS – Play with Docker is able to run about 3500 containers per host, only running containers as needed for a session. Play with Docker is completely open source, so you can run it on your own infrastructure. And they welcome contributions on their GitHub repo.

The second Cool Hack was Functions as a Service (FaaS) by Alex Ellis. FaaS is a framework for building serverless functions on Docker Swarm with first class support for metrics. Any UNIX process can be packaged as a function enabling you to consume a range of web events without repetitive boilerplate coding.

You can write serverless functions in any language in just a few lines of code and Alex provides dozens of sample functions for you to get started. FaaS has Prometheus metrics baked-in which means it can automatically scale your functions up and down for demand.

You can see the functions used in Alex’s demo in this Github repository: https://github. com/alexellis/faas-dockercon/

FaaS also comes with a convenient gateway tester that allows you to try out each of your functions directly in the browser.

Check out the video recording of the cool hack sessions below:

Learn more about our DockerCon 2017 cool hacks:|||

