With the advent of the latest computing technologies, machine learning (ML) today is vastly different from its past avatars. Earlier, it was consistently recognizing patterns and learning to perform specific tasks without needing to be programmed. In more recent times, machine learning is witnessing major disruption by relying on vast amounts of data to automate tasks and predict business outcomes accurately. Due to their exposure to newer sets of data, these models are now able to adapt independently. Learnings acquired from earlier computations and successfully present reliable and recurrent results and decisions. In a broader sense, machine learning is essentially about learning to do better in the future based on what was experienced in the past.

In modern times, there are really only a few problem areas where machine learning cannot be applied; it is practically everywhere, in business applications, sports, science and technology. Below are some of the many areas where machine learning is already being used as a force to reckon with:

In an increasingly automated world, dependency on manual processes are being drastically reduced, giving way to data science and machine learning. And this is simply the beginning.

According to Norwegian Software R&D Engineer & Data Scientist — Håkon Hapnes Strand: Listed below are some realistic future trends we are likely to witness, that are associated with machine learning:

Over the coming years, the demand for ML powered intelligence is seen as rising substantially in all types of end-use industries, specifically in the BSFI, retail, telecom, and manufacturing, in order to enhance the decision-making capability of machines used in these industries. This is truly ‘Back To The Future’. At Gamooga, we offer an omni-channel customer engagement platform backed by a powerful predictive intelligence engine. Get in touch with us to know more about our software and how it can help you!|||

With the advent of the latest computing technologies, machine learning (ML) today is vastly different from its past avatars. Earlier, it was consistently recognizing patterns and learning to perform…