Some of the key features of this unique product are as follows:-

One for All – With Motadata, it is possible to have a one platform for monitoring all network and security events across the IT infrastructure with unified dashboards to visualize key metrics for statistics such as high availability, performance and security of the infrastructure.

Voluminous – Motadata analytics platform is specially designed to meet speed with scale and context by processing over a billion events in less than 10 seconds on a single server.

Action-oriented – With Motadata, log management is provided across all devices, servers, applications and machine data to find actionable insights on security and other aspects.

Plugins all the way – Plugin based architecture which supports not only the existing infrastructure components but is also ready for any future components as well. The plug-n-play architecture enhances speed with quick app manager installation, processing and analytics.

Cost, Price & Money – Lower TCO and data retention for longer periods without any constraints are some of the offerings of Motadata.

Single Dashboard – Motadata comes with single Dashboard for all metrics for example CPU, memory and storage to name a few with comprehensive root cause analysis for all the performance bottlenecks. Flexibility and report customizations increase the speed and usability of the platform.

Notifications – With Motadata comes swift notifications for critical events using contextual alerts provide intuitive correlation across IT monitoring and log data and assist in pinpointing all the network bottlenecks and security threats before they become a business problem.

Collect & Monitor Everything – Too many tools leave no real control. Typically IT teams use multiple systems to monitor the hybrid infrastructure, which leads to information silos. Motadata is capable of processing and analyzing any kind of metric, network flow and log data using a single platform.

Correlation That Delivers Context – More often symptoms get manifested somewhere else very far from the actual root cause. Everybody sends alerts, but nobody provides context around that alert. An alert of high CPU utilization at 2 am is rather useless at 8 am in the morning. If you can’t see the snapshot of the state in real-time or historically, then you are very far from finding the real root cause and solving it.

Automate and Extend with Native Integrations – With native integration of PowerShell, SSH and third party APIs, quickly automate remediation. Download metric and log apps to instantly monitor everything from any source – metrics, network flow and logs.

Visualization & Analytics For Entire Team – Motadata packs a punch when it comes to processing any kind of data and presenting it in the most intuitive way for the user to visualize it in the way the user wants. The powerful analytics technology allows the user to get to the bottom of the problem instantly and take remedy actions.|||

Motadata is state of art IT management and log management platform that is build over Mindarray's flagship product Minder and power packed with new feature.