Seedstars World (Seedstars) have announced the addition of more countries to their fifth tour of Afrika in search of the continent's best seed-stage entrepreneurs in 2017. The additional countries include the likes of Cameroon, Sudan, Zambia, Mauritius, Madagascar, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and more.

With these additions, it takes the number of countries Seedstars will be travelling to in Afrika to over 23 in 2017.

“We have been absolutely humbled by the talent we witnessed being showcased on the continent. Our tremendous growth has been fueled by our amazing local Seedstars Ambassadors, our partners and many others who truly see the value in collaborating with these startups. While we are, at the core, an investment company, our focus this year is not only to support the winner of each local event, but support more entrepreneurs in the ecosystem financially, through skills development and working on strategic relationships between the entrepreneurs and our partners." said Claudia Makadristo, Regional Manager for Africa at Seedstars World.

Added to this announcement, Seedstars have also said that they will be accepting applications from seed-stage startups in South Africa, Mozambique , Democratic Republic of Congo , Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Mali, Senegal, Cameroon, Rwanda, Angola, Zambia, Mauritius, Madagascar, Botswana and Zimbabwe.

Applying startups must be less than two years old, have raised less than $500,000 in funding and have a minimum viable product, ideally with existing traction. Another additional criteria is that the startup must have potential to scale regionally and globally.

Apart from the tour and seed-stage entrepreneurs competition, Seedstars has other initiatives it runs on the continent like such as the Seedspace growth program and the Seedstars Academy.

Seedstars is a Switzerland based group of companies which have the goal of "impacting people’s lives in emerging markets through technology and entrepreneurship".|||

