SQL Server offers graph database capabilities to model many-to-many relationships. The graph relationships are integrated into Transact-SQL and receive the benefits of using SQL Server as the foundational database management system.

A graph database is a collection of nodes (or vertices) and edges (or relationships). A node represents an entity (for example, a person or an organization) and an edge represents a relationship between the two nodes that it connects (for example, likes or friends). Both nodes and edges may have properties associated with them. Here are some features that make a graph database unique:

There is nothing a graph database can achieve, which cannot be achieved using a relational database. However, a graph database can make it easier to express certain kind of queries. Also, with specific optimizations, certain queries may perform better. Your decision to choose one over the other can be based on following factors:

We are starting to add graph extension to SQL Server, to make storing and querying graph data easier. Following features are introduced in the first release.

Transact-SQL extensions will allow users to create node or edge tables. Both nodes and edges can have properties associated to them. Since, nodes and edges are stored as tables, all the operations that are supported on relational tables are supported on node or edge table. Here is an example:



Nodes and Edges are stored as tables

New clause is introduced to support pattern matching and multi-hop navigation through the graph. The function uses ASCII-art style syntax for pattern matching. For example:

Graph extensions are fully integrated in SQL Server engine. We use the same storage engine, metadata, query processor, etc. to store and query graph data. This enables users to query across their graph and relational data in a single query. Users can also benefit from combining graph capabilities with other SQL Server technologies like columnstore, HA, R services, etc. SQL graph database also supports all the security and compliance features available with SQL Server.

Users benefit from existing tools and ecosystem that SQL Server offers. Tools like backup and restore, import and export, BCP just work out of the box. Other tools or services like SSIS, SSRS or PowerBI will work with graph tables, just the way they work with relational tables.|||

