Are you looking for some effective AdSense alternatives for monetizing your blog?

AdSense has a good potential for earning if your traffic is from the western countries or has a good number of visitors.

However, you might want to have some other sources of income that can earn you a good amount other than AdSense on your blog.

If your AdSense is banned or you are in a niche that doesn’t get approval by AdSense, this article will help you with similar and even better-earning streams.

If you’re wondering why you should look for AdSense alternatives in the first place here are some reasons that might help you:

In case you want to continue with your AdSense, you could, of course, use AdSense along with these ad programs in order to supplement your revenue.

Ready for the best AdSense alternatives?

Here we go!

In this section, we’ll discuss about making money with AdSense alternatives that work on the same format of monetization as AdSense (displaying ads).

The programs discussed here require little or no involvement from your side apart from initial ad optimization.

The payout of these ad platforms is more or less similar to AdSense and has no scope for scaling in terms of revenue.

It is best if you’re just starting out and have no option to try other monetization methods.

If you’re looking for AdSense alternatives that can boost your income manifold, be sure to check out the second section.

I can go on and on with other CPM alternatives for AdSense replacements, but these are the ones that have proven to be a good replacement for Google’s AdSense Ad program.

Now, let’s head on to some better monetization methods other than AdSense.

In this section, we will discuss the AdSense alternatives that have huge opportunities for growth rather than the display ads that we discussed above.

Affiliate marketing is the process of referring your readers/followers to a product/service you think would benefit them and earn a commission from the former without having your readers pay a dime extra.

Here is a detailed guide on how to get started and become successful in affiliate marketing.

Please Note: Affiliate marketing isn’t a set and forget process like AdSense, but they pay a huge income that AdSense can never have. So it's worth a try.

Let’s head over some of the best affiliate programs you can join and promote to make more money than AdSense.

If you’re looking for a good AdSense alternative that can earn you more than your AdSense revenue, the above products can help you.

For those wondering what to do after AdSense ban, I’d like to say that this is where the real game begins.

Use any of the above contextual ads alternative to AdSense (like media.net) or start affiliate marketing that makes a huge profit with the traffic that you have.

If you’ve any doubts or issues with getting started with these better monetization strategies than AdSense, do let me know in the comments below.|||

