Allrecipes believes that the email addresses and passwords of some of our members who logged into Allrecipes.com before June 2013 may have been intercepted by an unauthorized third party.

We cannot determine for certain who all was affected. Out of an abundance of caution we are treating all Allrecipes.com members who logged into Allrecipes.com prior to June 2013 as though they were affected.

We believe that email addresses and allrecipes.com passwords created and used to login into the site prior to June 2013 are the only information that may have been involved.

What is being done to prevent future breaches?? We make regular system upgrades. We have no evidence that any information has been intercepted since June 2013. Out of an abundance of caution, we are recommending that members who registered or logged into allrecipes.com prior to June 2013 promptly change their password if they have not done so since June 2013. We are taking other steps as well and will continue to work diligently to deter unauthorized activity.

What if I have changed my allrecipes.com password since June 2013? If you have changed your member password after June 2013, we have no reason to suspect that this incident affected your current member password. It is still good practice, however, to change your password from time to time and to not use the same password on multiple websites.

How do I change my password? You may follow this link: https://allrecipes.com/account/forgotpassword/ to have a password reset email sent to the email address associated with your member account. Follow these steps to change your password: Sign into your account by clicking on "Sign In" or "Create a profile" at the top of the page (or the person icon in a mobile browser) in the upper right corner, and enter your email address and password where indicated. If you are already signed into your account, skip to step 3. Once signed in, click the drop down menu next to your username (or your member icon in a mobile browser) in the upper right corner of the page, and click "Settings" Once on the settings page, enter your desired new password in the indicated field, and again to confirm Scroll to the bottom of the page and click "Save Settings". Your Allrecipes.com password has now been changed.

If you have forgotten your password, please follow this link: https://allrecipes.com/account/forgotpassword/ to have a password reset email sent to the email address associated with your member account.

What steps should I take for my other accounts? Internet security experts recommend using different passwords for each account and creating passwords that are hard to guess as hackers will sometimes use passwords associated with one account to try and access other accounts. Therefore, Allrecipes is recommending that members who receive the allrecipes.com password change email notification also change passwords for all other accounts for which they use the same password.

I use Social Sign In (Facebook or Google+) to log in to Allrecipes. Is my password safe? Allrecipes did not implement social sign until 2014, so accounts where members are using social sign in are not among those affected by this incident. If you had an Allrecipes account prior to June 2013 and linked your account to a social log in post 2014, your password has already been updated, and is housed with the social sign in provider you use.|||

