Worried that too many Ontarians are getting priced out by fast-rising rents and surging home prices, Premier Kathleen Wynne unveiled sweeping measures Thursday aimed at cooling red-hot markets she admits have become "a problem."

Wynne said it's hoped the 16 measures — most of which will be contained in legislation that must first pass before they proceed — will curb housing costs that are rising "way faster than people's paycheques."

"When young people can't afford their own apartment or can't imagine ever owning their own home, we know we have a problem," she said. "And when the rising cost of housing is making more and more people insecure about their future, and about their quality of life in Ontario, we know we have to act."

Many of the measures were reported earlier today by CBC's Queen's Park reporter, Mike Crawley, before they were outlined by Wynne.

Toronto Mayor John Tory has been calling for a tax on vacant homes, and Wynne says Ontario will give Toronto and other interested municipalities the power to impose such a tax to encourage owners to sell or rent such spaces.

The moves come as Ontario residents — particularly those in larger cities  — find themselves struggling to keep up with rents and home prices that have far outpaced wage increases.

The average price of detached houses in the Greater Toronto Area rose to $1.21 million last month, up 33.4 per cent from a year ago. The news is no better in the Toronto rental market where some tenants are facing massive and sudden rent increases. Earlier this month, CBC Toronto reported about a tenant in a two-bedroom condo in Liberty Village — the same neighbourhood where Wynne made Thursday's announcement — jump from $1,660 to $3,320.

Wynne was asked how effective the measures will be when demand for homes continues to outstrip supply and bidding wars on downtown homes are commonplace.

"We are not interested in controlling the market," said Wynne. "That is not the aim. But we do believe that there is a need for interventions right now to calm what is going on, to put protections in place."

Wynne said she would not rule out other measures if she sees the need.

"Right now we believe these are the measures needed to help people find a place to live that they can afford," she said.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, speaking in Toronto Thursday as part of a Bloomberg series held at the Art Gallery of Ontario, was asked if there was a housing bubble in the city.

"We're looking at a time of pressures on housing that need to be alleviated," he told Bloomberg editor-in-chief John Micklethwait. He said the federal government is investing more than $11 billion to build more affordable housing and rental units, and that his government would "work with cities to create stability."

"People need to afford the homes in the cities that they work," he added.|||

Worried that too many Ontarians are getting priced out by fast-rising rents and surging home prices, Premier Kathleen Wynne unveils sweeping measures aimed at cooling red-hot markets she admits have become "a problem."