This is a response to this NY Times article.

The premise of the article is that Facebook is beating everyone by copying their features and “force a coexistence” between them, with the example being Snapchat.

For me however, this article misses the point of why Facebook isn’t attractive to the users that Snapchat has captured. For a young person today, being on Facebook is a liability, there is tangable damage to being in it.

If you are at school or college, it is a given that a post on Facebook that is negative about the school or a teacher, anything that is taken as irresponsible or negative to the school’s image will affect you in real life. They find one student and follow The Network down.

Future employers can use your Facebook to determine if you get a job, based off completely subjective principles, going back to when you were a teenager or even a child until they find something immature or irresponsible that disqualifies you from the recruitment process. Well, the solution for that is to lock down your account, restrict your posts to just your friends, right? Well, no. Not with The Network. If employers can’t look at your profile, they’ll look at your friends and base their ‘personality profile of you’ based off that.

The Network also means that you can’t have any separation of concerns, your family will be suggested you as a friend, your coworkers, your school friends, your bosses. No kid wants their family on social media while they make mistakes and try and figure the big wide world out.

The Network also means that any data you give Facebook is kept, anaylised, mined and used to further progress The Network. This by itself isn’t a problem, we use countless services that do the same thing, hell, I’m sure Snapchat do it. The problem is that it feels like Facebook is doing it.

Snapchat is a safe haven for creative, throw away content that isn’t indexable, searchable, doesn’t have a social graph or a permissions model. Facebook is an incredible social tool, but tools aren’t that much fun.|||

The premise of the article is that Facebook is beating everyone by copying their features and “force a coexistence” between them, with the example being Snapchat. For me however, this article misses…