Shopify Inc. (SHOP)(SHOP.TO), the leading cloud-based, multi-channel commerce platform designed for small and medium-sized businesses, today announced its new free Chip and Swipe card reader for in-person selling. With Europay, MasterCard and Visa (EMV) support, the new Chip and Swipe reader lets any Shopify merchant in the United States sell offline in a fast and secure way. The card reader was launched at Unite, Shopify’s annual partner and developer conference.

This Smart News Release features multimedia. View the full release here: http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20170420005468/en/

Full Power of Shopify Ecosystem

Shopify makes every aspect of starting, running and growing a business easier. With the new Chip and Swipe reader, business owners can have the full power of Shopify behind them when selling in-person. The reader seamlessly connects with a seller’s Shopify store, eliminating the need for multiple systems to run a single business. Merchants benefit from the ability to manage their entire business from just one place and do not need to spend hours updating in-person sales with those made on their online store.

“Shopify is already known as an industry leading ecommerce provider, and with our new Chip and Swipe hardware, we are demonstrating our deep investment in the retail world,” said Craig Miller, Chief Product Officer at Shopify. “We’re proud to launch a beautiful, entry-level product that lets anyone sell in-person. Now any of our merchants can use Shopify to power every aspect of their business, at every interaction.”

Designed for the Entrepreneur

The first piece of hardware created in-house by Shopify, the new reader’s design was directly informed by extensive research and user-experience feedback from our merchants.

The Chip and Swipe reader is made for selling at festivals, pop-ups and markets. Unlike other readers that must plug into a headphone jack, the Shopify Chip and Swipe reader features wireless functionality and an extra-long battery life. The card reader was also developed to grow with business owners as they move from casual selling to a permanent retail location, and includes a sturdy base that allows the reader to sit on a table or counter top.

An industry first, the Chip and Swipe reader will be offered at no charge for both new merchants and existing Shopify merchants without a Shopify point-of-sale (POS) solution, enabling anyone to start selling in person.

EMV Compliant

The new reader makes it easy for all Shopify merchants to be EMV compliant and reduce their vulnerability to fraud. EMV chip acceptance decreases the risk of financial losses for business owners, while protecting customers’ data. For businesses with more established retail spaces, Shopify also offers a Tap, Chip and Swipe card reader that supports EMV and contactless payments, including Android Pay and Apple Pay.

Shopify’s new Chip and Swipe reader is now available for pre-order by merchants in the United States and shipping starts June 2017: https://www.shopify.com/pos/credit-card-reader

Visit our Partner blog to see what else Shopify launched at Unite: https://www.shopify.com/partners/blog

About Shopify

Shopify is the leading cloud-based, multi-channel commerce platform designed for small and medium-sized businesses. Merchants can use the software to design, set up, and manage their stores across multiple sales channels, including web, mobile, social media, marketplaces, brick-and-mortar locations, and pop-up shops. The platform also provides merchants with a powerful back-office and a single view of their business. The Shopify platform was engineered for reliability and scale, making enterprise-level technology available to businesses of all sizes. Shopify currently powers hundreds of thousands of businesses in approximately 175 countries and is trusted by brands such as Tesla, Nestle, GE, Red Bull, Kylie Cosmetics, and many more.|||

Shopify Inc. , the leading cloud-based, multi-channel commerce platform designed for small and medium-sized businesses, today announced its new free Chip and Swipe card reader for in-person selling.