China’s export of lithium ion batteries was showing different trends in January 2017. Also, the export volume of lithium ion battery materials has developed different, while most of them witnessed a decline in a month on month and year on year comparison.



As the global lithium-ion battery market is booming, so are the exports of lithium materials by countries with high lithium reserves. One of the biggest players in the lithium market has always been China, sitting on giant reserves of raw materials like lithium.

However, the export volume of China’s major lithium-ion batteries has developed differently in January 2017, according to . China exported 124.66 million lithium-ion storage batteries in January, which represents a drop of 11.98% from December 2016, but is an increase of 11.29% from January 2016.

The export trend of lithium ion primary batteries, as well as battery packs, on the other hand, showed decreases in a month on month and year on year comparison. 103.54 million units have been exported in January 2017, what shows a decline by 10.27% compared to December 2016 and almost 60% to January 2016.

The global lithium-ion battery export value in 2015 has reached USD15.3 billion in 2015, which represents an increase of 7.3% compared to 2014. The highest amount hereby came from the countries of Asia, accounting for more than 84% of all exports.

China has been the leading exporter of lithium ion batteries again with a value of USD6.5 million, or 42.5% of the global export value. Following are other Asian countries like Japan, South Korea, and Hong Kong. The countries with the highest export value of lithium ion batteries outside Asia are the USA with a share of 5.2% and Germany, accounting for 3.1%.

Looking at the net export value for lithium ion batteries, China is also ranking first, followed by South Korea and Japan. To be more specific, China had positive a net export from 2012 to 2015 by USD3.2 billion. That represents a boost of 541.2%. South Koreas surplus just grew 1.7% in the same time, while Japan even witnessed decrease by 21%.

The five largest global exporting companies of lithium ion batteries are all based in Asia, namely Sanyo Electric (Japan), Samsung SDI (South Korea), Anco Macao (Macau), Black and Decker Suzhou (China), and Chervon Limited (Hong Kong).

What’s more, resulting in the withdraw of China’s government from subsidies for the electric-vehicle industry, prices for lithium ion are supposed to be reduced up to 40%. However, the price reduction is likely to only affect lithium-ion manufacturers, but not lead-acid battery producers, because lead is marked by significantly higher cost share of the production.

China is not only the major lithium ion battery exporter worldwide but also an important exporter of materials for lithium ion batteries. According to Tranalysis, the country exported large amounts of lithium carbonate in January 2017, namely 2,162.39 tonnes. This represents a fall by 12.79% to December, but a year on year increase by 34.28%.

Other important export materials for lithium ion batteries are lithium ferrous phosphate, lithium nickel cobalt manganite, ethylene polymer battery separators, and artificial graphite. All of the materials have witnessed decreasing exports in January. The largest drop was seen for lithium ferrous phosphate, which export dropped down by 65.64% compared to December 2016. However, compared to the same period in 2016, exports of lithium carbonate and lithium nickel cobalt manganate have shown increasing trends.

Lithium carbonate was exported mainly to Japan, accounting for over 70% of the total share. The main export destination of lithium ferrous phosphate was France. The export share to this country was 82.57%. Exports of propylene polymer battery separators went half to South Korea. The only material that showed a more balanced and spread export destination scheme was ethylene polymer battery separators. The main three export destinations have been Vietnam, Thailand, and South Korea.

Tranalysis is an intelligence and analysis provider on import/export data covering over 15 industries in China. For more trade information of batteries, including Import and Export analysis as well as Manufacturer to Buyer Tracking, contact our experts in trade analysis to get your answers today.

For more information about Tranalysis, please visit our or get in touch with us directly by emailing or calling +86-20-37616606.|||

Tranalysis is a Global Trade Information Platform that provides analysis and trade data on import/export markets around the world.