As an economic system founded on the idea of a private sphere — consisting of private individuals who own private property and make private profit in private markets — capitalism is assumed to protect individual privacy. The sanctity of the private realm allegedly ensures maximum freedom for the individual, as producers and consumers are liberated from unwanted interference from the state and nosy neighbors.

Capitalism’s detractors have long decried its tendency to hollow out the commons and push everyone into their private bubbles, but its supporters celebrate this atomization. “Civilization,” wrote Ayn Rand in 1943, “is the progress toward a society of privacy. The savage’s whole existence is public, ruled by the laws of his tribe. Civilization is the process of setting man free from men.” From this perspective, capitalism’s emphasis on the private sphere and the resultant privacy made it the world’s great civilizer.

As early as the 1970s, however, the bond between capitalism and individual privacy was becoming unstuck. In 1977, the right-wing legal jurist Richard Posner put forward his “economic theory of privacy,” eventually publishing it in a paper in, aptly, 1984. There, he argued that individual privacy hindered capitalism by interrupting the free flow of information that markets need to be efficient. Posner concluded that “people should not — on economic grounds in any event — have a right to conceal material facts about themselves.”

Posner was writing for , the law journal at the University of Chicago, the epicenter of the neoliberal storm that was spreading across the world. Milton Friedman was one of Posner’s closest colleagues, and Posner himself is often included under the Chicago School umbrella. Posner’s capitalist roots — with their endless exaltation of the private individual — made his arguments against individual privacy all the more surprising. The love affair between privacy and capitalism, long taken for granted by dove-eyed liberals, was revealed to be the shallowest of relationships: a marriage of convenience that was no longer convenient.

In the digital age, this relationship has become all the more fractious. A new form of capitalism has emerged on the Internet, variously referred to as informational capitalism, digital capitalism, or surveillance capitalism. Personal information is the lifeblood of the new economy: companies collect their users’ data to sell it to advertisers and generate revenue. The more companies know about individuals, the better they can target their advertisements, boost their “conversion rates,” and rake in profits.

And make no mistake, there’s a lot of money to be made. In the third quarter of 2016, a total of $17.6 billion was spent on digital advertising, a 20 percent rise from the previous year.

Facebook and Google have become a duopoly in this new context, accounting for about half of the total; of the $2.9 billion in growth over the last year, the pair was responsible for a remarkable 99 percent of it. In the process, they have become the two fastest growing corporations in the history of capitalism, with an ability to collect, monitor, and sell data on users in ways other companies can only imagine. Their collective net worth is $800 billion, more than the total GDP of the Netherlands.

Both their business models show that, in informational capitalism, privacy no longer impedes profit: privacy prevents profit. The belief that individuals should be allowed to control their personal information now contradicts capitalism’s profit-making process. Far from sheltering private individuals from external interference, as Ayn Rand imagined, companies now want to know individuals as well as they know themselves. Corporations strive for perfect transparency, so that, in the words of Google’s chief economist, Hal Varian, the search engine will “know what you want and tell it to you before you ask the question.”

We might take solace in the fact that these companies don’t carry the force of the state — that if their intention is to target advertisements more effectively and sell data more profitably, it also might redound to the benefit of the user.

Many people enjoy using a service that knows them well and recognizes their personal habits, preferences, and interests. The quality of their experience increases with the amount of personal information they turn over — and who doesn’t want better services?

But dangers do exist. Although much of the data that tech firms collect is frivolous, we should be wary of the aggregation effect: taken individually, each piece seems innocuous; taken together, an intimate picture of our person is revealed.

Yet even this does not get at the heart of the problem. The greatest threat lies not so much in what corporations know as in how they use that knowledge. The services they offer are entrancing, replete with conveniences and new possibilities, tailored to our every need. But when we cede so much personal information to corporations, we grant them incredible power and responsibility. Knowledge may mean power, but information often means domination.

And since the first large-scale data collection efforts in the nineteenth century, companies have been using technology to exert massive social control.|||

