is a professional Titanium tube manufacturers and Titanium material suppliers from China. BF Dongguan has been in the titanium business since 2005 and developed its reputation among the best Chinese titanium tubing suppliers. With unlimited numbers of welded titanium tube and un-welded titanium tube products of different specifications which have been supplied to our global customers from our BF Dongguan Industry in China. BF Dongguan being a titanium tube manufacturer produces titanium semi-finished products for most common sizes, include titanium alloy steel supplies like plate, bar, titanium tube, foil and wire, and produce titanium alloy pipes, fasteners, titanium flanges, titanium alloy steel, grade 5 titanium tube, Grade 5 titanium alloy, welded titanium tube, bicycle parts, racing parts, sport parts, deep hole parts, stamped parts, casting parts and precision machined parts according to customer’s drawings and requirements.

BFDongguan Industry is well known as titanium tubing suppliers who provide value added services to its customers, such as plate shearing welding, water-jet cutting, laser-cutting, EDM-cutting, bending, milling and turning.

BF Dongguan Titanium material stock like CP (Gr1-Gr4) titanium tubes, titanium alloy steel sheets and titanium alloy (Gr5, Gr7, Gr12) plates, Grade 5 titanium tubes, Grade 5 titanium alloy, welded titanium tube. These titanium alloy plates are manufactured according to ASTM B265 strictly with very good surface and flatness. Stock thickness small to 0.5mm, and all titanium alloy steel plates can be cut according customer requirements. BF Dongguan specialty is Gr5(Ti6Al4v) thin titanium tubing sheet, thickness can be 0.1mm. If your required titanium plates are not available on our titanium stock list, we will arrange those titanium products. All our titanium alloy steel sheets are rolled in our high-tech plate manufacturing factory. BF Dongguan known for its quality, reliability, and satisfaction and we are premium Chinese titanium sheets supplier.

BF Dongguan has been one of the premium titanium material suppliers from China having titanium tubing products in our stock. We are titanium tubing suppliers of CP (Gr1, Gr2) titanium and titanium alloy (Gr9, Gr5, Gr7, Gr12) seamless and welded titanium tubes and pipes, and micro titanium tubes. Grade 5 titanium tube, titanium alloy steel, welded titanium tube, Grade 5 titanium alloy, and most sizes CP titanium tubes and diverse titanium materials are available in our stocks. BFDongguan specialties are Gr9 (Ti 3AL2.5V), Gr5(Ti6Al4V), Gr7(Ti-0.2Pd), Gr12(Ti-0.3Mo-0.8Ni) titanium tube and large diameter seamless pipes. Gr5 tubes have very high strength, which are widely used in oil industry and used as protecting shell in ordinary industry. Gr7 and Gr12 pipes are famous for its anti-corrosion status, which are widely used in chemical industry. Grade 5 titanium tube, Gr9 titanium tubes are widely used in building titanium tubing frames. Our welded tubes are made from titanium plate according to ASTM B265, all the welding seams are tested by X-Ray, and hydraulic test when tubes are finished. We are able to supply 6 meters long welded titanium tubes only with one straight seam.

BF Dongguan Industry is a reliable titanium tube manufacturers and is considered as best titanium materials suppliers having various supplies like Grade 5 titanium tube, Grade 5 titanium alloy, titanium alloy steel, welded titanium tube, titanium tubing products like titanium flanges according to EN1092, ASME B16.5 or special flanges according to customer’s drawing. Flange form can be Weld Neck, Slip-On, Blind, Socket Wild, Threaded, Lap Joint, Ring Type Joint, Integral Flange, Welding Neck Collar, Welding-On Collar. Fittings include Elbows, Tees, Reducer, Cross, Cap, Boss, Coupling, Bushing, Plug, and Nipple.

BFDongguan have a workshop focus on titanium tubes machining parts and different Titanium material suppliers as well. We are authentic Titanium fastener manufacturer; having titanium fasteners, titanium alloy steel, titanium tubing bicycle parts, grade 5 titanium tube, grade 5 titanium alloy, welded titanium tube, racing parts and other machined parts according to drawings. Our fasteners are machined according to DIN, ISO, ASME standards or customer’s drawing and small size CP titanium tubing and titanium alloy Gr5(Ti6Al4V) fasteners are our specialty, the size we supply can be small to M1.0. Regarding bicycle parts and racing parts, we produce titanium alloy fasteners for bicycles, motorcycle and racing cars, stems, head set, pedal axis, etc, please get more from our titanium sport parts page. Besides these parts, we also produce other precision parts according to customers’ drawings.

If you are looking for titanium tube manufacturer from China in order to buy quality titanium tubing semi-finished products then you should come to BFDongguan.com. BFDongguan offers titanium materials such as titanium fasteners, titanium flanges and titanium alloy steel, titanium tubes, grade 5 titanium tube, grade 5 titanium alloy, welded titanium tube, titanium parts for sports, and other titanium precision machined parts, BFDongguan is a titanium material suppliers which can be absolutely your best choice when it comes to titanium products. Our dedicated staff will work closely with our customers as a very reliable partner to provide high quality products, solutions and services. We deliver beyond you expectations. BFDongguan.com are world’s leading Grade 5 titanium tubes and titanium tubing supplier from China and export to a good number of European and American countries and looking forward to expand our business circle globally.|||

BFDongguan are Titanium material & tubing suppliers & manufacturers that offers Grade 5 titanium alloy & tube, welded titanium tube, and Titanium alloy steel.