Judge tosses OPT and F1 Visa Case but, Challenges Loom for the Program

Recently, a District Court Judge tossed out Washtech’s case against F1 Visa holders, specifically challenging the OPT and STEM OPT case. Speaking with few students who are planning to study in the United States, the sense of relief was palpable. However, the relief may be short-lived.

OPT and specifically STEM OPT faces significant challenges from the Trump administration. STEM OPT issue has taken center stage as critics claim that STEM OPT like the H4-EAD program was created under lobbying pressure from Tech Industry. They also claim that these programs are a clever way to bypass the H1B caps. With H1B program likely to undergo significant changes in the next few months, it is almost certain that STEM OPT program will be significantly reformed or repealed.

Recently, Alex Karp, CEO of Palantir quietly signalled to Silicon Valley that business clout may not always lead to political clout. He emphasized that “Silicon Valley is marching off a Cliff”. He is implicitly signalling that the era of lobbying freedom and effectiveness that Silicon Valley enjoyed for decades may becoming to an end. Silicon Valley relies on highly skilled workforce and restrictions on employment of foreign workers is not something they like to deal with as status quo.

There are opponents of the OPT and STEM OPT in the Congress, specifically Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley. In 2015, he raised his concerns to the DHS in an open letter now posted on his website. As we discussed in great detail in article “Trump Uncertainty Principle- Impact on Foreign Guest Worker Programs”, GAO reports can get buried within the bureaucratic red tape, however, even older reports play a major role during policy revamps. As we predicted few months back in this post, GAO reports on H1B had suggested major policy and enforcement shifts Everything highlighted in the GAO report on H and L Visa abuse has driven recent policy changes by USCIS, DHS and Department of State.

GAO was asked by Senator Chuck Grassley to review the management of OPT Visas. As per GAO website,

Specifically quoting the 2014 GAO Report on OPT abuse titled “STUDENT AND EXCHANGE VISITOR PROGRAM“, the Senator highlighted the following  :

i) The (GAO) report found that foreign students, sometimes aided by school officials, were abusing the Optional Practical Training program to acquire unauthorized employment in the United States.  In addition, the report said that the federal government’s inability to track the foreign students in the program resulted in a national security risk.

ii) Under the proposed new regulations, a foreign student could work in the United States post-graduation on a student visa for a total of up to six years, completely outside of the non-immigrant employment-based visa programs, and their associated worker protections, established by Congress.

iii) Grassley had requested the Government Accountability Office report after hearing concerns that employers were targeting for recruitment foreign students with Optional Practical Training and learning that there was an atypical upward trend in participation.

The GAO report after carrying out a detailed analysis highlighted various areas of concern. Some of them are cited below.

i) ICE field agents identified cases where school officials used loopholes in the program to legally recommended OPT for foreign students outside their areas of study.

ii) ICE has not consistently collected the information and developed the monitoring mechanisms needed to help ensure foreign students comply with OPT requirements, thereby maintaining their legal status in the United States. The systemic problems in the OPT program create a National Security Risk.

iii) ICE does not have complete information on which foreign students approved for OPT are actively working and whether employment is related to their studies, per ICE regulations.

iii) GAO’s analysis of ICE data on students engaged in all types of OPT indicates that 38 percent (48,642 of 126,796) of student records do not contain an employer’s name. Furthermore, the data does not include the date on which students granted authorization began working. ICE does not require that students and school officials report this information.

While majority of students come to the United States with honorable intentions to get good education and build their future, there are others whose intentions are not so noble. It is debatable whether you consider who come to the United States to study with a overarching aim of immigrating as noble. Many students who fall in the second category take major loans to study in America, intend to get employed as soon as possible so that they can pay off their loans and eventually file for the “Green Card”.

Critics have no complaints with the first category of students who usually finish their studies, go back home and pursue great careers with the American Degree advantage. Critics complain the second category of students are increasing in numbers as OPT and STEM OPT extension in effect bankrolls their degree programs. In addition, the visa mills schools which allows students to vanish legally while supposed to be studying in the classroom increases the level of the problem. Opponents of the program have a real dislike for those who get enrolled in dodgy universities, do not attend the program as per schedule, work under the table with dodgy employer (s) and eventually become illegal aliens in the United States. In the last few years, such universities have come under increased scanner of the Department of Justice and DHS. Notably, an Indian Newspaper wrote about this problem in this article few years back titled “‘University of Manavallu’: In Silicon Valley, a dodgy Chinese-Telugu Alliance“.

As if, the Indian Staffing companies who had abused the H1B Visa had not done enough damage, these headline news about dodgy universities created more anti-immigrant sentiment in the country. The more notable cases of these universities were Herguan University and Tri-Valley University. Founders of both these Universities were imprisoned for Fraud. The FBI even went out of the way to set up a fake university to understand the extent of such fraud. One can expect all Universities to come under increased scrutiny in many ways. Scrutiny of the course structure and course categories right across to how the I-20 is issued and OPT is issued will come under major scrutiny in the next few months. With Jeff Sessions heading the Department of Justice, these investigative actions may already be underway. Students should be very careful to evaluate the universities and the programs as changes are imminent.

Since the GAO report was released and more recently, USCIS Service Centers have been rejecting applications for STEM OPT due to mismatch between the school’s name for the degree and the CIP Codes.  One can expect more scrutiny of Academic Programs and Schools which have not changed the course curriculum, however changed the CIP Codes to allow students to be granted OPT and STEM OPT Extensions. Enhanced scrutiny of the institutions and various programs may increase denials and refusals of OPT and STEM extensions.

Revocation of STEM OPT through “Comment and Rule-Making” Process

The new administration has not provided any clarity on whether they want to revoke or repeal STEM OPT. However, they have provided enough peripheral indications that they are actively considering changes in the STEM OPT as well as the H4-EAD spouse visas. We have already explained the “Comment & Rulemaking Process” elsewhere. We expect sudden policy shift around STEM OPT Extension in the next few months.

It is clear that DHS and USCIS are likely to examine more closely the abuse of F1-Visa, abuse of OPT and STEM OPT and consider the negative impact of these programs on American Students and Workers. Organizations who propose more stringent measures on OPT have also written about potential abuse and we expect them to rise from the shadows to increase focus on these issues.

As discussed in the commentary on the Washtech Vs DHS case, the plaintiffs made an allegation that due to the tax advantage employer (s) enjoy while hiring OPT students, American workers experience “discrimination”. Employer (s) who hire OPT Students get tax breaks for hiring them versus hiring resident college graduates.

The plaintiff alleged that the F1 Visa students being classified as non-resident aliens allowed their employer (s) to avoid paying the Medicare and Social Security taxes. In effect, this tax advantage placed American workers at risk of “Unfair Competition Injury”.  The government countered this claim attributing the tax differential advantage to the Acts earlier passed by Congress and not by DHS. DHS claimed that on this basis, the plaintiff’s have no standing to challenge the OPT rule due to influence of third party (Congress Act) actions. The court agreeing with the government, emphasized that the tax rules created for F1 Visa students were created 50 years before the OPT Rule was created. On this basis, they claimed that Washtech claims of “Unfair Competition Injury” from OPT Rule are misplaced and the motion was denied.

There is a real issue here and Congress could act to make changes to the Tax Code removing these advantages. The new administration could indirectly stifle the OPT by removing these tax breaks. In short, increased compliance and zero tax breaks will eventually force employer (s) to hire resident graduates. These tax breaks are also available to OPT student themselves for the duration of the employment. Making changes to both sides of the tax structure i.e. for students as well as for employer (s) will translate into more taxes collected for the government. More tax revenue, reduced compliance burden to monitor erring employer(s) and OPT workers, more American workers could be hired, would perfectly align with the new administration’s agendas.  Currently the OPT Status is issued by the SEVP listed universities. If the administration sets up a new organization within Department of Labour or DHS to issue the OPT Status, it further has the potential to reduce the number of OPT’s issued.

Jeff Sessions, the Attorney General had mentioned in 2015 that “OPT for F–1 visa students is “a backdoor method for replacing American workers”. In a proposed legislation released in 2015 by him and Ted Cruz titled “Americans Jobs First Act”, they had clearly highlighted their disdain for the OPT program (both OPT and the 17 months STEM OPT program). We have cited below one of the key proposals in the Act. The act was never passed, but, all indications are that the components of the proposed act will be implemented directly or indirectly through policy changes .

In a 2015 memo from Senator Jeff Sessions to the Republicans, titled ” Immigration Handbook for the New Republican Majority“, the disdain for OPT is very clear. Mentioning a report from the “Economic Policy Institute”, the handbook emphasizes that OPT is putting American STEM students at disadvantage. In one of the most thorough papers on the subject, the Economic Policy Institute notes the large disparity between how many qualified students that the U.S. graduates for specialized fields and the number that receive jobs in those fields:

“U.S. employers have access to the world’s largest body of STEM students… U.S. students make up one-third of the entire global population of high-performers on tests of science knowledge… for STEM graduates, the supply exceeds the number hired each year by nearly two to one, depending on the field of study. Even in engineering, U.S. colleges have historically produced about 50 percent more graduates than are hired into engineering jobs each year [while] that share [is] even higher in recent years… Of those graduates with the most IT-relevant education, a large share report they were unable to find an IT job while others found IT jobs to be paying lower wages or offering less attractive working conditions and career prospects than other, non-STEM jobs.”

Basis the above, it is our premise that OPT, specifically STEM OPT is not out of the woods yet. We believe that big changes are coming to the F1/OPT/STEM OPT program. These changes could be direct as repeal/modification through Congress Legislation, or through Presidential Executive Order. These changes could also come indirectly through indirect tightening and enforcement of the various existing rules.

These changes will significantly impact the future prospects of currently enrolled students and those who aim to head to the United States for higher education. Existing F1 Visa students, OPT students planning to migrate to STEM OPT and STEM OPT holder migrating to H1B may not get immediately affected, but, significantly uncertainty looms for them. As such, the recent win in the District Court may be short-lived.|||

24 months STEM OPT extension may be next on the cards for policy shift by Trump Administration. Final Ruling in the Case issued.