Hundreds of billions of pounds is set to leapfrog a generation and pass straight from grandparents to their grandchildren, as families battle to counter the unequal spread of wealth between old and young.

A study of almost 6,000 adults has found that most property-owning "grandparents" – those aged 75 to 85 – are giving substantial sums to both children and grandchildren while still alive. They are also conserving their wealth with the explicit intention of bequeathing assets to help younger family members buy homes after their death.

The "babyboomer" generation, meanwhile – those aged 45 to 64 – are relinquishing claims upon their parents' wealth and intend to pass it straight on their children if their parents do not specify this in their wills. This is seen as increasingly imperative if younger generations are to become homeowners themselves.

In growing number of cases it is a means of limiting inheritance tax (see below).

The study, undertaken by pension firm Royal London, is the latest snapshot of Britain's dysfunctional housing market, where vast property wealth is held by older generations but where younger family members are excluded from homeownership altogether.

This growing intergenerational divide has been highlighted in a number of studies, including the cross-party work and pension committee's Intergenerational Fairness report, published late last year.

Its findings included the fact that 45pc of babyboomers (in this case those born in the Fifties and Sixties) had become homeowners by the age of 25. By contrast, 20pc of "millennials" (those born in the Eighties and after) have achieved the same.

Think tank the Institute for Fiscal Studies, in the evidence it provided to the committee, said that today "people in their early thirties have average household wealth per adult of £27,000 – about half the average wealth holdings that people born in the Seventies had at the same age (£53,000)".|||

Hundreds of billions of pounds is set to leapfrog a generation and pass straight from grandparents to their grandchildren, as families battle to counter the unequal spread of wealth between old and young.