Hello guys, I will be teaching you how to improve your blog security for WordPress users.

Of recent I got a threat Email from an anonymous location concerning my website.

Therefore I have decided to to tighten my security and also share with you tips on how I did it.

Most website gets hacked by hackers who are always hanging on the camps and ready to strike innocent website owners and when this happens all your hard works (your designs, contents, SEO attributes, Followers, Blog Pride) are gone in a split second and you might probably start from scratch again.

I am here to ensure that does not happen because we should do prevent that from happening at all costs.

One thing you must know before we get started is a lot of websites are hosted on WordPress platform due to how flexible and great the WordPress layout is and most Big Authority websites out there make use of WordPress.

This however has a disadvantage because hackers are attracted to WordPress sites mostly due to this factor.

Although, WordPress Developers have put in much power and skill into releasing patches and updates to improve securities but most times we void this by using Third-Party Themes and Plugins but fear not I shall be sharing how to improve your blog security.

So like I said Earlier this would be Long and educative so help yourself with a cup of coffee and hop on for a ride…

What is security? Security is the condition of not being threatened.

Now blog security definitely means the state of your blog being threat-free, that is to say you have full assurance that your blog is safe and free from hackers.

If you definitely want your blog to last-long and stay safe on the long run then please consider employing use of security for your blog.

Also Read: The Perfect and safe Backlink Building Tutorial For Newbies

I think it’s high time I share the big deal on improving your blog security.

There are three ways which I will suggest.

The best way to secure your blog is by using security plugins, with that being said they can help a lot to any means by providing you with all the necessary supports.

In other words, they do the security job not you as the blog owner. Sounds Cool right? Well it is.

I will suggest you 5 free best plugins to get your sit ecurity up and rolling.

It is an easy to use and very easy plugin that provides lots of supports for users.

The awesome security scanner it has is one that will definitely work the job for you as it keeps track of your files and notifies you changes that might have been made to your WordPress system.

These are User Account Security, Database Security, File System Security, Comment Spam Security and Brute Force Login Attack Prevention.

The most downloaded WordPress Security Plugin will give you an enterprise-class protection. Along with 19 Million+ Downloads it is also the most used WordPress Security Plugin.

It contains WordPress Firewall, Login Security, Caching, Monitoring features, Multisite Security and Threat Defense field.

Formerly known as Better WP security, iTHEME Security offers you more than 30 ways to keep control of your WordPress Blog.

I recommend you get this plugin if you want to protect, detect, obscure and recover the regular backups of your WordPress Database.

It supports Two-factor Authentication, Malware Scan Scheduling, Google reCAPTCHA, user action logging, Detects Hidden 404 error and bans troublesome bots  and spiders.

It is very reliable, easy to use and effective too in securing your blog. It keeps you safe from hackers and other malware attacks.

The plugin enables you with quick fix single click security solutions and keeps your blog safe against RFI, XSS, CRLF, and SQL injection.

It is a Security Tools kit for Security Integrity Checks, Malware Detection, and Security Hardening.

The plugin keeps tracks of all activities on your Blog in such a way that if there is a breach in security then you can easily identify it by reviewing you Blog’s activity logs.

The plugin contains Remote Malware Scanning, Blacklist Monitoring, Website Firewall, Post Hack Security Action and Effective Security Hardening.

Another optional way to improve your Blog’s Security is by changing your root folder in Cpanel and how do you do this? Well let me tell you as it is very easy to do.

I am fully aware most of you use this format to log into your Blog’s admin panel (yoursite.com/wp-admin) and most hackers will access it from there knowing fully well that it is the page where you access your admin panel but when you change it from the root folder as discussed above then it will be more safer for you.

Let’s say I decide to change the “wp-admin” to “cybergeak-admin” then always I would log into my Admin Panel using “cybergeak.com/cybergeak-admin”. Now you understand right?! Good!!!

If you probably don’t want to use Security Plugins or you don’t want to change your root folder in Cpanel then I have got a recommendation for you and that is to get a plugin called WP LIMIT LOGIN ATTEMPTS. Download it: HERE.

I have come to the end of the article how to improve your blog security for WordPress users; you can also choose to use those three methods I gave you above all together. It is safer and better. I really invested a lot of time writing this article for you and I do hope you employ use of my methods and watch your blog become unhackable.

Please ensure to motivate me by dropping a comment.

And Remember: YOU WILL ONLY ENJOY SIPPING COFFEE WHEN YOUR WEBSITE IS SAFE AND RUNNING SMOOTHLY!!! Am I not right? Cheers!!!|||

Learn how to improve your blog security for WordPress users today. You should protect your site by all costs from hackers. See all you must know here...