In January of 2015, I attended a student assembly at Sauvie Island Academy, a charter school in Oregon. My colleague and I were there meeting with administrators to help the school upgrade its broadband. Though Sauvie Island is just under 20 miles from Portland, it’s isolated from the city’s metro area, limiting the community’s broadband connection. The island’s slow internet had trickled over into the school: with over 200 students, Sauvie Island Academy had just nine megabits per second of internet access at the time of my visit.

To put that in perspective, the Federal Communications Commission recommends that an average household, with 2.54 people, have 10 mbps of internet for basic activities, like streaming video and browsing the web. Sauvie Island Academy barely had enough bandwidth for a small family, let alone a school with hundreds of students.

At the assembly I attended, Sauvie Island Academy’s executive director asked the students if they were tired of seeing “the spinning beach ball,” that icon that pops up when websites are waiting to load. The entire gymnasium bellowed: “YES!”

Across the country, schools are dealing with slow internet—and it’s a shame. Having access to a fast connection at school can be a game changer, allowing students myriad educational opportunities. With speedy enough internet, students can enroll in online honors or AP classes that aren’t available in their schools, for example, or visit world-renown historic sites through virtual classrooms. But many schools are saddled with connections that can’t support a fully interactive experience.

The fact that fast internet is required to access modern educational opportunities is something that I’ve seen firsthand. For the last two years I’ve worked as an engagement manager at EducationSuperHighway, an organization that helps districts and states improve internet connectivity in schools. At my job, we want every student in the country to reap the benefits of digital learning and online coursework. And personally, technology helped level my playing field growing up. It’s why I do this work.

I was the first person in my family to be born in America, so when I started high school, I didn’t know much about how to get into college or which schools to consider. In ninth grade, my world history teacher pulled me aside and sparked my interest.

I posted up in the school library, scouring the Princeton Review and College Board websites. Each night I learned more, and by my junior year I had a list of schools to visit. I knew which ones had the best food, the most academic rigor, the best career opportunities, and the most exciting social scenes. After vetting my list with my teachers, I narrowed down my choices. When I applied, I knew as much about post-secondary education as students whose parents had graduated from elite universities. That’s the beauty of the internet.

That was 15 years ago. College websites barely scratch the surface of the digital learning that kids can access today. We have to make sure that each school can provide those opportunities to its students.

Some schools are already leading the way. Months before my trip to Sauvie Island, I visited Summit Shasta, a public charter high school in Daly City, CA — just outside San Francisco. The Bay Area is densely populated, with high-speed internet access; broadband connectivity is much easier to come by than in rural Oregon. With only 100 students, Summit Shasta’s connectivity was 500 mbps. At that speed, students can stream individual videos and lesson plans as part of their personalized learning.

And at Summit Shasta, each student had a personalized learning plan, complete with online exercises, videos, peer-to-peer coaching, and one-on-one tutoring. Students set their goals, submitted their work, and tracked their proficiency online. They were truly driving their own progress.

In June of 2013, President Obama announced the ConnectED Initiative, an attempt to improve learning technology across the country. “In a country where we expect free Wi-Fi with our coffee, why shouldn’t we have it in our schools?” he said, during a speech at a school in North Carolina. “Why wouldn’t we have it available for our children’s education?” He called on the FCC to build high-speed internet connections for 99 percent of schools in the country.

Part of what Obama was hinting at was E-Rate, an FCC program that makes broadband and telecom services more affordable for schools and libraries. E-Rate began in 1996 as a $2.25 billion fund that provided discounts for internet services. Districts apply for the funding annually and receive a discount that’s determined by the percentage of their students that receive free or reduced lunch. (Rural schools get a funding bump, as well.) But E-Rate was brought into being back when dial-up modems were world class technology. By 2014, the fund had grown by less than 10 percent and was providing discounts for obsolete technology. Imagine running all your digital devices on Windows 98: E-Rate needed an overhaul.

The FCC responded to Obama by modernizing the E-Rate program. First, it adopted new broadband standards, set by the State Educational Technology Directors Association. Those standards recommend that school districts provide at least 100 kilobits per second of internet access per student by the 2014–15 school year, and 1 mbps per second per student (roughly ten times as fast) by 2017–18. But last year, 23 percent of school districts were still below that 100 kbps per student target. That’s 21 million students with sub-par internet.

The problem compounds as we fail to upgrade, since bandwidth needs grow each year. Digital curriculums are constantly evolving. Virtual and augmented reality are nascent in schools today, for example, but soon they’ll be mainstream. Accessing these resources requires more bandwidth, which is why school districts should plan for 50 percent increases in speed each year, at a minimum.

That’s why schools need to upgrade to fiber-optic cables, which transfer data through light signals across small strands of glass. Fiber is the only option that can meet future bandwidth needs. Microwave towers, cable modems, and DSL all have their bandwidth limitations. At its maximum speed, fiber comes close to the speed of light. No other internet connection can provide that. Yet fiber construction can cost several hundred thousand dollars, putting it out of reach of many districts—even with a discount.

To reduce the construction cost for districts, the FCC created a matching program in 2014, so that states can help fund upgrades. Under the new rule, the FCC will match a portion of the money put up by state governments for a school’s fiber construction build. This match opportunity is only guaranteed for the next two years.

California, Massachusetts, Maine, New York, North Carolina, and New Mexico have already created matching funds, and several other states are in progress. It may seem small, but the matching program has shifted the conversation on fiber. Because of the match opportunity, it’s no longer a question of “if schools get fiber” in those states — it’s now a question of “when our schools get fiber.”

That “YES” that came from the Sauvie Island Academy students was a call to action. And it worked. After working with EducationSuperHighway’s consulting team, the school upgraded to a 100 mbps microwave connection. Hopefully, that means no more spinning beach balls. Fiber may still be in the school’s future, and it may take a few years to craft the personalized plans that all Summit Shasta students have, but Sauvie Island Academy is on the right track.

I hope to look back on school broadband access the same way I look back on internet access. In the early ’90s, internet was a luxury. The few places that had it used phone cords to stay connected. Today, baseline internet access is available in nearly every school and library nationwide. Eventually, high-speed internet access will also be ubiquitous.

We’ll get there, I’m confident. But we still have some work to do.

Curious how much a neighboring school district pays for internet access? Check out our Compare & Connect K-12 tool. Find your school district and see how your bandwidth and affordability compare to those in surrounding areas.|||

In January of 2015, I attended a student assembly at Sauvie Island Academy, a charter school in Oregon. My colleague and I were there meeting with administrators to help the school upgrade its…