Have you ever gotten great service at a hotel? Maybe they upgraded your room or left some complimentary snacks in your room if you had a late check in? Maybe nowhere else do we take the customer experience so personally as with hotels. I’ll never forget when a Marriott in Houston upgraded me to the presidential suite to atone for some mix-up that I didn’t even care about.

This photo is from nearly six years (or three iPhone versions) ago in that suite’s conference room:

Business travel veterans all have own versions of this story. People post photos of handwritten notes from hotel managers every day on LinkedIn to rave about service (and raise the bar in a public way). As nice as those moments are though, they’re misleading in a way. For a global hotel chain with hundreds of thousands of rooms and nearly as many employees, the random, singular acts of kindness shared on social media are relatively easy. Ensuring basic customer experience consistency is much harder.

I learned this (how else?) by talking to hotel chain employees as part of market research

One of the marketing software products I’ve worked on had great traction with brand advertisers, and hotels were one of our target verticals. I had a theory that the people in charge of loyalty programs would love using our product to design and optimize their rewards offerings. So as I had done before, I found people currently in that role to explain it to me. It was eye-opening.

In short, I found that the people I talked to weren’t trying to dream up new perks for visitors to the hotels. They had their hands full trying to make their current programs work as smoothly and consistently as possible – and with good reason. One manager at a global chain (we’ll call him Rob) summed up the challenge like this:

“Take something really simple: like having some chips and a bottle of water waiting in a rewards member’s room if they check in late at night. Nice idea, right? Except now you’ve got to make sure that this is executed exactly the same way across hundreds of hotels, because our guests expect the same level of service in Dallas that they got in Detroit. So you’ve got a logistical element now in making sure those snacks are on hand everywhere, plus significant employee training costs, even though it sounds simple, so they know when to do it versus not.”

Interesting as that was, it was what Rob said next that really got me seeing things his way:

…That’s not even the hard part. The hard part is when delight gives way to expectation. The platinum member who’s been with us twenty years gets angry that she’s still just getting a bag of chips after all these years. The fitness guy wants something healthier. And so on. Once it becomes an expectation, you’ve just created another way to risk disappointing someone. You might be better off not doing it.”

That was a bummer of an insight into how people behave, but an insight nonetheless. Where I saw a nice, simple idea, Rob saw a dozen different obstacles to be overcome before he could assess the cost-benefit of this customer experience upgrade. I still believed we could help people like him, but it was obvious that our positioning needed to be radically different than what I’d had in mind.

That’s why you have to talk to the market as a product manager. You need to understand not just how your potential users do their jobs, but also how they think. The emotion that came across as Rob explained the pressures of the job was crucial to my understanding. He sounded exhausted as he laid out how an initiative can morph from nice idea to a service risk. I could tell this wasn’t hypothetical stuff to him; those were real scars showing through.

Needless to say, the scars are what you’re looking for when designing a product to make peoples’ lives better.|||

