Facebook's mission is to give people the power to share, and make the world more open and connected. Through our growing family of apps and services, we're building a different kind of company that helps billions of people around the world connect and share what matters most to them. Whether we're creating new products or helping a small business expand its reach, people at Facebook are builders at heart. Our global teams are constantly iterating, solving problems, and working together to make the world more open and accessible. Connecting the world takes every one of us—and we're just getting started.

B8 brings together world-class experts to develop and ship groundbreaking products at the intersection of hardware, software, and content. We have a clear mandate to ship products at scale. In particular, seemingly impossible products that define new categories that advance Facebook's mission of connecting the world. The B8 team will apply DARPA-style breakthrough development at the intersection of ambitious science and product development. It will operate on aggressive, fixed timelines, with extensive use of partnerships in universities, small and large businesses. The Technical Project Team has the responsibility for scoping the effort from inception to product, communicating it to others, creating the partnerships necessary to achieve targeted results, and hitting key milestones. B8 seeks an experienced Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) Engineer who will be responsible for working on a 2-year B8 project focused on developing advanced BCI technologies. We are looking for a slightly impatient individual willing to face down their fear of failure to accomplish bold things. This is a two-year position based in our Menlo Park office.

Facebook is proud to be an Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action employer. We do not discriminate based upon race, religion, color, national origin, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions), sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, gender expression, transgender status, sexual stereotypes, age, status as a protected veteran, status as an individual with a disability, or other applicable legally protected characteristics. If you need assistance or an accommodation due to a disability, you may contact us at accommodations-ext@fb.com or you may call us at 1+650-308-7837.|||

Facebook's mission is to make the world more open and connected. Come work with us and do what you love.