Title: Current Trends in High Performance Computing and Challenges for the Future

Duration: 1 Hour



SUMMARY

In this talk we examine how high performance computing has changed over the last 10 years and look toward the future in terms of trends. These changes have had and will continue to have a major impact on our numerical scientific software. A new generation of software libraries and algorithms are needed for the effective and reliable use of (wide area) dynamic, distributed and parallel environments. Some of the software and algorithm challenges have already been encountered, such as management of communication and memory hierarchies through a combination of compile-time and run-time techniques, but the increased scale of computation, depth of memory hierarchies, range of latencies, and increased run-time environment variability will make these problems much harder. 



SPEAKER:

Jack Dongarra; University of Tennessee and Oak Ridge National Laboratory; ACM Fellow

Jack Dongarra received a B.S. in Mathematics from Chicago State University in 1972 and an M.S. in Computer Science from the Illinois Institute of Technology in 1973. He received his Ph.D. in Applied Mathematics from the University of New Mexico in 1980. Jack worked at the Argonne National Laboratory until 1989, becoming a senior scientist. He now holds an appointment as University Distinguished Professor of Computer Science in the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department at the University of Tennessee and holds the title of Distinguished Research Staff in the Computer Science and Mathematics Division at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL); Turing Fellow at Manchester University; an Adjunct Professor in the Computer Science Department at Rice University; and a Faculty Fellow of the Texas A&M University's Institute for Advanced Study. He is the director of the Innovative Computing Laboratory at the University of Tennessee. He is also the director of the Center for Information Technology Research at the University of Tennessee, which coordinates and facilitates IT research efforts at the University.



Jack specializes in numerical algorithms in linear algebra, parallel computing, the use of advanced-computer architectures, programming methodology, and tools for parallel computers. His research includes the development, testing and documentation of high-quality mathematical software. He has contributed to the design and implementation of the following open source software packages and systems: EISPACK, LINPACK, the BLAS, LAPACK, ScaLAPACK, Netlib, PVM, MPI, NetSolve, Top500, ATLAS, and PAPI. He has published approximately 200 articles, papers, reports, and technical memoranda and he is coauthor of several books. He is a Fellow of the AAAS, ACM, IEEE, and SIAM, a foreign member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and a member of the U.S. National Academy of Engineering.



MODERATOR:

John West; Director of Strategic Initiatives at the Texas Advanced Computing Center; SIGHPC Vice-Chair

John West is director of Strategic Initiatives at the Texas Advanced Computing Center, a part of The University of Texas at Austin. TACC is a provider of HPC expertise and services to the open science community. Prior to joining TACC he was director of the DoD's HPC Modernization Program, and held a number of other positions in private industry and federal government. He is a past general chair of SC and a founding officer of the ACM Special Interest Group on High Performance Computing (SIGHPC).|||

Title: Current Trends in High Performance Computing and Challenges for the Future Duration: 1 Hour SUMMARY In this talk we examine how high performance compu...