Successful email marketing is a very effective digital marketing channel. Many companies praise their great potential for driving sales and customer loyalty. TNW News mentions that 54% of digital marketers consider email as their most active channel. Marketing Sherpa further claims that 72% of US adults prefer to communicate with businesses through email.

However, successful email marketing needs a focused approach and paying attention to customer preferences. Here are six tips for creating successful email marketing campaigns that appeal to your clients.

The importance of mobile optimization should not underestimate. A Litmus study found that 55% of e-mails opened on mobile devices. And Blue Hornet emphasizes that 70% of consumers immediately delete e-mails if they are not seen correctly on that instrument.

Therefore, it is essential to use a simple design and a mobile-friendly template that allows the brand to deliver a clear message without any problem to customers.

Always address customers by name, as it encourages a more personalized and humanized relationship with them and shows that they prized as individuals. When deciding which clients to target for marketing email campaigns, it is essential first to analyze their behavior. Looking closely at your purchase history and analyzing feedback can help the brand determine how to run the campaigns. Customers will appreciate receiving emails that refer to the investments they have made, or the suggestions they have provided in the surveys.

Many customers tend to unsubscribe from marketing emails when they receive them very often. Although your business may not want to lose subscribers, it is important to give customers the option to unsubscribe whenever they want. However, the brand may also give them the option of receiving fewer emails instead of directly unsubscribing. Remember that sending many automatic emails can frustrate even the most loyal customer, so you have to make sure you respect their preferences. In fact, a Social Times study found that 33% of clients are discharged from branded emails because they receive them all too often, while 24% do so if content is repetitive or boring.

As with any aspect of the brand, be sure to try and examine the practices regularly. Check emails to see if they are accurate or have a technical problem before sending them, such as making sure they are well-optimized for the mobile version. Also, it monitors the quality and efficiency of email content by testing different campaigns and analyzing customer response.

Understanding customer habits and preferences allow your brand to design marketing email campaigns that drive customer loyalty. To give you with the best in customer service and sales, here you can learn more about Vocalcom. The world’s leading contact center software provider and premium customer interactivity platform, to deliver the best experiences.

Strategic programming is vital for campaigns. For example, sending emails after purchases can help increase sales or cross-sales efforts when the purchase memory is still fresh to the customer. You must also send emails to announce the departure of new products that may interest you or promotional offers. In any case, good programming ensures that customers receive offers when they are more likely to want them.

Customers usually have little time, and those who open e-mails just take a quick look. For this reason, it is imperative to create emails that attract visually, and that can drive your customers to action. Make sure the content is clear, concise and without any spelling or grammatical errors. Also, any link or bar code that included should work properly, and the balance between images and text can make emails easier to read.|||

Successful email marketing is a very effective digital marketing channel. Many firm praise their great potential for driving sales and customer loyalty.