O'Reilly, we don't know where you had your education in journalism and we don't care if you have a degree or diploma in journalism but we care when you opened your mouth like a fish out of water to call Putin a killer, knowing perfectly well that your country, America, has every type of killer including medical.

Let us name them O'Reilly. The World Health Organization, the Rockefeller Foundation, the Center for Diseases Control, George Bush, the United Nations, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the FBI, CIA and a host of others. These organizations and individuals have committed the most serious crimes against humanity but the corrupt American government and judiciary system continue to protect them.We all know that in America without the dollar you can't get justice and if you are born black you have an extra mountain to climb. If you are a qualified and intelligent journalist, you wouldn't have called the Russian leader a killer when America is responsible for the thousands of death across West Africa after triggering Ebola in Sierra Leone, Liberia, and the Republic of Guinea. Ebola is bio-weapon O'Reilly, so your country is a killer.Again, if you are intelligent enough, you wouldn't have called Putin a killer, after George Bush invaded Iraq to kill its citizens without finding any weapons of mass destruction. Journalism has lost its appeal and credibility to the extent that so-called journalists like you cover up crimes of America and calls someone else a killer."Smartness is a form of stupidity, "says Dutch scientist and co-writer of this blog, Johan Van Dongen. In an interview with Donald Trump, Fox News host Bill O'Reilly described Putin as "a killer" as he tried to press the U.S. president to explain more fully why he respected his Russian counterpart, Putin.We don't know who O'Reilly wants to impress because his statement reveals that even though he is a journalist he lacks intelligence or fears to open up the crimes of his country. How many scientists have been mysteriously killed in America? How many doctors were murdered in America, including Dr. Jeff Bradstreet for opposing dangerous autism-vaccine?How many people had the CIA and FBI secretly murdered in America? And how many people, globally, including Africans, had America sent to their graves with the deadly Aids bio-weapon? From the time of colonialism how many African leaders have been murdered by America? I will name only two, Patrice Lumumba of Congo and Muammar Khadaffi of Libya.|||

Your description