Adam is a 47 year-old car salesman. Like most Americans, Adam loves guns and everything related to his growing gun collection. With good sales numbers accumulating under his belt, he’s always on the look out for gun gadgets.

Much like other online shoppers, Adam looks for key markers before purchasing from non-core online retailers such as Amazon, eBay, or in his case, that list also includes Dick’s Sporting Goods, Big 5, and REI. Because it’s important that his gear is reliable in all operational contexts, Adam is a firm believer of “in-the-field” testing. A good return policy is a must because who knows, a product just might not hold up well enough. And because Adam is a stickler for detail, he’s not easily convinced of a product’s “stated” functions and features. One of Adam’s favorite brands, Magpul, is the North Star when it comes to convincing Adam of not just quality but also industry knowledge and specialization. As an electrical engineer by trade, Adam appreciates expertise and weighs it heavily in all of his purchasing decisions. In fact, he’s been following Magpul’s industry presence for over 5 years now and attend all of their trade shows.

A true Texan at heart, Emily resides in sunny Austin with her parents and where she works at a local printing firm. Emily is also a part time guitar tutor and has recently started a YouTube channel demonstrating her skills to her audience. Always in need for more audio and musical gear, Emily prefers to buy everything online in order to save time and money.

Having studied marketing at college, Emily tries her best to remain cognizant of its psychological impacts when it comes to buying things. There are a few go-to places (such as Sweetwater) for Emily not because they specialize in audio equipment but also because they offer fast, convenient, and no BS shipping. Having compared prices across the web, it simply makes more sense for Emily to become a loyal member to the brands she patrons often. Emily’s combined income gives her some freedom in terms of purchasing decisions but she makes sure her money is well spent on products that receive raving reviews and where she can learn more about complementary products. She spends 1–2 hours on average researching the potential purchase and watching review testimonials from her fellow YouTubers.

Greg of Colorado Springs is a senior at a prestigious university studying fashion design. An established overachiever among friends, some of Greg’s work has already been featured in magazines like GQ and Vogue. Like many fashion designers, Greg appreciates the simple beauty of great design — everything from food to furniture and from cars to indie films. In his free time, Greg is also a collector and trader of vintage t-shirts, always on the lookout for unique items to add to his collection.

A new obsession of Greg’s is stalking a company called Blipshift. Their unique product proposition is one of limited production. Designers and artists from around the globe submit unique, one-of-a-kind t-shirt designs to the company with hopes of seeing printed glory. Once printed, it’s gone forever. With a cult following from the motorsports community, Blipshift has caught the attention of the design-loving Greg. Greg’s dad left him with a Boss 429 before he passed and its been the love of his life. With motivation in mind, Greg reached out to Blipshift’s customer service team to see if there are upcoming designs related to the renowned mustang. Their reply blew Greg away. Not only were they able to confirm a design but also sent Greg a free t-shirt voucher as a thank-you for his enthusiasm and support.|||

2017 is on track to be another record year for eCommerce. In the U.S. alone, online sales is projected to hit $440 Billion. On mobile? $114 Billion. In a society where over 50% of purchases are now…