Software engineers appreciate nothing more than being surrounded by the loudest employees at our company – the inside sales team.

The constant shouting, cheering, and intense phone calls inspires code fluidity and quality in ways the company never imagined. So when redesigning our open office this past winter, a top priority was grouping these two antithetical teams together.

Immediately upon co-location, the software engineers loved over-hearing the constant drum of sales calls. It’s no secret that developers thrive when surrounded by boisterous and unexpected sounds. The pace and quality of object oriented classes, for-loops, and if-else statements skyrockets.

Programmer bugs, virtually ubiquitous before, declined rapidly as the loud number of calls increased. Our engineers were especially motivated by hearing the sales scripts repeated over and over again. Crafty prose such as “this limited promotion” and “if you order right now!” were team favorites.

After a few weeks and no negative feedback suggesting otherwise, it became clear that it just didn’t make sense to not bunch these two teams together!

Our developers were also inspired by the sleek business formal attire of our inside sales team. Pressed suits and monochromatic ties from Jos A. Bank inspired their dreams – “this could be me one day!” Reflecting on their own appearance of vintage New Balance sneakers and designer jeans while in close proximity to the suits made our engineers feel very connected to the rest of the company.

If thundering sales calls and formal attire aren’t enough to make your engineering team happy campers, being available as an on-demand IT resource will surely engage them.

Developers love nothing more than helping their non-technical co-workers throughout the entire day. They love computers so why wouldn’t they be excited!? Programmers especially feel validated when hearing “hey, so you know computers” and “I forget how to do this vlookup”.

Nothing is a better use of their software engineering skills than dropping everything to be instant IT for the sales team. And it’s almost as if there’s a correlation between the amount of their interruptions and corresponding levels of happiness.

You’re practically throwing your money away by not getting synergies from your highly technical engineers and the trivial demands of your sales team!

So this whole open office initiative worked out great, right!? But wait, shouldn’t your highly paid software engineers be focusing on writing code instead of answering Microsoft Office questions?

And considering it takes on average 23 minutes for a developer to recover full concentration after interruption, isn’t that a lot of wasted time and money being spent on unnecessary distraction? Yes and yes. By not tapping their feedback, you’re actually flushing money down the toilet.

Don’t miss out on key insights that affect performance and ultimately your company’s bottom line. Happster is an employee happiness platform that delivers feedback to where it’s most needed. Before your engineering team becomes disengaged and a revolving door to your competitors, let them speak their minds with Happster.

Check out our Kickstarter project. We have sloth shirts...and who doesn't love sloths?|||

