One could hardly imagine a modern college student without a smartphone, laptop, or tablet. And the truth is that these devices play significant role in every student’s life. McGraw-Hill Education performed a study among students and concluded that 77 percent of respondents improved their grades using learning apps (for students) on their smartphones and tablets.

Of course, there are two sides of the coin – positive and negative. The negative issue is that students waste a lot of precious time on unnecessary activities like watching videos, chatting on Facebook, checking what’s new in their friends’ lives, etc. Nevertheless, there is a huge advantage. Modern electronic devices allow enjoying various education apps for college students that make the timetable of a student more structured, and his/her life easier and more effective.

Moreover, there are a variety of study apps (for students) that help to develop learning skills, enhance study capacity, and improve overall educational performance. So, let’s look at some learning apps (for students) and study sites for college students that may be used for educational purposes.

1. GoogleDrive

 Google drive is a virtual disc where you can store any part of your life, including study materials, personal data, and much more. In fact, it could be used as one of the most helpful educational apps for students, android and iOS based.

2. Evernote

 Evernote is a useful app where students can store their class notes of any digital type. They can store and retrieve videos, audio recordings, and written notes. Evernote is developed for virtually all operation systems, so it is available among educational apps for students, android and iOS based.

3. StudyBlue

 StudyBlue is a super-feature that can help in preparing digital flashcards out of the stored notes and composing quizzes.

4. Oxford American Dictionary & Thesaurus

 Oxford American Dictionary & Thesaurus could be found among educational iPad apps for college students, apps for iOS and Android. The dictionary provides you with more than 200000 definitions that you can look up anytime, being both online and offline.

5. SparkNotes

 SparkNotes is one of the most useful learning apps (for students) as it helps to get acquainted with any material without actually reading the entire book. Students, obviously, have to read the required texts, but sometimes it is so useful to get your hands on chapter summaries that save your time and help to understand the class context.

6. EasyBib

 EasyBib can save you a great deal of time. Composing the list of citations is quite a time-consuming task. EasyBib is here to help with any citations, including APA, MLA, Oxford, Turabian styles.

7. Amazon Kindle

 This app supplies you with the access to thousands of books, newspapers, magazines, and articles. In fact, Kindle is a reasonably priced access to a big library.

8. Pocket

 The app collects links to your favorite or required articles, videos, and stores it so you can use them whenever needed.

9. Sworkit

 Students should take care of their health. Sworkit app is a great tool that gives you access to high-intensity workouts lasting from 5 minutes to one hour. Yoga, cardio, strengths exercises are all here for you in one of the best iPad, iPhone and laptop apps for college students!

10. AnyDo

 AnyDo is yet another example of a convenient education app for college students that helps to plan stuff. Get notified when anything of your interest happens without any hassles and missed events.

11. IHomework

 iHomework is in the list of cheap study apps (for students) that help to organize tasks, home works, exam schedules. It notifies the user of upcoming events and required home tasks. This app is just a good way to organize your studying.

12. iStudiez Pro

 iStudiez Pro is a comprehensive college student planner that will help you to organize a class schedule, track grades and home tasks. This app for iPhone or iPad is a good tool for busy students.

13. Mint

 This app could be useful for everyone. And it is not among the standard education apps for college students. However, since students are usually too busy, this app is a good friend when it comes to managing finances. With Mint you’ll never be late with bills and payments.

14. Clear

 Clear is one of the best planning educational iPad apps for college students. What is more, this app will help to organize both college and personal activities.

15. My Study Life

 A great planner for college students. My Study Life is on the list of study apps (for students) offered for free.

16. University Webinars

 University Webinars is a huge database of higher education videos, lectures, seminars, and explanations to specific topics in spheres such as education, innovation, business, and leadership.

17. Memrise

 Memrise is one of the most useful study sites for college students who are philology majors or study foreign languages.

18. Project Gutenberg

 This is one of the most handy study sites for college students as it contains the catalog of free books.

 19. How Stuff Works

 A comprehensive directory of science, technology, entertainment, and adventure videos to broaden students’ outlook.

 20. OpenCulture 

 A good website for both current and prospective students. Many videos, rankings, online courses, free libraries, textbooks, lessons, tutorials and more to enjoy!

21. Future Learn

 Future Learn offers interesting courses in Law, Psychology, Business and Management, Health Science, Digital, and Teaching.

22. Docsity

 Docsity is among the most visited study sites for engineering students

23. Pluralsight

 Pluralsight is a website that allows taking virtually any course in technology sphere. Moreover, it gives superior opportunities to evaluate students’ skills. Multiple tests and evaluations can be passed and results can be presented to a prospective employer. This is also one of the best study sites for engineering students as it offers many comprehensive courses in software development, IT, and creative professional courses (Graphic design, game art).

24. Alison

 Online engineering courses from ALISON is a good start for any engineering student.

26. Engineering Formulas

 Here you can find any needed formula with relevant explanations and examples.

27. GlobalSpec

 GlobalSpec offers some of the best engineering resources.

28. Eng Tips Engineering Forums

 Forums for engineering students and professionals, where particular topics are being discussed and shared.

29. Discover Engineering

 Discover Engineering is a wonderful site for those who are interested in engineering. Fu games, activities, articles, and online trainings.

30. Udacity

 Conferences, quests, and challenging experiences are guaranteed with Udacity.

We hope that our list of the best websites and education apps for college students will motivate your learning and help to improve your grades. It is never too late to learn something new!

The variety of educational websites and applications give a wonderful possibility for self-development and self-improvement. Modern technologies transformed the process of learning into a challenging and fascinating experience. So, do not waste your time watching TV! Visit educational websites and make your learning path brighter!|||

Let’s Look At Some Learning Apps and Study Sites For College Students That May Be Used For Educational Purposes.