President Donald Trump speaks at Snap-On Tools in Kenosha, Wis., April, 18, 2017. Trump was to sign the Buy American, Hire American executive order here as well.

President Donald Trump speaks at Snap-On Tools in Kenosha, Wis., April, 18, 2017. Trump was to sign the Buy American, Hire American executive order here as well.

President Donald Trump signs the so-called "Buy American, Hire American" executive order on Tuesday, April 18, 2017 during a visit to Snap-on Inc. in Kenosha, Wis. The orders clamp down on guest worker visas ... more

President Donald Trump signs the so-called "Buy American, Hire American" executive order on Tuesday, April 18, 2017 during a visit to Snap-on Inc. in Kenosha, Wis. The orders clamp down on guest worker visas and require federal agencies to buy more goods and services from U.S. companies and workers. (Mark Hoffman/Milwaukee Journal Sentinel/TNS) less

FILE - In this Tuesday, April 18, 2017, file photo, President Donald Trump speaks at tool manufacturer Snap-on Inc. in Kenosha, Wis. When Trump signed an executive order Tuesday in Kenosha, he sent a ... more

FILE - In this Tuesday, April 18, 2017, file photo, President Donald Trump speaks at tool manufacturer Snap-on Inc. in Kenosha, Wis. When Trump signed an executive order Tuesday in Kenosha, he sent a characteristically blunt message. “The policy of our government,” Trump declared, “is to aggressively promote and use American-made goods.” less

President Donald Trump signs the so-called "Buy American, Hire American" executive order on Tuesday, April 18, 2017 during a visit to Snap-on Inc. in Kenosha, Wis. The orders clamp down on guest worker visas ... more

President Donald Trump signs the so-called "Buy American, Hire American" executive order on Tuesday, April 18, 2017 during a visit to Snap-on Inc. in Kenosha, Wis. The orders clamp down on guest worker visas and require federal agencies to buy more goods and services from U.S. companies and workers. (Mark Hoffman/Milwaukee Journal Sentinel/TNS) less

Tools sit on display in a demonstration area at Snap-On Tools Corp. headquarters in Kenosha, Wisconsin. President Trump spoke at the plant about his executive order while making changes to a visa program that ... more

Tools sit on display in a demonstration area at Snap-On Tools Corp. headquarters in Kenosha, Wisconsin. President Trump spoke at the plant about his executive order while making changes to a visa program that brings in high-skilled workers to the U.S. less

The Wisconsin manufacturer where President Trump signed his “Buy American, Hire American” executive order Tuesday, has itself filed for a number of foreign work visas over the past few years.

The company, Snap-on, applied for nearly 70 H-1B visas between fiscal years 2009 and 2017, according to a review of the company’s labor condition applications on a U.S. Department of Labor website. Snap-on has an office in San Jose; 115 people in the Bay Area list themselves as working for the company on LinkedIn.

A labor condition application is the first step an employer must take to sponsor a foreign worker for an H-1B visa, which allows foreigners to work in the U.S. for up to six years. Filing a labor condition application does not mean the company will receive one of the 85,000 H-1Bs given annually to for-profit companies.

The Washington Post reported, citing the company’s applications, that Snap-on sought to hire a computer programmer at $75,000 a year and a systems analyst at $94,000 a year. Those wages, while above the prevailing or minimum wage set by the Department of Labor for H-1B workers in those positions, are lower than the average wages for comparable work in Santa Clara County. That’s legal under the H-1B program.

Trump criticized the use of H-1B visas to replace American jobs at the Tuesday speech at Snap-on.

The foreign work visas “should never, ever be used to replace Americans,” he said. “No one can compete with American workers when they're given a fair and level playing field, which has not happened for decades.”

A spokesman for Snap-on said the company employs a “handful of associates under the H-1B visa program, and the majority of them hold advanced degrees.” To qualify for an H-1B visa, the foreign worker must hold at least a bachelor’s degree.

“The best way to make America successful in this environment is to provide the technical capabilities that enable workers to win what is now a global contest for prosperity,” Richard Secor, a Snap-on spokesman, said in an email.

Critics of the H-1B program believe companies use the visas to squeeze out American workers in favor of foreigners willing to work for less, while proponents say the visas are used to staff highly skilled engineering positions they could not otherwise fill.

Regarding his executive order, Trump said Tuesday that he could not “think of a better place to make this announcement” than at Snap-on. A White House spokeswoman did not respond to a request for comment.

The number of H-1Bs that Snap-on has filed for is small compared to other companies. For example, Indian consulting company Infosys filed for about 700 H-1B visas in Wisconsin for fiscal year 2017 alone, according to myvisajobs.com, which uses Department of Labor data.

H-1B visas are most heavily used in Northern California, at companies ranging from startups to Google, Facebook and Apple.

Trump’s executive order called for a review of the H-1B program “as soon as practicable.” It was otherwise scant on details of how the president plans to overhaul the program. The order also aims to enforce rules that bar foreign contractors from bidding on federal projects.

Nicholas Pinchuk, CEO of Snap-on, said in a statement Tuesday that the company employs 6,700 “hard-working Americans.”

“It’s encouraging to know that our elected officials at the highest levels of government recognize the importance of American manufacturing and American workers and have chosen Snap-on to highlight this vital focus,” he said.|||

The Wisconsin manufacturer where President Trump signed his “Buy American, Hire American” executive order Tuesday, has itself filed for a number of foreign work visas over the past few years.  The company, Snap-on, applied for nearly 70 H-1B visas between fiscal years 2009 and 2017, according to a review of the company’s labor condition applications on a U.S. Department of Labor website.  A labor condition application is the first step an employer must take to sponsor a foreign worker for an H-1B visa, which allows foreigners to work in the U.S. for up to six years.  Filing a labor condition application does not mean the company will receive one of the 85,000 H-1Bs given annually to for-profit companies.  The Washington Post reported, citing the company’s applications, that Snap-on sought to hire a computer programmer at $75,000 a year and a systems analyst at $94,000 a year.  “The best way to make America successful in this environment is to provide the technical capabilities that enable workers to win what is now a global contest for prosperity,” Richard Secor, a Snap-on spokesman, said in an email.  Critics of the H-1B program believe companies use the visas to squeeze out American workers in favor of foreigners willing to work for less, while proponents say the visas are used to staff highly skilled engineering positions they could not otherwise fill.  “It’s encouraging to know that our elected officials at the highest levels of government recognize the importance of American manufacturing and American workers and have chosen Snap-on to highlight this vital focus,” he said.