We’re already past the first quarter of 2017 and WordPress still remains one of the most popular website platforms in the world. According to the data available at W3tech.com, about 27% of all the websites in the world are powered by WordPress. Can you believe that? It’s massive!

From the websites of renowned business names, such as CNN, Spotify, TED and many others to numerous small business websites, enterprises of all kinds use WordPress. That’s why we’ve chosen seven essential plugins for every newly launched small business website.

These are plugins almost everyone can universally use, no matter what type of WordPress website you have. Here’s the list:

There are about 3.7 billion Internet users worldwide nowadays. Therefore, website owners should bear in mind that some of them don’t speak or understand English. In order to enable them to grasp what your business has to offer, you may add the Google Language Translator plugin to your website.

Let users translate content on your WordPress website in their own language.

It will grant your visitors access to Google Translate – the most comprehensive translation platform on the Web. Although it isn’t equally accurate in all languages, it will help your potential customers get the gist of your offers and nudge them towards starting a business collaboration with your enterprise.

A large number of small businesses have a shoestring budget when it comes to additional investments.

Search engine optimization is more important than most webmasters realize. All the small things such as providing specific titles, adding meta tags, searching for relevant keywords, etc. are essential to rank your website well. Don’t neglect SEO just because you are on a possible budget, you can do it yourself to some degree.

Do your own SEO on WordPress to get more traffic.

One of the most reliable plugins in terms of website optimization is definitely the Yoast SEO plugin. It will be extremely useful for every business beginner, since it will guide you through different stages of search engine optimization. From adding meta descriptions and SEO-titles, to meta keywords, SEO powered by Yoast will easily teach you the ABCs of SEO.

Spam comments is a big problem for all website owners, especially if you do want users to leave comments and you have a comment form available but it is being abused. You can protect it to some degree with a captcha or something similar but not all spammers are bots.

Here’s where the Akismet plugin comes on stage. It separates comments made by real users from those left by bots and spammers. As a result, the posts published on your website will be purged from irrelevant and fake comments. Given that comments are also important elements of content, Akismet will improve reputation of your website.

You can monitor all website traffic with the Google Analytics plugin.

Its intuitive and user-friendly dashboard will easily introduce you to the world of website stats, data and graphs. What’s more, you can observe your website in real time, learning more about your visitors’ habits, behavior and preferences.

All these data will serve as a great input for the future changes on your website, so that you know what could increase traffic and generate higher revenues.

Keep track of views, visitors, clicks and more with Google Analytics for WordPress.

Since broken links are among most common dysfunctional content features, you need to ensure that they are spotted and removed as soon as possible.

Broken Link Checker is one of the most reliable plugins for that purpose. It will identify not only broken links but missing pictures, as well. What’s more, every dead link will be displayed differently, so that the website owner can easily see and fix them.

Broken links can harm your search engine rankings on Google and other search engines.

For website owners who run a small business it’s important to think in advance and analyze the most practical plugins for online payments. One of such reliable and widely used plugins is Full Stripe. Since this is a simple tool, its buttons can be placed anywhere on your website where you offer your visitors to buy a product or a service. What’s more, it can be used for payments and donations in equal measure.

Accept credit card payments on WordPress with ease using the Stripe plugin.

Also, you can use this payment feature with an automatic invoicing service for Stripe so your customers will automatically receive an invoice every time a charge occurs in your Stripe account.

Show your users which articles are your most popular using the WordPress Popular Posts plugin.

With this tool, you can stress out which posts have been most popular during a chosen period of time. For instance, you can select the hottest posts from the previous weekend and prepare them for your users on a particular day afterwards (e.g. the Monday after that weekend). That way, you’ll have a chance to choose the best of your website from time to time. Additionally, you can collect these articles in newsletters or even e-books.

Popular posts will intrigue users and create more call-to-action clicks on your website.

In addition to the plugins discussed in this article, there are many other options for each of the areas that an average WP-website needs to cover. We suggest that you start from our recommendations and keep adding new solutions to your website. Such a proactive approach to your online business showcase will ensure a constant inflow of new visitors to your website, which should eventually result in higher revenues for your small business.

AuthorBio: Mark is a biz-dev hero at Invoicebus – a simple invoicing service that gets your invoices paid faster. He passionately blogs on topics that help small biz owners succeed in their business. He is also a lifelong learner who practices mindfulness and enjoys long walks in nature more than anything else.|||

Tribulant Software, premium WordPress plugins blog with announcements, releases and other information