A few days ago, I ranted about how chat apps have poor support for URI schemes.

By "Chat Apps", I'm talking about the new wave of messengers - WhatsApp, WeChat, Telegram, Wire, and the like.

What do I mean by "URI Scheme"? You're probably familiar with:

The "scheme" is - it tells the computer "Open the web browser and load the specified resource."

You may also be aware of:

This tells the computer to open the email app and fill in "[email protected] " as the destination address.

There are hundreds of URI schemes in use. Older chat apps like ICQ and AIM made use of schemes - yet modern chat apps mostly ignore them. Why?

At the moment, there's is literally no way I can send you a link which says "This is my account on Wire, chat to me using the app."

Firstly, it's not all bad news! There are a few apps which do have rudimentary URI support.

There is an undocumented URI Scheme:

In repeated testing with friends, it performed inconsistently. Sometimes it would open a chat window, other times it gave an error.

Again, an undocumented URI Scheme. This is how to look up users by username:

In tests it worked reliably across all platforms.

The popular Chinese messenger has the bare minimum of a scheme:

That will launch the app, if installed. That's it. There's no way to target a specific user.

We take it for granted that everyone who clicks on a link has a web browser and email client installed. If they're on mobile, they probably have the ability to make phone calls and send SMS.

So what happens if you don't have a chat app installed? This hot mess:

It's pretty much the same on Android or iPhone - the user is sent to an unhelpful error page.

Both Telegram & WhatsApp let you look up a user on their website and then redirect you to the app.

If you open that in your browser, it will take you to the provider's site and they will then redirect you to their app.

For now, it seems that using an HTTP resolver is the least worst option. It can easily be shared and understood by users - and it doesn't tie the receiver in to a specific technology like Android Intents.

But, for the future - perhaps there's a better way?

Given that WhatsApp, Wire, Allo, Facebook and many others all use the Open Whisper Systems protocol, it seem bizarre to me that they can't communicate with each other. Imagine if your iPhone couldn't make calls to your friend's Nokia - unacceptable!

Similarly, all the major voice/video calling apps are converging on WebRTC to pipe your call around the world. The app is merely the user interface. You may prefer to use OutLook, I prefer Gmail - but they both use email as the underlying communications platform.

I've explained before why using a mobile phone number is a poor choice of identifier (mostly because the user doesn't own it and can't transfer it overseas) - but given that's what most people use now, it makes sense to include it as an option.

I want to share a link with someone so they can talk to me on my preferred chat app.

It is short and it doesn't tie itself to a specific action ( , , ), or to a specific protocol (Signal, WebRTC).

When clicking on a link, your device will either:

Let's take a look at some examples:

This assumes that both parties are on the same chat app.

If I'm on WhatsApp and my friend only has WeChat installed - what happens? Well, part of Federation means that you can talk across different chat apps.

Are URI Schemes the future once more? I think they have to be. Messaging app providers will shut down (MySpace), people will migrate away from platforms (ICQ), phone numbers and email addresses will change - but people will still want to chat with the minimum of fuss.

You may also like...|||

