There are a lot of Best Free Responsive WordPress Themes lists going around at the moment but I noticed a lot of them show the same themes from the past few years. The purpose of this list is to showcase some of the more recent stand out themes that are currently available to download for free.

The aim is to show a nice variety of free WordPress themes from simple blog themes to advanced magazine style themes and everything in-between. All of the themes on this list are available to download for free at WordPress.org.

If you are looking to give your restaurant, coffee shop or similar type of establishment a professional online presence then Brasserie is the perfect choice. This free WordPress theme not only looks great but is packed with great features than will help your business. Additional template layouts including a custom home page are included. You can also add a slider, pick from google font options and select your own brands color.

Brasserie is woocommerce ready meaning that you just have to install the plugin and you are ready to start selling your products. This awesome theme also integrates with other great plugins that will be a hit with your customers. You can add a form builder dedicated for table bookings and a food menu builder plugin is also integrated.

If you require a professional corporate look for your business then you won’t go far wrong with Crafter. This smart business theme is optimized for SEO, easy to customize and also translation ready. Developers Quema Labs have created a design with a nice mix of white space and striking bold fonts.

Crafter looks great on all devices from computer to mobile with its responsive design. Another great feature is how the theme incorporates neat css animations to give it an extra edge over it’s business theme competitors.

Sporty is a fantastic solution for anyone wanting a sports club, gym or sports fan website. This themes excellent array of options include the ability to add your clubs logo, colors and branding. Various template options and great theme documentation are also available with the theme.

This free WordPress theme also integrates seamlessly with the SportPress plugin. This means you can add club fixtures, players, stats and much more. Furthermore, Sporty also looks great on tablet and mobile devices making it one of the most popular sports themes out there.

Site Origin are well know for producing some of the best free responsive WordPress themes currently available and their newest offering is no different. Unwind is Site Origins latest, flexible multipurpose theme which is fully responsive and retina ready.

Integration with all major plugins also sets this great theme apart. You can set up an online store with woocommerce and also take advantage of the deep integration with Site Origins own range of widgets. Everything is there to set up an excellent business website or blog.

There are not too many free e-commerce WordPress themes to pick from with great detail and functionality. Fortunately Premier ticks all the boxes if you are looking to get your shop online. This striking theme integrates with WooCommerce beautifully to offer a stunning and practical e-commerce solution.

As well as looking great with WooCommerce, Premier also boasts other great features such as font picker, color picker and a slider to showcase your great products. Your brand will look amazing with this versatile theme that can work with almost any business type.

Blanche Lite is a modern WordPress theme with a focus on the fashion and design industries. The theme allows you to sell your products online with solid WooCommerce integration. It can equally be used as a cool laid back fashion blog.

In addition to great plugin integration this feature rich theme also includes options for a custom header, social media menu, four widget locations, custom logo images, favicon upload and much more.

Discovery is one of the best free responsive WordPress themes around due to it’s professional look and excellent options. Aimed at businesses of all sizes, it makes setting up easy with excellent customizer options including logo upload, colors, calls to action areas, social media buttons and image slider.

A custom homepage layout is also included with options to add partner logos, featured areas and much more. This business theme also has great set up documentation and video tutorials.

A great education style free WordPress theme suited for schools and universities of all sizes. A responsive design and translation ready theme that will work for educational sites worldwide.

Preschool and Kindergartens features include an image slider, social media integration, custom widgets and breadcrumb navigation. Great support and documentation is also available with this impressive free theme.

An elegant, clean and modern WordPress theme from Volthemes. Marlin is built with bootstrap and looks great on all device sizes. The main focus is on simplicity and ease of use for the end user.

This easy on the eye theme allows you to make the important changes via the customizer options. These options include the ability to change colors and add custom widgets to about us and latest posts templates. An excellent theme for photographers, small businesses and bloggers.

Indie is a free Minimalist WordPress Theme for bloggers. With a focus on clean layouts, colors and fonts this theme allows you to set up your blog in minutes with little fuss.

Some of the features that come with this elegant WordPress theme include responsive design, template layouts and plenty of customizer options. Indie is also translation ready and comes with full documentation including video tutorials.

Arouse is a simple, clean and well coded theme and one of the best free responsive WordPress themes available for bloggers. Suited for publishers interested in news, technology, travel, food and any other industry. This theme relies heavily on great content and images.

Some of the great features baked into this theme include a large image slider, grid layouts, widget areas and a featured posts area. This responsive theme is a very good solution for the keen blogger.

This e-commerce theme is primarily aimed at the fashion industry but is flexible and versatile enough to work for any business type. Deep integration with WooCommerce allows you to set up an online shop with ease while still achieving an individual look and feel.

Savile Row has multiple templates for blog, shop and page layouts including nice custom homepage options. The theme is also mobile friendly so your customers can shop on tablets and smartphones.

8Degree Themes recent theme release is called Eight Sec. This is a one page theme with multiple sections that is ideal for a creative website. You can pick from a boxed or full page layout both of which are fully responsive.

Other cool features available with this free WordPress theme include an image slider and WooCommerce compatibility. If you want to add a nice bbpress forum to your site then this theme also integrates with the plugin nicely.

If you need to showcase your work then Formation can solve all of your problems due to it’s feature rich options. This free WordPress Photography Theme let’s your images do the talking with an integrated full-width slider and fully responsive design.

Formation comes with full width, left sidebar, right sidebar and team page layouts. It also boasts an excellent custom homepage layout where you can upload multiple logos or images and featured text areas all through the customizer.

This is a visually stunning yet clean WordPress theme that works great for personal blogs. With a focus on pixel perfect design and nice fonts this blogging theme will appeal to a wide audience.

Features packed into this well laid out theme include the option to select either a boxed layout or full width layout. Either way you will be offering the user a fully responsive design that looks amazing on devices of all sizes.

Striker is labelled as a WordPress starter theme that you can use to build a new project. Alternatively this simple yet attractive theme is ready to use as a full blown theme out of the box. The sharp, clean design is fully responsive and looks great on all devices.

The customizer options allow you to add various images from your logo to background and the theme also has an in built slider that feeds nicely from your posts. Striker is also translation ready and fully documented.

Minimalist free WordPress themes are great for bloggers who want something simple yet professional for visitors to look at. Teletype fits the bill well. The theme is built on bootstrap and responds seamlessly on all devices. A sharp, clean focus on design and original font choice make it stand out from the crowd.

The main highlights for this theme are the lovely masonry blog layout and the drag and drop function for moving around the homepage elements in the customizer options.

Courtyard is a nicely designed free WordPress theme suited to hotels or travel blogs. The clean design is fully responsive and allows for a large header slider to show off your great imagery.

This themes landing page is easily customizable and comes with a “Rooms Slider” widget to list out hotel rooms with images and descriptions. Courtyard is a great option for getting your travel blog or hotel website up and running quickly.

Athemes most recent release, Talon, is one of the best free responsive WordPress themes that has become available in the past few months. The theme has an array of theme options including a choice of fonts, icons and blog layouts.

Talon also has page builder support so you can make your own page layouts. Widgetized footers, image header options and translation ready text are among it’s other splendid features.

Winsome is a responsive multipurpose one page theme made by Promenade Themes. Features include a fact counter, social media integration and an enhanced contact us section. The bright, sharp design looks ideal for design agencies although it would be also be a good fit for most business types

In addition to being an amazing one page theme, Winsome can also be used for a regular multi page website. Custom widgets are also incorporated making this a great option for showcasing your products.

This is a corporate business style WordPress theme that allows businesses, corporations and organizations to showcase their content. Caveat can be used for many different types of projects and allows you to add your own branding and identity with ease.

With a strong focus on your content, Caveat offers a nice clean flat design. Additionally you can select from unlimited colours and multiple blog layouts. Plenty of great options are available with this multi-purpose theme.

Breviter is a beautiful, elegant theme from Design Hooks. Based on clean design and robust code, this theme is ideal for creative bloggers and professionals. The themes main purpose is to emphasize different types of content (standard posts, image posts, videos, quotes, links).

I particularly like the spacious layout with plenty of room for sidebar content and nice images in the main content. Breviter also retains it’s lovely appearance on tablet and mobile devices.

If you are looking for a nice simple theme for your coffee shop or restaurant then Counter might just be the perfect fit. Great for letting your customers see what you have to offer or to get in touch via the contact form.

Counters simplistic layout let’s your images do the talking. The large header area allows for a large logo so you can show off your brand. It also has a customizer controlled front page, two blog layouts and various other useful options that’ll let you create a great website.

SparkleStore from Sparkle WP Themes is a feature packed modern WooCommerce WordPress theme. One of the Best Free responsive WordPress themes for e-commerce. Showcase and sell your products online with the themes intuitive theme options and documentation

The theme comes with 5 different demos so you are bound to find something that is a good fit for your shop. You can also rest easy knowing that your shop will look as equally good on a mobile or tablet device with this excellent responsive shop theme.

OdierLite is a simple and elegant WordPress blog theme. Theme developers ZThemes have built a beautiful theme that is responsive and retina-ready. The use of white space gives this clean design a great look for a creative blog.

This free WordPress theme comes with social networking share buttons, a featured image slider and other great customizer options that will help you achieve the look and feel your website needs.

Fitness websites have become very popular in recent years with many turning to WordPress as a great solution. Free WordPress themes such as VW Fitness offer a great way to get a gym, club or fitness website online. The bootstrap base give this theme a solid foundation to build a great site.

Some of it’s features include a banner section, testimonial section, appointment form section, call to action button (CTA), and social media. On top of this VW Fitness theme comes with it’s own shortcodes to make building the site even easier.

Vertex is a beautiful and simple blog theme has been put together with the designer in mind. Showcase your great content and beautiful images with this clean and modern design that uses lots of white space and leaves plenty of room for your content.

Fully responsive and clean code are also to be expected with this theme. Some of its features include an image slider and customizer options to add backgrounds, logos and much more.

A modern design full of customizable features, widgets and customizer options. Juno is a free WordPress Theme that allows you to easily customize colors, fonts, sizes, as well as showcase your products with it’s WooCommerce integration.

Juno includes features such as a slider area, a masonry style blog, fully responsive design, customizable colors, widget areas, customizable fonts and a lot more. This is a perfect choice for a small business or marketing website.

WP Hoot’s recent release, Brigsby, is a responsive theme for writers and bloggers. It is SEO friendly with featured image support and custom colors options. This is a light weight theme with a clean white and minimal design.

Brigsby is compatible with most major plugins such as WooCommerce, Jetpack and popular page builders. This flexible theme comes with various layouts and is well supported with very good documentation.

Comley is a simple, clean and responsive WordPress Theme that looks equally as good on a mobile device as it does on a desktop monitor. The well laid out templates and clean design make for a perfect modern blog or professional website.

The theme has been built with a lot of features such as multiple page templates, multiple blog layouts, multiple gallery layouts, several post formats and other theme options using the WordPress Customizer.

One Page design, portfolio, parallax effects, contact form and awesome animations are just some of the features that stand out with this elegant multipurpose theme. The sharp design and bold fonts are a great fit for business / corporate sites.

This theme has been built with Twitter Bootstrap and Font Awesome icons. Some of the options included are unlimited colors, social links, parallax background effects, 5 portfolio animations and an excellent built in slider.

Snowbird responsive WordPress Blog and Photography theme is a simple yet powerful design due to strong typography and a nice layout. The bloat-free, clean, well commented code-base will keep your website quick and accessible.

A quick help guide is available to get you up and running in no time. Features include unlimited colors, social media buttons and widgetized areas in the theme footer.

Esol is a responsive and fully customizable multipurpose template aimed at businesses of all sizes. The themes responsive design works great on mobiles and tablets and comes with various template layouts.

WooCommerce integration is built into the theme and it is also WPML ready, making it fully translatable. Additionally, this free WordPress theme offers both a boxed and full width layouts and multiple color scheme options.

An attractive clean, minimal, responsive one page business theme. Vega can be used for a personal blog, business website, landing page, business portfolio, or any other creative website. Like many modern free WordPress themes this has been built with the solid Bootstrap framework.

With this theme you will find animated content, three pre-built color choices (orange, blue, and green), full width image banner, multiple home page displays, multiple blog feed displays and various call to action options.

Morphology Lite is a modern design with unlimited colours, four blog styles, customizable sidebar column, custom templates, a gorgeous image post format and custom page backgrounds.

This versatile design works perfectly for designers and photographers with plenty of areas and options to show off your work in style. All options are easily editable through the WordPress Customizer.

A beautifully crafted WordPress theme for bloggers, photographers, personal and magazine websites. An array of useful customizer options include featured content, featured slider, featured grid, promotion headline, pagination, and icons choices.

The responsive design displays perfectly on all devices and looks great on all modern browsers. This a very good theme for showcasing your latest work.

An exquisite responsive blogger WordPress Theme by Theme Freesia. Edge is a simple, clean, blog-focused theme designed with lots of white space and nice stylish fonts. Much of it’s theme options are controlled through the WordPress customizer.

It looks great on all devices due to it’s fully responsive design. The theme is optimized and tested for fast page load times and has secure, minimalist and clean code. Features include WooCommerce integration for online shops, color theme options, social media options and multiple layouts.

Creattica WordPress theme is a flexible and easy to use theme from WP Hoot with a focus on elegant design and speed. The theme boasts plenty of excellent options including a choice of fonts and colors that as a result allow you to apply your own business branding.

In addition to this, Creattica is also eCommerce ready with WooCommerce integration. It also allows you to display your content in multiple widget areas, sidebars and footer layouts. Creattica’s unique layout will make your website stand out from the crowd.

The Minimal is a fresh, clean and a minimalist WordPress theme designed for a blog or a magazine. Most noteworthy features included are an image slider and good social media integration.

This theme has a built-in recent posts widget, popular post widget, social Links widget and an author widget. It also features a full width page option, two menus, SEO friendly structure and custom logo support.

Faceblog is clean, well laid out WordPress theme suitable for blogging or a creative website. The clean, elegant and responsive design will give your website a professional look and feel on all devices.

A magazine style homepage is available to showcase your content with the option to add your own color scheme. Most of the important theme options can be utilised through the customizer area giving you a live preview of your custom changes.

A multipurpose free WordPress theme for bloggers, Ultrabootsrtap is a solid, well coded WordPress theme with great options. Built on the bootstrap framework this theme is well supported and also comes with good documentation.

Ultrabootstrap inculdes a featured slider, featured posts, custom background, custom color and a custom homepage layout. The theme options are also easily editable through the WordPress Customizer.

Pashmina is a professional WordPress fashion blog theme built with bootstrap. The simple yet stylish layout is highlighted with a nice image slider to show off your posts.

Theme customizer options included a sticky menu, color options, featured post slider, built-in widgets, social profiles, about me options, banner advertisement and recent posts.

Despite it’s simple appearance, Tribes is a very effective theme for writers / bloggers. With a simple set-up you can have your website up and running in minutes. The content first approach will help you drive your readers to the most important part of your website – your content!

A wealth of support is available to get you on your way due to tonnes of tutorials with step-by-step instructions in the Tribes Support Center. This minimalist WordPress theme also looks great on laptops, tablets, phones, and any other screen.

Bizroot is a beautiful and responsive business WordPress theme that will allow you to make a website for a wide range of industries. This engaging theme also looks great on tablets and mobiles due to it’s responsive design.

The full width slider that comes with the theme is great for calls to action. Various sidebar options are also available to add any important widgets that you may have. This is a very good theme for businesses who want that corporate look and feel

Marvy is a free WordPress theme that is perfect for a web agency business, corporate business, business portfolio, photography site or freelancer showcase. A flat and minimal design gives your business a modern professional appearance.

Features include a custom homepage, responsive vertically centered layout and easy customisation theme options. Some nice tutorials are also available to help you get your website up and running with ease.

A clean, fully responsive and modern WordPress theme, Bizprime is a great example of a free theme with premium features. This highly customizable theme allows you to tinker with multiple display options via the WordPress customizer

A highly optimized design that has been constructed to give you a wonderful looking website on any browser, screen or device. It is also SEO friendly with a load of great tutorials on the developers website.

Karta free WordPress theme is a beautiful design you can use to share your travel experiences in a modern and creative way. Even though Karta is designed with travel in mind, you can use it for any kind of blog type.

Built with Bootstrap framework, this modern design is responsive and supports Jetpack masonry grid and Infinite Scroll. This theme also embeds social sharing options so your posts can be easily shared on Facebook, Twitter or Google Plus.

A great theme for individuals like coaches, freelancers or yoga teachers. Icoach has an eye catching modern responsive design that works well with any type of branding you would like to apply.

Select from unlimited colors for all of the main design elements. This nicely put together theme allows you to make the major changes through intuitive customizer options that offer a live preview of your website.

Flash from ThemeGrill is a free versatile theme perfect for any type of website. It provides multiple pre-built demos which can be imported in seconds using ThemeGrill Demo Importer Plugin.

The theme fully integrates with Flash Toolkit and SiteOrigin’s Page Builder Plugin. This makes Flash one of the best free responsive WordPress themes to have been released recently.

Brilliant is a beautiful and stylish WordPress magazine and blog theme. This free WordPress themes simple cusromizer options will allow you to change accent and background colors to match your tastes and branding.

Create a stunning blog or creative website with this seo optimized, fully responsive and translation ready theme. Underscores Starter Theme by Automattic forms the basis of the theme so you can be assured of a solid code base.

This is a visually stunning WordPress eCommerce theme built with Bootstrap. Craze can easily be an online store due to it’s tight WooCommerce integration that will allow you to sell products of any type.

You can also expect all of the usual WordPress standards with this theme such as a fully responsive design, up to date coding standards and compatibility with all the latest major plugins.

A responsive travel blog WordPress theme that allows you to easily keep readers updated on your latest adventures. Tone provides built-in tiled galleries with 9 sizes and Lightbox based on native WordPress image galleries.

The theme supports custom headers and backgrounds, also you can change the theme primary color used for accents. Tone is responsive, minimal WordPress theme for any creatives.

Verbosa free WordPress theme is an excellent option for writers. A fluid layout and clear typography against plenty of whitespace gives this theme a sharp professional look.

This multi-purpose theme is also truly responsive, with a fluid layout, uses microformats and microdata for best SEO results. Takes great advantage of featured images, supports Google fonts and has social menus with over 100 social icons.

This is a clean and professional WordPress Theme that looks awesome on any device. Along with an amazing layout this theme is highly customizable with plenty of available options.

Expeditions best features include a featured post slider, social icons and a custom logo option that will help you apply your own branding. The theme looks perfectly suited for a travel website or blog and is incredibly simple to set up.

Azalea is a clean and elegant WordPress blog theme that is perfect for lifestyle, food or fashion blogging. The theme is 100% responsive, highly customizable and easy to use.

Jetpack support is integrated into the theme as are google font options. Inline with the standards of any modern theme, Azalea has options baked into the customizer including the ability to change the main theme color to fit your style and needs.

This is a nice theme for non-profits, organizations and schools mainly because of simple design and simple set-up. Ixion has a nice custom homepage with an optional header image and call-to-cction button. The theme has bold typography and large sidebars to get your message across.

Ixion has been throughly tested for responsive design meaning it looks great on devices of all sizes. The sharp striking design makes this theme one of the best free responsive WordPress themes around at the moment.

I hope that you have found this collection of Best Free Responsive WordPress Themes useful. If you have come across any nice themes recently that you think should be on this list then please leave a comment below.|||

The most up to date list of the best free responsive WordPress themes you can download in 2017. Check out 55+ Best Free Responsive WordPress Themes 2017