In this tutorial I’m going to show you how to create a simple blog using Node.js and Cosmic JS. This is going to be the fastest and most light-weight blog you have ever created. Let’s get started.

View the demo

Install the Simple Blog App on Cosmic JS

View the codebase on GitHub

Make sure that you have Node.js and NPM installed on your machine, if not, visit the Node.js website to install the latest version.

Make sure you have Yarn installed globally:

Let’s start by creating a folder for our app. In your favorite terminal run the following commands:

Now let’s add a package.json file to import all of our dependencies for our app:

Add the following to our package.json file:

It’s a pretty light dependency list for a pretty light app. So what we will install is:

1. The Cosmic JS Node Module to get our content from our Cosmic JS Bucket.

2. Express for our web app framework

3. Hogan for our template views

4. Nodemon for development

Our scripts are necessary for starting our app in production and development.

Run the following command to install our dependencies:

and add the following to app.js:

There are a few things happening here:

1. We are importing our essential modules: Express, Cosmic JS, setting our PORT dynamically, etc.

2. We are pointing to some partials: header and footer, you can reference these partials from the codebase on GitHub.

3. We view our app home page (‘/’) and query our Cosmic JS Bucket for Post Objects, set the friendly date, then return the index.html template.

4. We are also adding our data to this page in the form of a global data store: cosmic. This data structure makes our template implementation super intuitive.

This part of the process is the most fun because it shows you the power of Cosmic JS combined with a declarative, logic-less template system like Mustache. Let’s create a folder called views and add our index.html file:

Add the following to index.html:

What’s happening here?

1. We pull in our header file with the Mustache template variable.

2. We pull in our Cosmic data using the Mustache variable {{ cosmic }} which has everything we need to layout our page’s dynamic data.

3. We are looping through our {{ cosmic.objects.type.posts }} and rolling out our blog posts.

What I like about this approach is that the template is completely logic-less aside from some boolean queries and array looping. It really does a great job of keeping our logic separate from our presentation (thanks Chris Wanstrath!)

If you want to build out the rest of the application, clone the GitHub repo and follow the README instructions.

This is the abridged version of the Simple Blog app available for download in the Cosmic JS Apps page. The full codebase includes a single post page view as well as a page dedicated to each author’s posts. View the full codebase on GitHub and deploy this app in a few clicks from your Cosmic JS dashboard by installing the app to your Cosmic JS Bucket.

I hope you enjoyed this tutorial, if you have any questions reach out to us on Twitter and join our community on Slack.|||

In this tutorial I’m going to show you how to create a simple blog using Node.js and Cosmic JS. This is going to be the fastest and most light-weight blog you have ever created. Let’s get started…