Tile is the staple decor item that takes on new, modern shapes and styles. Tiles have the potential to create the ambience of a room by conveying the essence of your taste paired with modern design. This year is seeing a variety of new tile trends that cater to just about every design requirement – from clean and minimal to flashy and bold.

Scroll down for new tile design trends that will inspire your next bathroom innovation and keep you coming back for more.

Gone are the days of blending tiled floors into the background of a room. In 2017, you will see the emergence of patterned bathroom tiles. Patterned tiles like brick and mosaic are reflective of this year’s renewed focus on artisanship and craftsmanship.

If 2017 could be a shape; it might just be the honeycomb. Designers today are getting geometric with the honeycomb tiles appearing in tiled flooring and walls. A bathroom with honeycomb gloss floor tiles in shades of grey with navy borders delivers a luxurious experience.

Colour Never Gets Old

Patterned tile isn’t the only element that builds up your bathroom’s modern and eclectic factor. Piecing together intricate designs using a variety of geometric and colourful tiles can have a powerful influence. Mixing various kinds of tiles together gives you the flexibility to get what you imagined when you were daydreaming about a renewed, chic bathroom. Not only that – different shapes and colours will add a little more mystery to your space.

Though colour will be trending this year, so will earthier tones like chocolate brown that present a sound option for those who prefer a more neutral palette. Deep brown vitrified tiles will add dimension to your neutral bathroom – giving it a sleek and clean look.

If the honeycomb tile is any evidence, this year will see more and more of atypical tile shapes. In place of the classic subway tile, 2017 seems to be welcoming long, narrow tiles for the bathroom with open arms. This idea is a sleek alternative for subway tiles too!

Come back to know more about the tile designs that are trending in 2017.|||

