The CEO Evan Spiegel allegedly said the app was “only for rich people!” back in 2015 and now it has come back to haunt him, after a report quoted by US-based news website Variety on Saturday as part of a lawsuit by an ex-employee Anthony Pompliano. He said that Evan does not want to expand the company into “poor countries like India and Spain” as the app was “only for rich people”.

According to the app info on the iOS App Store, the ratings of the current version of Snapchat was “one star” (based on 6,099 ratings) and all versions rating were “one and a half star” (based on 9,527 ratings) as on Sunday morning. The rating for the app on Android Play Store was “four stars” (based on 11,932,996 ratings).

Indians got offended and didn’t take the comment made, lightly. They took it to social media to lash out at the statement. As the ratings of the app dropped, the criticism of the CEO and the app increased.

A user in iOS App Store wrote “First of all, I didn’t even want to give any freakin’ star to this app. Evan (CEO of Snapchat) shows how stupid he is by saying this. I bet 3/4th of his company is run by Indian employees. If he didn’t want to expand it to poor countries, then why is this app free? Why didn’t he put any charges on it?”

There were more comments on the play store like “Poor India and Spain need better than Snapchat”, “Goodbye, My Snapchat Account and Snap Inc. You’ll be the product of gone by era and derision”, and “Poor Evan Spiegel”.

People didn’t even leave twitter as a mean to boycott and lash against the CEO. The app was trolled on Twitter, as #boycottsnapchat became the most trending hashtag on Twitter overnight.

There was a tweet by a user that said “I haven’t seen any Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians etc Tweets yet. Thanks @Snapchat for uniting us”! And we can totally agree with him.

Instagram surpassed Snapchat in daily active users of “Stories” feature, though it was first launched by Snapchat in 2013. Instagram’s “Stories” feature is used by more than 200 million people every day and  50 million users increased since January. While Snapchat who launched the “Stories” format in October 2013, had 161 million daily active users in February.

Snapchat went public in March and has more than four million users in India.|||

A day after the news broke out regarding the CEO of Snapchat Evan Spiegel made a statement that said about his disinterested in expanding the business...