I’m recently single, and being a nerd I brought my OKCupid profile out of its dormant state to hopefully meet likeminded women. I looked at my old photos and thought, “I should take a new one.”

But what kind of photo? I decided to put it to the test and conduct a survey to find the most attractive picture of myself.

First I had to decide on my search dimensions. I settled on:

This ends up being 24 combinations. Todd was kind enough to help me set up a photo-taking station complete with umbrella lighting and a DSLR. He realized this was going to take awhile, handed me a remote shutter controller, and left me to take my photos.

About 90 minutes and 24 photos later I had all my pictures. I had originally thought I’d need to create my own survey and use something like Amazon’s Mechanical Turk but then I found PhotoFeeler, a website dedicated to this kind of thing.

For each photo I gathered 40 votes from females up to age 37 along three dimensions — intelligence, trustworthiness, and attractiveness.

After $157 spent and I had the 24 x 40 = 960 votes in, I decided to do some aggregations.

What effect did glasses have on these dimensions?

Turns out, people with glasses look more intelligent! Who knew?

What about where I was looking?

This one was totally surprising to me because it contradicts OKCupid’s data on the same subject. At least for me, it doesn’t appear to make much of a difference. In the one case it did, attractiveness, looking to the side had a negative impact, something OKCupid suggests will have a positive effect.

Ah! Another contradiction of OKCupid data. Smiling was the tested factor with the largest impact by far.

There have been a few studies regarding beardedness and perceived trustworthiness and attractiveness, but I expected getting rid of my neckbeard to help, not hurt. Maybe I’ll be a true Software Engineer and keep it.

When taking photos for 90 minutes and smiling about half the time, my face muscles definitely got tired. Despite my best efforts, I suspect my smile was a bit less genuine and attractive as time went on. My facial hair was the factor that changed the fewest times, so it’s a good proxy for time. This could explain the decline in attractiveness with reducing facial hair.

Some of the results were surprising, but in the end I’m back where I started, with my default look: Glasses, smiling and a beard. Wish me luck!|||

I’m recently single, and being a nerd I brought my OKCupid profile out of its dormant state to hopefully meet likeminded women. I looked at my old photos and thought, “I should take a new one.” But…