This release includes two portions: HDK for developing Amazon FPGA Image (AFI), and SDK for using AFIs on FPGA-enabled EC2 instances such as F1.

Execute to download this HDK+SDK release to your EC2 Instance or local server. For an SSH connection execute . To get help with connecting to Github via SSH

The Release Notes document covers the list of supported features, programming environment, and known restrictions.

NOTE: The HDK and SDK are tested and supported for Linux operating systems, for the time being, other OSs haven't been tested by AWS

Please click the "Watch" button in GitHub upper right corner to stay posted.

The HDK directory contains useful information and scripts for developers wanting to start building Amazon FPGA Images (AFI). It includes the development environment, simulation, build and AFI creation scripts. The HDK can be installed on any on-premises server or an EC2 instance. The HDK is not required if you are using a pre-built AFI and not planning to build your own AFI. The following resources provide further details:

The SDK directory includes the runtime environment required to run on EC2 FPGA instances. It includes the drivers and tools to manage the AFIs that are loaded to EC2 FPGA instance slots. The SDK isn't required during the AFI development process; it is only required once an AFI is loaded onto an EC2 FPGA instance. The following resources provide further details:

AWS Marketplace offers the FPGA developer AMI for development on EC2 instances. The FPGA Developer AMI comes with Xilinx tools and AWS CLI pre-installed. The HDK examples and quick start can be run on any C4/M4/R4/T2.2XLARGE EC2 instance. Given the large size of the FPGA used in AWS FPGA instances, the implementation tools require 32GiB Memory (C4.4XLarge, M4.2XLarge, R4.XLarge, T2.2XLarge). C4.4XLarge and C4.8XLarge would provide the fastest execution time with 30 and 60GiB of memory respectively.

The Amazon FPGA Development User Forum is the first place to go to post questions, learn from other users and read announcements from the EC2 FPGA team.

Developers can build their own Custom Logic (CL) and deploy it on AWS. The CL must comply with the AWS Shell Interface Specifications, and pass through the build scripts.

The CL Examples directory is provided to assist developers in creating a functional CL implementation. Each example includes:

By following the example CLs, a developer will learn how to interface to the AWS Shell of the FPGA, compile the source code to create an AFI, and load/run an AFI from the F1 instance for use.

The Getting started with CL examples guide provides step-by-step instructions to build an AFI from one of the provided examples, register it with AWS, and load it on an EC2 FPGA instance.

Now that you have built an AFI, or if you want to use one of the example pre-built AFIs provided by AWS, you need to launch an EC2 FGPA Instance, and install the SDK as detailed at: SDK Quick Start|||

aws-fpga - Official repository of the AWS EC2 FPGA Hardware and Software Development Kit