I have long had it in the back of my head that I would like to do something sort of in the vein of BestPlaces.net . I never really had a clear ideaI wanted to do. I just keep seeing questions in various forums to the effect of "What city can I move to that has X?" and I feel like that represents some kind of underserved market or need.Then on March 30, 2017, I was snarkily tweeting a lot to vent and probably losing followers left and right. Somewhere in there, I began tweeting about wanting to do personalized relocation research for pay.And then I spontaneously created a website to go with the idea.I have since done an Ask HN and posted a question on Metafilter . I also had this useful little snippet of a conversation. I also added a newsfeed to the site in the form of a Google Group and posted a couple of articles to it. I still need to figure out pricing and services. I have a smidgeon of experience doing something similar I have been blogging for a lot of years. I have learned a lot about how to communicate things I want to talk about for various reasons.My very first website grew out of people asking if they could forward some emails I had written to share the information therein. Since there was demand for the information, I decided to post it publicly so they could share the links freely. Thus, my subjective experience has been that there is demand for things I know, but I have never been good at getting a wide audience nor at turning that seeming demand for my expertise into much of a money stream.But, historically, I developed blogs in response to people being interested in something I know. My primary impetus was simply to make that information available (for free). Monetizing it was a thing that was kind of an afterthought, like "Oh, I put a lot of time into this and people apparently get value out of it. I ought to find a way to get money for what I am doing. Um, how do you do that. Ummmm...Not sure."This project is the first one where I had this idea of "I would like to do x service and charge money for it." andcreated a website. For that and other reasons, I think this has more potential than most things I have done to turn into good money.My thought is that people who can't afford to pay for custom research done by a third party can use the information posted publicly on the site to inform their own research efforts. That piece can be monetized with ads and tips.But, I think the blog part of this will also serve to prove I know my stuff because, ultimately, the idea is to turn this into some kind of actual business. I am not clear yet what form that will take. At this point in time, my assumption is that it will be a service business where I do research for pay for people. But I am certainly not married to that idea.I love websites like BestPlaces.net , but everything I have ever seen in this space that tries to give a "custom" list of cities thatshould move to is basically incredibly generic and not done well. You answer a list of canned questions and the list of cities it generates often don't in any way fit the parameters I put in. For example, I typically get back a list of cities with weather that in no way matches my stated preference for weather.I think there is room for significant improvement in this space. I don't know exactly whatwill look like. I am in the process of trying to cook it up currently.I have written a couple of people requesting feedback. I haven't heard back yet. Historically, that sort of thing has not performed well for me. So far, it isn't looking promising this time around either.I am writing this post mostly for my own edification. It is meant to gather together what I have done so far. I am posting it to Business Bootstrappers (a Google group that I own) and Hacker News in hopes of helping other people think through their own nascent project or business idea.I am also hoping it will generate discussion or constructive feedback that will help me further develop the idea. Comments can be left on this blog or on the Hacker News discussion.|||

