It was a depressing situation for the whole family. Luckily her id card was embedded with an RFID tag. Combined with school bus tracking system, the tag helped the police officials to trace her whereabouts. She was being carried to a far off place by a stranger. Nancy was rescued by the police officials and was handed over to her mother safely. The stranger who abducted Nancy later confessed that, he did that for ransom.Around the globe, children are subjected to lots of such atrocities. Parents around the world are always concerned about such  dangers. The only way to escape danger is to prevent them. Technology has brought with it a lot of possibilities to do that.

RFID school bus tracking system is a smart technological invention that has gifted parents with added confidence. With RFID, ensuring the safety of your loved ones has become easier.

Automatic Identification, known as auto-ID for short, is a term given to the technology that is used to help machines in order to identify people or object. Automatic data capture is often coupled with auto identification. It is an all-rounder that identifies items, gains information about them and transfers the collected data into computer without the involvement of the employees.

The system is mainly used in order to collect error-free data.  The system increases efficiency and makes staff members available for other functions resulting in more productivity. Bar codes, smart cards, voice recognition, some biometric technologies, optical character recognition, and radio frequency identification (RFID) are the technologies that fall under the shade of auto-ID umbrella.

Radio frequency identification or RFID for short is the broad term given to the technology that uses radio waves to automatically identify people or objects. Identification can be made by a number of methods, but the normal method is to store a serial number that identifies a person or object on a microchip that is attached to an antenna (the chip and the antenna together are called an RFID transponder or an RFID tag). The chip transmits the identification information to a reader. The antenna enables the chip to transmit the information. The radio waves reflected back from the RFID tag is converted into digital information that can then be passed on to computers for utilizing it efficiently.

The worse nightmare a parent can have is losing their child. However, a little care can make a lot of difference. RFID tags are already attached to a lot of products we buy. Using it with the id card of your child can fetch a lot of benefits. RFID can be equipped for the simple reason that it lets the parents have peace of mind.

Checking the attendance details of children manually requires a lot of time and energy. With RFID school bus tracking system, the details are automatically entered. The accurate attendance details can thus be obtained.

• Parents or guardians get notified about children’s activities/whereabouts automatically and on time

The activities of the children are notified to the parents without fail. Performance tracking is possible that can result in the over-all development of the child. RFID tag helps in removing uncertainty.

• Can be used in library and canteen

The tag can be used for making things like borrowing books from library simple, orderly and clear. Through the tag, details of the book can be stored in the system, making the job of librarian much easier. Using the tag in canteen eliminates the need of carrying money and thus, lets the parents have peace of mind.

• The system monitors when and where each student gets on or off a school bus

The accurate location of children can be monitored by parents using RFID school bus tracking systems. This provides great relief to parents.

Tracking the physical location of children creates an extraordinarily detailed portrait of a child's school day. The over-all activity of the child can be monitored through the system anytime, anywhere, by the parents.

Reasons to Rely on Better Security

It is found that a child is abducted or goes missing every 40 seconds, i.e.

Out of the children kidnapped in United States

1.  Girls make up ¾th of the victims of non-family abductions

 2.  More than 1 of every 5 children reported as abducted are found dead

 3.  Out of the dead children found after abduction, 74% were dead within 3 hours of the abduction

 4.  Most of the victims are grabbed on the street by the kidnapper or lured to their vehicle

In today's hectic life, parents are unable to monitor their child's movements. The RFID system can be of great help them in such situations. With this technology, student tracking is possible and thus helps to enhance their safety. Also, by using RFID technology, you will be able to generate accurate attendance reports. In these ways, the application of RFID improves the overall efficiency of schools.|||

RFID school bus tracking system is a smart technological invention that has gifted to parents. Here describes the scope of RFID in school security measures.