Designing the next generation Internet routing protocol from scratch will require the complete re-architecture of the Internet. Therefore, we expect this venture to be a long term project spanning many years. The objective of the next-gen Internet routing protocol is simple – it must support Internet communications for the next thirty years. In our journey to design the ultimate protocol, we’re going to look into the future, and envision what life will be like in 20 to 30 years, then bring it back to the present time.

Border Gateway Protocol (current Internet protocol) is almost 30 years old. Back in the time when it first came out, the authors of BGP probably didn’t see a world dominated by iPhones, drones, IoT and Pokemon, as it would have required a stretch of the imagination. However, we’re going to imagine a world dominated by flying cars,  intelligent robots, spaceships going to the moon, cyborgs, trillions of IoT devices, self driving cars, floating cities, cities in space, robot soldiers, flying robots drones, flying humans with jetpacks, virtual reality, and much more. But none of this is possible with BGP and the current state of bandwidth limitations in the middle-mile and last-mile. Fortunately, in a few years, bandwidth will cease to be the bottleneck. In fact, Internet bandwidth will be universally ubiquitous just like water. As proof, here are just a few of the disruptive innovations in occurring WiFi, mobile networks, fiber deployment, and broadband networks.

Here are some breakthrough innovations happening in the networking world:

And this doesn’t include all the R&D being invested in the networks by the likes of Google, AT&T, Facebook, Apple, and so on. One day in the near future, Internet bandwidth will become ubiquitous and abundant for the price of $100 per port, anywhere in the world. When that time comes, we’ll stop referring to it in measurements like Mbps, Gbps, Tbps, etc. Instead, it will be referred to as a port, and the port will support whatever bandwidth is required, whether its 1Gbps or 100Gbps – no limitations.

The best place to start in our design and research efforts is with the packet.

The basic unit of networking is the packet, which is comprised of data. Packet switching is a digital communication system that delivers data in the form of packets, as opposed to circuit switching which forms a dedicated connection like telephone system of the past. Packet switching supports connectionless protocols like IP and UDP and connection-oriented protocols like Frame Relay and MPLS. An IP and UDP Packet is classified a layer 3, whereas Frame Relay is layer 2, and it’s proper name is called a frame, not a packet. Here are the properties of a packet:

Displayed below is an Internet Header Format.

In addition, there is also the TCP Packet is very similar to the IP Packet, with the exception that TCP is a layer 4 protocol. For all intended purposes, the TCP Packet has all the same limitations as the layer 3 packet, as shown below.

In constructing the next-gen Internet routing protocol, we’re going to simply disregard the packet in its current form and create a new one from scratch, that will incorporate big data, machine learning and security. We’ll refer to the new packet as  Learning Packet System or LPS, which will have the following characteristics:

In part 2, we’ll continue into LPS, then start looking into the Autonomous System.|||

