The way to get profitable startup idea is not to try to think of startup ideas. It's to look for problems, preferably problems you have yourself.  In fact, for many entrepreneurs, successful business ideas start out as solutions designed to address a challenge they face personally. Solving the problem that frustrates you - may be one of the best ways of finding an idea for your startup. Look at these software developers who acted accordingly before they found success.

Chris was 19 years old wheh he started work as a software developer. He was doing PHP development and building brochure (Flash) websites for Philadelphia’s local bars and clubs. In 2000, he founded Wildbit as a web design shop. On October 2007, he launched a startup, Beanstalk (a private code hosting SaaS platform for developers that now allows writing, reviewing and deploying of code). According to Chris’ wife Natalie, today Wildbit is a multi-million dollar company that has more than 100 000 clients (companies) of this and some of their other products.

From where did the idea for Beanstalk startup come to Chris? He needed to solve his own pain.

Joel Gascoigne was working full-time as a freelance web developer. During that time, he had several projects that he considered as startups, but all of them were not very successful. In October 2010 he launched his new startup, Buffer (a SaaS platform that now automatically updates your several social media accounts at the best times throw scheduling). Today Buffer has more than $1,000,000/ month in recurring revenue (2017).

Joel Gascoigne had a hobby and needed a tool for himself to get more out of it.

Then Joel decided to find an app for himself.  But the current solutions lacked crucial built-in features or required a lot of manual operations – hence, he needed a custom app.

Bryan Helmig was doing a lot of freelancing for small businesses in Columbia, Missouri. He and his friends were helping companies integrate their many business services with one another. In October 2011, they launched a startup Zapier (a SaaS platform that enables easy data integration between 750+apps). Zapier does not disclose its financial data, but it may have close to $7 million in annual revenue (2016).

Bryan Helmig had many boring repetitive tasks during his job as a software developer.

There was an absence of solutions to make his job less boring. So Bryan decided to create one.

In 2000, Danny Wen got his degree in computer science from the Cornell University (Ithaca, New York). In 2003, he started a two-person agency to provide web design and web development services. In 2006, they launched a startup, Harvest (a SaaS platform for developers that now allows tracking time, invoice clients, collect payments, and send estimates). According to Danny Wen, today, it is a multi-million dollar company with 40 000+ customers, and 51 personell (2017).

Danny Wen discovered that it was not very interesting to track time and send invoices to their customers manually or with the help of not very convenient tools, so he decided to find a more appropriate solutions.

At that moment there was no matching apps. So he decided to create one for himself.

Matt Harris was the “typical nerd who started programming when he was ten or eleven”. He and his friend were working on different startup projects as contract developers. In late November 2012,  they launched a startup, Sendwithus (a SaaS platform that now allows marketers to test different variations of so-called transactional emails without having to go through a developer). Sendwithus does not disclose its financial data, but it raised $2.3M in 2014. Today it powers more than 10M emails each day, and process over 100M API requests between its customers and their Email Service Provider (ESP).

Matt Harris had many boring repetitive tasks during his job as a software developer. The process started feeling "Groundhog Day"-like.

The market was untapped and there was no viable solution and no real technology in place.

Nathan Barry sometimes describes himself as a self-taught IOS app developer. At one moment he became obsessed with the world of audience building and book publishing. During that time, he wrote 3 books, 2 courses, and built an email list of 37,000 subscribers. In October 2014 he made the decision to walk away from the book and training business and focus full-time on his startup ConvertKit (a SaaS platform that now helps professional bloggers to grow their email lists and sell courses). Today ConvertKit makes $480,000/month in recurring revenue (2017).

Nathan Barry had realized that email marketing is, probably, the best way to sell his books and courses.

Then Nathan decided to find an app for himself.  But the current solutions were not very easy to use or were lacking crucial built-in features; hence, he needed a custom solution.

“Email courses, or follow-up email sequence are really powerful for getting people to come back and buy, but you should automate that. If you give away a sample chapter on your sales page [and get subscribers], you should remind them over time to come back and purchase. But it was such a pain to set that up in MailChimp. The autoresponder follow-up sequence would make me a bunch of money, but I didn’t set it because it was just too frustrating to use that interface and to go through that. You had to create a bunch of different lists, and it was also a pain. I also wanted to know about the conversion rates for my forms - I had to either use an outside plug-in, or go calculate it with Google analytics. And I thought “okay, there are always best practices, what if I built a tool that had all of them built in by default? After trying to find a painful problem to solve, I decided to solve one of my own: email marketing. That journey led me to create ConvertKit, my dream email marketing application. No more hacking together a system using other off the shelf providers — I built ConvertKit to follow the best practices I use, built in by default”.

In 2006, Ben Congleton got his Master's Degree in Computer Science and Applications. In 2009, with initial funding by seed accelerator Y Combinator, Ben and his friends built Olark (a SaaS live chat). They made their first million in sales in 2010. Today, this app is used by 12000 paying customers worldwide.

The initial idea of the software that should solve their own pane was born 10 years before Olark was launched.

“In the late 90s, I co-founded a web hosting company with some friends. We used instant messaging clients to talk to each other, and wanted a way to connect instantly with our customers too. We looked around for solutions and finally found live chat software that was built for call centers, but not for really small teams like us. The software was clunky, but it was so valuable that we committed to using it. Live chat became essential to the growth of our business. It allowed us to connect with our customers, explain our value proposition, and make the sale. Live chat was really valuable, but we suffered through software that didn’t really meet our needs. At that time, almost all chat platforms were built for giant call centers. We ended up paying a lot of money for a solution that didn’t really fit our needs.

 Ten years later, we realized that there was an enormous opportunity to build a beautiful, easy-to-use product that felt and operated more like the chat we were using to talk to our friends online, like GTalk. Our hope was that by making live chat easier to use, we could unlock the value of talking directly to your customers for every business that sold online. Then, Olark was born.”

Chris Keller has a degree in Computer Science from Virginia Tech (2003). In 2007 he launched his app FollowUp (an email reminder SaaS), but he didn't get the first paying client untill 2011. FollowUp was acquired by Argon Technologies in 2014. Now Chris Keller is an investor.

Chris Keller built this app to solve a problem he had.

“I was reaching out to people that I met at conferences. So every time I emailed them, I go to my calendar and put, like, “Email Bob, if he hasn’t replied”. Then the Google Calendar reminder comes in, and I’m like, “Who the hell is Bob? And where is that email?” So, I was like, “There has got to be a better way for this.” So one day, I was like, “You know, I really wish I could put the reminder on the email when I send it, and it brings back the email to me. And so, I started thinking about, how can I do this? And I thought, well, if you could somehow use the BCC field, only I can see it, they can’t, and you can indicate when in the form of an email address. And so that was literally when it was born, and I built the first version in a week after I thought of it. I built it as a service that anyone could use, but I was the only one using it.”

As a primary user he knew in details how to improve the product.

Brandon Pearce received his B.S. in Computer Science in 2005. In 2004, he launched his startup Music Teacher's Helper (today, it is a 6-figure SaaS that helps music teachers manage their private music teaching studios). In 2009, Brandon sold almost everything he owned, and began traveling the world with his wife and two daughters (now three), while continuing to run his business.

How did Brandon come up with the idea for his startup?

Where do startup ideas spring from? What are the best ways to brainstorm ideas for a startup? How do entrepreneurs come up with new startup ideas? What are good startup ideas for 2017?

But every idea needs a validation. Take a look at founders of these startups, which later became multimillion-dollar SaaS companies – they used a "minimum viable product" (MVP) approach to validate their ideas.|||

Where do startup ideas spring from? What are the best ways to brainstorm ideas for a startup? How do entrepreneurs come up with new startup ideas? What are good startup ideas for 2017?