Today we some-what proudly present a new service for people that take their privacy serious.

 In the world where peoples right to privacy and the right to be anonymous is under attack, we’re helping you to fight back. njal.la is a service that helps you to have a domain name without having to tell the world who you are. We register domain names in hundreds of top level domains totally anonymous. Yeah you read right. We don’t need to know who you are, what you are, where you are. We don’t even need an e-mail address — we can do with an anonymous XMPP account you can set up somewhere.

 

 The service is not a regular domain name reseller. We don’t sell you domain names actually. You pay us so we can buy one for ourselves. The price includes your right to use it. We’re even giving you access to our anycasted DNS service.

 

 Think of us as your friendly drunk (but responsibly so) straw person that takes the blame for your expressions. As long as you keep within the boundaries of reasonable law and you're not a right-wing extremist, we’re for promoting your freedom of speech, your political weird thinking, your kinky forums and whatever. Even Trump is welcome. Hell, he might even be a customer. We’ll never know. We might even be approved by him! Or not. We don’t really care.

 

 For us, every single person has the right to a reasonable protection of their privacy, their anonymity and their views. We don’t always agree with our customers (in fact we think we’ll hate quite a lot of them) but we’ll protect them anyhow. We’ve got a long history proving that point - we’ve been working on making people anonymous for a decade and we’ve been to court multiples times for our stubborn behaviour. We’ll keep doing that.

 

 The service allows transferring your current domain names to us. Or you can get a new one. The DNS can be hosted by us, or not. You can of course pay using Bitcoin - or other means as well. And if you don’t want us to protect your privacy, we’ll give you back the domain name. You can take the anonymity out and still use our service (and to be honest, it looks great and the simplicity is just awesome) - or you can transfer the domain name to another crappier registrar if you for some reason don’t like privacy and great services. We’re ok with people making the wrong decisions as well - that’s why it’s great to be anonymous, you don’t have to care about what other people will think of you!

 

 njal.la is opening up today for beta testing, we’re letting in a limited amount of customers to use our service, give us feedback and try to optimise. We’re sure it’s the best there is, but since we’re always improving, we’ll pretend to listen to your feedback and make it better.

|||

FOR IMMACULATE RELEASE. Announcing the opening of NJAL.LA