On the highest level, thrashing is a direct result of roadmap issues. Whether it’s bloated, non-existent, or poorly communicated, start your treatment with a roadmap overhaul and you’re 80% of the way to a cure.

When I look back at the scope of initiatives we were trying to accomplish last year, I laugh. A few of us were trying to tackle the jobs of a 50 person highly-funded company, and do so with the same or better quality.

Our goals and resources were hilariously out of sync. I’m not sure if we got there out of sheer optimism, or by comparing ourselves to companies that were several steps ahead, and I’m not sure it matters. We set ourselves up to thrash, and then we made good on that foundation.

Late last year we sat down to correct our course. Our revised roadmap felt skeletal. I mean bare. bones.

Now, looking back a few months later, I think we could have simplified it even more. The most valuable takeaway:

Creating genuine focus is a deliberate process. It’s an ongoing exercise in saying no. It means regular reality checks — looking at what you’re doing from 10,000 feet. The things we could do are endless. Zooming out helps avoid getting lost in the infinity.

Aside from setting direction, a tight roadmap is invaluable to team communication and motivation. The simpler it is , the easier it is to feel and track progress.

More importantly, everybody knows that whatever their focus may be, there was a deliberate “why” behind it. Nothing is more motivating and empowering than having confidence that what you’re working on every day has value.

Your time is valuable. Start treating it that way.

There are almost certainly things you do on a regular basis that you could eliminate with little or no consequence.

Tasks and to-dos are going to create themselves. Processes will get bloated. It’s just how things go. It’s like accumulation of junk around your house. It’s on you to constantly be aware of creep and ruthless with what stays and what goes.

So when a repeatable task is important enough to stay, that means it’s important enough to empower someone else with.

When you try to do everything yourself you’re not a hero. You’re impeding. Use the opportunity to teach and empower.

They’ll grow as individuals, improve processes you don’t have the time to look critically at, and you’ll be free of one more task eating up your limited cognitive bandwidth.

You are here to serve your customers and team. But one of the best ways you can serve them is by zooming out and thinking strategically about your business.

If you don’t prioritize that because your calendar looks like a unicorn vomited all over it, everyone suffers. And it contributes to the feeling that you’re spinning out of control.

Think you’re doing yourself a favor by telling people to check back with you in a month?

Kicking the can down the road doesn’t help you, and certainly doesn’t help the people asking for your time. Get comfortable saying no.

It’s easy to pick 10 things to do in a given week. We operate with a sense of inevitability that we won’t get to everything, yet we commit anyway.

Then, we just bump remaining tasks to our new list, and voila…dominoes.

Next thing you know, you feel like you aren’t getting anything done, despite being busy all day long. Your team might wonder why you can’t deliver. And you start to doubt yourself. Important tasks get jumbled up with with everything and become easier to avoid.

“I’ve wanted to work on ______ for three weeks and I just can’t get to it!”

We hold a Monday meeting where we cover our major focus for the week.

No one ever has more than 3 things on their list. If we see someone’s plate stacking up, we help prioritize, remove, and set each other up for a successful week.

Every day we post a quick update to Basecamp sharing what we did that day. Progress, interesting conversations, things we’re struggling with, etc.

We also meet briefly on Friday to recap the week and hold each other accountable to our major commitments.

Above all else, thrashing is a feeling. We can talk all day long about fixing processes, defining roadmaps, and prioritizing tasks. But the most impactful thing we continue to do as a company is reflect on where we’ve been, not just where we’re going. (Inspo: Gary V)

We’re okay with slowing down to speed up, because we love what we do. We are building the company of our dreams. And while there are big things on the horizon we’re hungry to accomplish, we don’t let false urgency or blind ambition cloud our ability to see how amazing things already are.|||

Last year we traded productivity for some hard lessons in prioritization.
We walked away with a skill that forever changed the way we approach growing a company and leading a team.