When I left my job at a tech startup back in November 2013, I had no plan. It was a Friday, so after giving in my notice I would just go to the pub. I sent an email to one of the two company founders, “Do you have a minute to chat in the boardroom?”. He was sitting a couple of desks down the office from me and he looked busy. It took about 45 minutes before he stood up, gave me a nod and walked into the boardroom. I think that 45 minute wait was the most nervous I've ever been at the company.

“So, what would you like to talk about?”

“I’m here to let you know that I am leaving the company.”

I think I felt the shock across the table. I was at the company for 4 years and I understand how hard it is for a startup to lose a good employee. “I’d like to give freelancing a go, as well as working on some products of my own.”, I said. But freelancing, even though I could be very good at it, was not what I ultimately wanted to be doing. The reason I was leaving was because I wanted to build something that I would own, not something that has been asked of me. Exchanging your time for some money (being either an employee or a freelancer) has a very linear line of income. I thought that a fixed time investment in building a product would have the potential for compounded revenue growth and at the same time working on projects that would be more exciting.

But I had no plan, I had to come up with a plan. It took me about 3 weeks to declutter my todo list. And when my mind was clear, the very first thing I did was to get some scissors and cut a long strip of paper, writing on it “Work only on products for the next 6 months, no freelancing no matter what!”. I placed it between my keyboard and my monitor, so that it would always be in sight. What it meant was that for the first 6 months, my time would be focused on experimenting with product development and online sales. I should suppress my natural urge to go out and find clients, as well as turn down every opportunity or client that would ask me for freelance work. I feared that if I did some freelancing for quick money, it would be very easy to just slide down the rabbit hole of consultancy work, maybe getting into another comfort zone similar to the security of having a job.

So online software sales it is. How do you sell software online anyway? At the time I had some experience with the open source Magento eCommerce platform and I knew that Magento, can be configured to sell “Downloadable” products. I thought hey, that’s a nice clean way to sell software and also manage the customers, view sales reports and easily update the product information from a back office. So the selling platform was chosen.

The next step would be to pick a payment gateway. At the time I knew that Stripe, this new payment gateway which was very developer friendly, had lower fees than PayPal. I looked around for some ready solutions to use Stripe with Magento, but they were a bit pricey. Maybe there is a pricing gap in the market, I thought. Maybe a Magento Stripe integration should be the first thing I should build, and use it to sell itself. In the beginning I wasn't sure about it at all. The market seemed rather crowded, so not a lot of upside potential. “Well.. if this covers around half of my basic monthly expenses, I would be happy”, I thought, and the product was chosen.

So by Christmas time in December 2013, I launched Stripe Payments, which was an inexpensive payment gateway integration between Stripe and Magento. What I didn't expect though was that by the end of its first month in the marketplace, it would make three times as much income as I originally expected. The income it produced was not completely passive, I had to offer some customer support with it. Every single email that was coming in, I would read carefully, think what the customer actually needed from their business point of view and then add it as a feature to the module. Within a few months, the module climbed the charts to become the most popular and most advanced Magento-Stripe integration in the marketplace.

There is a nice thing about listening carefully to your customers. Most of the time, they will point out the correct feature that you should be working on. Unless you are Steve Jobs or Elon Musk working on some paradigm changing cool shit, it is not your job to come up with new features. You should let your customers tell you what they need. If they got themselves into the trouble of coming to you and asking for a feature that they would find useful, it is a lot likely that 100x more customers are out there looking for the same thing and who will never come knocking your door.

One of the features that was asked for in the beginning, was the ability to sell subscriptions using the module. But at the time, that didn't fit in my head. It just sounded wrong using Magento to sell subscriptions, but that was just because I was coming from a SaaS world into the eCommerce world. The second time the same feature was asked of me, I did not ignore it. So I set out to build a second product, Stripe Subscriptions for Magento. This also sounded like it had a very limited upside potential. However, the combination of the two modules together was the only reason my monthly income ever peaked to be twice as much as my regular monthly salary at my old company. Is there some sort of pattern here?

Best of all, even though some customer support was necessary, the income was just as passive as I would ever hoped to get. There are a lot of ways to make money, and as soon as you figure out how to make enough, then you can just go and do whatever you want to do in life. I’m particularly in awe of what David Welsford has done with his time — restore a sailing boat and sail around the world:

Anyway, in my case, I didn't take a year off to travel. What I really wanted to do was to return to my roots, to build a successful SaaS product. So I set a goal to build a product that was so ambitious, that if the project worked out then it would be the last one I ever needed to work on. But the market was too saturated to enter in a profitable way and the fact that we raised some investment meant that we had to push for growth and answer to investors. When we eventually realized that we would run out of money before we met any of our growth targets, we pulled the plug.

I now understand better how growth should not be taken in 100X growth steps. You can’t have a baby in less than 9 months and you can’t build a large company without going through each incremental step of the journey. So I begun paying more attention at where the next steps are and have started moving towards the next project. How will it play out? I can't tell yet, but if you enjoyed the post and would like a follow-up, hit the Recommend button.|||

When I left my job at a tech startup back in November 2013, I had no plan. It was a Friday, so after giving in my notice I would just go to the pub. I sent an email to one of the two company founders…