In my previous article Getting Started with Jenkins and GitHub I showed you how to create your first Jenkins job and download the source of your project from GitHub. If your projects are stored in TFS you can read how to setup your Jenkins job for TFS here: Integrate Jenkins with Team Foundation Server. The next step was how to build your projects via MSBuild and download packages via NuGet, find more in Integrate Jenkins with MSBuild and NuGet. Here I will show you how you can easily execute your MSTest tests in your Jenkins Job and publish the results.

You don’t need a plugin for the execution of the MSTest tests because I will show you how to do it via Windows Batch Command in order to be more configurable.

After your build steps for downloading the source code and building your project, add a new Windows Batch Command.



You can use the following command in order to start the execution of your tests:

First you specify the path to the mstest.exe console runner, you can create an environment variable for it. Next after the switch “/resultsfile:” specify the file path where the results are going to be saved. Next after “/testcontainer:” paste the path to the DLL where your tests are located. You can find more information about the console MSTest execution in the Official MSDN Documentation.

Add a new post build step “Publish MSTest test report“. Specify the path to your TRX file (the tests results file which you have configured in the above step).



At the end of your Job definition be sure that you delete the TRX Tests Results file manually or via the deletion of the whole workspace if the file is placed in it. Otherwise, the next job will fail due to already existing results file.

When you start youryou can view thein yourAlso, you can access your tests results for each specific Job Run from the “” link.If you open the link you can view the complete history of your test suite. Specific test- failing rates and execution times.|||

Explains how to configure Jenkins MSTest tests execution- different parameters. Also how to publish the generated RTX results file and display the results.