Let’s start off with the basics, GANs is an acronym for Generative Adversarial Networks. These were first introduced in 2014 by a group of researchers led by Ian Goodfellow. The main idea behind a GAN is to have two competing neural networks. The first of these is known as the generator. The role of the generator is to generate data from an input vector of noise. The second model is known as the discriminator, whose role is to discriminate between the data generated by the generator and real data. These two networks are battling against each other; the generator trying to create more and more realistic samples to fool the discriminator, while the discriminator is learning to get better at distinguishing the difference between the generated and the real data.

We can think of this as a money counterfeiter “battling” a police officer. When the counterfeiter starts, the money they create is easily distinguishable from real money. An easy day's work for the police officer. However, the counterfeiter keeps trying, altering their technique until they fool the police officer. When they do fool the police officer, they improve their forgeries in that area. The police officer doesn’t give up that easily and learns how to distinguish these new counterfeits to real money. This process goes back and forth, each competing against each other, until the counterfeit makes perfect replicas.

The only thing that is missing from the above scenario is a second police officer - a “dirty cop”. The dirty cop is actually working with the counterfeiter, telling them how their forgeries are being identified. This is basically the process of a GAN. The counterfeiter is the generator network, and the police officer trying to identify the forgeries is the discriminator network. So then what is the dirty cop? Since the discriminator is a neural network, we can backpropagate to find the gradients of the input data. This information tells the generator how to change its output data (by updating its weights based on the gradients) to increase the probability of it being determined as real from the discriminator’s viewpoint. The dirty cop telling the counterfeiter how to improve is analogous to this tuning.|||

If you have been on a Twitter lately (and follow similar people to me), it seems like there is a new GAN being hyped up every day, and I dare say that I am…