The party's definitely over for Silicon Valley SAN FRANCISCO — Valeri Davies was "living in la-la land" a year ago. The publicist at e-commerce firm Campsix enjoyed the fruits of a hot Silicon Valley start-up: fat salary, free massages and lunches. Today, the company is defunct. Davies, 30, is unemployed, considering a government job. She spends her days reading about the Middle East. "Things went from Romper Room to a nightmare," says Davies. "Our company was throwing $50,000 parties every 6 months. Now, my friends and I can't find work." Silicon Valley is in its worst slump in its 50-year history. It may not have bottomed yet. And it is far from reclaiming its past glory in the nation's economy. Search past issues of USA TODAY for stories on this subject Valley unemployment is rising faster than in any other U.S. metro area. Venture funding — mother's milk for valley start-ups — is down 71% from a year ago. September was the first month in 25 years to pass without an initial public offering of any type, including the high-tech ones that minted many a Silicon Valley millionaire. Valley real estate, soaring in the 1990s to make the area one of the nation's priciest, is plummeting. Bankruptcies are rising. Tech executives are selling homes and luxury items (story below). The downturn has been especially harsh because the valley soared so high with the Internet boom, lifting stock markets and the U.S. economy, making the area synonymous with instant riches and unfettered promise. "Companies have gone from the highest high ... to the lowest lows — all in 2 years," says Ben Horowitz, CEO of valley software maker Loudcloud. High-tech pioneer Fred Hoar, who started at the valley's Fairchild Camera and Instruments in 1969, notes that the valley goes through a "depression, recession or turndown" every decade. "But this is deeper than anything before," he says. "Paper billionaires have become millionaires and thousandaires." The area's malaise has a national kick. Silicon Valley was the top patent producer in 1999, when the economy kicked into overdrive. That year, valley inventors were awarded nearly 7% of 84,000 U.S. patents — more than twice their share in 1990. Such innovation helped propel the U.S. tech sector. It grew four times faster than the overall economy in the 1990s. It accounted for almost a third of economic growth in 1995-99. And its share of gross domestic product was 8.3% last year — up from less than 6% in 1990. Now that leadership role appears threatened. More than 80% of VC money — crucial to young firms — is focused on keeping existing firms alive. While many of the nation's top venture capitalists remain clustered in Silicon Valley, their share of the national VC pie has slipped. Valley VCs invested $6.1 billion in the first half of this year — 32% of the total invested by all VCs. That's down from 38% in 1999, according to research firm VentureOne. Tech titans are cutting jobs in record numbers. Cisco Systems is laying off 8,000 — its first layoffs ever. Hewlett-Packard is chopping 7,000 jobs. In its 62-year history, it hadn't cut more than several hundred jobs at a time. The industry is buried in excess inventory. Cisco alone is purging itself of $2.2 billion in excess inventory. This week it said it scrapped $450 million in inventory and sold $32 million more for just $4 million. The tech-rich Nasdaq stock index, meanwhile, has lost 64% of its value since peaking in March 2000, wiping out $4.1 trillion in market wealth. Government defense spending because of the war on terrorism could boost valley firms. But most of the big defense contractors, such as Lockheed Martin and Boeing, are not based in Silicon Valley. Many hot biotech firms are outside the area, too, including Celera Genomics and Human Genome Sciences, both of Rockville, Md. Plus, it's too early to say whether anti-terrorism will be a permanent growth market, says Larry Kubal of Labrador Ventures in Palo Alto, Calif. Dwight Jaffee, finance professor at the University of California at Berkeley, compares Silicon Valley's struggles to the defense-industry slump that plunged Southern California into a deep recession in the early 1990s. That area has never fully recovered its past heft. "Until the recession hits, people don't believe it is happening," he says. "And once it happens, it takes longer to shake than you think." • Unemployment rises. The unemployment rate in Santa Clara County, the heart of Silicon Valley, soared to 5.9% in September — highest in 7 years — and three times the rate in 2000. It is expected to go even higher. Last year, when unemployment was a record low of 2%, many high-tech workers jumped from one hot start-up to another every 6 to 9 months. Insiders called moving from one gig to another the "Hollywoodization of Silicon Valley." Today, high-tech's employed aren't thinking of going anywhere. "The valley used to be full of mercenaries, looking for the next great opportunity," says Chris Larsen, CEO of E-Loan. "Now, everyone is a missionary, perfectly content to build a company." That is, if they can find work. Like thousands of other tech workers, Steve Brien, 38, lost his job in February as an independent contractor developing software for San Francisco-based brokerage giant Charles Schwab. Since then, he's contacted hundreds of San Francisco Bay Area employers without luck. He's considering moving to Florida to teach scuba diving. Six months before losing his job, Brien had a chance to join Schwab full time. But Brien, who was making $135,000 a year, figured he could do better freelancing. "I looked for the high-stakes money," he says ruefully. "I didn't even think about the longevity. I just assumed it was there. And 6 months later, it was gone." • Bankruptcies jump. For the 6 months ended in September, there were 9,945 new Silicon Valley bankruptcy filings — up 3.3% from the same period a year ago. In San Jose alone, it's been a steeper 4.2%. Driving these numbers are people like John Hamilton, 34, who filed for bankruptcy in March. During the go-go years of 1999 and 2000, he organized lavish parties for tech firms. One of his clients, software firm Inktomi, celebrated the opening of its valley office with a Mardi-Gras-themed party. Carnival rides and Cajun food greeted 600 guests. When the Nasdaq peaked, Inktomi was trading above $230 a share. Hamilton pulled down $120,000 a year. "There was a lot of fantasyland going on — money that didn't seem to have an end," he says. But parties dried up with the dot-com collapse. Hamilton's annual income plummeted to $30,000. Former client Inktomi has seen its stock drop to $4.57 a share. Hamilton now works for a marketing firm with clients such as Sun Microsystems and IBM — firms he says are more stable. • Real estate suffers. Silicon Valley home sales plunged 32% in September from a year ago, compared with 12% nationwide. Prices have fallen the most in top-drawer areas like Los Altos, where the median sale price of $1 million is down 22% from a year ago. In the CEO haven of Saratoga, a Tudor-style home sold for $3.2 million in September — half what it sold for 18 months ago. In recent months, construction of at least three Silicon Valley homes, owned by tech execs and worth $3 million to $8 million, was scotched or downscaled. Among the cutbacks: The use of shingles instead of more expensive clay-roofing tiles and galvanized steel in place of pricier copper gutters. "High-tech executives are trying to sell high-end homes that their ... salaries can't support," says Carole Rodini, president of Alain Pinel Realtors. Commercial office space has been hit, too. In San Francisco, office vacancy rates have soared to 14% from 2% a year ago. In the financial district, rental rates have plunged 38% to $51 a square foot. • Start-ups hurt. Fresh-faced executives, who 2 years earlier fielded funding pitches from venture capitalists, now must lay off employees at cash-starved companies. Salesforce.com CEO Marc Benioff says companies are in shock. "Many are trying to figure out how to slash their budgets." Consilient, a Bay Area software developer, has shrunk to 22 workers from 120 in January. Jon Corshen, brought in 5 months ago to help save the company, says it will fold without a buyer or 11th-hour venture capital infusion. Instill, a software developer in Redwood City, said VCs recently pored over company books much more closely than they did 18 months ago. Instill got the $12 million it wanted. But last year, VCs offered Instill more money than it wanted with less negotiation. It is unlikely the tech sector will retake the supercharged growth role it played nationally in the 1990s U.S. economy, says Sung Won Sohn, chief economist for Wells Fargo. That is because the 5% annual growth in gross domestic product that tech helped create could not be sustained forever by any one industry. Sohn expects Old Economy sectors like auto manufacturing to gain more clout. Still, many valley executives are bullish about the area's future role. Innovation is just happening at a more sustainable rate among stronger firms, says Kubal at Labrador Ventures. The valley still has the magical formula of a concentration of venture capitalists and high-tech firms and good universities that kick out entrepreneurs. While venture funding is down, the $25.4 billion invested by VCs this year already makes this the third-best year on record, says Kubal. "It is the worst of times, yes," says Nathan Myhrvold, former chief technology officer at Microsoft. "But ... the engine of innovation is still humming."|||

