Google released support for multiple users. Once you enable this feature, you can teach your Google Assistant to distinguish between you and a partner or roommate. Check out the launch video:

Cool! Now, you’ll have your music, your calendar, and your news when you command the Google Home. But, this is only the beginning — it opens the door to new features and new problems.

Now that you will have a sense of identity to your Google Home, it won’t just be for a change of settings. If Google Home knows exactly who is talking, it will also be able to verify your identity.

Google will be able to more efficiently attach all of your voice data to the vast amounts of internet data it already has about you. Now that Google knows it’s you when you ask “What time does Papa John close?”, be ready for that ad to show on your computer.

Also, imagine Two-Factor Authentication with your Google Home. Instead of a phone call or text, the Google Home can verify it’s you by voice.

Apparently, people are starting to buy through voice assistants already, despite the fact that this is pretty risky. According to the BI Intelligence survey, 2% of voice users have paid a bill with voice commands, and 1% have sent money to a friend. With voice authentication, we can only assume these numbers will go up as trust in voice assistants goes up. The command, “Okay Google, Venmo $10 to John” won’t be far away now.

We’ve recently seen that your TV can command your Google Home. What would happen if a commercial placed an order instead? With multi-user features in place, you’ll now have an answer to this problem.

Should kids be able to control the lights in their parent’s room? Currently, if they speak the right command they can. Multiple users will eventually enable voice access control around your home. For example, you’ll be able to have your Google Home only answer to your voice.

In the future, you’ll be able to define which person has voice access to specific, or a group, of devices. The opposite is true as well. It will become easier to give someone access or temporary access to your devices through voice.

Parental Control is now possible. Through sentiment analysis, Google will be able to determine the sensitivity of questions. If a child asks an inappropriate question, the Google Home will be able to respond appropriately.

Soon, Amazon Alexa will roll out this feature. Until then, we are left waiting to find out how voice can really benefit our lives.

What do you think will happen after voice assistants can support multiple users? Respond down below, or let me know on Twitter.|||

Google released support for multiple users. Once you enable this feature, you can teach your Google Assistant to distinguish between you and a partner or roommate. Check out the launch video: Cool…