Preview with for best results. The sleep track was designed to calm a chattery mind and guide you to deep restful sleep. Can also be used during the day for naps.

Preview with for best results. The relaxation track was designed to quickly take you to a deeply relaxed state. You can use this track whenever you need a break or want to relax more deeply.

Preview with for best results. The meditation track was designed to support your meditation practice by triggering brain activity which has been observed in seasoned meditators. Comes in a 10-minute, 15-minute and 20-minute version.

Preview with for best results. The creativity track was designed to promote out-of-the-box thinking so that you can more easily see creative solutions. Also great for brainstorming sessions.

Preview with for best results. This focus track was designed to help you focus and be more productive during any activity, be it complicated work or just a hobby. Uses a cafe environment as background sound. Also useful as a 45-minute break timer.

Preview with for best results. This focus track was designed to help you focus and be more productive during any activity, be it complicated work or just a hobby. Uses a stream as background sound. Also useful as a 45-minute break timer.

Preview with for best results. This focus track was designed to help you focus and be more productive during any activity, be it complicated work or just a hobby. Uses a windy environment as background sound. Also useful as a 45-minute break timer.

Preview with for best results. This focus track was designed to help you focus and be more productive during any activity, be it complicated work or just a hobby. Uses a windy environment with thunder as background sound. Also useful as a 45-minute break timer.

Preview with for best results. The energy track was designed to increase your energy and motivation whenever you feel tired or unmotivated. Try it as coffee replacement.

Preview with for best results. The rain track was designed to simply drown out noise in your surroundings. It does not use neural entrainment to influence you brain activity. Can be looped during the night to reduce the impact of a noisy environment.|||

Discover the power of sound with a collection of high-quality audio tracks which combine sound and science to enhance productivity, relaxation and sleep.