The CW has done it again with its latest addition, Riverdale.

I just can’t afford to miss an episode! The creators are doing a great job at portraying modern-day life in a small American town (with the exaggerations, of course) and the storylines are refreshing. Out of all the teen dramas that I’ve been watching for the past five years, Riverdale has to be the only series that is artistically deep.

Enzer’s World (E.W.) Recognitions Winners such as Awkward and Faking It (which both aired on MTV) were good shows, but one quality that they lacked which Riverdale adds to its winning formula is depth.

Do you feel me?

Oh, and they’re a couple of story lines suitable for older people/adults as well! That is another aspect of the show that I really like. The way in which ‘both sides of the fence’ have been integrated into one series makes for a fictional series that is relatable.

The cast is not so bad: there are a couple of new and not so new faces. Lead actors KJ Apa (Archie), Lili Reinhart (Betty), Camila Mendes (Ronnie) and Madelaine Petsch (Cheryl) outshine the rest of the main cast members with roles which have undoubtedly showcased their good side. As an ensemble, all of the members work well together.

All the songs played during the episodes were cleverly selected. They are all hit songs which fit in with the plot and a part of the show that I look forward to. The music made for the series is also good.

The show could last as long as E.W. Top Series 90210 which aired on The CW for five seasons. Unlike Melrose Place (which also aired on The CW) the show has already been renewed for a second season. I really like the show but I don’t think it will last as long as other hit series like Supernatural and Arrow.

The 2017 Radio Disney Music Awards will air on the Disney Channel at the end of April and the 2017 Billboard Music Awards will air on ABC in May.

The 2017 Academy of Country Music (ACM) Awards, the 2017 Kid’s Choice Awards, the 2017 iHeart Radio Music Awards and the 2017 Oscars all aired a couple of days and weeks ago.

The Kid’s Choice Awards were lively, as usual. I didn’t bother watching most of the show because I don’t like repetition. Most of the content was carried forward from the previous year and the noisy arena is beginning to irritate me.

The iHeart Radio Music Awards were saved by Ryan Seacrest. The 2015 edition is still the best produced iHeart Radio Music Awards show in the archives, enough said.

The Oscars did not disappoint this year. The opening monologue, the presentation of awards and speeches, the musical acts, the stage and inserts all made Hollywood’s biggest night special (because it should be!).

The producers of this event always make the right choices. It’s a television special that leads by example.

Out of all the events that have aired on TV so far, the ACMs take the crown. Everything about that telecast was outstanding such that it felt like the biggest night in music. I didn’t expect a good show but after watching this year’s edition, I will not be missing the next one. Well done.

Love him or hate him, Justin Bieber is a success and he is still relevant. I am not a huge J.B. fan, but his work has to be some of the 2010s best of pop music. I like how he has evolved in music. When he started, he was this cute little Canadian but after a few years of exposure, one can tell that he is slowly becoming a mature dude. His recent releases prove the 'haters' wrong by showcasing his talent accompanied by sounds I never thought he could use.

I wonder who he is going to marry. Is he going to shock the world by coming out as gay in a few years?

What is he going to do next?

Songs by Justin Bieber that we like:

-    As Long As You Love Me (ft. Big Sean)

-    Where Are U Now (with Jack U)

-    What Do You Mean

“Joy is what happens when we allow ourselves to recognize how good things really are.” – MARIANNE WILLIAMSON

“Friendship, like credit, it is highest when it is not used.” – ELBERT HUBBARD

“For me, there is nothing more humbling that the pride of a humble man.” – RAGA MAHMOUD

“There can be no keener revelation of a society’s soul than the way in which it treats its children.” – NELSON MANDELA

“Happiness will never be any greater than the idea we have of it.” – MAURICE MAETERLINCK

Shout Out To My Ex; Touch; No More Sad Songs

Album Name: I get it.

I Feel It Coming by The Weeknd ft. Daft Punk

Not Going Home by DVBBS & CMC$ ft. Gia Koka

Madly by Us Three

Good News: The E.W. Board has begun drafting the 5th E.W. Independent Online Recognitions Shortlist. All of the shortlisted brands will be revealed after the current E.W. Year has ended. A set of categories with new additions will also be revealed after E.W. Day.

Sadly, the public vote which is used to determine the Top Celebs will not be used this year. This means that the E.W. Board will this year be given the task of selecting E.W.’s Top Celebs using criteria which I can’t reveal to the public.

E.W. Steam has a new theme and it’s all about the Sexy, Sexier and Sexiest. If you’re not a fan by now, then the color of blood is blue, lol. Well, red is a sexy color, right?

In case you haven’t heard, E.W. will be celebrating its fifth blogging year in June. A lot of effort has been put into making our fifth year special not only for our team but also for our loyal fans, followers, partners, and sponsors.

Multiple playlists featuring music that has contributed to our success and that we will be partying to have been created for you on Youtube. Search for ‘Enzer’s World’ on Youtube to view all of the music videos.

Another feature that we will be adding later this year is Enzer’s World Radio. The E.W. Board has decided to give E.W. Radio another trial run round which will feature more celebratory content. More will be revealed later this year.

#TheRoundUp by Enzer is proudly sponsored by:|||

