June is fast approaching, and we are super excited to be hosting cloud builders from all over the world at the Gaylord National Resort and Convention Center located in Washington D.C. for our .NEXT Conference - The datacenter event of the year.

.NEXT is an industry-leading technology conference where IT professionals gather to get a first look at the latest in enterprise cloud solutions, hear expert advice on building enterprise datacenters, and network with peers on the value that IT can bring to the business.

Here are five reasons to join your fellow community members in Washington D.C. for .NEXT June 28-30.

The event features main stage sessions designed to inspire innovation and professional growth, technical tracks to dive deep into the latest enterprise cloud technologies, and vision tracks to help with strategic planning.

Product experts, customers, and partners are ready to dig into what matters most to IT professionals today such as big data, security, workload lifecycle, hybrid clouds, machine learning and more.

The best part of any conference is connecting with the community. Get a front row seat at .NEXT to the awesome folks that make up this exciting community, make new friends and share a laugh in our community lounge.

Be one of the first to take a look behind the curtain to see some of the cool and exciting things our engineering teams have been working on, that may make it into the future product roadmap.

Use this opportunity to take classes like our full-day, instructor-led Acropolis 5.0 course and explore certification opportunities like the Nutanix Platform Professional (NPP) or Nutanix Platform Expert (NPX) certifications.

Don’t miss this unique opportunity to meet like-minded professionals and have fun in the process. Are you ready for the next wave of IT transformation? Join us at .NEXT D.C. to find out.

P.S. Need to convince your boss? We can help with that. Download the justification letter, and we will see you at the event!|||

June is fast approaching, and we are super excited to be hosting cloud builders from all over the world at the Gaylord National Resort and Convention