Theranos Inc. misled company directors about its laboratory-testing practices, used a shell company to “secretly” buy commercial-lab equipment, and improperly created rosy financial projections for investors, according to allegations in newly unsealed court filings in a suit by one of its investors.

The Silicon Valley company—which once promised to revolutionize the blood-testing industry using tiny samples from finger pricks—also ran “fake ‘demonstrations tests’ for prospective investors and business partners” using commercial devices while pretending to showcase its own technology, according to the filings.

The accusations are based in large part on testimony from 22 former Theranos employees or directors who were deposed by lawyers for Partner Fund Management LP, a hedge fund suing Theranos. The filings contain some of the first substantive details to emerge from several court proceedings against the company, though they include only short excerpts from the depositions.

For instance, former Theranos director Gary Roughead, a retired Navy admiral, said in a deposition “it was not until some of the press reporting that [he] became aware that there was extensive commercial analyzers in use,” according to the filings.

Adm. Roughead didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment through the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, where he is a fellow.

Theranos said the documents reflected a “one-sided filing by one party to litigation” and that it disagrees “with much of what PFM alleges in its complaint.” It said many of the allegations repackaged media reports over the past couple of years. The company said late Friday that of its three former directors who have been deposed, not one stated that he had been misled. It said the allegations about “fake” demonstrations had “no merit” and “completely distorts Theranos’ practices.”

Partner Fund initially sued Theranos in October alleging the embattled startup had misled the hedge fund when it solicited a roughly $96 million investment in 2014. The new filings followed a suit that Partner Fund filed earlier this month to block a deal Theranos sought to cut with other investors.

That deal would reward investors who accept it with additional equity and other rights in exchange for legal releases protecting Theranos, its directors and its founder, Elizabeth Holmes, from other potential lawsuits.

Theranos said the deal “is consistent with [Ms. Holmes’s] longstanding, personal commitment to doing the right thing for the Theranos shareholder base.” It said Partner Fund’s effort to enjoin the deal is “meritless” and “self-serving,” and would harm other shareholders.

Lawyers for Partner Fund didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment.

In the complaint, Partner Fund said the deal would also give the investors who accept it priority in the event of a bankruptcy by Theranos, arguing that could harm the hedge fund’s ability to recover its investment.

A judge in the Delaware Court of Chancery issued a temporary restraining order blocking that deal last week, ahead of its scheduled closing last Friday. The judge, Travis Laster, will decide whether to allow it to proceed after a hearing that is scheduled for early May.

The filings so far made public include just the complaint and a related brief. Theranos said in a court filing Friday it would ask the court to keep broader excerpts of the depositions those documents cite under seal.

According to the documents, Theranos set up a shell company called Protegic Procurement Company to buy commercially available devices from companies like Siemens AG to run lab tests. Theranos then modified those devices to run small finger-prick samples on them, people familiar with the matter said.

The company was incorporated in Delaware in 2013 and listed as its sole director one of the Theranos employees who was deposed in the case, business filings in that state show. Theranos said it is “a common practice for companies working on confidential, proprietary technology” to use subsidiaries to acquire supplies and that it wasn’t an effort to conceal its purchases “from anyone.”

A former employee told the Partner Fund lawyers in one of the depositions that he had been told not to talk to people about the use of such devices, according to the filing.

Another former employee estimated in a deposition that Theranos was doing only about half of its tests on the smaller finger-prick samples and was running those on commercially available equipment, not devices made by Theranos, the document says.

The Wall Street Journal first reported in October 2015 that Theranos was using its own devices for few tests and that employees had concerns about the accuracy of its technology.

One of those former employees, Tyler Shultz, the grandson of former Secretary of State George Shultz, also told the Partner Fund lawyers in a deposition that Theranos and Ms. Holmes overstated the accuracy of its testing devices.

The Journal identified Tyler Shultz as a source in a November article about his dealings with Theranos and its prior outside lawyers. Tyler and George Shultz declined to comment.

Theranos eventually voided or corrected about 920,000 lab test results through this March, according to the filing, which attributes the number to a disclosure made to investors in connection with the pending deal.

The filings also raise questions about Theranos’s financial projections. Theranos gave Partner Fund financial projections in January 2014 that estimated it would have a gross profit of $1 billion in 2015, a filing says.

But in a deposition, the company’s former controller told Partner Fund lawyers she had prepared a separate projection less than two months later to help prepare Internal Revenue Service reports that contained a far lower estimate: just $100 million of gross profit in 2015.

The newly public details were revealed after the Journal filed a legal challenge seeking to overturn the court’s confidential treatment of expansive portions of the original filings.

Appeared in the Apr. 22, 2017, print edition as 'Theranos Investor Suit Offers Detail.'|||

An investor said in newly unsealed court filings that Theranos used a shell company to buy commercial-lab equipment, then pretended it was using its own technology in demonstrations for prospective partners and investors.