Note: Chosen 10 top BigCommerce apps in this list focus on improving conversion rates, push shoppers to checkout, and increase sales for BigCommerce stores. We do not include apps that support operational functions.

When it comes to choosing an eCommerce-hosted platform to build an online store, BigCommerce was your No.#1 option thanks to their easy-to-use dashboard, unlimited sales cap on any plans, 0% transaction costs, 24/7 support from a dedicated team, and more.

Besides BigCommerce’s built-in features, however, you still need assistance from third-party apps to take your store to the next level of automation and efficiency. But when it comes to finding the right add-on apps, it is nerve-racking and time-consuming. Too many apps that it can take you weeks to try, test and finally come up with the right ones for you. One minute cost to find a right app is a one minute wasted when you’re so busy handling your 9-to-5 job and your entrepreneur dream at the same time.

So…we’ll save your time, by doing the research, trying all the best BigCommerce apps on our test stores, contacting the developers for in-depth information, and putting together top 10 BigCommerce apps in this comprehensive article.

P/S. Number #6 and #3 are the most unique apps that you cannot find substitutes in BigCommerce App Store.

Adding, editing, removing payment information are sometimes real hassles for online shoppers at checkout step, which can lead them to drop if the options are not easy enough for them.

Rebilia is the best BigCommerce app that helps merchants solve this problem nicely. It allows shoppers to save their payment methods (currently support Authorize.NET, Braintree, Stripe, PayPal Payflow Pro, PayPal Payments Pro…) for future purchases. Shoppers can view, add, delete payment options on their account. You, as the store owners, can easily manage authorised transactions partially or in bulk in BigCommerce admin.

Compass incorporate a comprehensive reports of all your analytics metrics into a dashboard in your store admin. Instead of manually keeping track of metrics in excel, you can now watch all metrics calculated for you by Compass in 1 dashboard.

You can make bad business decisions due to the lack of contextual data. Compass gives you the benchmarks of your industry to help you make sense of your data. Though 100% precision is impossible, Compass crunches their huge pool of data to produce results closest to reality.

Pricing: From Free to custom. Refer to their website for details



Amazon dedicates 70% of its homepage to product recommendation widgets. Embracing this idea, the app builds highly advanced recommendation algorithms to tailor product recommendations based on customer’s behavior & interests on store.

To improve better product discovery experience for your customers at all pages, the app builds 4 types of recommendation and give you the options to set up any types on any pages (except checkout page):

The design is clean and 100% customizable with handy tools in settings admin so you can design its looks to match with your store’s theme:

Pricing: This app pays for itself. It takes 4% of the extra sales it generates monthly. No bills if on sales. This is a no brainer for stores that are limited on budgets.

89% of online shoppers make purchase based on reviews from past purchasers. Yotpo Reviews is a full-solution platform to help you generate reviews and curate those reviews into effective traffic and conversion drivers.

In the free version, it sends follow-up emails to buying customers to request reviews. More advanced features in premium packages include responding to reviews (publicly or privately), transforming 5-star reviews in Facebook ads, incentivising customers to write review with coupon codes…

Growing revenue for your online store goes with growing your email list and fan bases of your social accounts. Better Coupon Box empowers catchy welcome popups that ask customers to follow social media or subscribe email in exchange for a coupon code on their first purchase. This is a brilliant idea how to use coupons to convert visitors into buyers for online stores, executed by the best BigCommerce app to build popups.

What’s special is, Better Coupon Box lets you target the right customers and save costs with multiple trigger options:

There are many loyalty solutions for BigCommerce, but we think this is the top BigCommerce app. It helps you build a point-based loyalty program on your store. You can reward points to your customers if they take profitable actions on site, such as purchases, referrals, account registrations, social shares, and more. You can decide what actions and how many points to reward on the app settings.

Pricing: Free with up to 500 members, from $59 – Custom pricing, based on number of members (>500) – https://www.sweettoothrewards.com/pricing/

Aftership is one of the best BigCommerce apps in shipping management. In the app dashboard you can track the status of all shipments, and view a detailed analytics report on shipments that are delivered, pending or overdue. Detecting delivery exceptional trends in the report will help you take actions. The app also automatically sends out customized notifications to customers when shipment is in transit, out for delivery, failed attempt, etc.

For your customers, they can view the delivery status of their order in 1 click, and receive auto delivery notification right when the order is delivered.

Pricing: Free to Custom based on number of shipments per month – https://www.aftership.com/pricing

Built from the original idea of upselling and cross-selling tactics applied by Amazon and other big eCommerce sites in the work, Boost Sales app helps sell more to each customer, increase average order value by upselling and cross-selling relevant products they’re interested in.

The offers show up in form of interactive popups. While product upsell alternates cart options with higher-priced items, cross-sell allows you to bundle complementary products into combo and sell at value price.

The app also incorporates Sales Gamification technique: if you set a price threshold to offer a discount code, the app will motivate your customers to spend a little more and reach goal to receive the special offer. It looks like this:

Once installed into your BigCommerce store, Sellbrite helps you list your inventory from one central catalog to several popular online marketplaces by bulk. When you sell on other marketplaces, central inventory will be automatically synced real-time to prevent overselling.

When sales are made on each of the channels, the orders seamlessly flow into Sellbrite so you can print discounted shipping labels and ship all your orders from a single interface, or automatically route orders to Fulfillment by Amazon (FBA).

Pricing: Custom from $220 / month, based on number of orders / month with 14 Days Free Trial https://www.sellbrite.com/pricing/

Focusing on boosting checkout rate, this little awesome app is a unique one that you cannot find a substitute on BigCommerce App store. When customers add items to cart, you can motivate them to finish checkout by running different types of exciting offers with this app:

With the last one, not only can you increase checkout rate but you can also get decent social referral traffic from your customers’ shares.

Though BigCommerce includes some add-on features in their admin to help you promote deals on your store (Banners) and improve SEO rankings, the App Marketplace still has a lot of potential tools from third parties that can give you a strong boost in sales growth.

Above are the top 10 best BigCommerce apps we’ve collected from our own research and testing. There is no “1 size fit all”, of course. Try ones that you feel like, keep testing and the numbers will tell you which ones work best for your business.|||

Top 10 best BigCommerce apps in this list focus on improving conversion rates, push shoppers to checkout, and increase sales for BigCommerce stores in 2017.