The March for Science - San Francisco celebrates public discovery, understanding, and distribution of scientific knowledge as crucial to the freedom, success, health, and safety of life on this planet. We are a nonpartisan group, marching in support of the following goals: Communication, Funding, Policy, Literacy, and Diversity.

Communication: Publicly-funded scientists must be free to communicate openly their research, data sets, and interpretations of their work. Public outreach, education, and accessibility of scientific knowledge should be encouraged.

Funding: Investment in science and research is essential to drive innovation and deliver solutions to the complex challenges society faces. A long term strategic approach to funding science is needed, with policy stability and a commitment to increased investment that will ensure future growth and prosperity.

Policy: Public policy should be guided by evidence-based scientific research, local scientific knowledge, and mainstream scientific consensus.

Literacy: A well-informed citizenry is essential to a free and successful society. We support initiatives to promote broad public knowledge and discussion of scientific work.

Diversity: We consider all human beings equal. This should be reflected by diversity in scientific opportunities and leadership, open access to scientific results, and fair distribution of the benefits of scientific discoveries. We oppose the manipulation of science to marginalize groups of people, and instead support the right to pursue and enjoy the fruits of science regardless of age, gender, ethnicity, disability, sexual orientation, religion or lack thereof, political affiliation, or socioeconomic status.|||

Official page for the March For Science - San Francisco. The March for Science - San Francisco celebrates public discovery, understanding, and distribution of scientific knowledge as crucial to the freedom, success, health, and safety of life on this planet. We are a nonpartisan group, marching in support of the following goals: Communication, Funding, Policy, Literacy, and Diversity.