The best advice I am able to give you on how to pass the Y Combinator interview is to control your “first breath”. The first 20 seconds to two minutes when the partners patiently listen. There’s more on what to do with that time below, but that’s it in a nutshell.

The second best advice I’m able to give you is to read YC’s material on their own site — They mean it. [1] [2]

Twice a year my cofounders at Cymmetria and I are bombarded with requests for help.

Mainly from two communities. We’re the first Israeli startup to get into YC (that we know of — there have been Israeli founders like Roee Shenberg and Daniel Gross before us, and Dan Danay and Talia Frenkel at out bacth — S15.), and we are one of the bigger YC cyber security brands. Between these two communities we get dozens of requests for meetings.

It’s important for us to help the ecosystem much like we were helped, but we don’t scale to the demand. Below is the advice we find reproducible.

I am careful about startup advice. Mostly, it sucks. The advice you get is usually generic (“never hire people, until you’re bleeding out of your eyes”), it is also often contradictory (“anticipate your needs and hire accordingly”). And worst of all it’s dependent on the “expert” giving the advice.

Startup advice is a fad and everyone is an expert. There are three “expert” types you’ll encounter:

We try and be honest founders wherever we can, but advice has limitations.

“Control your first breath” is about the basics, with a twist in how a YC interview works.

The construction of the YC interview is simple. You have a few minutes to get your point across. They will listen to you at the beginning, likely without interrupting, and then ask questions. You can use this to your advantage and to help them make a decision about you.

WTF DO YOU DO? PLEASE JUST TELL ME.

It sounds simple enough, but it’s not.

If there is one absolute truth about being pitched by a startup founder, is that it’s even money on if you’ll understand what it is the startup does by the end of the meeting. My first pitch was two hours long (!!).

Thus, not only do you potentially miss the investment opportunity, but the investor’s questions will be about that first stage of understanding what you do, rather than moving on to other more important things.

You have this “first breath” of 20 second to two minutes. They will not likely interrupt you. Use the time well. Be sure you explain what you do. Otherwise imagine them having someone over their shoulder incessantly whispering “But what is it they do??”. Just think for a second how many startups they see in that one day of interviews alone. Put yourself in their shoes.

Personally, when I listen to a pitch I need to create a profile in my head where I “get it”. I’d think I’m now an expert on what someone does because the profile holds. That’s when I can start asking questions and poke holes in it. If it’s never complete, I never get that far.

It’s your time, use it well.

To my understanding, over half of all of YC’s returns come from just two of their startups. They invested in hundreds and hundreds. I may be remembering wrong and it’s more, but you get my drift.

Make sure your “first breath” gets the point across. You will be a unicorn.

In B2C, which I know very little about, your life is easier. To my understanding traction is about “the hockey stick”. Show them growth if you have it. Show paying customers if you have them. Show active users, registrations. Whatever it is you have which is most derisked, but do not hide the rest. They will be on to you in a New York second. When you have none of this, sell them on why the opportunity is huge, and about you.

For B2B, it’s much harder to convince people you may have a shot. Once again the best way get the point across is with traction. Unfortunately, your hockey stick could be five years away and is irrelevant here.

Using basic derisking, tell them of what your best successes so far are. Number of paying customers? A PoC signed? A PoC scheduled? A PoC planned? Never neglect to mention customers and $$$.

You may have very little traction, and that’s okay. This makes your pitch about the opportunity. In that case, I can’t try and help you too much in this post or it will go completely off track. A conversation is necessary. But, your goal is explain why it’s an inspiring opportunity and how it would make money. Show them the path to success.

For both B2C and B2B, at the very least show them you are working hard. For example, you managed to get some users, even your friends, to use your app in a “soft launch”, or installed your product at a customer site, or even just that you are working toward that goal, regardless of pay. Show them you try, and intend to keep trying.

#3 is what comes next. The partners in the interview are likely to ask you questions. They may fire them fast. They may be patient. But, don’t worry — you got this bro.

It’s your startup, you know it through and through. And, you’re not expected to have an answer for everything. This is exactly why you’re going to YC — To learn.

It’s important at this stage to note that YC is different from most other investor pitches — You are sitting in front of other founders. Be honest with them. You may end up coming across as arrogant or ignorant, otherwise.

If you’d still like to prepare, I recommend going through filling the Business Model Canvas Excel while watching some YouTube how-to videos, and then creating a quick and crude pitch deck following Sequoia’s Aaref Hilaly’s how-to guide, and this pitch deck template on Slideshare.

The reason I call this the basics is because I believe any startup pitch, regardless of what, or in front of whom, or what information (team, problem, what, solution, why/customer value, etc.) is shared, these two parameters (what you do and your chances of making it huge) are what investors are listening for. But remember, it’s just my take on it.

You are sitting in front of smart geeks. They may have seen dozens of you before and they may have never even heard of your field — but they do know a lot. Think of them as if they were you, only in a different field. Forget the marketing b/s. Just tell it like it is.

An amazing starting point would be how you’d have explained it to someone who is already an expert in YOUR field. Then if that’s unclear, add to it, or replace it with a simple explanation to the you who isn’t.

Reading online about the various partners’ background may not be a bad idea.

I highly recommend talking to other alumni, both because we send in recommendations on startups, and because their advice may be different than what I wrote above.

Lastly, always submit to YC, it’s worth it. Do not get discouraged! But do consider if it shouldn’t be the next batch you try for. That said, why not submit? You could always try again. You’ve got nothing to lose.

I may follow this post with something on how to build pitches based on the First Breath principle, but for now, Good Luck!

A lot of people who contacted me following this post specifically asked about bringing a demo to the interview. You should, but it’s unlikely to happen.

Place the laptop on the table with the demo on the screen, so the partners can see it’s there, and you can be ready in case they ask to see it.|||

The best advice I am able to give you on how to pass the Y Combinator interview is to control your “first breath”. The first 20 seconds to two minutes when the partners patiently listen. There’s more…