It’s tough to make money in the Android universe. When I first started reading about Android smartphone manufacturer profits, I was shocked by how little, if any, profits were made selling Android devices.

How could Android smartphone manufacturers thrive in this environment?

Android is open source, meaning it’s available under a license to let anyone study, develop on top of it, and distribute it. It’s conveniently called the Android Open Source Project (AOSP). If you’re a smartphone manufacturer (from here on out, will refer to them as Original Equipment Manufacturers or OEMs), you can build off of the AOSP for your devices, by agreeing to the “Android Compatibility Definition Document” that forces a standard, so that apps and services are guaranteed to work somewhat consistently across devices [1].

However, if an OEM wants access to Google apps, they have another agreement to sign with Google. This further restricts how differentiated an OEM can make their software experience.

The catch is: an OEM can’t pick and choose from the Google apps. It’s an all or nothing deal. If they want anything Google, they have to pre-install list of Google apps on their device, and only use the Play Store as the distribution channel for apps. And if Google doesn’t like any of the software modifications an OEM makes to their version, they can prevent access to their apps and services.

Google apps are tremendously popular [2]. This puts pressure on OEMs to comply, and provide access to these Google apps on the phones that they sell. Google is the house in this game: they capture most of the value. All apps are downloaded through the Google Play Store. Every time someone makes a purchase for an app, or within an app, a percentage of that goes to Google.

Margins only really exist at the premium end of the smartphone price spectrum (think iPhone, Samsung Galaxies and flagship phones). Manufacturers realize this, so they release their latest and greatest “flagship” each year, priced at the top of the bracket.

This makes this segment hyper competitive. Due to the higher margins, there exist opportunities for OEMs that can wait out short term profits for a larger piece of the pie (e.g. OnePlus, a Chinese OEM, undercuts flagship phones, offering nearly the same specs as flagships, at a significantly lower price point).

Competing on hardware specs alone isn’t defensible. We’ve seen this with the churn in OEM standings in the last 5 years. When an OEM offers nothing more than a laundry list of specs, they are easily overthrown by the next OEM that figures out how to add more specs to the list / offer the same specs at a lower price.

We’ve reached an inflection point — smartphones are powerful enough to handle computationally intensive experiences like virtual reality. OEMs are in a powerful position when it comes to creating these experiences because they can go below the application level and add functionality that 3rd party app and peripheral developers can’t (without branching off and making their own versions of Android).|||

It’s tough to make money in the Android universe. When I first started reading about Android smartphone manufacturer profits, I was shocked by how little, if any, profits were made selling Android…