Today, the majority of consultants skim clients by perpetuating that #blockchain is what is isn't: an omnipresent, DDoS resistant source of truthful data. Hence, everyone thinks they need "the blockchain" and hence, prototypes are conceived to become the new disruptive platform for X. However, that aim is only met in theory.

First, DApps don't scale on current public blockchains. The mantra of ridding "the middleman" obscures the fact, that a variable number of competitive, anonymous and slow miners become the middlemen instead. As an alternative to public blockchains, the PoC is delivered as a database with distributed administrators and some audit capabilities.

Second, the proposed solutions hardly take into account how valuable data should be shared without regret. Slowly but surely, such data-sharing tensions became the true riddle to solve for R3 which in turn implemented that "data is only shared with those parties which are required to see it". The same problem exists for public blockchains once pseudonyms don't cut it: You can't record and process your uber on a self-policing p2p platform if you don't tell them where to go. If all rides would be end-to-end encrypted and thus not exploitable by stakeholders, how could a decentralized uber ever become a functioning market? There are solutions that maximize pseudonymity guarantees, but eventually computation over encrypted data is needed.

Those unmet expectations led to a few abandoned PoCs that I know of, probably some more and a stream of pivoting blockchain startups. The essence is, that many are looking at the wrong problem. It's important to solve the scalability issues and we'll get there. Also, these shared databases ("DLTs") are becoming more clever. Even more important though is, why do users share which data, with whom and without regrets on future platforms?

Roughly two years ago, I realized that chaining blocks doesn't solve what is a precondition for most of the hyped use cases: making the best use of aggregate data while rewarding users in a fair manner. At first, this middle ground between selective aggregation, reward and privacy has little to do with technology. However, guaranteeing such a middle ground becomes more and more feasible with methods like differential privacy, federated learning and homomorphic encryption. The thoughtful application of those technologies will truly pave the way for cloud technology of the future. Eventually, intermediaries who use them will win consumers and industry over and in turn make everyone better off.

In this vein, I'm looking forward to keep on doing what Ethereum Vienna is best at: educating people about such cutting-edge technology. Next week, we will have a talk about the possibilities of homomorphic encryption. So check it out and remember: keep unsubstantial consultants at bay and start looking for substance!|||

