Last week, Amazon founder and CEO Jeff Bezos published his latest annual letter to shareholders, in which he shares some of the business insights and philosophy that have helped him turn Amazon from a fledgling online bookstore startup into the $425 BILLION behemoth it is today.

Bezos’ annual letters began in 1997 and have become absolute must-reads for anyone working in tech, and for good reason — since its founding in 1994, no company has weathered as many storms and defied our expectations as much and as frequently as Amazon. And it’s all happened under the watchful eye of Bezos, who has steadfastly remained CEO through all 22 years of the company’s history.

I’m sure a sizable chunk of letter’s readers were startup folks (like myself) looking to apply some of Jeff Bezos’ hard-earned insights at our own companies, and it didn’t disappoint. His latest letter was as thought-provoking as ever, and I could feel myself getting smarter while reading it.

However, on subsequent readings I slowly started to realize how potentially misleading some of this advice could be for a lot of people, without the proper context.

For my own benefit (and hopefully for others’), I thought it would be useful to go through each of his points one by one, and evaluate which ones are usable as-is, and which ones require extra consideration.

In this blog post, I’ll be excerpting each main idea from Bezos’ letter and then classifying it as LEGIT or BULLSHIT:

This is a very real phenomenon, and one that’s observable in a lot of other fields as well.

The unifying theme here is that people, companies, and systems all naturally tend to lose energy and devolve into a dull, dreary equilibrium over time.

The solution, according to Bezos, is to always keep yourself in Day 1 mode. Or, as Steve Jobs famously said, “Stay Hungry, Stay Foolish”.

This is one of those enduring pieces of wisdom that sounds so obvious, and yet is so hard for people to follow through on consistently, because it goes against our most basic instincts.

We all know we should be laser focused on customers’ needs, but too often we let ourselves get distracted by bullshit vanity metrics and other activities that seem fun and interesting but don’t actually help us build better solutions for our customers’ problems.

Customer obsession has been a recurring theme for Amazon, and it should always be a welcome reminder for us as well.

This here is what we call a false dichotomy. Bezos is contrasting two things — market research, which tends to be more quantitative, and design research, which tends to be more qualitative.

Which is more important? Bezos says it’s the latter, but the correct (and boring) answer is “neither” — they are complementary and will produce better decisions together, than either one can by itself.

Bezos’ advice makes sense for Amazon because they’re a gigantic company, and most companies that get that big tend to gradually neglect design research and end up looking at their customers more as data points than as fully fleshed-out human beings.

However, this advice could be dangerous for new startups and developing businesses who are already having to rely mostly on intuition and anecdotes to make decisions, and could greatly benefit from better data and market research. Context matters!

On one hand, this is a useful insight because all enduring businesses are built on some larger growing trend(s), and it’s much easier to compete in a growing market than a shrinking one.

However, Jeff Bezos makes it sound like embracing a big trend is simply a matter of indecision, and companies simply have to “man up” to start reaping the rewards.

What he fails to mention is that embracing the wrong trend, or embracing it at the wrong time, can be just as dangerous as not embracing one at all.

Amazon has embraced AI and Machine Learning because Amazon is an internet giant that generates unfathomable quantities of data every day, and that kind of big data is the lifeblood of machine learning algorithms.

While there are a lot of big trends happening right now — AI & Machine Learning, Mobile Messaging, VR & AR, On-Demand Delivery, Drones, Cryptocurrencies, IoT, Self-driving cars — most of them would probably be a total waste of time for your company. Embracing a growing trend is only useful if it allows you to provide an even better solution to your customers’ problems. Otherwise, embracing them will only cause you to fail faster.

He goes into more detail in last year’s letter, where he says there are two types of decisions:

As companies get bigger, they tend to overuse the slower Type 1 decision-making process for most decisions, including for many Type 2 decisions.

This is a great way to think about decisions, and how to better allocate your time and energy to the ones that matter most. Unfortunately, fast and empowered grassroots decision-making is one of the first things to go as companies grow.

The lack of Type 2 decision-making is why we hate bureaucracies so much, and why centrally planned economies didn’t work in the Soviet Union, Cuba, North Korea, etc.

By the way… Type 1 vs Type 2… Day 1 vs Day 2… Are we sure Jeff Bezos isn’t a Sith Lord? :P (“Only a Sith deals in absolutes.”) Would that make Elon Musk a Jedi, then? But I digress…

This sounds smart on the surface, but it’s actually bullshit because this idea of “70% information” doesn’t work in practice.

For example, if I asked you to apply this idea to your next work project, how would you go about doing that? What would “70% information” look like for you? How would you know when you’ve gotten to 70% information, so you can stop and move on to your next decision(s)?

“70% information” implies you can somehow know and measure what 100% information is. However, for real-world business decisions of consequence, 100% information is simply not quantifiable. 100% information is basically infinity, and there’s no such thing as 70% of infinity.

This is a much more actionable version of the “70% rule” above.

Anyone who’s worked on a difficult project with an urgent deadline knows that you will inevitably reach a point where your time is almost up and you either (A) have insufficient information or (B) you’re just unable to reach a consensus. You can’t predict when those moments will happen, but you will definitely “know it when you see it”.

In those moments, Jeff Bezos’ advice to “disagree and commit” makes a lot of sense. The ability to confidently make bold (but informed) leaps of faith in these kinds of situations of uncertainty is what separates the good companies (and leaders) from the bad.

This is generally true, but there are instances (particularly in tech and other fast-changing industries) where teams are purposely misaligned, by design.

Sometimes companies will intentionally try to “disrupt” themselves in order to innovate, by creating new product teams that have fundamentally different and conflicting goals from the core “cash cow” product team.

WeChat is the most popular mobile messaging app in China today, but it was originally created by a skunkworks team within its parent company Tencent that directly competed with their already-successful product named QQ, which was China’s equivalent of AOL Instant Messenger at the time.

Apple has famously cannibalized its own products many times over. The iPhone and its built-in iTunes music player cannibalized the iPod. The iPad tablet cannibalizes the Macbook Air and other Mac laptops.

Misalignment isn’t always a bad thing, but it does have to be managed properly, and while conflict between misaligned teams will be inevitable, it can be minimized with the right incentive structures.

Speaking of misaligned incentives… When the cost of publishing content online is free, and the easiest way to monetize that content is through ads and page views, it’s no wonder we’re living in an age of never-ending clickbait and #FakeNews.

Anytime you’re reading something on the internet that you didn’t directly pay for, you should always be asking yourself:

In the case of Bezos’ annual letters to Amazon shareholders, a lot of people will read them expecting to gain insights that they can immediately start applying at their own startup.

But that’s not Bezos’ goal, at all:

To be fair, when it comes to content quality, Bezos’ letters still rank near the top.

However, the same can’t be said for most “startup content” you’ll come across online. Most of it is either just bad, and even if it’s good, you have to remember that its primary purpose is to promote a brand and business that is NOT yours.

If you really want a successful person to share their most valuable and usable business insights with you, you should either be paying them, or persuading them to invest in you.

When it comes to (free) online content though, you get what you pay for, and that almost always ends up being “nothing”.

And while there is genuine wisdom to be found online, it can be hard to find amongst all the noise and clutter. It takes discipline and a discerning eye to be able to effectively filter for the wisdom that is (A) actually usable and (B) actually relevant to your company.

It’s something I’m always working on, and I hope this helps you in that regard as well :)|||

Last week, Amazon founder and CEO Jeff Bezos published his latest annual letter to shareholders, in which he shares some of the business insights and philosophy that have helped him turn Amazon from…