In my defense: I am medically handicapped and simply getting healthier has played a large role in me being less of a shit show here lately. Getting healthier has been no small feat.

This is something I struggle with: Figuring out which metrics matter and somehow making progress on those metrics.I know you can use forums, social media and the like to further projects, but I have never been good at that. No, instead, much to my chagrin, I was always good at being a walking, talking train wreck where I attracted all kinds of attention of the wrong sort and could not for the life of me figure out how to direct that attention into things I wanted to direct it into, such as traffic for my websites or new members for a discussion group I own.Over the years, I spent a lot of time trying to figure out how to stop being a walking, talking train wreck.* For the past few years, I actively worked on attracting less attention and lowering my public profile. I was fairly successful at achieving this goal. On the upside, that meant I saw fewer shit shows. On the downside, it seemed to lead to even less positive attention, such as website traffic.I found the whole thing crazy making. In recent months, I have actively worked on trying to raise my profile again, but gradually and without drama, as much as possible.I seem to be making progress on figuring out how to actually get stuff done and direct attention where I want it. I am not really sure how this is happening, but it seems like it is. I'm pleased as punch.Well, not really. I really would beif I was seeing positive drama on the scale of the negative drama I used to see. Sadly, this is not happening. I have not "gone viral" or similar.In the last few days, I left a couple of links on HN promoting a Google Group I own. The result has been an influx of new members. This is a thing I have never in my life been able to pull off before.The interesting thing is neither of these comments got a single upvote nor any replies. I wanted to blog about it because it somewhat flies in the face of what I would have thought.I would have thought that getting upvotes and/or replies would matter. But it apparently has no bearing at all on getting "conversions" -- getting people to actually submit a join request.I wanted to note it for posterity -- and because I think I learned something. I might want to revisit this lesson some time, so now I have a record of it.|||

