I was inspired to join the Anka Cooperative after serving as a diplomat in Turkey and coming literally face to face with this heartbreaking crisis everyday for two years. Together we have built a sustainable model whereby…

Reflecting on the journey of any venture and you realize all the mistakes made, all the pitfalls that should have been avoided, all the time wasted. Maybe we really should have launched six months back, or maybe everything was meant to be and now is our time.

What I do want to spend time reflecting on is how much I learned from this experience and incorporated from the tech and startup communities across the globe.

The first recorded Syrian refugees arrived in Turkey in early 2012. Earlier this year the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees determined that over 3 million desperate men, women and children have sought refuge in Turkey. This is the population of my hometown of Chicago, Illinois.

What problem would we try to solve? Food? Shelter? Education? Housing? Transportation? It’s completely overwhelming to contemplate all the issues that need solving.

We decided to start with jobs. Jobs give refugees a dignified way to support their families and a sense of purpose.

I had heard that the entire carpet weaving industry of Pakistan grew out of the Afghan refugee camps in the 80’s, and Turkey has an excellent tradition of weaving fine carpets — I thought this could be a place to start. I partnered with an American company who has been producing high quality carpets in Southeast Turkey for over 35 years. And my co-founder already had experience working in refugee camps.

People ask me, “Isn’t your project just a drop in the ocean given the massive crises facing Syrian refugees?” Yes, in a sense. But like any startup, we have to find traction first and then scale. The Empowerment through Employment model is one that can be easily replicated to other locations and other social enterprises. My hope is that this model grows to make a difference in the lives of thousands in dire need.

As a talk-thinker, or think-talker, I find it helpful to have a sounding board for ideas. I spent months talking with people about our project. So many constituencies wanted to support and contribute, but soon they would ask the inevitable questions: “This sounds great, but where is your website? When is your launch?”

Our team of volunteers works in 5 countries and was looking for leadership. I struggled to provide that from 7000 miles and 8 time zones away. And if you think social enterprises are immune to shiny objects — “Ooh a new Slack Plugin!” — think again.

We got distracted by what XYZ celebrity said about a cause, and whether we should hire another lawyer to check on our first lawyer. We wondered if we should be applying for grants, or if we should open a new workshop.

We needed to become a lean startup and trim the number of meetings to keep our core team focused on the immediate task. For us, our immediate task was selling rugs and raising awareness about our empowerment model. To do that we needed:

We spent months and thousands on legal fees looking into starting a non-profit. The proposed structure would have required multiple boards and entities set up in different countries — so more paperwork, legal issues, translation, etc. And not once did this get us closer to our immediate objective of sustaining our effort through sales.

I then reviewed our existing inventory closer. We have on hand over 500 rugs made by refugees. The market value of these goods was well over $3 million. We did not need to be chasing $30,000 grants.|||

I’m typing this late into the night in Bucharest, we’re about 48 hours prior to launch, and about 6 months behind schedule. I was terrified last week at this time — because we were supposed to launch…