We will use a well known Angular testing framework called Protractor. Protractor is an end-to-end testing framework for AngularJS applications which runs tests against your application in a real browser, interacting with it as a user would.

Angular JS applications have some in built directives like ng-model, ng-repeat, ng-controller etc. which are not included in Selenium locators. So,It is not able to identify those web elements using Selenium code. So, Protractor on the top of Selenium can handle and controls those attributes in Web Applications.

Step 1: Download and install NodeJS from here. Make sure you have latest version of node. Here, I am using node v7.8.0. You will need to have the Java Development Kit(JDK) installed to run selenium.

Step 2: Open your terminal and type in the following command to install protractor globally.

Step 3: Update the webdriver manager to download the necessary binaries.

Step 4: Following command will start up a Selenium Server. This step will run the web driver manager in the background and will listen to any tests which runs via protractor.

You can see information about the status of the server at http://localhost:4444/wd/hub/static/resource/hub.html.

Before jump into the writing the test case, we have to prepare two files that is configuration file and spec file.

Basic Understanding of the Terminologies used in configuration file:

You can find more configuration option from here. They have described all possible terminology with its definition.

Basic Understanding of the Terminologies used in spec file:

Before run the test case make sure that your webdriver manager and your application running in different tabs of your terminal.

Now, Run the test with :

You should see the chrome browser opens up with your application url and close itself. The test output should be 1 tests, 1 assertion, 0 failures.

Bravo! You successfully run your first test case.

How to test Rest Api request in Protractor?|||

Protractor is an end-to-end test framework for AngularJS applications. Protractor runs tests against your application running in a real browser.