Will Chinese Governments and other foreigners dump USA assets because of the exposed SEC “Securities Exchange Commission” data being exposed allowing for any hacker to execute the below tools to extract highly sensitive data? According to reports, Gigabytes if now Terabytes of SEC data can be extracted as of now throw this method to simply extract financial information for criminals to steal. The data however was not secured using the correct access control list options to secure files with inside the directory. Tools such as scp “secure copy”, ftp “file transfer protocol, sftp, and other arbitrary hacking tools can be used to query the Securities exchange commission directory since it’s not secured with “ACLS” and extract massive amounts of data quickly to any offsite Server, which would or will cause financial collapse because SEC data will be of no good use. The following link you can visit SEC “Securities Exchange Commission” link, which is a FTP share that should have been secured and download a archive of 10-k data that turns out to be over 100’s of Billions of dollars (“FORBIDDEN FTP SHARE TO ACCESS AT SEC “SECURITIES EXCHANGE COMMISSION”)(FORBIDDEN SEC FTP SHARE)(FORBIDDEN FTP SEC SHARE TO EXTRACT DATA)(FORBIDDEN SEC SHARE ACCESSIBLE)(2017). The previous server tools can be used to extract the high powered Securities Exchange Commission to any location however this can be sent through proxies that will be crowded through Millions of servers, but we have seen all the data being extracted. The Hacker News previously reported “SEC CIK Confirmation Codes to Retrieve Funds on the Web”, which researchers from “POGO” a federal misconduct agency that fines company’s 100 of billions of dollars however we found a tweet from various investigative researchers that located articles, which stated Hewlett Packard and Google assisted 5 Million businesses to secure their data, but since then a massive security glitch erupted to exposing over 200 Million sensitive, classified, confidential, and do not distribute data. (Tweets from POGO federal agents) (2014). In 2014 Hewlett-Packard today

agreed   to pay a total of $108 million to the Securities and Exchange Commission to settle civil and criminal charges over violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, but in this case it is much deeper fines that can result in seizure of corporate assets and property as we located the CIK and CCC codes on Onion Deep Web. We was able to located 100 of millions of corporations CIK and CCC codes to be able to gain access to financial securities and the ability to execute illegal trades. Most of the topics that are of interest in the Deep Web are illegal credit cards, drugs, sex, illegal identity, and other miscellaneous activities (The Deep Web) (2015).

YouTube Video that shows how to SCP files from remote Host to Destination Host

10 SCP Commands to Transfer Files/Folders in Linux between 2 Computers|||

