The observed changes in graphene’s electronic structure on the adsorption of four individual DNA nucleobases indicate molecule-specific interactions with a strong coverage dependency. To understand whether the sensing mechanism is purely related to the molecule-induced electronic structure modification of graphene, we need to look at the molecule–graphene interface electronic structure in more detail. When a molecule is brought into contact with graphene, there are several physical effects that can influence the energy alignment of the molecular and graphene levels at the interface41. Previous DFT calculations of DNA nucleobases adsorbed on graphene have predicted that nucleobases interact with graphene only weakly, predominantly by van der Waals interactions4,13,16. The frontier molecular orbitals (highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals) lie far from the Fermi level of graphene13. As a result there is only a very weak hybridization between the molecular levels of the nucleobases and the low-lying π-states of graphene, leading to a negligible charge transfer between the molecules and graphene13. Even though there is almost no direct charge transfer, the electronic structure of graphene can still be significantly influenced by the molecules.

It is commonly accepted that the adsorption of molecules onto a metal surface gives rise to the formation of molecular dipoles in the adsorbate layer. The effect of the electric field generated by such a dipole layer is a modulation of the surface potential of the metal, which can be measured as a change in the surface work function of the metal26,27. As graphene is a two-dimensional material the dipole electric field also modulates the number of charge carriers causing shifts in the Fermi level of the graphene, with the metal contacts acting as charge reservoirs42. This molecular gating is similar to the doping induced by a back gate contact when a voltage is applied. A similar mechanism has been previously reported for graphene on polymer substrates, where dipole fields of the polymer substrates caused both a work function shift and Fermi level shift in the graphene. In the case of polymer substrates, the Fermi level shift disappeared on samples without metal contacts, ruling out polymer to graphene charge transfer as the doping mechanism43. DFT modelling predicts that nucleobase adsorption onto graphene will also induce interfacial dipole formation, giving rise to a shift in graphene’s work function by 0.22, 0.15, 0.13 and 0.01 eV for G, A, C and T, respectively13. This has been calculated for one nucleobase molecule adsorbed in a flat geometry in a 5 × 5 supercell of graphene. Our experimental results, however, differ from the DFT predictions. The magnitude of measured Fermi level shifts shows a different order with respect to deposited nucleobases, and that these changes vary significantly with coverage. The consistency of our experimental shifts has been confirmed by two independent techniques and using different graphene samples from two producers. In the lower coverage regime (below 0.1 ML) the observed order of magnitude of Fermi level shift was G>C>T>A, which gradually changed to a molecular sequence of C>T>A>G at coverages greater than a monolayer. The magnitude of the shifts was in the range of 0–0.2 and 0–0.06 eV for C 1s and CNP shifts, respectively. There are several potential explanations for this strong coverage dependence and inconsistency with the previous DFT calculations. The most pointed difference being the observed angle at which the nucleobases adsorbed onto the graphene changing the strength of the molecular dipole44.

The strong coverage dependence of DNA nucleobases induced CNP shifts in graphene can be partly explained by the aforementioned molecular gating mechanism generating shifts in CNP. The electrostatic depolarization model is commonly used to explain molecular modifications of the work function and electron affinity of semiconductor and metal surfaces due to the electric potential drop across a layer of dipolar molecules26,27. At high coverages, the mutual interaction between the formed dipole moments can lead to a strong coverage dependency26. This can happen with and without a direct charge transfer between molecules and substrate. The electric potential drop, which is proportional to a change in the Fermi level of graphene, can be described as a function of molecular coverage (N):

where μ is the z-component of the dipole moment of the molecule, α is polarizability of the molecule and c is a constant representing the geometry of the dipole lattice26. The fits obtained using this model to our electric transport data are shown by solid lines in Fig. 2. The model correctly predicts an initial increase of the carrier density with increasing molecular coverage and saturation as the intermolecular interactions depolarize the absorbed molecules. The model fits well the data for C, T and A; however, the guanine data could not be properly fitted by this model due to a change of sign at high coverage. In spite of this, the depolarization model indicates quite correctly that guanine possess the highest dipole moment and polarizability, followed by C, T and A (ref. 44). It is important to note that the dipole moment sequence is exactly the same as the sequence observed in CNP and C 1s shifts in our experiments.

The adsorption geometry of molecules is an important factor that affects the interface electronic structure. Unlike the in-plane alignment considered in most of the DFT calculations13,14,15,45, our NEXAFS measurements have shown a tilt of all four DNA nucleobases to the graphene surface of ~30–45°. The method used to calculate this tilt angle39, however, is sensitive to disorder in the layer, and the measured values may represent partly ordered molecular layers with patches of disordered molecules. This structure is similar to the previously observed nucleobase films on graphite by scanning tunnelling microscopy46,47. Such disorder in the molecular layers could also be caused by defects and ripples ubiquitously present in the CVD graphene samples. A different nucleobase adsorption angle on graphene is expected to significantly alter the distance between the molecules and the graphene, and the hybridization of the molecular orbitals with the graphene. Ahmed et al.16 have recently demonstrated using DFT that the local density of states of DNA nucleobases on graphene exhibits a strong angle dependence for the molecular states within an energy range of a few electronvolts of the Fermi level. These states could be at the origin of the different sequence of nucleobase-induced shifts in our experiments compared with DFT calculations.

Another possibility for the difference is the interaction of DNA nucleobases with defects in graphene or even the SiO substrate. Structural defects and surface contamination are known to produce localized electronic states close to the Fermi level and act as internal or external scattering centres for electron waves, greatly degrading transport properties of graphene48,49. CVD graphene contains a range of defects, such as grain boundaries and point defects49. Unfortunately, the exact type of defects, the electronic structure and the nature of interactions between these graphene defects and adsorbed DNA molecules is still unknown. Although defects may play a dominant role in the observed shifts, we can exclude that a unique defect or a contamination in our samples is responsible for the sensing mechanism by observing the same results on two different graphene samples from different sources. The SiO substrate can also play an important role in the sensing mechanism of GFETs on SiO as has been proposed recently50. Using DFT modelling it has been suggested that the sensitivity of graphene to gas adsorbates can be attributed to external defects in the insulating substrate50. However, at this point it is difficult to clearly identify the role of these defects in our measurements and further studies are needed to elucidate the dominant sensing mechanism in our GFET devices.

Although both electric transport and XPS measurements have shown qualitatively similar behaviour, there is a difference in the information obtained by these two methods. The magnitude of the observed C 1s binding energy shifts relative to Fermi level shifts calculated from CNP shifts has shown to be consistently higher for the same coverage of an adsorbed nucleobase. For instance, the C 1s shifts for thymine are five times larger than the effective shifts calculated from the electric transport using equation (1) (Fig. 3). The simplest explanation for this difference is the presence of metal contacts near the measured graphene in the GFETs. Metal–graphene interfaces have been identified to have a significant influence on the transport measurements in graphene electronic devices51,52. The alignment between the metal work function (4.3 and 4.7 eV for Ti and Au) and graphene (4.5 eV) can lead to the presence of potential steps around graphene/metal contacts that have been reported to extend up to a few micrometres from the metal electrodes52. The contacts can thus act as effective transport barriers, causing high resistance in GFET devices. As the measured GFET transport properties are dominated by the areas of highest resistance, molecule-induced changes in the contact resistance could dominate our observed results, despite the large device areas. This characteristic indicates that if proper metal contacts are made with an optimal alignment with graphene, the electrical transport can become substantially more sensitive than seen with our graphene devices. If the measured signals from XPS are taken as the upper bound, we can expect an improvement in the sensitivity of GFETs to DNA nucleobases by up to a factor of 10 with proper metal contact engineering.

While these results confirm the fundamental sensitivity of graphene for DNA sensing, the task of implementing this design of graphene sensor into any realizable DNA sequencing technology presents even further challenges not yet discussed. Water-induced doping of graphene on SiO reduces device sensitivity and increases device noise53. As DNA sequencing is necessarily carried out in buffered ionic solutions, reduction of this effect becomes vital. Recent research has shown that using a different substrate will modify the graphene–water interactions24,54, suggesting that optimized substrate management may provide a pathway to water-based DNA sensing. Another problem faced by the use of large area graphene sensors for DNA detection is the requirement to distinguish between the effects of adsorbed nucleobases and the charged phosphate backbone. Experiments that test DNA strand sensing will be vital in understanding any phosphate backbone graphene interactions. Moreover, the device sensitivity will be influenced by the nucleobase adsorption angle that modulates the strength of the adsorbed molecular dipoles, potentially resulting in a significant difference between free nucleobases compared with attached nucleobase in a DNA strand. The charge state of graphene may provide an effective tool for electrical control of the nucleobase–graphene angle and the conformation of the DNA strand55.

In conclusion, we have shown that the electric transport measurements using GFETs fabricated on SiO can probe distinct conductance signatures upon adsorption of four different DNA nucleobases. By decreasing the size of the graphene channel in these devices and taking advantage of recent improvements in graphene mobility and noise reduction techniques, we predict that single-molecule sensing of guanine, cytosine and thymine by bulk graphene devices can be achieved. Successful device designs will require the identification and deeper characterization of dominant sensing mechanisms, combined with optimized metal contact engineering, to amplify the sensitivity of graphene devices to individual molecules. We have also established that the different nucleobases have different magnitudes of interaction with graphene that strongly depend on molecular coverage. Further research into device design may enable this molecule discriminability to be exploited for selective nucleobase sensing.|||

The development of improved DNA sequencing technologies relies on the ability to distinguish each of the four DNA nucleobases separately.