In ketosis, the body creates metabolic insulin resistance, and muscles get insulin resistant, so we don’t get glucose in muscles — we’re using free fatty acids and ketones. So once you’re keto adapted and your first meal out of it is a milkshake or fries — 200g of carbs (because you’re insulin resistant), it takes a massive amount of insulin to push that to storage, and it will make you feel like death.

Ketosis is a workaround where we don’t have to break down proteins to convert them to glucose to feed the brain. We can break down body fats, which turns to ketone bodies, which are water soluble and can go through the blood brain barrier, and fuel the brain in a really effective way. When you are in ketosis, you do spare some glucose, just for some parts of the brain and red blood cells — the few tissues that have to run on glucose and have no other workaround.

Note: biggest benefit of ketosis — being able to skip a meal!

Robb claims that for eons humans and other every other organism on the planet didn’t have consistent food based on an ancestral template. So how do we know our brains used to run off glucose? 🤔

Because our brain is so big and so metabolically active — ~2% body weight, 20% energy use — it’s really important to protect it. Between 70–80% of the brain can shift to fuel on ketone bodies, but 20–30% need glucose.

You can force your body to run on fats, where you do carbs every couple of days or eat carbs earlier in the day, and later in the day just fats and proteins, and then you fast through part of the next day. So you force your body to run on fats, produce some ketones (not full nutritional ketosis levels), but when you do drop in some carbs, your body can handle that, and it doesn’t put you in diabetic blood sugars.

Robb isn’t sure, but he personally feels best when ketotic (in full ketosis).

Robb also makes caveman coffee with their MCT oil, mixed with sugar free peanut butter, and soy lecithin/sunflower lecithin — which gets him to 0.5 millimolar blood ketones level — decent ketosis even though adding some carbs. Ketone salts don’t sit well with Robb.|||

I love podcasts and listen to hundreds of them a year. When I stumble upon ones packed with knowledge, I like to take notes. That helps me process and retain the information and gives me the ability…