Are you asking what is Google Data Studio or how to use Google Data Studio? Google Data Studio is a new tool from Google, currently in beta mode, which enables you to display your analytics data in beautiful and easy-to-understand reports. These reports are fully interactive and can be easily customised and shared with anyone who has a Google account for Google data visualisation.

As an online marketing agency that is obsessed with measuring and proving the ROI that we give our clients, one of the most frustrating things we have experienced is the fact that it is not easy to share data from Google Analytics with our clients.

When we started out a few years ago, we created some simple dashboard reports and exported them as PDFs that we emailed to our clients each month. Not only were these dashboard reports quite limited, but also the export feature of Google Analytics was pretty bad. Blank pages appeared at the end of documents, there were loads of unnecessary whitespace between data and they looked terribly unprofessional due to them being pixelated.

In the end, we gave up and used various other third-party tools to give our clients as much of the useful information as possible. We even had to start taking the data and manually put it into spreadsheets, just to get the results across to our customers. This all became very time-consuming, but for a tool that is the market leader in everything that is web analytics, there was no other way to share that data. That was until Google launched Google Data Studio.

The main aim of Google Data Studio is to take all the analytics data from various Google products and services and make it useful and easy-to-understand. Anyone that has used Google Analytics will know how complex the software is, with endless amounts of data, half of which you probably don’t understand. Every individual and business will want to see different data, so although it is great that the software tracks everything, it becomes hard to just extract the need-to-know information.

Google Data Studio was originally part of the Google Analytics 360 Suite (i.e. the paid version of Google Analytics) and a free version was released with some limitations. However, due to its success, they have now opened it up and made it free to everyone. With the help of this tool, website owners can now improve their web usability by having the data that they need to make better marketing decisions.

Anyone who has a Google Account can access Google Data Studio and the software has two main sections:

Reports – this is where you create reports and can see all the reports you own or that have been shared with you.

Data Sources – this is where you connect your Google Data Studio account to the various data sources, such as Google Analytics, Google AdWords, YouTube, etc.

Before you can create a report, you need to connect a data source. So, if you want to create a report for your Google AdWords data, simply use the tool to connect to your Google AdWords account. The data will then be available to use in Google Data Studio and you can create a report using the drag and drop editor to show off that information.

Another great feature of Google Data Studio is the fact that you can import a lot more than just Google Analytics or Google AdWords data. For example, as long as you put your reporting data from any other software into a Google Sheet, you can import it into Google Data Studio. This means you can even create beautiful reports for the likes of Facebook and other social media channels.

Because all the reports you create in Google Data Studio are interactive, it means they automatically update when your data updates and sharing them is as easy as clicking a button…literally, just click the share button at the top of the window!

If you are an existing client of ours, on one of our SEO packages, you will notice that we have already started to use this tool for some of your monthly reports and we plan to add more useful reports over the coming months.

If you want to find out more about Google Data Studio and how it can help your business, get in touch for more information on what is Google Data Studio. Remember to also take a read of our article on removing referral spam from Google Analytics to help ensure that the data you are tracking is accurate. I would also be interested to hear about your own experiences of Google Data Studio, so feel free to leave any comments below and I will get back to you.|||

What is Google Data Studio? In this post, we talk about Google data visualisation & how to use Google Data Studio to improve your marketing.