Protein is the main ingredient in building bigger muscles.

Without protein athletes would be unable to prevent muscle breakdown.

Preventing muscle breakdown helps give to give your muscle’s time to recover and grow.

This article will cover some awesome protein food sources to help boost up your protein intake throughout the day.

You can find these protein rich food sources at your local grocery store.

Take advantage of them as they are a perfect combination to and diet or meal plan.

Turkey Breast and Chicken Breasts: They contain  at least 30 grams of protein. You can cook chicken and turkey with seasoning to add flavor.  Amazing protein source for any meal including rice or potatoes.

Cheese (Non-fat Mozzarella Cheese): Cheese contains anywhere between 30-32 grams of protein. You can pretty much add it to anything to increase flavor and protein content.

Eggs Or Egg Whites: Eggs are packed with protein containing 13 grams of protein per every 100 grams. You can add eggs with veggies or toast or you can mix eggs whites in with protein shakes to increase the protein amount significantly.

Fish Sources Such As Tuna, Salmon, and Halibut: Fish is full of protein and it great when looking for a more lean source of protein. It contains roughly 26 grams of protein per every 100 grams. Fish tastes great with rice, veggies, and seasoning.

Nuts and Seeds Such As Pumpkin, Squash, Peanuts, and Almonds: Nuts and seeds can contain around 33 grams of protein per every 100 grams. They are high in fat so try not to eat to many. They are an awesome food filler if you are looking for some snacks in between meals.

Tofu: It may not contain as much protein as other food sources but it still has about 7 grams of protein per every 100 grams making it a protein rich food source. Tofu has a kind of cooked egg like texture and can be added to a variety of different meals for flavor.

Protein Powder: We can’t forget the amazing meal replacement protein source. Protein powder typically contains around 25 grams of protein per scoop. They are great to have after a workout for quick protein digestion and absorption. They can also be mixed in shakes with other nutrient rich ingredients.

Steak Or Roast Beef: Every 100 grams of beef contains about 30 grams of protein. Beef has a higher content of natural creatine in it making it perfect for bodybuilders.

What do you think of the protein sources listed above?

Also check out “7 Major Nutrition Mistakes That Bodybuilders Make”|||

Awesome Protein Food Sources For Muscle Growth! Have you ever wondered what food sources contain the most protein for building muscle? Well surprisingly...