Orgzit is a SaaS application hosted in the Cloud – the world-class Amazon Web Services to be specific. We take care of all the hardware requirements and licensing costs needed to host the application, so that you can focus on your business' core activities.

Don't you love it when software does not get in the way of getting things done? Orgzit is designed from the beginning to be a modern application that provides a fast and interactive user experience. So, say goodbye to waiting in frustration for the page to refresh and say welcome to an almost desktop-like user experience.

We know it can be difficult to master 5 different interfaces to do 5 different things. Orgzit has a simple and consistent user interface that you can get started with in 5 minutes and use it uniformly whether you are managing tasks or expenses!

To help you automate the recurring actions that make up your team’s daily work – we have custom processes. Save time and resources with Workflow Automation Rules to automate activities likes sending emails, alerts, updating values, creating tasks and reminders.

Kanban boards are a great technique to visualize the progress of your work through a sequence of stages.

Create your apps with simple but extremely powerful custom fields that can capture alphanumerical values, dates and times, users, photos and documents. Power up custom fields with attributes to control their behaviour including user access, edit-ability, and even run calculations.

We know that there is no one size fits all! Therefore, Orgzit allows to organize your organization's work and your team members into teams and projects in any way you want.

You can implement restrictions on user access via role based access permissions and user scoped views. Access permissions define the access restrictions of every user as Administrators, Regular users, and Readonly users. User scoped views define data-level restrictions that allow non-admin users to see only the data they are tagged on.|||

Orgzit is a powerful unified information management tool that empowers teams to organize and collaborate, making their working lives simpler and more productive. FREE for first 5 users, forever.