Mike Huckabee isn’t happy with the service of Comcast. He complained about some technical error and the Comcast technician didn’t arrive.

Mike Huckabee made tweets 7K times before he tweeted about a Comcast customer service problem; but when he did, oh man.

In the periods since he left the Arkansas governor’s office, the democrat has tweeted about the United States ex-president, Hilary Clinton’s maid, his lousy Delta flight- even the Oscars colonoscopies.

He jotted down so many tweets about so many things that Washington Post had a witticism skilled rate them, and Patton Oswalt tried to perform them as standup comedy (which Huckabee then tweeted about).

But in all those years, Huckabee wrote zero about his customer experience with Comcast, which has been frequently dubbed ‘the words company in America’ by many markets.

Huckabee is discerning in what he unveils about the ups and downs in the Mike Huckabee’s life.

All he’s told us about this specific problem is that something in late March, something went inaccurate with his Comcast service and technicians didn’t come to fix up that technical mess.

The North Korean government tried to show its military advantage by launching an airborne missile Sunday. It blew up hastily but still shook the neighbors of dictatorship and raised tensions with the US.

Huckabee, who ran for president two times, often employs hyperbole-by-tweet. The post found a wit skilled who liked it when he compared President Trump to Gotham city’s hero but still rated one-third jokes of Huckabee ‘stupid’ or ‘bad’.

As he continued to wait for technician of Comcast, Huckabee tried out some more customary lines. Comcast and its rival Time Warner Cable regularly bottom out in customer satisfaction surveys, as The Post noted in 2015.

The Consumerist twice rated Comcast as “Worst Company in America,” which was also the Verge's headline when Comcast tried to merge with Time Warner in 2014.

in January in PC Magazine, it was the “most disliked company.”

A 75-year-old Comcast customer in Northern Virginia was once so distended by a skipped appointment that she took a hammer to her local service center and shattered things until a cop came. The post noted, “The Hammer Lady” became “a folk hero for fed-up customers everywhere,”

Huckabee was less pardoning this time around.

After spending an hour of his afternoon comparing his cable supplier to United Airlines, the mafia, North Korea and a president who foreign policy he contrasted one to Holocaust ovens, Huckabee finally received the attention Comcast.

The company has been making exertions to enhance its image. After its “worst company” rating in 2014, Comcast improved its app to let people know when an expert was about to reach. A year later, it published thousands of fresh customer service jobs.

And by Monday dusk, Comcast has resolved Huckabee's issue, which it blamed on an arranging fault.

A spokesperson wrote in statement, “We completely understand Governor Huckabee’s frustration and are so sorry that we missed yesterday morning’s scheduled appointment," also added, "We worked to send a technician to the Governor’s home as soon as we learned about this and are happy we were able to resolve the issue that same day.”|||

Mike Huckabee isn’t happy with the service of Comcast. He complained about some technical error and the Comcast technician didn’t arrive. Mike Huckabee made tweets 7K times before he tweeted about a Comcast customer service problem; but when he did, oh man.In the periods since he left the Arkansas governor’s office, the democrat has tweeted about the United States ex-president, Hilary Clinton’s maid, his lousy Delta flight- even the Oscars colonoscopies.He jotted down so many tweets about so many things that Washington Post had a witticism skilled rate them, and Patton Oswalt tried to perform them as standup comedy (which Huckabee then tweeted about).But in all those years, Huckabee wrote zero about his customer experience with Comcast, which has been frequently dubbed ‘the words company in America’ by many markets.Until Monday.Huckabee is discerning in what he unveils about the ups and downs in the Mike Huckabee’s life.All he’s told us about this specific problem is that something in late March, something went inaccurate with his Comcast service and technicians didn’t come to fix up that technical mess.The North Korean government tried to show its military advantage by launching an airborne missile Sunday. It blew up hastily but still shook the neighbors of dictatorship and raised tensions with the US.Huckabee, who ran for president two times, often employs hyperbole-by-tweet. The post found a wit skilled who liked it when he compared President Trump to Gotham city’s hero but still rated one-third jokes of Huckabee ‘stupid’ or ‘bad’.As he continued to wait for technician of Comcast, Huckabee tried out some more customary lines. Comcast and its rival Time Warner Cable regularly bottom out in customer satisfaction surveys, as The Post noted in 2015.The Consumerist twice rated Comcast as “Worst Company in America,” which was also the Verge's headline when Comcast tried to merge with Time Warner in 2014.in January in PC Magazine, it was the “most disliked company.”A 75-year-old Comcast customer in Northern Virginia was once so distended by a skipped appointment that she took a hammer to her local service center and shattered things until a cop came. The post noted, “The Hammer Lady” became “a folk hero for fed-up customers everywhere,”Huckabee was less pardoning this time around.After spending an hour of his afternoon comparing his cable supplier to United Airlines, the mafia, North Korea and a president who foreign policy he contrasted one to Holocaust ovens, Huckabee finally received the attention Comcast.The company has been making exertions to enhance its image. After its “worst company” rating in 2014, Comcast improved its app to let people know when an expert was about to reach. A year later, it published thousands of fresh customer service jobs.And by Monday dusk, Comcast has resolved Huckabee's issue, which it blamed on an arranging fault.A spokesperson wrote in statement, “We completely understand Governor Huckabee’s frustration and are so sorry that we missed yesterday morning’s scheduled appointment," also added, "We worked to send a technician to the Governor’s home as soon as we learned about this and are happy we were able to resolve the issue that same day.”Comcast chat support | Comcast supported routers | Comcast tech support | Comcast technical support 24 7