How to prepare vegetables properly. When it comes to your diet, we always say you don't need to skip on flavor. In the world of vegetables there is A LOT of flavor. For us we always find ourselves wondering how to cook half of them so we can not only enjoy them, but reap all the nutritional benefits from them as well. We compiled a list of our favorite vegetables, their benefits, and how to prepare them properly in different ways. Vegetables not only aid in your fitness journey, but are also packed with vitamins and nutrients for a healthier lifestyle....

A lot of people just starting out on their fitness journey ask the same question, how often should I work out to get the best results? The answer to this is different depending on what you want to achieve. If you are only going to the gym 1 - 2 times per week, then you really aren't doing anything, except for maintaining your current physique. If you aren't happy with your current physique, you need to bump up those numbers. To achieve the best results, you should be going to the gym 3-5 times per week. Especially if you are...

At FastFit we developed our own ab routine that, in our opinion, puts crunches and sit ups to shame! The greatest thing about it is, you can do this routine from anywhere. Whether you are traveling or on vacation, there really isn't an excuse not to complete it. We know you will feel good about it. This routine consists of 5 exercises and will take 20 minutes or less to complete. Rest in between sets for about 30 seconds and move on to the next exercise. We like this routine because it keeps the workout entertaining, and it targets both upper...

What is intermittent fasting? Basically, it is a conscious decision to skip a certain meal throughout the day. In our opinion / experiences breakfast seems to be the easiest option. You may wonder why would I want to do this? Well, there seems to be many benefits that come with intermittent fasting day in and day out. One of the most popular and widely claimed is fat loss. If you wait to eat 4-6 hours from the time you wake up, your body is in a fasting state. When you consume your first meal after 4-6 hours of waking up your...

Most people who are trying to attain their fitness goals think that eating before going to sleep is a huge mistake. They often think that what they consume will turn into fat while they sleep since they aren't active. This is FALSE. It all depends on what you are consuming before you sleep, and what you should be consuming is protein. Benefits to consuming protein before going to sleep Muscle, brain, and nervous system recovery. Burns fat. Lean muscle growth. Improve the quality of your sleep. Consuming protein before you sleep isn't just for those who want to build muscle, but for...|||

Get high quality articles on fitness & nutrition at FastFit Official.