Last month, I pitched a fellow growth executive on an idea: let’s swap companies for a day. We did — here’s the story:

I met Matt (Head of Growth, The Black Tux) at a coffee shop on Wednesday, Feb 22nd. A short 30 min conversation about podcast advertising and SEO quickly turned into hours of bantering around all-things-growth — how to work with designers, building a growth-minded culture, hacky ideas, etc. I started thinking in the back of mind — holy shit…while we work for different startups, our work lives are basically the same.

I showed up on a bright, sunny day in Santa Monica at their office.

A few days previous, Matt shared an overview of his company’s data & business. So I had done my homework beforehand. The morning was spent going much deeper — I asked tons of questions on topics including, but not limited to, margins, virality, seasonal buying behavior, previous hires, discounting, email marketing, acquisition, personas, LTV, branding, conversions, etc. I took in every piece of knowledge about the team and business I could in a 3 hour sprint. During lunch, Matt opened up about interpersonal challenges — how best to work with creative teams, engineering teams and company stakeholders. It was fascinating — mostly because I have struggled with literally the exact same challenges. One challenge that stuck out was: given that meetings can be a time suck, how could he find more time in the day for exploration, strategy and ideation.

In the afternoon, I put my headphones on and wrote.

It ended up being a 6 page document…I broke it up into: 

1) Macro thoughts on the business 

2) Thoughts on the how Matt could gain more time & headspace

3) Growth strategy feedback

(what I’m seeing, what’s great, what’s missing, etc)

4) Tactical ideas for unexplored areas.

We then spend 2 hours reviewing the document with clarifications, questions and debate on ideas/strategies. Honestly, I was very impressed with Matt and the company. They have a solid handle on how to grow their business. The blindspots I saw were around the edges — areas that they had previously thought about, but forgotten to re-access for a while. I called these “mythologies”. Every company has them — someone, at some point, who seems smart, says something…and then others repeat it as if it’s truth. It seems logical, it seems right, it seems true. But, in my opinion, there’s hidden gold in breaking down mythologies and re-testing previously held “beliefs” — for growth tactics, personal, and company building.

So, how did the day feel for me?

Honestly, I was fucking exhausted. Like a sponge, I soaked up everything I could about their business. I let myself get lost in the weeds of their tactics, their organization and their company. I definitely needed a good night’s sleep after that. Besides that, it was a ton of fun and I learned a lot — seeing into someone else’s growth stack, team organization and mindset was incredibly powerful.|||

Last month, I pitched a fellow growth executive on an idea: let’s swap companies for a day. We did — here’s the story: I met Matt (Head of Growth, The Black Tux) at a coffee shop on Wednesday, Feb…