“We need to get him into a boy-friendly school,” I emphatically say to my wife. Our son is in the fifth grade and has just been suspended for fighting at school. This isn’t the first time. I’ve had enough and want to transfer him from this Catholic school in a neighboring town to our local public school. I’ve judged the school as too feminine. I’m biased.

Before my wife and I got married, we had to resolve our considerable differences in politics and religion. She agreed to register as a Democrat in exchange for raising our kids Catholic. She did her part while we lived in New York City. I did mine as the stay-at-home dad dutifully driving our two children back and forth to Catholic school here in California. It was stupid. But a promise is a promise.

Now all these years later, I’m reading a recent New York Times article, Jerks and the Start-Ups They Ruin, while listening to the podcast Note To Self, hosted by Manoush Zomorodi. If you don’t know this podcast, more homework. Manoush is introducing me to the word “cucked” and the concept of man box. Look them up.

Tech companies are taking some big hits for their male leadership. For good reason. Boys and men, mostly white, dominate the engineering and product cultures underlying most of our innovative startups. It starts in high school math classes and stretches to tech-savvy universities like Stanford, MIT, and Harvard. Add to this early success, the arrogance of money, and inflated egos. A pretty toxic mix.

The big-name startups are trying to tackle this problem head on. From launching unconscious bias classes to hiring big guns incorporating diversity-friendly thinking into all elements of the business. Recruiting, hiring, performance reviews, internal leadership training. But here’s the thing, all of this, while useful, won’t resolve the problem. The “boys will be boys” justification.

Let me be clear here. I’m not saying they are all-powerful or even aware. I’m just saying this is what it is. They stay insular for comfort. For simplicity. For efficiency. They do it because they get caught in the tech bubble and don’t get out much. When they travel the world, they generally travel in their mobile bubble. They don’t engage much. They don’t learn.

It will take the proverbial village to fix this. Including the boys. We need to change. We need to step up and be accountable. It can’t be everyone else stepping up. Speaking up. Demanding voice. Nor should we lean on governance, rules, structures, or big spends on training. All of which, in most cases, mask the problem and give our corporations cover for continuing their bad habits. Come on, you know it’s true.

I’ve lived a male-dominated life. Raised by a single father who wore a military uniform and jumped out of planes in the dark of night. My teen years spent in a house full of boys. Seven of us. Living in Northwest Florida. Ten miles south of the Alabama border. Guns, trucks, fights, football. That was my life.

Then I got married and had a daughter. A girl in my house. Everything changed. I woke up. I learned. To a point. My male deficit is deep-seeded. I slip back to my ole way of thinking. It’s an active battle with self. I think I win sometimes, but sometimes not so much. It’s like that AA mantra “let go and let God.” I don’t do either.

So here’s my corrective list for the tech bro culture. I’m speaking mostly to you guys running product teams and engineering. You know who you are.

“Renn, it’s not about diversity. It’s about merit and capabilities.” I hear my hometown mentors saying somewhat judgmentally. Sure. An easy out. But here’s the truth. The mix makes a difference all by itself. The views, the perspectives, the sensitivities, the logics, the history, the cultural understanding. It’s rich. Far beyond the skill- and merit-based logics.

Wake up. We live on a globe. People of all types. Of all sexual mixes. Of all ideologies and perspectives. Embrace everyone. Include everyone. Try to understand. Learn. Be changed. You and the ideas you bring to life will be so much better for it.

A movie comes to mind. The Scent of a Woman. And the speech by Lieutenant Colonel Frank Slade played by Al Pacino. “And that my friends is called integrity. That’s called courage. Now that’s the stuff leaders are made of.”

I often think about our son’s school years. Was it the right decision to move him out of his Catholic school? Was it for the right reason? I’ll never be sure. But what I do know is that my life has taken me around the globe many times. I’ve found myself leaning on and listening to people from cultures far different from my own. Smarter, deeper, and far more understanding of me than I am of them. As condescending as this might sound, I’m better for being out there. For engaging the world. Some say it shouldn’t matter but it does. Real world.

We live in interesting times. We all just need to stop claiming victimhood and step up. For us boys, we need to be the sons our fathers expect. Even when they couldn’t have imagined this world. Ever.|||

Here’s my corrective list for the tech bro culture. I’m speaking mostly to you guys running product teams and engineering. You know who you are.