First look at this video of Oriel Ceballos selling art in the subway:

We had the idea of conducting such a project, that may sound a bit odd in the beginning, when we met Oriel Ceballos at an art show in Harlem earlier this year. After a successful career as a professor, he decided to take an early exit and started a life as a full time artist, collector and curator. More info on him can be found on his Instagram page: https://www.instagram.com/or1el/?hl=fr

In order to broaden his audience, engage with people and sell his artworks, Oriel regularly - several days a week - goes to a subway station in either Manhattan or Brooklyn, displays his artworks and paints live.

What about his station selection process? He just tries stations with traffic and where there is enough space to display the pieces. However, it rang a bell in our data science-sensitized ears.

The next step for us is to gather data about subway stations that are relevant to our use case and try to come out with a way for artists to optimally select the subway station that best suits their requirements!!

In order to go from our envy and inspiration to a data visualization task, we needed to gather datasets. But before gathering datasets, we needed to know what kind of data we were looking for. In particular, what features of subway stations were relevant to our analysis.

Here are our hypothesis on the features that matter, and that are not too complicated to access:

We are not stating that the best station is the station with most traffic, in a very arty place, and with very rich people. The point here is to be able to discuss those variables in order to find the best match between an artist and a subway station.

We got our data from different sources: MTA turnstile data, NYC Open Data platform, and by crunching some information manually.

In this task, we started from the great work by Henri Dwyer, that can be found here: https://henri.io/posts/new-york-subway-traffic-data-part-1.html. The original data is here: http://web.mta.info/developers/turnstile.html

In its final format, for each subway station, it includes the mean daily traffic, as well as the daily traffic for 6 consecutive days in April 2017.

In order to link a subway station with an appeal for art, we decided to count the number of art galleries in a radius of 0.2 miles around the subway station. This would be a great indicator of the artiness of the zone.

We found the data to do so on NYC OpenData: https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Recreation/New-York-City-Art-Galleries/tgyc-r5jh/data

The dataset includes all art galleries in New York, many information on the galleries such as name, telephone.. and the GPS coordinates.

For each station, we needed the GPS coordinates, to link them to the art galleries and the neighborhood, the name of the station and the type of Entrance.

We found these information on NYC OpenData: https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Transportation/Subway-Stations/arq3-7z49/data

In order to have insights on the wealth of commuters at each station, one indicator is the median income in the neighborhood of the station. We found this information on this website: http://statisticalatlas.com/county-subdivision/New-York/New-York-County/Manhattan/Household-Income#figure/neighborhood and scrapped manually.

We then collected the GPS coordinates of the centroid of each neighborhood using Google Maps, in order to link each station to the neighborhood of the centroid it is closest to.

We've had to go through the following preprocessing steps:

These steps are not in the following report as they don't include visualization but are available on the github repository.

Below is a snapshot of the different datasets in their preprocessed format, before merging.|||

