The stage is set, you setup your profile, uploaded some killer pics and now you got a match. But why hasn’t she replied to your message? Why aren’t you getting dates with any of your matches?

Recently, we surveyed female Dine users in New York City ages 22–35 and asked them what they felt the biggest deal-breakers are for not pursuing a match on dating apps.

Because dating apps are nothing new these days, at this point many of us already have a common understanding of things that will lower our chances in making matches. For example, it’s commonsense to most users that not having a profile picture will get you a left swipe.

Being a male dating app user myself, some of the reasons as to why women wont pursue a match was breaking news to me. Since many of us already know the common deal-breakers on dating apps, I wanted to share with you some less-commonly known reasons that are hurting male users.

With many men on dating apps experiencing ghosting, no reply messages or matches never leading to actual dates (or in the worst case, not getting any matches at all), there are some things men can optimize ranging from small profile edits to changes in behavior that could help lead to to more matches and essentially more first dates.

Many women users from the survey expressed that not showing any smile or emotion in pictures is a good enough reason to not pursue interest in someone. At this time, I don’t have strong enough evidence as to why that is but as many have said, a smile goes a long way. According to women Dine users, the same applies on dating apps. My advice is to make sure you’re smiling in your pictures that you choose to upload.

According to female Dine users, having pictures of girls regardless is they are family or friends is enough grounds for not pursuing a male user. For women users who are seeking to meet a man serious about having a relationship, many different conclusions such as being a player or someone who has to many relationships with random girls could be drawn from pictures like this. It sends the wrong message. Take those pictures down and replace them with quality pictures of you.

Many female Dine users stated that being too aggressive is enough to cut off communication with their matches. So once you get that conversation going, be easy with your words. Take this example below:

In this example, the male user doesn’t seem creepy or malicious yet, he completely blew his chance in meeting this woman IRL because of his aggressive and pushy messages.

Not only did they match and have a date setup on Dine, she also confirmed that they can meet in person. But then when he wasn’t getting replies as quick as he would have liked to so he began sending rapid fire messages. Sorry guys, but to women this comes off as too eager and super desperate. It will lead the woman user to thinking you have the same characteristics of a stalker. It also demonstrates a lack of patients. Not good qualities fellas.

On Dine, users are at ease because at the time a match is made the first date is already coordinated, but regardless of what app your on, don’t blow it by saying something too pushy, rude or vulgar. Many men get frustrated when women don’t answer them back but there could be many reasons as to why that is so snapping back with something angry or just sending a ton of messages is grounds for an unmatch.

Although this is common sense to an advanced dating app user, too many male users (also woman) leave their profiles and bio vague and sometimes completely blank.

Before women decide if they will meet someone in person over dating apps, safety among many other things are taken into consideration. For women users, men who leave little to no information on their profile makes it hard for them to gain trust. Not including basic things like job, education, age, etc. comes off as shady. If you are someone who is confident and not afraid to hide your identity, taking 2 minutes to write some information about yourself shouldn’t be too hard. Not having it filled out could send the opposite message about who you are.

Dine which has been featured in Apple App Store as well as Business Insider is creating a buzz as a new social dating app centered around meeting someone for the first time over the best food or drinks in town. Endless swipes from left to right that only lead to dead end conversations are history. With Dine, it’s time to meet people, get back out there and go on an actual date.|||

The stage is set, you setup your profile, uploaded some killer pics and now you got a match. But why hasn’t she replied to your message? Why aren’t you getting dates with any of your matches…