Streamroot DNA™ distributed network architecture offers Vivendi a competitive advantage

 with a unique delivery solution designed to increase viewer quality of experience.

Streamroot Inc., the leader in hybrid over-the-top (OTT) video delivery, announced today that it has entered into an agreement to help Vivendi SA, a French multinational mass media conglomerate, deliver large-scale OTT video content through its patented Streamroot DNA™ service.

With a wide-ranging multimedia offering that includes Universal Music Group, Dailymotion, Gameloft and Canal+ Group, Vivendi has faced mounting delivery costs from traditional content delivery networks (CDN) as the appetite for OTT video continues to increase exponentially. In a quest to ensure profitable growth while offering a differentiating service for its flagship VOD platforms and live sports and TV streaming channels, Vivendi is implementing Streamroot DNA™ to improve quality of experience and cut operating cost across group companies.

“At Vivendi, we strive to maintain and fortify our position by combining the best content at the highest quality regardless if we deliver via satellite or over-the-top. To offer high quality experiences and manage ever growing audiences for OTT, we needed a partner that understood these challenges,” explains Philippe Rivas, VP, Distribution Technology at Canal+ Group. “Streamroot not only offers consistently high quality across group companies and user platforms, but also unlocks great value with its disruptive business model. This agreement is highly strategic for our group,” Rivas adds.

Streamroot DNA™ has proven to be a crucial foundation for cost-optimized over-the-top video strategies by:

“Streamroot DNA™ is the ideal solution for the group’s comprehensive over-the-top offering, combining top quality viewer experience with predictable cost,” say Streamroot Co-founder and CEO Pierre-Louis Théron. “We are thrilled that Vivendi has placed its trust in Streamroot; it is yet another testament to strong industry support for our innovative services.”

Vivendi is an integrated media and content group. The company operates businesses throughout the media value chain, from talent discovery to the creation, production and distribution of content. Universal Music Group is engaged in recorded music, music publishing and merchandising. It owns more than 50 labels covering all genres. Canal+ Group is engaged in pay-TV in France, as well as in Africa, Poland and Vietnam. Its subsidiary Studiocanal is a leading European player in production, sales and distribution of movies and TV series. Gameloft is a worldwide leader in mobile games, with 2 million games downloaded per day. Vivendi Village, groups together Vivendi Ticketing (in the United Kingdom, the United States and France), MyBestPro (expert counseling), Watchever (subscription streaming services), Radionomy (digital radio), the venues L’Olympia and Theâtre de L‘Œuvre in Paris, and CanalOlympia in Africa, as well as Olympia Production. With 3 billion videos viewed each month, Dailymotion is one of the biggest video content aggregation and distribution platforms in the world. www.vivendi.com, www.cultureswithvivendi.com

Streamroot is a leading provider of innovative OTT video optimization technologies for content publishers, network service providers and enterprise customers. Its robust, reliable and lightweight stream acceleration solutions offer improved quality of service, global reach and unique fixed-fee economics. They are based on open standards such as WebRTC, Media Source Extensions and HTML5, and are widely adopted by broadcasters around the world. Founded in 2013 in France, the company today benefits from VC funding and serves premier media groups from its Paris and New York offices.|||

Streamroot DNA offers Vivendi a competitive advantage with a unique delivery solution designed to increase viewer quality of experience.