The autosklearn-zeroconf file takes a dataframe of any size and trains auto-sklearn binary classifier ensemble. No configuration is needed as the name suggests. Auto-sklearn is the recent AutoML Challenge winner.

As a result of using automl-zeroconf running auto-sklearn becomes a "fire and forget" type of operation. It greatly increases the utility and decreases turnaround time for experiments.

The main value proposition is that a data analyst or a data savvy business user can quickly run the iterations on the data (actual sources and feature design) side and on the ML side not a bit has to be changed. So it's a great tool for people not doing hardcore data science full time. Up to 90% of (marketing) data analysts may fall into this target group currently.

To keep the training time reasonable autosklearn-zeroconf samples the data and tests all the models from autosklearn library on it once. The results of the test (duration) is used to calculate the per_run_time_limit, time_left_for_this_task and number of seeds parameters for autosklearn. The code also converts the panda dataframe into a form that autosklearn can handle (categorical and float datatypes).

plus samplers, scalers, imputers (14 feature processing methods, and 3 data preprocessing methods, giving rise to a structured hypothesis space with 100+ hyperparameters)

The code uses a pandas dataframe format to manage the data. It is stored in the HDF5 file for convenience.

As an example you can run autosklearn-zeroconf on a "Census Income" dataset https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Adult.

And then to evaluate the prediction stored in zerconf-result.csv against the test dataset file adult.test.withid

The script itself needs no installation, just copy it with the rest of the files in your working directory. Alternatively you could use git clone

autosklearn-zeroconf is licensed under the BSD 3-Clause License (Revised)

these are not related to the autosklearn-zeroconf or auto-sklearn but rather general issues depending on your python and OS installation

alternatively search for them with

and explicitly add them to the libraries path|||

autosklearn-zeroconf is a fully automated binary classifier based on the AutoML challenge winner auto-sklearn.  Give it a dataset with known outcomes (labels) and it tunes massively parallel ensembles of data sicence machine learning pipelines. As a result you get a list of predicted outcomes for your new data and an estimated prediction precision.