Social media is recognized as one of the most popular ways of spending time. In fact, it is a kit of online technologies that allow users to communicate with each other.

We are going to help you consider all social media apps with a deeper understanding. Furthermore, we will give you a piece of advice on how social media could be the most profitable option for a new startup.

Types and features of the most popular social apps

When you are planning to choose the appropriate app that you want to use as the sample for your future product. What types of social apps exist, what features do they have? You can check it out right here.

If you just like chatting, messenger app were created specifically  for you. Messenger is a mobile app or web service for instant messaging. In addition to common talks with friends, messengers are actively used in business. They make it possible to provide the client with timely service.

The most popular messengers today are undoubtedly WhatsApp, Facebook Messenger, Viber, and ICQ. Each of the listed messengers has their own circle of users and their own set of interesting features.

Hint from Cleveroad: Before creating your own app, you should understand how to make a social media app, what features it should have, what bonuses users will receive, and how they will chat. Also, you should select what chat type your messenger will have - group or only individual, call types - voice or audio calling/both of them. If immersing in details, you can add a typing status feature in your messenger - it allows users to see when their interlocutors are typing a message.

It's never been as easy to launch live streaming video from any place as it is today. Now any smartphone owner can do it. Live streaming apps are gaining wide popularity day by day.

Live stream video is interesting for consumers because it's a more of an authentic advertising type, rather than an already edited video clip. For example, the company can show how they manufacture their goods, hold various contests, raffle some gifts and so on.

Different social media apps like Periscope, Meerkat, Stre.am dominate their social media apps sector.

Hint from Cleveroad: If you intended to build a live streaming app, pay attention to how your database will be updated - manually or automatically. Also, you should decide on whether you will use a ready app builder or development company that will do it from scratch. Add a Like button so users can select the most popular channels. As for monetization, here you can add paid channels, so users will be able to check specific content that's only available on a paid basis.

DIY. Do you know what this abbreviation means? 'Do it yourself'. If you are a creative person, it means that you like creating something new. Handmade things can be really cool and fascinating sometimes. So to share pictures of your work, you need to use special apps for this.

Pinterest and Wishbone apps allow grouping images by topics or posting them on a general board. Also, you can buy goods you like via Pinterest. Talking about Wishbone, you can compare pieces of music, interesting books etc. So there is sense in making the combined social media app.

Hint from Cleveroad: Considering the particularity of this category, first you should add the feature of works category selection. What kind of pictures do you want to see - nature, movies, animals? Then you can also add paid content - for example, you can download a picture only if you pay for it. Search by favorites would be preferable as well. it can be a little unclear for an ordinary user to make out how to create a social network app from scratch, but remember that the development companies are at your disposal.

An active way of life suits successful people today. Fashion, movies, hobbies, sports, leisure, travel, daily routine - all these activities make life versatile and interesting.

Lifestyle apps conquer the mobile apps market since they simplify some of our daily routines. Every day such mobile apps send us news from our friends, remind us to visit a gym or drink the required amount of water. Generally, it seems impossible to find the best social apps for Android or iPhone since each app can be attractive with its own features.

So this type of app is also widespread. Operator, Foursquare Swarm, Nextdoor - they are the few of the most popular apps among thousands of their competitors.

Hint from Cleveroad: If you build social media app in the lifestyle category, you must consider the same features as in the Messenger apps category. Chat types, audio/video calling, as well as geolocation-based search.

It is impossible to ignore this category of apps. In fact, it isn't far from 'Apps for inspiration', but here you can also add some cool videos. As you know, today many famous people like singers and movie stars use Instagram where they share their daily photos and videos. Generally, they all have a lot of subscribers which put comments and likes under each photo. So it is the first key point that any social media and business app has - interaction between users.

An app like Vine allows users to create short video clips. And because vine videos are widely spread on the Internet, it is a direct competitor to Instagram. Apart from these two apps, you should also pay attention to the Snapchat app. It's a kind of photo chat where you can exchange your pictures. It should be noted that this app has one disadvantage - pictures are stored here only for 24 hours.

Hint from Cleveroad: If you intended to make social media app like this you should choose an app with a niche that is created to satisfy the demands of a specific circle of users. You should add some new features to your app. For instance, Instagram can boast about such interesting features like native filters for photos. And of course, you should decide on what target audience this app will be created for.

News websites owners see social news apps as very serious competitor. It is not a surprise since social networks provide users with the latest news too. If video streaming is popular, then a news streaming app should also be interesting for users.

Of course, the Twitter app is first this list since it has news content that can be streamed by means of videos, GIFs, pictures, and there is even a live streaming video feature. It's a small wonder, if you strive to learn how to make a social app like Twitter.

Hint from Cleveroad: First, you'd better find an appropriate news source that will be used for news posting in your app. Decide on the number of social networks where users can share their news with. As for design, it is necessary to think over how news will be displayed in the news feed. In addition, it is necessary to build a correct business to business social media strategy.

Do you like blogging? If you are an enthusiastic blogger, you know that it is not an easy activity. First, you must have good writing skills, a way with words, and of course, you simply should love writing.

Bloggers must have an app that would allow him or her to write posts from all their portable gadgets. It is not difficult to build a social media app like this.

Hint from Cleveroad: If you need a social blogging app, you should decide on how comments will be left. It means only registered users will be able to leave a comment or it will be open to any Internet user. Development companies can give you a detailed description of how to create a social app for any circle of users.

This category won't be interesting for everybody due to its specific goal. But people who are looking for a job or who wants to develop useful contacts will surely find business social media apps more than helpful.

LinkedIn career app is familiar to many people. Today it is literally the largest business network in the Internet. It is oriented directly for business. You can build your professional brand there, look for employees, and read professional news.

Hint from Cleveroad: First of all, you must select what user profile types there will be. Search by company/category/professional field, type of user account - simple/premium etc. Correct understanding of how to make a social network app will help you build a correct business strategy.

One more app category that is intended for a limited group of users. If you don't want to be recognized, but you want to participate in any discussions, such apps are built for you. They can perform various features and you must find the right way how to create social media app for anonymous users.

For example, Ask.fm app is very popular among teenagers where they can ask each other any questions. All questions are posted in an anonymous way, but if you want, you can show your name.

Hint from Cleveroad: If you made a decision to learn how to build a social app for anonymous users, you should be concerned about the following features: capability to see who left a comment (user can put a tip if he agrees to reveal his personality), users banning (if somebody forgets himself or herself), Like/Dislike button, user status, and sharing in other social media.

Not everybody is good at communicating. We mean some people just have some difficulties with socialization and this problem should be solved. But along with the digital world development, now you can find friends and girlfriends just by using special dating apps. People can find love there and it is really working.

Tinder app - a well-received dating app where people of all ages are looking for a soulmate. This app is considered to be one of the best social Android apps. You register via Facebook, enter age and sex of the partner you are looking for, and the app will match you with all of the appropriate profiles for you. Then you can start a conversation with the person you like.

Or we can take a Tastebuds app as an example - here you can find your partner by musical taste. Do you like Beethoven? You are surely not alone in this world and this app can prove it.

Hint from Cleveroad: To develop a dating app, you cannot ignore a feature to ban users since people can be very importunate. In addition, you can add a captcha code feature for registration to make sure that only real humans will create a profile. Like/Dislike button, anonymous mode, the design of your profile - all of this should be considered. Using proper a business model, it is possible to create your social network that will meet all clients' requirements.

Cleveroad company has rather large experience in the development of the apps and websites for various fields of activity. And social media apps development is not the exception to the rule.

To sum up, during any social media app development there are two main points that you should take into account - ASO strategy and monetization type. That is how you will promote your app, whether it be for Android or iOS operating systems, and how you will make money with your app. However, your first task is to scrutinize how to create social app. But there are many pitfalls one cannot ignore.|||

Social media trends of today can be rather diversified. So firstly it is necessary to learn all about most popular social media apps to make decision for specific social media app development. It will help you create your own unique social app.