Yes. Finally! Wasn't easy, but I have my new, shiny AmigaOne X5000. So let's take a look at it!

Many were waiting for the day when new and strong Amiga(One) will appear. That happened now. Currently, the X5000 can be purchased with the dual-core processor. In the future, a more powerful machine will be available. Is it worth buying the current model or wait for a four-core version?

The software that every customer receives is AmigaOS 4.1 Final Edition Pre-release for the X5000 (the equivalent of the AmigaOS 4.1 Final Edition Update 1). As its name implies, it's not fully finished version. This means the ISO file should be downloaded from Hyperion's website and you must record your own CD or DVD. Of course, when the development is done, a user will get full AmigaOS 4.1, without having to pay extra money. In spite of all, the current version is quite clear and well-written. There should be no problems with AmigaOS. Personally, I was expecting a state closer to beta, but it's much better. Only problems I've noticed are disappearances the DVD drive after a soft reset (the problem is known program) and random problems with the keyboard. Sometimes if you press (any) key it's recognized like many presses of same keys. If something like this happens, perform a soft reset and after reloading the AmigaOS keyboard will work properly. This is a rather sporadic affair, but after so long development such defects shouldn't be present.

 Also, there is some kind of bug in NGFileSystem. It looks like in some case with SQL database files could be corrupted. For end user there is two option: make a backup of SQL files (like cookies.db from Odyssey) or install problematic software on SFS or FFS partition. The problem is known for Hyperion, so it should be resolved soon.

 As you can see, Hyperion rightly choose the nickname Pre-release for this version of AmigaOS.

Computer's pack have also the Enhancer Software Plus and Personal Paint. Both on CD. Undoubtedly, especially this first package, along with Warp 3D Nova and Radeon HD drivers are nice to have! Here, is worth to mention, that the latest Warp 3D Nova isn't the same as (old) Warp 3D. So if we want to use software written under the older Warp 3D (and this is now absolutely lion's share of the games and programs), you have to buy Warp 3D - separately from AMIStore. Alternatively, you can take advantage of the Wazp3D software solution (but it's slow and not recommended). As you can see, this cause confusion (for people less oriented in Amiga). All answers, of course, can be found on the internet, but it shouldn't be like this. Unfortunately, one of the biggest disadvantages of the X5000 is manual, or lack of it! Even the so-called quickstart is missing! Another (hardware) problem is, that front panel headphone input is not connected. And microphone as well. First of all, this is because (now) standard is HD Audio. AmigaOS (yet) doesn't support it. That's why the computer is equipped with extra music card. It shows, that lack of instruction, in my opinion, is a big mistake. The user gets a bad feeling and it shows, that system or distribution is not ready for sell. But, still, if we compare it to top classic Amiga configuration, X5000 problems are a piece of cake. With new, quite modern hardware, we don't neet to solder, replace capacitors or patch the operating system. Buyer will have new hardware with a guarantee and technical support (mentioned card music problem).

Impressions from usability. The computer as a whole thing is so good, that all problems and disadvantages are disappearing. As I mentioned (at the beginning) I decided that X5000 will be not only my main Amiga, it would be my main computer for every day. The daily intensive work on the X5000 and experience from my previously system (based on Pegasos II G4), shows it could be true. Of course, (please) look through the prism of the Amiga. We can't directly relate the latest AmigaOne to a current PCs or Macs. Despite all that, thanks to a more powerful processor, 2 GB of RAM for the system (and separate 2 GB for Ram Disk) computer can handle easily typical task: the internet or even preparing clips for YouTube. Certainly, it's not the level of the latest Intel i7 processors, but for daily use, it's enough. Nevertheless, there are two software problems. Not from today, we know that one of the biggest problems of Amiga is an outdated browser (Odyssey). Despite all that, Odyssey is surprisingly good (including Gmail support, banks, YouTube or Facebook). Although the previously mentioned JIT in JS is slowing down everything. The second case is FullHD movies. Practically it's impossible to play them without loss of FPS. The problem isn't AmigaOne itself, but graphics card drivers. Although it's planned to be changed, it's a little bit funny that we can't play FullHD videos. Hello, developers? Now it's time for 4K movies! So, if only Odyssey gets a new engine, and AmigaOS will get support for hardware decoding of FullHD, the investment of 2300 Euros can be somehow excused. However, since you read these words, I think it is worth to consider to buy a new hardware. It will be always better, than old and inefficient retro machine. Because AmigaOS 4 has the integration with RunInUAE for old compatibility games (software) and has a reserve of power and continuous (despite slowness) software development it's possible to use (in most of the task) X5000 as a typical computer. This could be a solution for people who want to use the latest AmigaOS and have a passion for retro titles. Or they like the atmosphere of this operating system, and they do not want to resign from modern technology.|||

