While many wine lovers are going gaga over the beauty and unmatched experiences of wine tours of the Napa Valley, there are some places that are either unexplored or surfacing gradually. Argentina is one such country that is an exciting land of wines and considered as one of the top 5 wine producing countries. It houses some of the world’s greatest wine destinations that are mesmerizing and give you an experience of a lifetime. Being a wine lover, it is a must for you to explore the unexplored beauty of Argentina through its incredible winery and vineyards. If you are a novice, the place will make you fall in love with its elegant and premium quality wines that you might not have had before on any another wine tour.

So, all set to take a scroll through the top 11 wineries of Argentina?

Situated in the Lujan de Cuyo region of Mendoza, this wine cellar was born in the year 1998.  It was started by a group of friends with a passion for bringing Argentine wine at the forefront of the world’s wine culture. Achaval Ferrer produces red wine of fine quality and in small quantities. It is a small winery known for Malbec and as you walk through the areas, you will witness the internal workings and production processes. When your tour ends, you can take a stop for barrel tasting inside the cellar.

Up for a relaxing winery lunch? Ruca Malen awaits you with several courses complemented with exquisite wines, wonderful vineyards and gorgeous view of snow-capped mountains. Indulge in a splendid experience with a combination of salad and crisp apple chips served with Sauvignon Blanc or choose Argentine steak with juicy Malbec wine. As a part of the wine tour, you will be taken in their tasting room and you will also get to learn about the blending processes of wines. The famous wine from Ruca Malen is single varietal Petit Verdot which you should not miss.

Nicola Zapata found this winery named- Catena Zapata. It was 1902 when he planted the winery’s first ever grapes. And, since then, his family has never stopped and the tradition of wine-making continues to offer some of the world’s greatest wines. You will be offered four types of wine tastings- Single Vineyard Tasting, Angelica Zapata Tasting, Nicolas Catena Zapata Tasting and Art of Malbec Tasting. Since, you will be accompanied by specialized guides on your wine tour, it is advised to book in advance.

Located in the UCO Valley, this vineyard features modern architecture and offers magnificent views from the property. The cellar can accommodate approximately 5,000 barrels and has a gallery which houses exclusive collections of the country’s art. For wine lovers, it is a fantastic place which is known for producing first-class wines. From Merlot to Malbec, Chardonnay to Pinot Noir and Sparkling wines, the varieties are elegant, deep in colors and rich in aromas.

Situated along the Andes Mountains, above 4,200 feet from sea level, Andeluna, winery will surprise you with its state-of-the-art facilities even before you start sipping a glass of wine. Tastings happen at the tasting bar where you will be offered Limited Reserve and Grand Reserve wines in the wine cellar. Food lovers can enjoy a 5-course meal served with a glass of wine at their restaurant. Wine specialities of Andeluna are Cuatro Cepas and Malbecs.

Built in the year 1901, the building of Bodega Benegas was originally one of the relics of the old Mendoza. In the year 1999, it was bought by Federico Benegas who restored the property into its original design. This winery Bodega Benegas today is known for producing best quality wines because of excellent climate conditions and favourable soil that lend its wines, a deep and intense color with balanced acidity. When you are on your tour inside the winery, you will get to taste three lines of special wines. They include- Family Line, Estate Line and Benegas Lynch Line with fantastic Malbecs, Chardonnays, Cabernet Sauvignon and Cabernet Franc.

Tip- Reservation required. Groups of not more than eight people.

A family owned winery which was built somewhere between 2001 and 2004. It uses cutting-edge technology in the production of wines yet retaining the charm of traditional wine-making methods. The first ever wines of Bodega Vistalba came out in the year 2003 and got introduced in the market in the year 2005. When you visit this winery, you will enjoy from four wine tasting options: Classic, Vintage, Vistalba and Premium. And during your tour, you will also get to explore the vineyards and the facilities of Bodega Vistalba.

A winery which lies in the heart of Mendoza region brings together two cultures- French and Argentine in form of wines. The winemaking process of Bodegas Caro involves the use of two signature grapes- Malbec and Cabernet Sauvignon coming from France and Argentina. Harvesting is done by hands followed by sorting of grapes before they are de-stemmed. Each vintage wine is aged in oak barrels- CARO for 18 months and Amancaya for 12 months. The wine tasting that lasts for an hour includes a selection of French and Argentine cheeses paired with CARO, Aruma and Amancaya.

This winery of Gimenez Riili boasts of state of the art technology, stainless steel tanks, temperature regulation systems and French oak barrels that produce great wines, especially Malbecs. Gimenez offers you with a unique wine tasting experience which includes learning about wines in an ambience surrounded with beautiful mountains and crystal clear streams of water including a guided tour of the tank rooms and barrel rooms. Here, you will enjoy exclusive wines of the Riili along with grilled traditional dishes.

The Clos De Los Siete winery produces its exclusive wines made from 5 main grape varieties- Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Syrah, Malbec and Petit Verdot. There are four key elements that contribute to the quality, taste and texture of Clos De Los Siete wines like generous soils, widely varying temperature, high altitude vines and plenty of sunshine. Indulge in a splendid wine tour where you can enjoy the view of snowy Andean peaks as the backdrop and breath-taking landscapes bathed in heavy sunshine. The tour will take you through the vineyards, its facilities, wineries and cellars.

As the name suggests, Familia Zuccardi is a family owned winery which aims to produce highest quality wines by focusing on attention to detail. To every tourist who is here to explore the beauty of its wine tasting tour, it offers introduction to the harvesting methods, cooking courses and exclusive wine-pairing lunches. Wines special to this place that you must try include- Aglianico, Albarino, Ekigaina, and Bourboulenc. For food and art lovers, the premises also has an olive oil factory, two restaurants, and an art gallery.

The next time you plan a trip to some wine destination, Argentina can be a great option. As a wine lover, you might get confused which wine region to pick, but, these 11 are the hottest wineries that are unique and will give you an unmatched experience that won’t let you get over your tour. Whether you want to go for a relaxing holiday or simply take up a vacation to enjoy wine with family and friends, these wine regions are a must-visit.

And if you have any specific wine destination in mind, do let us know because we, at Tango Tours are here to make all the necessary arrangements for your custom wine tours.|||

Argentina wine region is unlike any other wine region on earth. Plan a wine tour and taste your way through different wines and visit several wineries.