LG definitely went outside the box on this one with the whole modularity thing and it’s nice to see company is trying new things, but they are sticking to the essentials and they finally released a phone in this series that’s a force to be reckoned with.

The LG G6 packs a 5.7″ display in an attractive sleek phone that comfortably fits in one hand. Starting off with the hardware and design. It is what we have been looking for, for quite some time with LG and it is finally here.

The LG G6 is sculpted from aluminium and glass, complete with chamfered edges and that glass back opens the door for wireless charging. Which LG did implement.

Weighing in at about 161 grams and measuring thickness in at just under 8 mm. The LG G6 provides the solid and premium feel. There are multiple good options available in colours like, ice platinum, astro black and mystic white.

The black one will appear to have smaller bezels and it will blend in better than any other colour. In terms of overall size, it is both shorter and slimmer than the Google Pixel XL and it is very similar in size to the Galaxy S7 Edge, but it is still smaller.

What is interesting is the fact that the LG G6 has a larger display than both those phones, we are looking at a 5.7 inch IPS display with a resolution of 2880 x 1440 which sounds like an odd resolution and that’s Because it is.

The screen has been stretched vertically and now has an aspect ratio of 18 : 9 as opposed to these 16 : 9 we are all used to. Although this isn’t an AMOLED display, it is one of the better IPS screens that just looks great.

This is also the first phone with a screening the sporting curved corners. It actually looks very nice. It is something different, but it is nice. In addition it helps with corner drops adding a tad more organization to the mix.

Speaking of recognization, the LG G6 has an IP68 certified Water and dust resistance making it perfect for all around places, whether you are at the beach, in the rain or you are clumsy. It will withstand spills and that drops in the toilet.

Now, taking look at the back of the phone, we have got the return of the dual camera set up as well as the power button that doubles as a fingerprint reader, I still wish LG would stick the power button on the side, they have been doing this for years and I have gotten used to it. There is always double tap to wake, if I ever need to check my notifications.

Turning the phone on and you will be greeted by Android 7.0 with LG UX 6.0 UI, on top. Say what you want about Android skins but LG’s really isn’t that bad. it is fairly light, it is quick has been clean up with only a handful of preloaded apps and overall it just works fine.

Sure, it may not be the most attractive, but it does have some added bonuses like navigation key customization, the usual quirky yet cool looking lockscreen animations. It got different system themes, application scaling.

There is Comfort view which pretty much just turns everything black and white to reduce the blue light emitted from the screen. You can swipe down on the home screen to quickly search something up and more.

The LG G6 is easily usable, although I did end up ditching the stock SMS app for texture and the stock keyboard for flexi I will say that. Then of course you have got android 7.0 complete with double tapping, recent apps button to quickly jump back to your previously used app.

Most exciting feature in this is that Google assistant and of course multitasking. Now, this is where you can really put the tall screen to use. The taller screen makes using two apps at once more comfortable.

Now, the LG G6 is with smaller body and larger display and makes for an awesome contact and media consumption smartphone, but sadly enough it still has a single bottom firing speaker. It does get nice and loud, but it is definitely on the tinny side of things.

Id doesn’t sound horrible, but it definitely gets the job done. Speaking of getting the job done LG did just that and they didn’t remove the headphone jack.

Overall performance is very solid, I must say everything I do on any other phone works nearly perfect here on the LG G6. The snapdragon 821, 4 GB of RAM and Adreno 530 GPU combination makes very very quick and smooth user experience overall.

Well, performance is not completely spotless. I have yet to come across anything that be considered a performance issue and other than the phone getting a little warm, while playing games.

There is been nothing abnormal whatsoever and just a quick not I know you might complain about the LG G6 having the snapdragon 821 as opposed to the Snapdragon 832, which is the newest chip, but don’t sweat it. The Snapdragon 821 is actually a very good chip and it is nothing to worry about.

Moving forward, about battery performance. Well, the LG G6 has a 3300 mAh battery, which seems pretty small for phone with a 5.7 inch screen. It might have about 4 or 4:30 hours of on screen time, which is not horrible.

I have experienced worse, but it is just not what I was expected. There would be times, where I check my phone only to see significantly less than what I normally get on any other phone at certain point during the day and it doesn’t help that, there is always-on display with an IPS screen.

So, the battery life is not dreadful, bit it is not great either. It is passable good thing. it got wireless charging and quick charge 3.0 on deck to keep the phone juiced up.

Moving on to the cameras, I was reluctant to mention these earlier, because I am just not that impressed with these cameras. The LG G6 supports dual 13 MP lenses for the primary shooters set up and a front facing 5 MP selfie camera.

I will say that, shots captured by these cameras looked very nice, clean colour reproduction, solid contrast and decent sharpness levels, but most of the time those sharpness levels appear to be a little out of whack, shots appear over sharpens or over-processed. leaving me with a shot, I am not too pleased with.

Now, I understand this is totally opinionated subject because there are a ton of people that actually love these cameras and don’t get me wrong I do really like the cameras.

Especially the wide-angle feature, it is great for capturing landscapes and such. I love the camera on the Google pixel and that is the phone that I carry most of the time, because of that.

But of course, it is the more expensive phone, still the LG G6 has a very solid set of cameras which will please most people, they are just not my favourite, so the question that we are faced with is, is it enough?

Sadly the LG G6 is not available neither on Amazon india nor on Flipkart, which are india’s most famous Shopping websites. But LG G6 will cost around 48K to 50K INR, which is more expensive than phones like the Huawei mate 9, One plus 3T and many others. But it’s less expensive than Google Pixel XL, the iPhone 7 plus and the upcoming Samsung Galaxy S8.

does the LG G6 have enough to compete with Samsung Galaxy S8? It will compete with Galaxy Note 7, but I feel as always the Galaxy will end up being the crowd’s favourite.

The LG G6 is definitely making some noise out there in the smartphone market and I believe, it will deserve more attention.

The LG G6 is a huge step forward from what we got from the LG last year and it is a phone that I could definitely recommend to buyers. There are few improvements, I would make but it is not enough to hold the phone back from being worth it.

So, what do you guys think of the LG G6? Did LG hit it for the Six with this? Are you picking one up and if not let us know why it is?|||

LG definitely went outside the box on this one with the whole modularity thing and it's nice to see company is trying new things, but they are sticking to the essentials and they finally released…