Jeff seid is a young men’s physique competitor who has accomplished a lot in his life so far!

He began playing sports around the age of 5 years old.

Being a very athletic kid growing up he realized that being physically strong and in shape helped him accomplish his goals.

During his high school years he got into football and wresting.

Jeff began looking around on bodybuilding.com and noticed a category called men’s physique which sparked his interest.

He began to read more about training and dieting for the sport.

At this time Jeff had been training for 6 years in the gym and was interested in competing.

During his first competition in men’s physique he blew the judges away with his aesthetics!

He won the overall award at his pro competition making him an IFBB pro in men’s physique.

He is one of the youngest men’s physique competitors to every become an IFBB pro in the sport at only 22 years old.

Jeff is now a Mr Olmypia Men’s physique competitor but has not competed since 2014.

Jeff does a lot of super-setting in his workouts making a very fast but intense training session.

His workout contains superset and trisets.

Superset’s are paring two exercises together without any break in between sets.

Trisets are just paring three exercise together without any breaks between sets.

3 core based exercises such as leg raises, cable crunches and obliques.

First three exercise are not superset’s.

Triset consisting of three exercise back to back

One Arm Dumbbell Triceps Extension with Incline Dumbbell Curl and Lying Close Grip Barbbell Triceps Extension Behind The Head

Lying Close Grip Barbbell Triceps Extension Behind The Head 2 sets of 10 reps

Triset #1 – Front Dumbbell Raise with Side Lateral Raise and Seated Ben Over Rear Delt Raise

Triset #2 – Standing Barbell Press Behind The Neck with Cable Seated Lateral Raise and Dumbbell Lying Rear Lateral Raise

Standing Barbell Press Behind The Neck 2 sets of 10 reps

3 core based exercises such as leg raises, cable crunches and obliques.|||

Jeff Seid's Official Workout Routine! Jeff Seid is a men's physique Olympia competitor with one of the most aesthetic physiques in the industry. Find out...