This is an English translation of a post written in French by my father Gérard Lebrun. The pages numbers refer to the original text of Grothendieck’s work Récoltes et Semailles (“Crops and Seeds”).

I was intrigued by the unusual path of Grothendieck, the recently deceased mathematician genius who, after twenty years of work that garnered him the 1966 Field Medal (the Nobel Prize for mathematicians) brutally severed all links with the mathematical community and lived for 45 years in seclusion and solitude, devoting himself to meditation, the search for meaning, and introspection. I tried to understand.

Outside the circle of mathematicians who are still exploring the paths opened by this visionary, there is little documentation on Grothendieck, except for an account written by his own hand, a kind of a diary that he kept (intimate and at the same time “extimate”, since he sent a few copies to former colleagues or former students, and considered publishing it at one point, but didn’t find a publisher) - a very long diary of over a thousand pages entitled “Crops and Seeds: Reflections and Testimony about my Past as a Mathematician.” Although unpublished then, the text has already been making its way to readers. I will quote a few excerpts from it, so that you can learn about and appreciate the ideas of a man in search of the absolute.

This post is divided into 3 parts:

III. Break with the mathematical community: meaning and spirituality

The name of Grothendieck, a mathematician who died recently at the age of 86, is not very well-known or is completely unknown to the public. We are talking here about an extraordinary person who made a mark on the culture of his time - a lone genius who opened new unimagined paths in mathematics, not only one of the greatest scientists of the twentieth century, but also a libertarian spirit, a rebel, a nonconformist who brutally broke all ties with the mathematical community in 1970 at the height of his fame just like Rimbaud suddenly abandoned writing poetry. Rimbaud turned away from his muse and chose personal advancement over his art by getting into the coffee and gun trade; Grothendieck withdrew from society to live in solitude in a small village in the Pyrenees, not to escape from himself but to find himself in an insatiable spiritual quest that is documented in Crops and Seeds.

Some key elements of a remarkable biography, along with quotes gleaned here and there from Crops and Seeds.

Alexander Grothendieck was born to a Russian-Jewish father, a revolutionary anarchist named Schapiro, and a German mother, a left-wing activist named Grothendieck (as you can see, he has his mother’s last name). His father was incarcerated from 1906 to 1917 for participating in the revolution against Czar Nicolas II. The couple emigrated to France as Hitler rose to power, leaving their child Alexander (he was six years old at the time) in Germany in the care of a foster family – with a pastor who practiced the Frénet method and promoted the “back to the land” movement.

After taking part in the Spanish Civil War, his parents returned to France in 1938 with a refugee status and reunited with their child (he was then ten years old). But in 1939 they were deemed “suspicious” because of their nationality and their activities: his father was first interned in the Vernet camp (Ariège), after which he was handed over to the Nazis by the Vichy authorities and would eventually die in Auschwitz; his mother was interned with her child at Rieucros camp (Lozère). From 1942 to 1944, young Alexander was hidden in Chambon-sur-Lignon at the"Cevennes College", administered by Pastor Trocmé who had been leading resistance efforts aimed at rescuing Jewish children.

Alexander followed his studies in high school without considering himself to be one of the “brightest” students; actually, as a student, he tended to pursue his interests; this independent approach would stay with him in his later years.

He graduated from the “Collège Cévenol” and became a student at Montpellier in 1945. Then the period of his scientific training began. From the outset Grothendieck surprised his elders. Working independently, he reinvented “the Lebesque integral” (which dated back to 1902) to calculate complex volumes.

After arriving in Paris in 1948, he soon leaves for Nancy where mathematicians of the internationally-renowned group “Bourbaki” [the name of an imaginary mathematician] such as Jean Dieudonné and Laurent Schwartz would train and mentor him as much as possible. Soon the disciple surpasses his masters: to test him, they give him fourteen problems that they have failed to solve. He can choose the problem that interests him the most… Dieudonné tells the story: “In less than a year, he had solved all our problems! ”

Recruited and promoted to the CNRS, he spent a few years abroad (in Sao Paulo) after completing his thesis. His return ushers in what will be his most productive period, stretching from 1958 to 1970, a period that coincides with the Bourbaki group’s best years. His lucky break came with the opening of the IHES institute [Bures-sur-Yvette Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques] where he and Dieudonné were jointly offered a chair in mathematics. That’s where Grothendieck’s great adventure began. He led a prestigious seminar in which young talented mathematicians came together to make new discoveries and collaborated with great passion; he also initiated an ambitious project that aimed to fuse arithmetic and geometry.

In 1966, Grothendieck received the Fields Medal, which is the most prestigious award in recognition of accomplishments in mathematics and is often compared to the Nobel Prize. First sign of discontent though: Grothendieck boycotted the medal presentation ceremony, held in Moscow, to protest against Soviet military action in Eastern Europe.

The chasm widened in 1968: when the anarchist, libertarian Grothendieck addressed a group of students occupying the Orsay university, he discovered that he, a non-conformist, was seen by them as a “mandarin”! He came before them to defend scientific research; two years later, he abandoned the mathematical community by asking the question: “Will we continue to conduct scientific research?” He then returned to Montpellier, where he worked as a simple teacher up to his retirement - after he retired, he lived alone in a small village in the Pyrenees mountains where he died last year on November 13th.

So how should we go about summarizing Grothendieck’s exceptional contribution to mathematics? - A contribution that will require perhaps decades to be fully assimilated by the following generations of mathematicians.

This contribution is the result of a truly comprehensive approach, the search for a full understanding that ignores the usually established boundaries between separate fields. The ambition of Grothendieck’s vision is to bring the two separate worlds of geometry and arithmetic together by developing what he proposes to call a new “arithmetic geometry”.

The title of his great work demonstrates the scope with which he wishes to endow his research. The title - Elements of Algebraic Geometry - pays homage to Euclid’s Elements of Mathematics by implicitly referring to it. This is nothing less than designing a new mathematics based on Euclid’s mathematics.

Crops and Seeds sees Grothendieck using his typical approach, citing metaphors as is his habit, metaphors such as those of a “home” to build, but also metaphors of heirs and of a builder.

Most mathematicians are likely to be confined within a conceptual framework, a “Universe” fixed once and for all - one they basically found as “complete” during their education. They are like the heirs of a great and beautiful fully-equipped house, with living rooms and kitchens and workshops, and cookware and tools in all corners, but in which you can still cook and tinker. How this house was gradually built over generations, and how and why such tools (but not others) were designed and crafted…), why the rooms are laid out and developed in a certain way here, but in another way there - these are all issues that the heirs would not dream to question. That’s “the universe”, the “given” in which one must live, and that’s all there is to it! It’s something that looks great (and they most likely haven’t even explored all the rooms), but familiar at the same time; but most of all it is immutable. In my mind, I feel like I am part of a lineage of mathematicians whose spontaneous vocation and joy is constantly building new homes. Along the way, they also can’t help inventing and giving shape to tools, utensils, furniture and required instruments, not only for building the house from the foundation all the way up to the top, but also for copiously filling in future kitchens and future workshops, and furnishing the home to be able to live in it comfortably. However, once everything to the last gutter and the last stool is set, it’s rare that the worker takes the time to linger in these places, where every stone and every rafter bears the trace of the hand that has worked on it and put it in place. His place is not in the tranquility of the ready-made universe, as welcoming and as harmonious as it is - it has been arranged by his own hands or by those of his predecessors. Other tasks in other places are already calling him, pressing urges (to satisfy needs) that he is the only one to feel; or perhaps he anticipates needs that he’s the only one to sense. His place is in the open air. He is a friend of the wind and is not afraid to be alone with his task. [Pp.38-39]

Grothendieck continues, providing us with his own interpretation of his work as a mathematician:

If I excelled in the art of the mathematician, this wasn’t so much because of my skills and my determination to solve problems left to me by my predecessors, but rather due to my natural tendency to pick up on crucial issues that nobody else had noticed, or to identify the “best ideas” that were missing (when the new concept hadn’t yet been proposed, no one realized that it was missing) and good formal elaborations which nobody had thought of before. But more than just simply discovering new questions, ideas, and formal elaborations, my gift lies in the discovery of groundbreaking points of view and this talent has always driven me to introduce and develop completely new topics. And that, I believe, is essentially my contribution to the mathematics of my time. But as its very name suggests, a “point of view” in itself is limited. It reveals to us only one view of a landscape or a panorama, among a multiplicity of others that are equally valid and real. “It is when these complementary points of view of the same reality are combined, when our ability to view things is enhanced, that the view can provide us with a more complete access to the knowledge of things. The more complex and rich the reality we want to grasp, the more important it is to have several "sets of eyes” to apprehend it to its fullest extent and in all its finesse. And it happens sometimes that a beam of convergent views on the same vast landscape enables us to grasp the One through its multiplicity, gives birth to something new: a whole that surpasses each partial perspective, just as a whole organism is more than a sum of its body parts and organs. We can simply refer to this new thing as vision. Vision unites the already known points of view that embody it as well as revealing others that were previously ignored, just like a groundbreaking perspective enables us to understand and discover that a multiplicity of issues, concepts and new formal elaborations are in fact a part of the same whole. [pp.41-43]

The unifying vision of Grothendieck has led him to define a common framework to simultaneously study the geometric (“continuous”) and the arithmetic (“discrete”) aspects of Mathematics that challenge the idea of space. We therefore compared Grothendieck to Einstein. Grothendieck made the comparison himself, not to invoke, but to underline both the kinship of spirit and the difference in “substance” between him and Einstein, since Einstein’s work was in the field of physics, while his own was in mathematics:

Grothendieck reveals a lot about himself in the words “I didn’t even realize what I was about to accomplish, it was more like playing a game…” These words remind us of children’s games. In fact, for him, “creation” connects us to the inborn abilities of children who set out to discover the world by playing.

To conclude this section, I will cite Grothendieck’s beautiful text about the creation of the world:

I mentioned earlier Rimbaud, another genius who, at the age of 21, left poetry to become an adventurer. The controversy of what to make of his abandonment of poetry will never be resolved. As for Grothendieck, he never really left mathematics behind (he continues to fill pages and pages of calculations even during his retirement… “boxes full of scribbles”), he left the “mathematical community”, disassociated himself from institutions devoted to the research and study of mathematics, resigned his position, his chair, and gave up his seminar… and instead involved himself in a quest for meaning.

What caused this break with the past? His colleagues recall the shock of an event from 1968: he was badly treated. "It was like a terrible slap in the face, it was so brutal; afterwards, he was no longer the same.” He ends his relationship with the founder of the IHES who accepted military funds to finance the institute. No more. He decides to get away and return to his home university, where he takes on the role of a simple teacher.

Two passages of Crops and Seeds deal with his departure from the institutions associated with mathematics:

Grothendieck’s colleagues did not understand this departure. Many spoke of “suicide”; others of “desertion”; some believed “the man is lost to math,” “the machine is out of order “. As for his students, (including his disciple Pierre Deligne, a future Fields Medal recipient), they had to face the daunting task of taking it upon themselves to continue exploring along the paths that were opened to them by Grothendieck, as the visionary himself was no longer there

This abrupt departure marks a major break in his life as a mathematician. It seems that what triggered it was the disagreement with the founder of the IHES who accepted military funding for the institution. From this point on, Grothendieck’s political awareness comes to play a much more important role in his life; this political awareness was already there before, but assumes its full power only now. As he starts to rethink his past in the world of mathematics, he comes to discover the flaws, the compromises, and the ethical issues at play in this milieu. As he unravels and analyzes all of these, he makes no concessions, even going as far as to pose the harsh question, "Will we continue to conduct scientific research?”, in front of an audience of CERN scientists.

In fact, this iconoclastic question represents his attempt to grapple with the issues that are at stake of what came to be called “political ecology”. Grothendieck identified with this movement; at the time, he became involved as an activist in the group “Surviving and Living”.

The message was simple: this planet is going to die soon, we need to completely change our way of life. Grothendieck changed his lifestyle completely. After leaving behind his chair and his seminar, he became a simple teacher at his former high school in Montpellier, where he continued to teach until his retirement. He had also settled in a small village where he led a reclusive life and lived close to nature, devoting himself to what he called “meditation.”

Actually, his vision of himself didn’t change overnight, he says. It took a few years to begin to get to know himself and get into meditation.

Crops and Seeds can confuse readers. There are a lot of thoughts, observations, and analyses that seem like they are replayed in a loop, because they are constantly repeated, reiterated, and re-examined in increasing depth. The text can be compared to a sieve that keeps the substance being sifted as a whole, and yet separates the elements making up the mixture. This is the background against which Grothendieck’s meditation is carried out until the truth and meaning of events past and present are extracted. It is what Crops and Seeds is all about.

It is impossible to exhaustively cover or to even simply give an overview of everything that is discussed in his deep meditative confession whose pages are overflowing with ideas. I will only mention what Grothendieck defines as two types of corruption in his former work environment. The first one prompted his departure from the mathematical scene: the self-serving collusion of scientists with the military establishment. He discovered the second type of corruption almost fifteen years later, when he wrote Crops and Seeds: the plagiarism of his work by those who appropriated his results without even citing him or ever mentioning his name - he speaks of Burial, Funeral. His meditation on these events gave him the feeling that these two types of corruption are not unrelated. He realized that what unites them is the lack of self-respect; and it is in the loss of self-respect that he recognizes the root of the loss of respect for others, and for the work of the Creator - the disrespect of nature, the disrespect of the environment.

Grothendieck withdrew from the scene in order to not even passively condone corruption, but he did not abandon his work. For that reason his dismay at the plagiarism that goes on among his former students has only grown. But as a result of his self-development, he has added the following remarks:

Crops, sowing: you reap what you sow, you cannot shirk responsibility - this awareness is part of the long work of self-discovery that he initiated by deciding on his departure, a decision that was insane according to his fellow mathematicians.

“It is said that the world becomes fertile with any decision where we express ourselves fully: there where winter soil stretched out as far as the eye could see, a thousand possibilities rear their heads and turn it green.” [Gracq, The Lands of the Setting Sun]|||

This is an English translation of a post written in French by my father Gérard Lebrun. The pages numbers refer to the original text of Grothendieck’s work Récoltes et Semailles (“Crops and Seeds”). I was intrigued by the unusual path of... | Alex Lebrun | Cofounder and CEO at Wit.ai (Facebook)