Everyone has different ways of getting work done, and every manager needs a way to hit their deadlines, track the time their employees spent working on tasks, and collaborate with their team. And luckily, there are literally hundreds of online programs that do just that.

Which one is right for you?

Well there’s no right answer; some like to keep it simple, with just a standard task and workflow system, while others add features like chatting, calendar syncing, and workflow management.

But what really is right depends more on a matter of work type and personal preference, and you need to do a bit of research and find out what will be the best fit. Luckily for you we’ve already done the research, and we took into account our own experience of managing two IT companies, thousands of Capterra reviews, as well as helpful case studies highlighting the most useful project management features.

Let’s take a closer look at what we found:

Asana is a web-based software tool used to help with team collaboration. It’s main benefit is that it allows users to manage tasks or projects online without having to use email.

Each team is given a workspace, and within that workspace are specific tasks. Under each task, users and team members can follow the projects they need to so that if anything changes, followers of that particular project with get updates or changes sent to them automatically.

Tasks tracking is implemented marvelously there. The ability to enter/modify tasks at the speed of thought helps get thoughts down before focus is lost.

Asana also allows companies to use the product at enterprise scale.

Trello is another popular software tool for office collaboration, and it’s an efficient one too as it makes use of the kanban paradigm, first popularized by Toyota back in the 1980s for supply chain management.

All projects within Trello are represented by “boards,” which contain lists and cards that allow you to drag and drop and progress from one task to the next, mirroring the flow of a feature from idea to execution.

Users can then be assigned cards that contain their tasks or projects, and these cards can be moved, updated, and even be used for communication about a specific task. Cards hold comments, attachments, checklists, and even due dates that sync automatically with the calendar.

It’s pretty simple methodology, but it sure has gotten a lot of companies to switch over to Trello.

Basecamp is a great project management tool for handling small projects very well, and its simplicity makes organizing and finishing projects a breeze.

Within Basecamp are several different tools, including a message board, chat room, schedule & calendar, docs & files library, and even one for check-ins.

With Basecamp it’s all about efficiency and communication, as its combination of tools gives businesses and their employees everything they need to collaborate and get the job done, which also makes it a great tool for remote employees.

It is more about team communication in Basecamp, rather than just task tracking as Asana or Trello.

TeamWork projects is a very user-friendly project management tool that’s easy to use and has a nice eye-catching design. It is similar to Basecamp but with more features.

In addition to the built-in analytic tools, TeamWork gives users collaboration tools that you won’t find anywhere else, including sending messages and shareable notes, the ability to give tasks priorities, assign tags, create milestones and invoices.

TeamWork also integrates with your email, and not just normal integration, you can actually create and assign tasks via email.

With TeamWork, it’s more about managing everything, not just tasks like with Asana or Trello.

Podio is a web-based project management tool which is completely customizable to suit your project needs.

Organizations can have different workspaces for different departments, or one workspace for the entire organization depending on preference. Within the workspace, different tools and apps provide direction and user flow, and within these apps are multiple items that provide details on each individual contact or project.

These items can then be broken down into a checklist, or different tasks, and can then be assigned to selected employees to complete.

What makes Podio different is that Podio is used to build custom business Apps. For example, you can create a Projects App and a Tasks App and connect them to each other. Or create your own CRM workspace.

Wrike is one of the few project management tools that’s embracing email as others are trying to limit the amount of emails sent, and the software centralizes around individual tasks.

Both collaboration and file sharing take place at the task level, and each task can essentially be looked at as a mini project.

Wrike also keeps all users in the loop at all times with customized desktop notifications, so if anything is updated, changed, or added to a task, all users within that task get a notification. It also integrates with your email and makes it incredibly easy to tag or email other users about a task or project.

And chances are that if it works for the Hootsuite marketing team, it’ll probably work for you too.

Clubhouse is another easy-to-use project management tool, and is especially useful for software development teams. Instead of being crammed with a bunch of fancy features you’ll never use, Clubhouse has everything you need with a simplistic user interface.

Clubhouse also allows for easy progress tracking and predictive analytics, perfect for software developers.

Here is why Geckoboard team moved from Trello to Clubhouse.

Flow is one of the more visual project management tools, and its main goal is to give everyone on the team high-level transparency into everything the team and/or company is working on.

Flow covers everything from day-to-day personal tasks to projects with your team at work. With Flow, you can organize your entire life in one place instead of having to jump around between different apps for personal, work, side projects, etc.

Flow is gorgeous. The guys at MetaLab have really paid attention to the details, and it shows.

Redbooth is great project management software for those looking for something simple to organize tasks and files while improving efficiency and communication.

Redbooth is easy to use and navigate, and allows users to easily check and update current projects and individual tasks. The program also offers an interactive dashboard for easy operation showing all tasks, and with a simple click, all details can be viewed and added including the due date, comments from team members, and attachments or files.

Redbooth also features a workload chart, allowing managers to quickly view all tasks assigned to each employee and their due dates so their workload can be managed accordingly.

ActiveCollab is a great project management tool for keeping organized, and its powerful, yet simple interface always gives you a nice overview of any and every project your team is working on.

What’s different about ActiveCollab is not surprisingly the collaboration features, as it actually allows you to bring clients on the board to collaborate with you on projects.

With ActiveCollab, you can easily assign tasks to a team, get detailed overviews of each project, estimate and track the time spent on each task, and even issue invoices to clients.

Taiga is a little different than the others when it comes to project management tools.

Taiga is designed specifically with startups and agile developers in mind, and is a powerful, free, open source management platform that’s great for agile implementation.

Jira is pretty standard these days at any software development company. This is the most powerful and flexible project management tool but there’s a learning curve in terms of setting the workflows up.

It has an extensive feature set and customizations are endless. Everything integrated into it – from Confluence, Bitbucket & Project management. That said it requires significant administration effort to use.

Pivotal Tracker is another project management tool made for software development, and it’s a great, lightweight tool.

Pivotal is very simple to use for agile development and works well if you like the kanban/iteration concepts. Developers tend to like it a lot. But it is not a great issue tracking system. If you start adding bugs to it, the project backlog and icebox quickly become very large.

Targetprocess is a project management tool most commonly used for software development, but it can also be used for marketing, education, and recruiting.

The software gives you the transparency you need across teams to manage agile projects, and its flexibility adapts to your business workflow and management approach. Through enhanced visualization functionality, you can visualize and manage any agile project.

As you can see there are a lot of different tools out there, each with a little something different to offer.

It may just come down to what you’re most comfortable with and what makes the most sense for your budget. But now hopefully you have a better understanding of how some of these tools work, and how simple add-ons can make some of them that much better!|||

Whether it’s for software development or getting business projects completed, these are the 14 best project management tools on the market.