App Stores have changed the way we buy software. For developers, they’ve made the distribution of software easy, especially on mobile devices. While the App Stores are perfect (well, almost) for Free and Paid apps, I believe they are not set up for subscription-based services. Here’s why -

Before we get into the problem, let me explain how the App Stores are structured. The App Stores only have two categories — Free and Paid. Here’s what they mean -

Paid Apps: You need to pay upfront to download. Example: Monument Valley, Fantastical 2

Free Apps: They are ‘free’ to download.

Free apps are further classified into:

The freemium category is where the problem exists. Whether it’s the ‘Extra Lives’ on Candy Crush or Evernote subscription, they all fall under freemium. App Stores represent them as ‘in-app purchases.” Sigh.

The recent 85/15 revenue share model is a good indication that Apple wants developers to build subscription-based software. But, there is a twist — you should offer some part of your service for free. They’re pushing everyone towards the over-hyped ‘Freemium’ model. What they don’t understand is, one size doesn’t fit all.

Most users will be content with the free tier. So instead of focusing on improving the service for the users, developers spend time in ‘converting’ the free users to paid subscribers. Throwing in nag screens, ‘special offers’ and desperate pop-ups are just a few examples. As a product person, I can assure you that we don’t enjoy showing such screens to spoil the experience. But, the App Stores have left us with no choice.

To overcome the forced Freemium model, developers have tried different hacks. For example, Basecamp doesn’t allow new users to sign up through their mobile app as they don’t have a free tier. One can only log in. It highlights the fact that App Stores are the ‘only’ platform to distribute software on mobile devices. Which is the reason why they should be accommodating for all the developers.

This is straight from the App Store Review Guidelines:

Services like Apple Music and Netflix get a special privilege. While I understand these products cannot afford to provide any part of their service for free, Apple/Google should recognize that the same holds good for other apps as well. We certainly can’t afford a free tier.

Let the developers choose a business model that suits them the best. Adding a category for subscription-based apps will solve a lot of problems. It’ll certainly encourage more serious developers to list their software on the stores.

Set the right expectation by clearly differentiating Freemium apps from the Subscription-based apps.

It’s now clear that the user is downloading and starting the trial. Let users try the product out without any restrictions (do not auto-charge the credit card after the trial expiry), and let them decide if they want to subscribe. Also, let the developers choose their product’s behaviour after the trial: it can either downgrade to a free version or stop working by showing a paywall. This will allow us to focus more on the product rather than obsessing over how to make users pay.

Do not force freemium on everyone, please.|||

App Stores have changed the way we buy software. For developers, they’ve made the distribution of software easy, especially on mobile devices. While the App Stores are perfect (well, almost) for Free…