The AI Optify data team writes about topics that we think software engineers will love. AI Optify has affiliate partnerships so we may get a share of the revenue from your purchase.- For this post, we have scraped various signals (e.g. online ratings and reviews, topics covered, author influence in the field, year of publication, social media mentions, etc.) from web for Node.js books. We have fed all above signals to a Machine Learning algorithm to compute a score and rank the top books.

The readers will love our list because it is Data-Driven & Objective. Enjoy the list:

1. Node.js the Right Way: Practical, Server-Side JavaScript That Scales 

 $13 JavaScript is the backbone of the modern web, powering nearly every web app’s user interface. Node.js is JavaScript for the server. This book shows you how to develop small, fast, low-profile, useful, networked applications. You’ll write asynchronous, non-blocking code using Node’s style and patterns. You’ll cluster and load balance your services with Node core features and third-party tools. You’ll work with many protocols, creating RESTful web services, TCP socket clients and servers, and more.

2. Web Development with Node and Express: Leveraging the JavaScript Stack 

 $21 Learn how to build dynamic web applications with Express, a key component of the Node/JavaScript development stack. In this hands-on guide, author Ethan Brown teaches you the fundamentals through the development of a fictional application that exposes a public website and a RESTful API. You’ll also learn web architecture best practices to help you build single-page, multi-page, and hybrid web apps with Express.

Get up to speed on Node’s event-driven, asynchronous I/O model for developing data-intensive applications that are frequently accessed but computationally simple. If you’re comfortable working with JavaScript, this book provides many programming and deployment examples to help you take advantage of server-side development with Node.|||

Top Node.js Books