Many other scientists don’t think everyone will wait to find out; as soon as CRISPR is shown to be safe, ethical questions will recede, just as they did with IVF. Church thinks this still misses the point: The floodgates are already open to genetic reengineering—CRISPR’s but one more drop in the river. He notes that there are already 2,300 gene therapy trials under way. Last year the CEO of a company called BioViva claimed to have successfully reversed some of the effects of aging in her own body with injections from a gene therapy her company devised. “Certainly,” Church notes, “aging reversal is just as augmentative as anything else we were talking about.” Several gene therapy trials for Alzheimer’s are also in progress. These won’t likely produce any objections, because they are to treat a devastating medical condition, but as Church points out, “whatever drugs work to prevent Alzheimer’s will probably also work for cognitive enhancement, and they will work in adults almost by definition.” In February 2016 the boundary crumbled a bit more when the United Kingdom’s independent fertility regulator gave a research team permission to use CRISPR to explore the mechanisms of miscarriage with human embryos (all embryos used in the experiments will ultimately be destroyed—no pregnancies will result).

Nielsen reported in 2015 that the average adult over 18 spent roughly 10 hours a day looking at a screen. (By comparison, we spend 17 minutes a day exercising.) I still remember the home phone number of my best friend from childhood, but not the numbers of any of my good friends now. (This is true of seven of 10 people, according to a study published in Britain.) Seven out of 10 Americans take a prescription drug; of these, one in four women in their 40s or 50s takes an antidepressant, though studies show that for some of them anything from therapy to a short walk in the woods can do as much good. Virtual reality headsets are one of the hottest selling gamer toys. Our cars are our feet, our calculators are our minds, and Google is our memory. Our lives now are only partly biological, with no clear split between the organic and the technological, the carbon and the silicon. We may not know yet where we’re going, but we’ve already left where we’ve been.|||

Like other species, we are the products of millions of years of adaptation. Now we're taking matters into our own hands.