As many cold-brew aficionados are aware, Starbucks often runs out of it’s delightful cold brew throughout the day.

“Sorry, all outta cold brew” she pontificates with an empathetic but too familiar tone.

The rejection is painful. My beloved, gone again.

The standard Starbucks answer is they can’t brew ahead of time and also measure demand for the next day.

As an entrepreneur, I look at business challenges and try to solve them in an effective and profitable way:

The problem: Customers are angry and deprived of cold brew.

The constraints: Must brew 20 hours ahead of time. Need to accurately estimate demand.

Over-produce buckets of cold brew, and create a new “20+ Hour Cold Brew” that has been brewing for longer than 20 hours (your over-supply from each day now meets demand for later days). Sell this 20+ as a premium drink, with an added charge.

Your “20+” cold brew will be the most delicious kind, as it’s a well known fact among cold-brew-snobs that the longer the brew time, the better.

As long as you brew 2-days ahead of time, you’ll profitably convert all surplus cold brew supply into sales, and all customer demand into sales.

If you run out of your regular cold-brew, you can offer customers a “free upgrade” to the 20+ brew, which will be a welcome treat for regular cold-brew drinkers.

Howard Shultz, CEO of Starbucks, said in 2016: “The opportunity to create an entirely new cold coffee experience is limitless.”

As the cold brew category grows in popularity, Starbucks stands to benefit the most. However, the large scale effect of “cold brew at home” kits are not yet felt by the mighty Starbucks, as a large market segment is ripped off, penetrated and cannibalized by 3rd party vendors.

Shareholders should be aware of the shortcomings of Starbucks’ failed cold-brew strategy. By not accurately meeting demand, Starbucks is disappointing it’s loyal consumer base and investors.

According to Starbucks own website, “cold brew sales grew 338.9 percent between 2010 and 2015.”

Mr. Schultz should ask himself “what is the opportunity cost of ignoring this market segment and betraying cold brew customers?”

When a customer is denied their cold-brew, this is a “punishment” according to B.F. Skinner, who popularized the time-tested concepts of operant behavior and reinforcement.

According to wikipedia, “.. punishers serve to decrease behaviors.. negative reinforcers are stimuli that the subject will work to be rid of or to end.”

If B.F. Skinner was an investor, he’d be rolling in his grave.

Feeling the punishment, cold-brew consumers go to other cafes or order online cold brew kits.

Starbucks barely benefits from this, since its stores rarely sell the Starbucks Cold Brew System and are almost always out of stock of their Narino Cold Pitcher Packs.

Google trends tells us cold brew is a cyclical business, and as summer approaches Starbucks better step up its game!

You can thank me in cold brew and gift-cards, Starbucks!|||

As many cold-brew aficionados are aware, Starbucks often runs out of it’s delightful cold brew throughout the day. The standard Starbucks answer is they can’t brew ahead of time and also measure…