Checkout our Medium blog post to see what amazing things you can do with nteract.

Note: There will be s and quirks. Please come tell us about them!

nteract is a literate coding environment that supports Python, R, JavaScript and other Jupyter kernels. It wraps up the best of the web based Jupyter notebook and embeds it as a desktop application that allows you to open notebooks natively on your system. Double click a on the desktop, use Spotlight on the Mac. It Just Works™

Head to the Releases page and download the version for your OS.

The contributors are listed in contributors

To learn how to contribute, head to our contributing guide.

This project adheres to the Contributor Covenant code of conduct. By participating, you are expected to uphold this code. Please report unacceptable behavior to rgbkrk@gmail.com.

Feel free to post issues or chat in Slack (request an invite) if you need help or have questions. If you have trouble creating an account on Slack, either email rgbkrk@gmail.com or post an issue on GitHub.

To get started developing install a python runtime then install in dev mode.

At least for now, we need the python 3 kernel installed when hacking on nteract:

As you make changes, close the entire app (cmd-q on OS X, or ctrl-c at the terminal) then run again.

The webpack build will keep occurring as you modify source. When you open a new notebook, you'll get the freshest copy of the notebook app.

You can run nteract's documentation generator by running

And then opening in your favorite browser.

It is recommended to run before packaging a release.

To package a release for your current platform run:

To package a release for all platforms run:

Make sure you have the required dependencies for a multi platform build installed.

The OS X release has to be signed with an Apple developer key. Currently only Kyle (@rgbkrk) has this set up.

Then verify that the copy of nteract in works properly (mostly ad-hoc basic notebook loading and execution).

Work on the nteract notebook is currently sponsored by

We're on a common mission to build a great notebook experience. Feel free to get in touch if you'd like to help. Resources go towards paying for additional work by seasoned designers and engineers.

The nteract project was made possible with the support of

If your employer allows you to work on nteract during the day and would like recognition, feel free to add them to the "Made possible by" list.|||

nteract - :notebook: Desktop notebook app + packages