Due to an error with our domain registrar “plivo.com” and all its subdomains were unreachable for the last 12 hours.

We have isolated and resolved the configuration error with our domain provider, however we expect the change to propagate globally within next 3-12 hours.  (April 24th, 18 hrs UTC)

In the interim we have replicated all our services on “plivo.io” domain to ensure there is no service downtime. We have detailed the recommended workaround about the same below.

We apologize for the inconvenience.

Meanwhile if you have any issues or questions regarding this incident, please contact us at: https://support.plivo.com

We have mapped all our “plivo.com” subdomains to “plivo.io”. We recommend that you make changes to your current app to use plivo.io to ensure uptime of service till further updates.

All our APIs are now available at  https://api.plivo.io instead of https://api.plivo.com.

You can now use https://manage.plivo.io to access the Plivo Dashboard.

You can now use phone.plivo.io to register your SIP devices.

You can now use app.plivo.io to call a SIP application instead of app.plivo.com.

To avoid any downtime we recommend hard coding the following DNS/IP entries on your servers

Note: dig or nslookup or host commands will still resolve to the invalid IP as those tools are not using /etc/hosts but only the resolvers set on your computer or server.

Please use ping to ensure the IP is correct:

# ping command will not respond but you should see the correct IP as ping is using /etc/hosts

Paste this block in your /etc/hosts file and your operating system will use these IPs instead of making a DNS request. This is a temporary workaround that should be removed once the incident is resolved.

Please use phone.plivo.io instead of phone.plivo.com to register your SIP phones.

Please use the following links instead of cdn.plivo.com for the WebSDK.

You don’t need to change /etc/hosts for the WebSDK.

You can now use the following DNS (SRV and CNAME) for Custom Inbound Carriers :

For WebSDK version 1 and version 2, please use the updated js files.

You don’t need to setup /etc/hosts for phone.plivo.com anymore.

Dashboard is now available here:

We have created a new API. You can now use https://api.plivo.io instead of https://api.plivo.com

We are still working on the Inbound SMS part.

You can now directly register your Softphone and Hardware SIP Devices directly using the domain/IP 98.158.107.18

Calls to WebRTC clients are now working. Note that you should still use the workaround above for phone.plivo.com to register the WebRTC SDK v1 and v2.

Our DNS provider has started propagation process of the DNS.

Inbound calls to DIDs are still be impacted for North America and Europe.

Calls from SIP and WebRTC clients are working.

Calls to SIP and WebRTC clients are not yet working.

We are still working on the SMS service.

While we are working with our DNS provider for plivo.com, we are currently deploying an alternative solution to get the service back online.

We are working with our provider to expedite the renewal of the DNS. We will update you shortly.|||

