Merge request approvals allow you to block merges until the specified qualified users or groups (and the number of them) have signed off (approved) them. This is a crucial step of code review in many organizations. As we continue to iterate on new functionality, we are simplifying the interface in the project settings with this release, laying a foundation for high usability for more powerful features in the future.

Learn more about merge request approvals in our docs.

GitLab 9.1 ships with improvements to the Disaster Recovery feature that we've released in GitLab 9.0 in Alpha.

We've made it easier for developers to work on the feature itself. We've also reduced the number of steps required to setup Geo.

Finally, we've added support for replicating the following types of files saved on disk: issue, merge request, and comment attachments, as well as user, group, and project avatars. We plan to continue working actively on Disaster Recovery in the coming releases.

Learn more about Disaster Recovery in Alpha in our docs.

Pipeline mini-graphs now show in the system information box in commit views. Previously they were only shown in merge request views.

Learn more about pipelines in our docs.

We have changed the behavior of pipeline notifications in GitLab 9.1, to reduce chatter and allow users additional control. Notifications for successful pipelines will now be off by default, and can be re-enabled by setting the notification level to Custom and selecting . Additionally when selecting custom notifications for successful pipelines, only the initiator of the pipeline will receive an email.

Learn more about pipeline notifications in our docs.

As we add more features into GitLab, the historical view of system actions recorded in the discussion threads of issues and merge requests becomes increasingly important to know what has changed recently and further in the past.

With this release, we are introducing icons next to system notes, to allow you to easily demarcate system actions versus user comments. And this also allows you to scan quickly through a long discussion thread and get a quick high-level sense of how an object has evolved over time.

We’ve added the usage ping, already present in GitLab Enterprise Edition since version 8.10, to GitLab Community Edition.

In the coming months, this will enable you to see how your cohort usage compares to that of everyone else using GitLab. See the issue on this effort and the background of this project. You can see the exact payload that is being sent every week in admin > cohorts. You can opt-out in admin > settings.

Learn more about usage ping in our docs.

Issue Boards are a great solution for planning and managing issues that are being worked together by a team, allowing you to track them as they move from stage to stage in your workflow.

With this release, we are introducing focus mode in Issue Boards, which hides the navigation UI when toggled on.

This is helpful for co-located teams, when many folks are looking at a large screen together during a collaboration session. Just click the button at the top right of a board to toggle it on and off.

Learn more about Issue Boards in our docs.

In some situations, developers can create multiple containers based upon the same code base. This can occur when building a container in an earlier stage to be consumed in a later stage, or when packaging different versions of dependencies.

As part of GitLab 9.1 the Container Registry now supports multiple image names for a single project, allowing a simple way to store a project's multiple containers.

For example storing both and is now supported.

Thanks André Guedes for the fantastic contribution!

Learn more about Container Registry in our docs.|||

GitLab 9.1 Released with Service Desk, Canary Deployments, Burndown Charts, and much more!