Above is the newly selected logo of the initiative, which I describe as:

Let me know what you think about it, below in the comments.

In last 3 months (since OSSDC inception), researchers, software and hardware engineers, including in auto and embedded space, joined OSSDC Slack, almost 250 from 14 time zones (at this time), and OSSDC GitHub organization, and started to participate at the discussions and contribute to the 3 ongoing MVPs we are focusing on in the next 3 months.

One “wheel length” at a time, until we achieve the whole set of ADAS features, required to move to full autonomy:

The slide above is from an excellent CVPR 2016 ADAS tutorial, presented by Texas Instruments, I’ll write more about this.

The plan is also to enhance and accelerate through hardware (FPGAs), wherever possible, the vision processing pipeline (see slide below from same tutorial), as our focus is mainly on vision based perception for SDCs (like AutoX), cheaper to build and scale:

Update: See also my other (newer) article, with more details on this and “hiring” oportunities:

Let’s work together on bringing the best hardware and software for open source SDC and other mobile robots that could benefit from the same technologies.

Even if you have a startup in the works in this area, I believe collaborating in the open (as much as possible) will be more productive.

My focus is to keep the open source SDC going, and enable everyone to approach it, not only research teams.

Also very important these days is ensuring that your current and future products could be used by a lot of people, by enabling their functionality for open source projects.

With the recent announcement that the lead of Udacity Open Source SDC project started a SDC taxi company, I think OSSDC remains the only community that really strives to push further Open Source SDC as a whole = hardware + software.

Join us in building safe and affordable Open Source SDCs!

For more updates follow me on Twitter @gtarobotics|||

In last 3 months (since OSSDC inception), researchers, software and hardware engineers, including in auto and embedded space, joined OSSDC Slack, almost 250 from 14 time zones (at this time), and…