et's face it: any script kiddie with a pair of pliers can put Red Hat on a Compaq, his mom's toaster, or even the family dog. But nothing earns you geek points like installing Linux on a dead badger. So if you really want to earn your wizard hat, just read the following instructions, and soon your friends will think you're slick as caffeinated soap.

The following test installation was conducted on the concrete floor of the garage of a detached single-story house, on unconsecrated ground, using a 400MHz clamshell iBook, and began shortly after local sunset.

Step 1: Find a suitable badger. Specimens from zoos are ideal, but suitable badgers can be found as roadkill along highways in many parts of North America, the British Isles, continental Europe, Asia, and parts of Africa.

Step 2: Once you have obtained a dead badger, check it carefully for structural damage, particularly in the spine, skull, and legs. Dead badgers do not heal, and a badger with broken legs will display limited mobility. Brain and spinal cord damage is likely to interfere with the Linux installation and render any successfully-installed system unstable, as well as voiding all explicit and implicit warranties according to the laws of any and every state, country, or alternate dimension, present or future.

Step 3: Obtain a copy of FleshGolem or other cyberspiritual controller program. This test was conducted with a copy of FleshGolem downloaded from the Apple site's utilities section. Follow all installation instructions carefully, including addenda in the readme.txt file.

Step 4: Insert Duppy card or attach external SpiritInTheSky adapter. Duppy cards work best if you're using a Mac with an Airport slot; response on the external SpiritInTheSky adapter may be sluggish. Further notes below apply only to Duppy card installation on the test iBook used.

Step 5: Install Duppy card security antenna (included with card) in badger. Badgers may be run without security antennas, but this is not recommended. Insecure badgers may be hacked by anyone with a compatible card and badger bits. Each Duppy card/antenna system is uniquely coded so that a properly installed system will allow only the original user to run the badger.

Step 6: Install your badger's operating system. VüDü is the preferred Linux distribution for badgers and related species (see Step 1). This distro was designed by German software engineers who contributed to the SuSE project before they started up Twisted Faces Software in Jamaica. An alternative distribution is Pooka, which is available for download at SoulForge.net. However, there is no alpha build for MacOS and Amiga, and some Windows NT users have found that the Harvey utilities built into Pooka may cause sudden, unpredictable invisibility issues.

Default partitioning: /root goes in the spinal cord and brain stem, /swap and /soul go on the left hemisphere of the brain, and /usr, /var, and /home go on the right. If you're working with a badger with damage to one of those areas, you can repartition one or the other brain hemisphere, but as noted in Step 2, using a brain-damaged badger is not recommended and may interfere with successful installation. System configuration information and the spiritual components of the package come on a small, rolled-up piece of parchment. Space is available to write in a password, as well as any auxiliary programs like NecroNull. The VüDü package comes with two scrolls, but a Santeria, Vodoun, Wiccan, or Catholic priest or priestess who has undergone Twisted Faces' scrollmaking training can also provide suitably blessed parchments. Check the VüDü home page to find a qualified cleric in your area. When modifying the scroll, be sure to use chicken blood-based ink, and write neatly. Various languages may be used on the scroll -- VüDü is written in SoulScript, but successful modifications have been made in Latin, Hebrew, and Enochian. Further modifications can be made by Telnetting or SSHing into your badger later; start only with essential information. After finishing modifications, roll up the scroll and stick it down the badger's throat, all the way into the stomach. Use a screwdriver or pencil to get it all the way in.

Step 7: Install VüDü itself. In the package, there will be a large square of herb-scented paper. This is the entire code for VüDü. Fold this paper into an origami shape resembling the animal you're installing VüDü on (see also Appendix II). There are folding directions for common animals in the box. Make a hollow inside your paper badger and add a little more blood and hair from your animal.

Step 8: Invocation/boot procedures. Place badger in center of fireproof surface, making sure ventilation is adequate and all doors are locked. Turn off all cell phones and pagers, and cease using all other unapproved electronic devices. Using the badger's blood, smear a foot-wide pentagram around its body. Place origami code-badger at the top point of pentagram, and light paper while making the boot incantation:

DISCLAIMER: No badgers or Macintoshes were harmed in the course of this test installation. Your results may vary. Please note that zombie badgers are banned in many municipalities in California and Wisconsin; zombie badgers must remain leashed at all times in Texas. Zombie badgers can move at great speeds, and are prone to sudden acceleration; use proper caution when driving your zombie badger. Do not allow your zombie badger to consume mushrooms or African snakes, or your badger may emit catchy techno music. Do not taunt zombie badgers. Prolonged use of a zombie badger may cause acne, insomnia, leprosy, unusual weather, or the end of time. Please dispose of your zombie badgers properly; consult your local recycling company for proper disposal protocols.|||

