How Apple's Supply Chain Contributes to the Betterment of the Environment

Earth Day, celebrated on April 22nd, is approaching. Electronics OEMs have an opportunity to be major contributors to the betterment of Earth. Apple's supply chain, and its supply chain partners, are embracing renewable energy and other activities to address both good business and enviromental practice.

Earth Day was created in 1970 as a vehicle to build a healthy, sustainable environment, address climate change, and protect Earth for future generations.

The environmental impact of electronics production and the industrial effects on the environment are major concerns for the electronics manufacturing industry. Responsible manufacturing in the electronics industry demands for the use of renewable energy and greener options, such as alternative raw materials, within all the production processes.

Protecting the forests: 100% of the paper used in Apple's packaging comes from recycled paper, or from sustainable forests.

In 2014, Apple set a goal to become 100% renewable including all Apple retail stores, offices, facilities, and data centers. Apple has been renewable in Singapore by 100% since 2016.

In total, Apple powers today 100% of its operations in 23 countries with renewable energy, and 93% of the worldwide operations in the rest of the countries. Apple's data centers run on 100% renewable energy.

Apple's Japanese manufacturing partner Ibiden has become Apple's first supplier to pledge the use of 100% renewable energy spread across 20 new solar energy facilities.

Ibiden's investment includes a floating solar PhotoVoltaic (PV) facility, one of the largest in Japan. Apple's Japanese partner's 100% renewable energy use makes Apple's supply chain greener.

Apple uses Ibiden technology to bring together the integrated circuitry and chip packages in Apple devices. Ibiden, headquartered in Ogaki, Gifu prefecture in Japan, specializes in printed circuit boards and integrated circuit packaging

The power generated by over 12 megawatts of solar energy is enough for the Japanese company to construct products for Apple. Apple and its manufacturing partners plan on generating over 2.5 billion kilowatt-hour per year by the end of 2018.

In the U.S., Apple and NV Energy plan on building a 200 megawatts solar farm in Nevada scheduled to be completed in 2019. This is part of Apple's continuous goal to become a leader in sustainability.

In the recently published Greenpeace's Clean Energy Index, Apple scored 83% obtaining a final Grade A, thanks to its low usage of conventional energy sources such as coal, nuclear, or natural gas.

Apple also scored top marks in Energy Transparency, Renewable Energy Commitment and Siting Policy, Energy Efficiency and Mitigation, and Renewable Procurement, with a B in Advocacy.

For consumers, Apple developed its Apple Renew program which offers an easy way to recycle all your Apple devices at any Apple Store or online. If your devices qualify, Apple sends you a gift card. It's easy: Tell Apple which device you have, get a prepaid mailing label by email, delete your data following Apple's simple steps, ship your device. Apple receives Macs and PCs.

By sending your old personal or business devices to Apple for responsible recycling, you can help prevent climate change, protect natural resources, and keep harmful toxins out from the ecosystem.

Recycling electronics is a great way to celebrate Earth Day for a better future for the next generation.|||

Electronics OEMs have an opportunity to be major contributors to the betterment of the earth. For Earth Day, we're looking at the efforts of one major OEM: Apple.