Finding out you are an Empath is a major milestone in anyone’s life.

I know that because it was for me and for the people I help and coach.

Suddenly you find out that how you have always felt all your life has a name, and it gives meaning and purpose to many experiences and relationships you have been through in your life and the type of people you have been meeting.

The thing is, if you have found this article, and you are now here reading it is because you most certainly are an Empath.

Because nothing happens by chance.

I found out I am an Empath at the beginning of a full-blown spiritual awakening many years ago.

It was one of those A-HA life moments that brought a lot of clarity to my life and to whom I truly am.

So, if you are wondering if you are an Empath, here are the 5 major signs:

1. You feel unexplainable emotions all of a sudden

You’re feeling great and all of a sudden you enter a place with other people and you start feeling emotions like sadness, anger, anxiety, etc, without having a specific reason to feel that way.

Or you start feeling a rush of positive and good energy all of a sudden.

You get confused because you have no idea of what’s going on.

You’re simply picking up on other people’s energy and feeling their emotions as if they’re your own.

You can even clearly feel how someone else is feeling in regards to you. If they like you or not, if they feel anxious around you, or happy.

And this is especially tricky with negative energy.

Empaths are very sensitive to TV, videos, movies, news and broadcasts, especially when there’s violence or emotional dramas depicting shocking scenes of physical or emotional pain inflicted on adults, children or animals. It can easily bring an Empath to tears.

Some Empaths will even feel further as to feel other people’s pain in their own bodies.

2. Meeting challenging people and being in challenging relationships

Spending your whole life as an Empath without knowing it is a very challenging place to be.

But as everything in life, that happens for a reason, because you have certain lessons to learn about yourself.

Many Empaths spent a lot of years in a powerless position.

Because they feel other people’s emotions so deeply and clearly, they feel this calling to help everyone.

But when you as an Empath try to help someone else that is not ready to be helped (or even want your help) you’ll attract all sorts of people and relationships into your life: abusive people, narcissistic people or just people that want to feed on your energy.

And this happens in every kind of relationships: family, friends, romantic, work, etc.

The reason why you attract those type of people is because they’re being a mirror to you. If you feel powerless and play small in life, you’ll attract people that will validate that, and will make you feel more powerless and small.

Those are wake-up calls for you to step into your inner power and start looking within, instead of avoiding facing and working on your own issues by helping others.

Those type of people and challenging relationships will keep appearing over and over again in your life until you finally decide it’s time to focus on yourself and help yourself instead of trying to save the whole world.

That’s why so many Empaths find out they’re Empaths at the beginning of a spiritual awakening and when going through major changes in their lives: because they’re finally ready to look within and do their inner internal work.

3. You need to withdraw from people to recharge

Empaths that feel powerless are like a sponge, absorbing all kinds of energy from others, especially negative energy.

That makes them feel exhausted, drained, depressed, and in desperate need of alone time to recharge their “batteries”.

That happens because when you come from a place of feeling powerless, you basically feel like you have no control over picking up stuff from others and you’re open and vulnerable to all kind of energies.

When you are ungrounded in your own energy field, you pick up everything from everyone.

That is why you need to recharge so often and it can be really challenging for an Empath to be around crowds of people for a long period of time.

The good thing is, this all changes when you step into your personal empowerment.

When an Empath finds out he is powerful beyond measure and has the power within to decide if and when they pick on other people’s energy, they”ll then start coming from a place of being whole and grounded and will feel very differently.

That’s when you’re able to help other people without losing yourself in the process.

In other words, when an Empath steps out of the “victim mode” and steps into their inner power, their reality starts to change.

You’ll probably still enjoy your alone time because you are so connected to your own emotions, but you can easily navigate social situations and feel great afterwards.

4. You are very intuitive

When you find out you are an Empath, that can be a huge revelation to you and you might want to search and read more about it.

And in the beginning, that might become your identity: I am an Empath.

But, the truth is, you are much more than that as you’ll find out as your spiritual journey progresses.

Empaths have more gifts than just the ability to feel other people’s energy and emotions.

Most of them are highly intuitive as well and have other gifts of claircognizance, clairvoyance, etc.

Their intuition is like their internal guiding system and never fails, even if they many times chose to follow the mind instead of their intuition.

Your intuition is the voice of your soul.

You’re an Empath because you have centuries of experience and wisdom inside you from all the past lives you have been through.

And you’re highly intuitive because that is the voice of your wisdom communicating with you.

Eventually as they progress in their journey, an Empath learns to trust more and more in their intuition and how they feel, rather than their mind of cold facts.

5. You have a hard time knowing how you feel

Empaths have a tendency to openly feel what is outside of them more so than what is inside of them. They’re highly tuned into the external world and other people and in the urge to help others.

This can cause Empaths to ignore their own needs.

They might experience withholding of their own emotional expression which leads to frustration, resentment and even depression.

It can cause them to say yes to situations that make them feel bad and putting their well-being behind being at service to others.

If you relate to this, and as you learn to distinguish between your own emotions and the emotions of others, you’ll become much more in tune with how you feel and your well-being becomes a priority.

You learn to say no to what doesn’t feel good to you, and to take your time to decide when you are not sure about something or someone, instead of saying yes immediately to please the other person.

Your own emotions become the motor that runs your life, and that’s when you can start creating and manifesting a new reality and a new life, more aligned with your inner truth, stopping the cycle of giving your power away to others.

Because you can only live an amazing life and help others when you’re fully connected with your true self and put your well-being as a priority in your life.

People of all walks of life and animals are attracted to the warmth and genuine compassion of empaths.

But it is only when an Empath does their inner work and becomes whole, that they can fully use their gifts to help others in any way.

I would like to say that I truly believe that being an Empath and sensitive to other people’s energy is our natural state, because everything and everyone is connected.

Many people are not that sensitive because they’re simply disconnected from everything around them, and especially, disconnected from who they truly are.

I do believe that being an Empath is not a curse in any way, like some blogs or websites might say.

It is a beautiful gift that was given to you to be cherished and honoured.

And it is when an Empath is ready to go within and start to come out of the “victim mode” and step into full personal empowerment, that their gifts are truly felt as a blessing and they can create the amazing life their deserve.

I’ve helped and coached personally many people that are Empaths on their journey of self-discovery and empowerment as that is my life purpose and calling, and it is truly amazing seeing them completely transforming their lives and themselves into a place of empowerment, happiness and joy.

If you are an Empath and feel ready to step into your inner power, click here to read this article about why Empowerment is key for Empaths.

Click the Image to Book Your Spot at the FREE Webinar:|||

Finding out you are an Empath is a major milestone in anyone's life. I know that because it was for me and for the people I help and coach. Suddenly you find