Welcome to Day 1 of #ioscon 2017 with Paul Ardeleanu Welcome to Day 1 of #ioscon 2017 with Paul Ardeleanu 

 Fire exits? Voting system for rooms' allocation? Code of Conduct? We got it covered. Join us in CTRL as Paul kicks off #ioscon 2017! ioscon Paul is a software engineer, trainer and speaker specialised in data-driven solutions on Apple platforms with an emphasis on prototyping, best practices and balance with agility. He started programming back in the days of Fortran, graduated with a PhD in Computational Physics from UCLan and currently building multi-platform software solutions at Lupo, a software consultancy in London, UK. He blogs on Medium and often tweets here. ×

Since Swift arrived on the iOS and Mac development scene a few years ago, the cocoa developer community has been in a new age of discovery. We've raced to discover new ways of working and thinking with the platform on which many of us have grow careers. But there are still engineering problems and ideas best and easiest solved using some our favorite concepts from Objective C. In fact, some old ideas have been given new legs simply because we are now seeing the world through a Swift lens. Don't throw out your old tricks just because the new and shiny thing looks cool. It turns out, they keep your options even more wide open than you thought. cocoa apple SWIFT objective-c iOS ioscon Trained in the mystical and ancient arts of manual memory management, compiler macros, pthreads and header files, Saul Mora is a developer who honors his programming ancestors by using Optional variables Nib based UI in Swift. Classically trained in Objective C, Saul has traveled the world gaining experience, hoping to earn his status as a neckbeard. Saul has embraced the Swift programming language in order to be ready for the many algorithmic journeys ahead. Currently, Saul trains daily deep in the heart of modern China, Shanghai. The temple monks at 流利说寺 (Liulishuo) permit Saul to meditate daily by crafting an award winning app dedicated to helping the Chinese learn English. Saul tweets at @casademora, and his work and thoughts can be found at http://saulmora.com and http://nsbrief.com. ×

Apart from being an awesome code prototyping tool, the Xcode Playgrounds can also be used for Test Driven Development. In this short talk, Paul will show you how to unit test your code using Playgrounds, how to make use 3rd party libraries and generally how to avoid the excuse of testing being too hard :) Get your Xcode ready and follow along. xcode iOS tdd ioscon Paul is a software engineer, trainer and speaker specialised in data-driven solutions on Apple platforms with an emphasis on prototyping, best practices and balance with agility. He started programming back in the days of Fortran, graduated with a PhD in Computational Physics from UCLan and currently building multi-platform software solutions at Lupo, a software consultancy in London, UK. He blogs on Medium and often tweets here. × There seems to be some interest lately in lists of technical iOS questions and answers. This is a good start for figuring out where to start preparing but it’s not enough. This talk will cover specific approaches to answering technical / whiteboard questions, and programming tasks that will make you stand out from the crowd. These suggestions have been gained from my experience from both sides of the interview table, and I’d like to show you how a small change in your approach can make a big change in the way you come across. ioscon Abizer Nasir is a freelance iOS / OS X developer who has been working full-time in Swift for over a year. He has spoken on a variety of subjects related to Objective-C and Swift development at iOSCon, NSLondon, Swift London, Swift Summit and AltConf. He organises NSCoder Night London. ×|||

2 day conference in London, United Kingdom. iOSCon celebrates the latest developments and the sharpest minds in iOS. Do you want to find out about all the la...