* Fidelity is also referred to as Signature Fidelity Rating (SFR) and is the relative measure of the accuracy of the signature (predefined). The value ranges from 0 through 100 and is set by Cisco Systems, Inc.

Administrators could configure Cisco IPS sensors to perform an event action when an attack was detected and one of the signatures in the preceding table was triggered. The configured event action would result in preventive or deterrent controls to help protect against an attack that was attempting to carry out the attacks. As the notes in the table indicate, all but one of the signatures has been retired to increase the performance of Cisco IPS sensors while focusing on more current threats. That being said, if DDoS attacks are a concern for your organization, it is recommended that these signatures be enabled. The event action does not necessarily have to be a preventative measure, such as dropping or resetting an existing connection; the action can be to notify administrators of potential DDoS attack attempts using alarms or log messages.

Cisco ASA threat detection consists of different levels of statistics gathering for various threats, as well as scanning threat detection, which determines when a host is performing a scan. Administrators can optionally shun any hosts determined to be a scanning threat.

Threat detection statistics can help administrators manage threats to the Cisco ASA; for example, enabling scanning threat detection provides statistics to help analyze the threat. Administrators can configure two types of threat detection statistics:

Basic threat detection statistics: Include information about attack activity for the system as a whole. Basic threat detection statistics are enabled by default and have no performance impact.

Advanced threat detection: Statistics track activity at an object level so the Cisco ASA can report activity for individual hosts, ports, protocols, or access lists. Advanced threat detection statistics can have a major performance impact, depending on the statistics gathered, so only the access list statistics are enabled by default.

Visit Configuring Threat Detection for more information about this feature.

The challenge in preventing DDoS attacks lies in the nature of the traffic and the nature of the "attack" because most often the traffic is legitimate as defined by protocol. Therefore, there is not a straightforward approach or method to filter or block the offending traffic. Furthermore, the difference between volumetric and application-level attack traffic must also be understood.

Volumetric attacks use an increased attack footprint that seeks to overwhelm the target. This traffic can be application specific, but it is most often simply random traffic sent at a high intensity to over-utilize the target's available resources. Volumetric attacks generally use botnets to amplify the attack footprint. Additional examples of volumetric attacks are DNS amplification attacks and SYN floods.

Application-level attacks exploit specific applications or services on the targeted system. They typically bombard a protocol and port a specific service uses to render the service useless. Most often, these attacks target common services and ports, such as HTTP (TCP port 80) or DNS (TCP/UDP port 53). For further details about mitigating application-level attacks, see  Identifying and Mitigating the Distributed Denial of Service Attacks Targeting Financial Institutions.

Stateful devices do not provide complete coverage and mitigation for DDoS attacks because of their ability to monitor connection states and maintain a state table. Maintaining such information is CPU and memory intensive. When bombarded with an influx of traffic, the stateful device spends most, if not all, of its resources tracking states and further connection-oriented details. This effort often causes the stateful device to be the "choke point" or succumb to the attack.

For further information about stateful inspection, see the Stateful Inspection Overview section of the Cisco ASA 5500 Series Configuration Guide. Common stateful inspection devices and their role in threat mitigation are firewalls, IDS/IPS devices, load balancers, and web application firewalls.

Firewalls represent the most common stateful inspection devices in today's threat mitigation arsenal. In stateful firewall solutions, there is a component commonly known as the stateful packet inspection (SPI) engine. This is also referred to as DPI (deep packet inspection). This engine provides intelligence by looking into the packet flow to determine and define connection information and application-level details. For more details about firewall stateful inspection, see the Cisco IOS Software Stateful Packet Inspection section of the Cisco IOS Firewall Design Guide.

IDS/IPS devices are often deployed at the network core and/or edge and provide intelligent decision capabilities by using DPI to analyze and mitigate an array of attacks and threats. Moreover, DPI allows the IDS/IPS device to react to network events and traffic in real time, providing alerts or inline mitigation. For more details about IDS/IPS stateful inspection, see the Cisco IOS Intrusion Prevention System Deployment Guide.

Load balancers use SPI to make decisions based on the connections that traverse the load balancer function. For more details about the load balancer stateful inspection engine, see Is Your Load Balancer A Firewall?

Web application firewalls use SPI to evaluate web-based application flows, such as GET requests. For details about SPI in web application firewalls, see the Web Application Firewall page documented by the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP).

Remotely triggered black hole (RTBH) filtering can drop undesirable traffic before it enters a protected network. Network black holes are places where traffic is forwarded and dropped. When an attack has been detected, black holing can be used to drop all attack traffic at the network edge based on either destination or source IP address. For further information regarding RTBH filtering, see the Remotely Triggered Black Hole Filtering -- Destination Based and Source Based (PDF).

Note: RTBH filtering is supported on Cisco IOS, Cisco IOS-XE, and Cisco IOS-XR platforms. For more details, including using RTBH filtering for IPv6, see Remotely Triggered Black Hole Filtering in IP Version 6 for Cisco IOS, Cisco IOS XE, and Cisco IOS XR Software.

Network administrators can use Unicast Reverse Path Forwarding (uRPF) to help limit malicious traffic flows occurring on a network, as is often the case with DDoS attacks. This security feature works by enabling a router to verify the "reachability" of the source address in packets being forwarded. This capability can limit the appearance of spoofed addresses on a network. If the source IP address is not valid, the packet is discarded.

uRPF guards against IP spoofing by ensuring that all packets have a source IP address that matches the correct source interface according to the routing table.

 Normally, the security appliance examines only the destination address when determining where to forward the packet. uRPF instructs the security appliance to look also at the source address. For any traffic to be allowed through the security appliance, the security appliance routing table must include a route back to the source address. See RFC 2267 for more information.

 To enable uRPF, enter this command:

uRPF works in two different modes: strict mode and loose mode. When administrators use uRPF in strict mode, the packet must be received on the interface that the security device would use to forward the return packet. uRPF in strict mode may drop legitimate traffic that is received on an interface that was not the firewall's choice for sending return traffic. Dropping this legitimate traffic could occur when asymmetric routing paths exist in the network.

When administrators use uRPF in loose mode, the source address must appear in the routing table. Administrators can change this behavior using the allow-default option, which allows the use of the default route in the source verification process. In addition, a packet that contains a source address for which the return route points to the Null 0 interface will be dropped. An access list may also be specified that permits or denies certain source addresses in uRPF loose mode.

 Care must be taken to ensure that the appropriate uRPF mode (loose or strict) is configured during the deployment of this feature because it can drop legitimate traffic. Although asymmetric traffic flows may be a concern when deploying this feature, uRPF loose mode is a scalable option for networks that contain asymmetric routing paths.

A newer solution for mitigating DDoS attacks dilutes attack effects by distributing the footprint of DDoS attacks so that the target(s) are not individually saturated by the volume of attack traffic. This solution uses a routing concept known as Anycast. Anycast is a routing methodology that allows traffic from a source to be routed to various nodes (representing the same destination address) via the nearest hop/node in a group of potential transit points. This solution effectively provides "geographic dispersion." For details regarding geographic dispersion that uses Anycast to dilute a DDoS attack, see How whitehats stopped the DDoS attack that knocked Spamhaus offline.

Antispoofing measures such as limiting connections and enforcing timeouts in a network environment seek to ensure that DDoS attacks are not launched or spread from inside the network either intentionally or unintentionally. Administrators are advised to leverage these solutions to enable antispoofing and thwart random DDoS attacks on the inside "zones" or internal network. To use connection limits and timeouts for DDoS defense purposes, see the Configuring Connection Limits and Timeouts section of the Cisco ASA 5500 Series Configuration Guide.

Caution: Oversubscription of stateful processes can cause a device to fail. For more details, see Stateful Devices.

Reputation-based blocking has become an essential component to today's web filtering arsenal. A common trend of malware, botnet activity, and other web-based threats is to provide a URL that users must visit for a compromise to occur. Most often such techniques as spam, viruses, and phishing attacks direct users to the malicious URL.

Reputation-based technology provides URL analysis and establishes a reputation for each URL. Reputation technology has two aspects. The intelligence aspect couples world-wide threat telemetry, intelligence engineers, and analytics/modeling. The decision aspect focuses on the trustworthiness of a URL. Reputation-based blocking limits the impact of untrustworthy URLs. For details about web reputation technology, see Cisco Web Reputation Technology. An example of reputation-based solutions is the Cisco Web Security Appliance and Cisco Email Security Appliance.

Global and crowd-sourced reputation information provides the most coverage in web reputation technology, and administrators may question which reputation engine or service to use and whether one is enough. The recommendation is to use multiple engines or services, such as the following:

Moreover, web reputation solutions with high coverage include Cisco Web Security Appliance, Imperva, Trend Micro, and others.

Another evolution is on the horizon for web reputation. Beyond the traditional attack, there is a continuous threat to the brand and business reputation. Many tools and services are available for organizations to protect manage their reputations. See References for more details regarding the available tools.

ACLs provide a flexible option to a variety of security threats and exploits, including DDoS. ACLs provide day zero or reactive mitigation for DDoS attacks, as well as a first-level mitigation for application-level attacks. An ACL is an ordered set of rules that filter traffic. Each rule specifies a set of conditions that a packet must satisfy to match the rule. Firewalls, routers, and even switches support ACLs. When the device determines that an ACL applies to a packet, it tests the packet against the conditions of all rules. The first match determines whether the packet is permitted or denied. If there is no match, the switch applies the applicable default rule (generally an implicit "deny all"). The device continues processing packets that are permitted and drops packets that are denied.

ACLs are often used to protect networks and specific hosts from unnecessary or unwanted traffic via protocol/port filtering, although filtering may also be based on TCP options and flags. For example, ACLs can disallow HTTP traffic from a high-security network to the Internet. You could also use ACLs to allow HTTP traffic only to specific sites, using the IP address of the site to identify it in an IP ACL.

ACL filtering provides flexible mitigation options. The following list provides additional examples of the available filtering options:

The following resources provide more details about ACL configuration and management:

Early in 2013, the concept of DDoS run books gained a bit of prevalence. The premise behind a DDoS run book is simply to provide a "playbook" for an organization in the event that a DDoS attack arises. In essence, the run book provides crisis management (better known as an incident response plan) in the event of a DDoS attack. The run book provides details about who owns which aspects of the network environment, which rules or regulations must still be adhered to, and when to activate/instrument certain process, solutions, and mitigation plans.

 Case Studies and an example template for DDoS run books are in References.

It is worth nothing that manual responses to DDoS attacks focus on measures and solutions that are based on details administrators discover about the attack. For example, when an attack such as an HTTP GET/POST flood occurs, given the information known, an organization can create an ACL to filtering known bad actors or bad IPs and domains. When an attack such as Slowloris arises, administrators can configure or tune firewalls or load balancers to limit connection attempts as discussed in Tightening Connection Limits and Timeouts. 

 Manual responses also include obscuring IP addressing schemes, using Network Address Translation (NAT), and creating custom IPS signatures or application layer inspection policies based on attack traffic, baselines, and industry events.

 The response process is often overlooked. As mentioned in DDoS Run Books, organizations often do not have a process or a plan and thus rely exclusively on manual responses. Proactive solutions and constant monitoring and configuration updates should be the common practice, with manual responses regarded as rare solutions.

Because of the prevalence of DDoS attacks in recent years, numerous organizations and businesses now provide DDoS protection as a service. While there are various ways to accomplish DDoS protection and attack mitigation, most providers offer an inline solution in which an organization's traffic can be sent to or through the service entity. The service then filters out the offending traffic and reinjects the good traffic into the organization. A few of the most prevalent in the industry are in the following list:

At its core, the Prolexic DDoS Solution uses Prolexic's PLX routed platform service (the most basic Prolexic DDoS mitigation solution). In general it allows a customer to route traffic to the Prolexic environment where it will be inspected and filtered based on anomalies, known misbehaviors, and provided details. Subsequently the "clean" traffic will be routed back into the customer environment. For more details regarding the PLXrouted solution, see the PLXrouted datasheet (PDF). For more details regarding Prolexic solutions, see their DDoS mitigation service portal.

 The AT&T Internet Protect: Distributed Denial of Service Defense solution is for AT&T customers looking for DDoS protection. Because AT&T already runs the network that the customer's traffic is traversing, AT&T uses its expertise and intelligent solutions in the backbone to filter any malicious or ill-advised traffic before it enters the customer environment. In addition, the defense solution analyzes netflow. If any flows pose a threat, they are routed to a "scrubbing environment" where the traffic is filtered, allowing the remaining "good" traffic to continue to the customer environment. For more details about the AT&T Internet Protect - Distributed Denial of Service Defense solution, see AT&T Internet Protect - Distributed Denial of Service Defense Solution Product Brief (PDF).

 The Verizon DoS Defense Service works much like those previously discussed in that it monitors traffic and routes traffic through the Verizon environment to be scrubbed, allowing the good traffic to be routed back to the protected customer environment. For details, including Service Level Agreement (SLA) information, see the Verizon DoS Defense page.

 The Arbor Networks Pravail Availability Protection System (APS) solution is an example of an onsite (on premise) solution. The unit sits inline in a customer environment and has a connection back to the Arbor intelligence backend. This service incorporates intelligence and information learned from the Arbor Security Engineering and Response Team (ASERT). Coupled with techniques such as baselining and anomaly detection, Arbor APS is a prominent DDoS solution. See the Pravail Availability Protection System solution page and the corresponding data sheet (PDF download)

With the number of DDoS attacks increasing over the past year, it is important that network engineers, designers, and operators build services and monitor networks in the context of defending against DDoS attacks.

This document presented the different attack types, their categories, and the techniques they use. It presented classic and current methodologies in the identification, classification, and mitigation of DDoS attacks. Because networks vary, we do not aim to provide an all-inclusive DDoS mitigation document that applies to every organization, but we have attempted to describe the tools available for dealing with DDoS attacks.

Using the Cisco six-phase DDoS mitigation model is a good start, and may also be continuously revisited when creating a sound DDoS policy. Preparation is a key part of any DDoS strategy. Ensure that the tools to be used for DDoS identification are tested, functioning, and in the proper locations and that networking staff is trained and capable of operating the necessary tools for DDoS identification.

There is nothing worse than having a network impaired or down and not having a good plan to identify and classify the problem. DDoS attacks can be hard to identify. Many network problems have the look and feel of a DDoS at the beginning, but then complete analysis rules out a DDoS attack. Knowing the baseline traffic and network utilization is the key to understanding a suspected DDoS condition.

The techniques in this white paper provide network administrators with information and tools necessary to identify and mitigate DDoS problems.

Botnets: The New Threat Landscape

 //www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns340/ns394/ns171/ns441/networking_solutions_whitepaper0900aecd8072a537.html 

 Cisco IOS Firewall Design Guide

 //www.cisco.com/en/US/prod/collateral/vpndevc/ps5708/ps5710/ps1018/product_implementation_design_guide09186a00800fd670.html 

 DNS Best Practices, Network Protections, and Attack Identification 

 //www.cisco.com/web/about/security/intelligence/dns-bcp.html 

 Deep Inside a DNS Amplification DDoS Attack 

 http://blog.cloudflare.com/deep-inside-a-dns-amplification-ddos-attack 

 Real World DNS Abuse: Finding Common Ground 

 http://blogs.cisco.com/security/real-world-dns-abuse-finding-common-ground/ 

 Defenses Against TCP SYN Flooding Attacks

 //www.cisco.com/web/about/ac123/ac147/archived_issues/ipj_9-4/syn_flooding_attacks.html 

 How whitehats stopped the DDoS attack that knocked spamhaus offline 

 http://arstechnica.com/security/2013/03/how-whitehats-stopped-the-ddos-attack-that-knocked-spamhaus-offline/ 

 Identifying and Mitigating the Distributed Denial of Service Attacks Targeting Financial Institutions 

 http://tools.cisco.com/security/center/viewAMBAlert.x?alertId=27115 

 Remotely Triggered Black Hole Filtering in IP Version 6 for Cisco IOS, Cisco IOS XE, and Cisco IOS XR Software 

 //www.cisco.com/web/about/security/intelligence/ipv6_rtbh.html

How Cisco IT Uses NetFlow to Capture Network Behavior, Security, and Capacity Data

 //www.cisco.com/web/about/ciscoitatwork/network_systems/network_data_monitoring_and_reporting_web.html

NetFlow collectors help with collection, analysis, and display of NetFlow data exported from network devices:

This document is provided on an "as is" basis and does not imply any kind of guarantee or warranty, including the warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular use. Your use of the information on the document or materials linked from the document is at your own risk. Cisco reserves the right to change or update this document at any time.|||

A Cisco Guide to Defending Against Distributed Denial of Service Attacks