The word “vote” originates from the Latin votum, derived from vovere, to vow, meant a solemn promise, hence a wish, desire or prayer, in which senses the doublet “vow,” derived through French, is used now chiefly.

Even when most citizens are not rational about their vote, there is rationality in the process of voting. People vote to express themselves, hoping to become agents of change, transforming the outcome and the mandate, and also because other people vote.

But there is no duty and no obligation to vote.

Albert Hirschman’s most famous book, “Exit, Voice and Loyalty” argued that people have two different ways of responding to disappointment. They can vote with their feet (exit) or stay put and complain (voice).

There is a cult of exit. It has always been the default position, especially in the economics profession. If public services are rotten, people should be encouraged to escape them. But Exit can be punishing and backward, even when introduced as freedom and innovation. When the railroad system is bad, switch from trains to roads is not beneficial to citizens. And Exit also ends up in giving up democracy to technocrats, in the world of Alfred Hirschman, it produces “an oppression of the weak by the incompetent and an exploitation of the poor by the lazy which is the more durable and stifling as it is both unambitious and escapable.”

One of the oldest book about elections and votes dates back to 65–64 BC. Entitled the “Commentario Petitionis”, it is a guide on campaigning supposedly written by Quintus Tullius Cicero in order to help his little brother of the great Philosopher and Lawyer Cicero.

It already addressed the problem of getting people to vote, and the arguments that most of the critics have against voting and that were also summed up by Albert Hirschman in “The Rhetoric of Reaction”: a bad choice could endanger previous gains (jeopardy); the result will end up harming people anyway (perversity); and problems are so huge that nothing can be done about them (futility).

It’s all been there for centuries.

Obviously it’s still here, and I like the way Neil Gaiman addressed it in 2013 for the Guardian:

He goes on speaking more precisely about politics:

It’s only logical. How do you want to exchanges promises if you never voices them. You can be a politician or contribute to political life by being a part of what is now being called Civil Society.

Or you can vote.

And as a matter of fact, it’s alway good to remember that many people don’t always have a choice between “Voice” and “Exit”. For most of Europeans, it’s as recent as 1989.

Leonard Cohen even made a song called “Democracy” out of it.

As a matter of coincidence, searching Youtube for that song, I discovered that Neil Gaiman had illustrated it in a video.

Isn’t the work of these two artists the perfect motivation to go vote?|||

The word “vote” originates from the Latin votum, derived from vovere, to vow, meant a solemn promise, hence a wish, desire or prayer, in which senses the doublet “vow,” derived through French, is…