Three Mobile customers are receiving potentially embarrassing messages intended for other users after a fault on the network.

The supplier has been inundated with complaints from around the UK after service went down several areas - including Merseyside.

Customers on the network - which bills itself as the “best network for data” - have been left unable to make or receive calls for around four hours.

The technical issues are also likely to leave a few texters red faced after complaints people were receiving messages not intended for them.

Downdetector.co.uk - a website which reports network outages - has received over 10,000 comments about Three Mobile, as well as over 600 reports of the outages.

It says they have received reports from Liverpool, London, Birmingham, Glasgow and Manchester.

Were you affected by the Three Mobile outage? Email Josh.parry@trinitymirror.com

Kris Hughes commented: “Can’t make or receive calls or texts in Liverpool for over three hours now. It’s costing me money/work and to make it worse, I’m getting texts meant for other people, from numbers I don’t know! Tried contacting Three but being told (when I eventually got through) that the network in my area is OK.”

Some users have reported that they are even receiving private text messages about private bank accounts.

Another commenter added: “Also got a text about a Barclays Bank account, I don’t even have one!”

Twitter users also took to the social media site to complain.

Tom Turner tweeted: “Anyone else getting texts from random numbers? I’ve had two today and my friends on Three have had them too.”

@SabreBeauty added: “Getting random texts too? I think it’s a network issue ‘cause the texts are only coming from other Three numbers.”

A spokesperson for Three Mobile Support tweeted: “Some customers are having issues making calls and sending texts. We’re working on getting sorted asap, Sorry.

“Keep an eye on our feed for info. Our advice is to ignore all SMS that you deem incorrect. We are working to resolve this immediately.”|||

The supplier has been inundated with complaints from around the UK after service went down several areas - including Merseyside.