Delta flight attendants will be empowered with an innovative new tool on their handheld phablet devices starting today in an effort to personalize the travel experience for the airline’s 170 million global customers.

The Guest Service Tool is the newest enhancement in a long line of technology innovations, providing Delta’s more than 22,000 flight attendants key information so they can better engage with customers while in flight.

“Our flight attendants, as with all Delta employees, are committed to making the flying experience better for our customers while endeavoring to bring more humanity to the skies,” said Allison Ausband, Delta’s Senior Vice President of In-Flight Service. “Having technology at their fingertips to identify and greet customers by name, highlight a customers’ (SkyMiles) Medallion status, address disruptions in their travel in real-time as well as a host of other opportunities means the world’s finest flight attendants can provide an even more exceptional customer experience.”

With the Guest Service Tool, flight attendants will, for example, be able to recognize high-value customers and better serve those on board who may need extra assistance or attention. As the tool evolves, they’ll also be able to provide customers with the status of down-line flights and connecting gate information.

“We’ll continue to enhance the device and Guest Service Tool to take advantage of customer-provided data to further personalize the on board experience,” said Ausband. “Eventually, flight attendants will be able to deliver food and beverage options that meet customer preferences and better identify those customers who may have had a previous disruption in their travel, all in an effort to deepen engagement with those who fly with us.”

When Delta provided its flight attendants with the sleek Lumia 1520 phablet device last year, it was with the intention of reducing Delta’s environmental impact and reliance on paper materials. Beginning Sept. 1, the 500-page, 5-pound On Board Manual containing safety and service materials will be loaded on to their device, saving 55 tons of paper annually and reducing the airline’s carbon footprint by 1,800 metric tons annually—the equivalent of removing more than 370 passenger vehicles from the road.

The move to advance technology in the cabin comes on the heels of Delta’s industry-leading initiative to equip its nearly 12,000 pilots with innovative Microsoft Surface Tablets to be used as an electronic flight bag as well as enterprise connectivity tool to improve efficiency and reduce pilot workload.|||

Delta flight attendants will be equipped with an innovative new tool on their handheld phablets to better serve customers.