Wunderlist Task Manager for Android is an awesome cool cloud phone synchronization application task manager, allowing you to organize your to-do lists and synchronize them at any time And anywhere. With this application, you can organize the tasks more effectively.

Wunderlist – To-do and Task List helps you stay organized by keep you on track, sharing tasks, make shopping lists,assigning tasks and all of these will organizing your life.

If you need task management, to-do list, GTD app, productivity app, time management, google agenda, taking note and personal assistant, Wunderlist – To-do and Task List is the best cross platform all Apps and easy to use web interface.

Unfortunately Microsoft decided to stop Wunderlist, but the good news Microsoft introduce a new To-Do App called “Microsoft To-Do“.

To-Do List apps allow you to do these jobs :

• Create all lists you need and access them through your phone, tablet and computer.

 • Easily share lists and collaborate with family, friends and colleagues.

 • Start conversations about your chores.

 • Attach photos, PDFs, presentations, and more.

 • Divide work and delegate tasks.

 • Set a Reminder to ensure that you never forget important deadlines (or anniversary gifts).

 • Organize your projects for home, work and anywhere in Folders.

Microsoft To-Do allows you to create a list for anything—for work, home, university and others. You can keep track of deadlines by adding reminders, due dates and notes, and personalize each list with colorful templatess. You can access your lists from anywhere with the To-Do apps for iPhone, Android phone, Windows 10 devices and the web.

Get Microsoft To-Do Preview for iPhone, Android, Windows and the web today.

Any.do is an application for you to create lists, organize yourself better and remember the most important things from day to day.

With support for multiple platforms, you can access Any.DO from different places and devices, ensuring that you are always aware of what to do and up-to-date. When you start the app, a small interview tells you some of the features of the service as an introduction – and soon after you must register in the application to use it.

Google Keep is an online service for you to create notes and lists, allowing you to add images and access them on any computer you use.

 With it, you’ll never miss an event again because you just have to trust it, and you do not have to worry about remembering everything you have to do.

In addition, your notes are displayed as post-its in which a colored banner can be added to help identify content priority, for example. The service is offered by Google and for it to work properly you must have a valid account in the company (such as Gmail, for example) and access to Google Drive.

Todoist is already a well-known personal and group task management service available on 14 different platforms that are capable of communicating with each other – whether it’s on iOS, Android, Windows, Mac, or the Google Chrome and Mozilla Firefox.

You can use Todoist for a wide range of purposes, whether professional or personal, as application functions shape according to how you use it.

With Todoist, you can organize your entire day, week or month routine by creating tasks that can be shared with others and synchronized on any of your devices.

TickTick – To-do & Task List is an application for organizing annotations and lists of items or tasks, leaving them registered in the form of notes on your Android.

With it, you’ll never miss an event again because you just have to trust it, and you do not have to worry about remembering everything you have to do.

To complete the package, the program allows you to set different colors for your to-do lists, distinguishing these tasks from the others in the main program screen. Additionally, it is also possible to create an alarm for your notes.

Remember The Milk is an application developed for Android whose function is to allow you to manage the tasks of your daily life with the ease that you deserve.

With it, every thing to be done is recorded as a different item, which can be tagged with different subjects as well as having the alert repeated as many times as you feel necessary.

To use Remember The Milk, you need to create an online registration, otherwise you can not access any of the application’s options or perform data synchronization with the service server. That is, another function of this app is to make your tasks always available to you, regardless of the device on which you are viewing your information.

Trello is the official application of the free project manager. With it, you can always keep an eye on the progress of the processes, as well as make changes to the status of the tasks and include details about the projects.

First of all, you need to create an account with Trello. Enter your name, email address and password. If you prefer, you can sign in using your Google account (it may be the same one used to download on Google Play). After that, the Trello is ready to be used.

2Do is an application for you to organize appointments, notes and tasks, leaving them registered in the form of notes in your device.

With it, you’ll never miss an event again because you just have to trust it, and you do not have to worry about keeping it all in mind.

To complete the package, the program displays annotations created in the form of a clean list, making it easy to see the items as a whole. This is a free version of the program and is limited to creating two lists.

Toodledo is an App that allows you to create task lists, with the possibility to set priorities or mark items as favorites, helping in the organization.

In addition, the application also has a series of specifications that can be associated with each of the annotations, being possible to create events with repetition and mark an item as completed.

The great advantage of using the application is that you guarantee that nothing else will only be in charge of your memory or with a superficial note in the calendar. To use the service you need to create an account and you can do it on your home page by clicking “Register” and filling the open form on the screen.

SplenDO is a free app allows you make a smart list for your important notes or appointment and others, you can manage your tasks, grouping the tasks and sync them with an google account.

SplenDO comes with smart home screen widgets show instantly what to do, Intelligent notifications and Support for recurring tasks.



EveryTask is another to-do list and task manager allows you to do any list like previous apps plus Bulk editing of the lists to move tasks, delete tasks, add tasks to Projects.

Also you can Plan your Projects in detail and add all Tasks to the Planned list, Drag and Drop to order the tasks and use project view to keep track of all your project lists.

 Android (Free)

If you liked this article, the best way to thank or compliment us is to share it on Facebook and social networks, using the following buttons:|||

