On August 31, 1969, a rape was committed in Vietnam. Maybe numerous rapes were committed there that day, but this was a rare one involving American GIs that actually made its way into the military justice system.And that wasn’t the only thing that set it apart. War is obscene. I mean that in every sense of the word. Some veterans will tell you that you can’t know war if you haven’t served in one, if you haven’t seen combat. These are often the same guys who won’t tell you the truths that they know about war and who never think to blame themselves in any way for our collective ignorance.

The truth is, you actually can know a lot about war without fighting in one. It just isn’t the sort of knowledge that’s easy to come by. Speaking of the rapes however this same act has carried onto the Japan, China, and Vietnam banking system exposing all of their data in corporate environments. This would cause a major Nuke war against USA involving Japanese, Vietnam, and China to send Nuke missiles to U.S.A as anyone can access their financial banking data. The following link shows China, Vietnam, and Japan exposed data allowing enemies, which might be USA to take their information. 9 Million exposed Chinese and Vietnamese banking data (2014). The latest articles shows Millions of exposed files however we was able to find a secret classified photo of U.S Soldiers doing sex acts with a Vietnamese woman. Millions of exposed sensitive files (2015). The following link shows the secret classified photo in Google showing US Soldiers raping Vietnamese woman however the photo is very powerful showing high ranked U.S Soldiers raping a Vietnamese woman. Secret Classified photo showing US Soldiers raping Vietnamese woman (2016). The picture shows blood coming from the Vietnamese Woman foot, which appears to be coming from her vagina as intercourse already happened from the soldiers. If you go one directory back on the same link showing the U.S Solders raping the Vietnamese Woman it will say Access Denied however the classified photo is accessible to view, but you can visit the following link it will show as Access Denied. Access Denied Classified Vietnamese Woman Rape Photo

The following link, which proves the picture is real can run error level analysis (ELA), that is to find parts of a picture that were added to it after editing. After processing a photo the program produces the image with edited parts standing out. The picture has had no parts added to it, which shows the 2 U.S Soldiers still in the picture however this proves that the picture is real. If you take the Photo or hyper link “https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/26/74/36/267436fa871dcfb2f2492d27dd4f41da.jpg” and visit the following link “verify the authenticity of a photo you will see all objects in that environment are real. (verify the authenticity of a photo)(2016). As this is shocking news to the public and nation however U.S.A gets massive amounts of financial loans from China, which as of now China would back-out of any financial loans to fund U.S.A forever. What would the US do if China refused to loan it any more money? (2016). I was able to access sensitive financial YEN information however I can be able to share this information to wipe out Chinese, Japan, and Vietnam infrastructure. HP provided HSBC with an all-included services approach based on 80 HP printers and multifunction printers (mfps). The five-year contract gives HSBC the flexibility to implement devices from other manufacturers if required.HP have also provided file server administration to HSBC however our Investigators located a tweeted feed, which what appeared to be from POGO corporation that handles massive misconduct lawsuits ( TWEETS from POGO Prosecutors) (2015). The networked printers are managed centrally using Web JetAdmin, while SafeCom middleware tracks costs and enables secure printing. According to the statement HSBC made was “HP showed an in-depth understanding of the issues and a flexible approach to Pay per use services with its Total Print Management (TPM) offering,” said Heath. “HP’s commitment to working in partnership with the customer was also notable.” Lack of security for HSBC Data Center environment shows that HP mismanaged all of HSBC files exposing a Investment Fund Trust giving access to their trading accounts to Cyber Criminals to wipe out HSBC funds ( HSBC Investment Trust Fund Sensitive Document Exposed ) (2015). Our Investigators have also ran across an article that gives strong allegations that HP deployed a solution for 5 Million small businesses. The security controls somehow triggered unlocking sensitive, forbidden, and military secrets totaling over 500 Million trade secrets, sensitive forbidden files, financial, and military government secrets from US and many other nations ( HP responsible for exposing 100s of Millions of corporation Files) (2015) . According to HSBC they stated that HP have built up an excellent working relationship with HP, so that any issues are addressed and resolved immediately. Furthermore, the Pay per use services contract and the Total Print Management approach are highly flexible so that we can review our requirements periodically,” concluded Heath (HSBC and HP partnership ) (2015). On the HP website there is a video, which explains “HP helped HSBC address their sustainability, IT, and business problems through more energy-efficient, less wasteful technology infrastructure” ( HP Video Gallery with HBSC testimony ) (2015).|||

On August 31, 1969, a rape was committed in Vietnam. Maybe numerous rapes were committed there that day, but this was a rare one involving American GIs that actually made its way into the military…