Welcome to the recently launched Dissertation Blog. This network provides the opportunity for you to gauge important ideas that relate directly to your university studies. In order to promote a meaningful and constructive discussion, we follow these guiding principles:

We will post comments. We will instantly remove spam comments and remarks that are off-topic, denigrating or offensive;

We will reply to meaningful and on-topic comments promptly, when appropriate;

We will respect proprietary information and confidentiality; and

We will be respectful when disagreeing with others’ opinions, we encourage stimulating debate.

At www.study-aids.co.uk we encourage you to visit the Dissertation Blog regularly to read new reference material and content. We would also like to share the thoughts and opinions of people who interact with this blog. But to be truly successful, we hope you join in the discussion as well. The primary function of the Dissertation Blog is to promote a productive exchange of ideas relating to dissertation and essay writing, referencing and knowledge sharing. At times, we will even post unique material for you to read and reference. We welcome your contributions in the form of comments on the posted material. Because we aim to promote an environment conducive to constructive dialog, we ask you to adhere to a few basic rules;

Be polite. You are welcome to disagree with points made by others, but please do so with respect and courtesy. Disrespectful or insulting language will not be tolerated. Any posts pertaining to this will be removed instantly; and

Do not use the blog to promote your company’s products or services in a manner that is not conducive to the blog. Similarly, do not use the blog to vilify products or services of other companies.

www.study-aids.co.uk is one of the leading and most respected education resource networks available on the internet. We are dedicated at introducing university referencing material to students across the globe; we listen to student needs and conduct ourselves in the most ethical way. We do not encourage breach of copyright and offer guidance on how to avoid plagiarism whilst studying. With over 30,000 unique visitors a month the www.study-aids.co.uk network has more than quadrupled its site traffic in the past 12 months.

www.study-aids.co.uk features articles, reference material and electronic resources in many disciplines including Business Management, Marketing, Economics, Construction, Law, Psychology, Information Technology, Media & Communications, Finance and Human Resource Management.|||

About About Dissertation Blog. You Will Find Dissertations, Articles, Reference Material And Electronic Resources In Many Academic Disciplines.