For those on low incomes and those trying to save money, winter can be a financial nightmare. Pipes freeze and can burst, boilers break down and the cost of heating up your home goes up. Sometimes with bills its the small things that you do that can make the big difference. Here are some top tips on how to keep your heating bills low over winter.

Wanting to heat up a specific room? close the door. This will stop any heat from escaping into hallways and allow the room to heat up much quicker. When it gets to a desired temperature just turn down the thermostatic  radiator valves. Over the course of the winter you could save around £40 – £80 on your bill.

The small gap at the bottom of the front door which allows it to open and close smoothly loses a staggering amount of heat. Hallways also depending on there size can take a long time to get warm due to typically undersized radiators. The most cost effective and stylish way to help seal the gap is to install a draft excluder. These are pretty cheap from Amazon with the one linked being only £14.99. You can get ones with more artistic designs but these come at a higher price.

Second to doors and windows, attic hatches can be a big culprit for heat loss. The way round it is to put some insulation around the corners. Be careful when doing this as insulation is huge irritant can can cause you to come out in rashes by handling it. Wear gloves and eye protection; ideally a long sleeved shirt that you don’t mind throwing away after use. Insulation can be bought from any reputable DIY shop and builders merchants.

Pretty self-explanatory really; if you usually have your room stat set at 25 degrees, then turn it down to 23. Don’t tell any one about it and see if they notice the difference. Chances are they won’t and if they do turn it up by 1 degree and see if any body still complains. This habit won’t save you a life changing amount of money but over the years it will pay dividends.

We hope you will implement these tips and have found them useful. Check out our article on how to keep your home problem free.|||

How to keep your heating and gas bills low this winter, top tips.