The guy below is William Hitler, the direct nephew of Adolf Hitler. And if you are thinking the U.S NAVY written on his sailor’s cap is photoshopped, you my friend are going to learn something new today.

William not only served for the U.S Navy, he was also awarded the Purple Heart for his services. Here’s his story.

William Patrick Stuart-Houston Hitler, or ‘Willy’ as he was known as amongst his peers, was the son of Adolf Hitler’s brother, Alois Hitler Jr, and his first wife Bridget Dowling. Alois was met Bridget in 1909 in Dublin and moved to Britain after their marriage, where William was born in 1911.

In 1914, Alois abandoned his wife and three-year-old son to go traveling through Europe. The outbreak of the Great War—World War I—prevented him from returning to England, so he settled down in Germany, married again (despite still being wed to Dowling) and started a new family.

 

For years, Alois made no attempt to contact his wife and son back in Liverpool, instead having someone tell Dowling that he was dead. In 1924, the truth came out. Alois was charged with bigamy in Germany, but avoided conviction because Dowling interceded on his behalf. She drew the line, however, when Alois asked her to send William to Germany for a visit. She would not let her son visit until he reached his 18th birthday, in 1929.

 

That year, William traveled to Germany and reconnected with his father, who took him to a Nazi rally where he saw his uncle Adolf, leader of the rising National Socialist (Nazi) Party. William visited Germany again in 1930, this time meeting his uncle in person and receiving an autographed photo from him.

 

These happy times with Hitler didn’t last. After returning from a 1931 visit to Germany, William published some articles about his uncle, whose flamboyance and rapid rise to prominence had made him a person of interest to the European and American public. But, according to William, the Nazi leader didn’t like the way the articles portrayed him. Calling William to Berlin, Hitler reportedly ordered him to retract the articles. In what William described as a “wild-eyed and tearful” outburst, Hitler reportedly threatened to kill himself if William ever again published anything about his personal life.

 

William’s 1931 articles about his uncle brought additional unexpected consequences. Now that his relationship to Adolf Hitler was public, William became persona non grata in England. He was fired from his job in 1932. Unable to find other employment in his homeland, he decided to look for work in Germany; perhaps his increasingly influential uncle could be persuaded to help.

 

No warm welcome awaited in Germany. Hitler sent William a letter during his visit, denying they were relatives. Shortly afterward, William’s father sent him back to England.

At this point, William faced a choice. He could either change his name and try to find a job in England, or scrounge for evidence to prove his blood relation to Hitler in order to blackmail him for a job in Germany. He decided on the second course.

William got all the documents together and proved his relation to Hitler to his aunt, Angela Raubal. After verifying the documents, Raubal set up a meeting of William with Adolf. This time Hitler received William calmly and helped him find a job at Opel, the car maker. Whenever he attempted to send money to his needy mother back in Liverpool, however, he was unable to do so. Hitler himself explicitly forbade him from sending money to anyone outside the Reich, including his mother.

After about a year at Opel, William was abruptly suspended from his job. His uncle had revoked his work permit. Eventually after his protests, William was allowed to work again but each and every movement of his was closely monitored and scrutinized. After a particularly frightening meeting with an angry Hitler in 1936, he decided to leave Germany.

After coming back to England, William tried to join the British armed forces but was rejected because of his direct relation to Hitler. He then emigrated to the US in 1939, with his mother. He repeatedly tried to join the US armed forces but again his efforts were blocked because of his relation to Hitler.

Finally, in 1942, William wrote directly to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, begging to be allowed to serve in the US military. “I am one of many, but can render service to this great cause,” he wrote. FDR passed the letter on to FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, who looked into William’s background and finally cleared him for military service.

Sworn into the US Navy in New York City on March 6, 1944, William Hitler went on to serve three years as a pharmacist’s mate, receiving the Purple Heart for a wound he suffered. He was discharged in 1947.

'Willy' Hitler: Adolf Hitler’s own nephew ended up being awarded a Purple Heart in the US Navy in WWII|||

