This high-performance premium EV, powered by cutting-edge technologies, will lead the charge for Qoros to make a strong entry to the new energy vehicle market.

Equipped with the most advanced electric drive-line technology, the Model K-EV takes the driver’s breath away with its staggering performance. It only takes 2.6 seconds for the vehicle to accelerate from still to 100 km/h, providing exhilarating driving experiences to the driver. The Model K-EV is also fitted with a high-performance battery system, promising a range of over 500 km. The application of such proven technologies puts the Model K-EV ahead of ‘concept car’ category and makes it possible for Qoros to bring it to the market in near future. The engineering test car of the Model K-EV will come to the upcoming Guangzhou Auto Show in November, with its market launch planned in 2019.

The asymmetric door design

 Defined as a high-performance premium EV, the Model K-EV is created by an international design and engineering team to offer customers premium driving and riding experiences and a taste of future mobility. The unique experiences start with the asymmetric door design. The revolutionary asymmetric door system allows greater possibility for designers to create a distinctive experience for the driver and passengers. The large-sized gull-wing door on the driver’s side automatically opens when activated. The front passenger’s door with a two-hinged system opens outward as a conventional door or slides horizontally alongside if needed. The door on the rear passenger side features a sliding system to ensure maximize convenience and ease of use for passengers entering and exiting the car.  Qoros Model K-EV features “Clever Carbon Cabin” (CCC) technology, a seamlessly-integrated cabin made primarily from carbon fiber. The seamless construction of CCC lends Model K-EV its refined appearance, while aerodynamic design features and sleek body lines help to enhance its performance and increase energy efficiency. The use of this durable material contributes greatly to the lightweight body of the car to achieve better energy efficiency and help reduce “range anxiety”. The CCC technology also maintains vehicle body strength and durability while allowing significant design freedom for designers and engineers.

http://pluginfuture.com/qoros-model-k-ev-making-its-global-debut/ This high-performance premium EV, powered by cutting-edge technologies, will lead the charge for Qoros to make a strong entry to the new energy vehicle market.  Equipped with the most advanced electric drive-line technology, the Model K-EV takes the driver’s breath away with its staggering performance. It only takes 2.6 seconds...|||

