We are excited to share the preview release of in-database analytics and machine learning with Python in SQL Server. Python is one of the most popular languages for data science and has a rich ecosystem of powerful libraries.

Starting with the CTP 2.0 release of SQL Server 2017, you can now bring Python-based intelligence to your data in SQL Server.

The addition of Python builds on the foundation laid for R Services in SQL Server 2016 and extends that mechanism to include Python support for in-database analytics and machine learning. We are renaming R Services to Machine Learning Services, and R and Python are two options under this feature.

The Python integration in SQL Server provides several advantages:

Data scientists, application developers, and database administrators can all benefit from this new capability.

The standard open source CPython interpreter (version 3.5) and some Python packages commonly used for data science are downloaded and installed during SQL Server setup if you choose the Python option in the feature tree.

Currently, a subset of packages from the popular Anaconda distribution is included along with Microsoft’s RevoScalePy package. The set of packages available for download will evolve as we move toward general availability of this feature. Users can easily install any additional open source Python package, including the modern deep learning packages like Cognitive Toolkit and TensorFlow to run in SQL Server. Taking advantage of these packages, you can build and deploy GPU-powered deep learning database applications.

Currently, Python support is in “preview” state for SQL Server 2017 on Windows only.

We are very excited about the possibilities this integration opens up for building intelligent database applications. Please watch the Python based machine learning in SQL Server presentation and Joseph Sirosh Keynote at Microsoft Data Amp 2017 event for demos and additional information. We encourage you to install SQL Server 2017. Please share your feedback with us as we work toward general availability of this technology.|||

Official News from Microsoft’s Information Platform