

 Apple offers great benefits. For starters, you can count on great compensation. Bonus programs. Stock purchase and 401(k) savings and investment plans. A brand new Macintosh computer. Great employee discounts. Comprehensive health benefits (including medical, dental and prescription drug coverage, vision care and life insurance). And the chance to work on great technology, with some of the finest minds in the computer industry. 





 Think about that for a second. It's your chance to work in a creative environment. Mind you, that environment is intense. You could find yourself being challenged like you've never been challenged beforepushing the envelope to do the best work you've ever done in your life. Although, come to think of it, that just might be the biggest benefit of all.



 Salaries. From entry level on up, Apple salaries are competitive with salaries at other technology companies.



 Bonus programs. Apple has a variety of bonus programs to reward outstanding performance at all levels of the organization.



 Profit sharing. At Apple, we believe in sharing our success with those who make it happen: our employees. Our Profit Sharing Plan is based on the company's quarterly revenue growth and operating profit. You are eligible to participate from your hire date.



 Stock purchase. Apple common stock is offered every six months at 85 percent of its fair market value. During the May and November enrollment periods, you can authorize payroll deductions for stock purchase, up to 10% of your salary.



 401(k) savings and investment plan. Apple offers a 401(k) Savings and Investment Plan with a broad range of investment choices. Employees can enroll on their first day at Apple and contribute directly from their pay before taxes are withheld. To help our employees' savings grow, Apple matches a percentage of employees' contributions based on their years of service. In addition, two types of loans are available through the plan.



 A computer at home. We encourage employees to familiarize themselves with the hardware and software they help create. To that end, we provide generous incentives toward the purchase of Apple products.



 Flexible benefits. Everyone's situation is unique. So Apple offers FlexBenefits, an innovative program that lets you choose the benefits package that best fits your lifestyle and individual/family needs. Apple automatically provides you with enough FlexDollars to purchase basic benefits. Then if the basics are all you need, you can either increase your take-home pay or deposit the extra FlexDollars into your Apple 401(k) account. If you have needs beyond the basics, you can purchase benefits for eligible family members or buy additional life insurance. The basics include: Time to relax. Apple provides a holiday schedule that gives you ample time off to recharge and a generous vacation accrual schedule.



 Health & fitness. The Apple Health & Fitness Program is designed to encourage positive lifestyle changes and enhance the quality of life for Apple employees and their families. Key program components include fitness programs, health education and preventive care. Fitness Centers are located in: A Fitness Reimbursement Program is available to those employees who do not have access to an Apple Fitness Center. This program provides financial assistance for both fitness memberships and health promotion classes.



 A place to work, a place to learn. Apple is a place where learning never stops. As an Apple employee you may be eligible to request reimbursement of up to $5,000 a year for eligible courses though Apple's Educational Assistance Program. 



 All represented benefits apply to regular, full-time employees of Apple Computer, Inc. and may be changed at any time. The official plan documents or applicable policies, as revised or amended from time to time, will govern in case of any conflict or question. 

|||

