Last week, we asked the question: “What is the purpose of Saulter Road?”, and today, we are publishing the survey responses. Long story short, said two different ways:

It’s my hypothesis that these statements can be applied to any street in any city, not just Saulter Road. For a additional thoughts on why that matters, check out “Homewood Streets are worth fighting for.”

Duh?!? Right? But, this is important, because people argue about solutions without understanding the counter-party’s perspective and assumptions.

This isn’t just an issue with Saulter, but the question of which perspective matters most when constructing roads?

I’m thankful I don’t have to answer these questions, these are all questions that cannot be answered with our data — but they are things to be considered.

For the raw data, click here.

As we said earlier: the proximity a person lives near or uses the road determines how the person perceives the intended usage of the road. We weighted the different responses of speed on a scale of 1 to 4. This created a spectrum of use case based on perceived vehicle speed with the following scores:

The spectrum looked like this:

Then, we applied the numerical value to the responses and averaged the values based on other attributes in the survey:

Where people fell on the speed spectrum:

We did the same thing for how people reported using the road:

The averages are lower on road usage because people could select multiple choices (people can use the road in multiple ways, but they can only live in one place). Thus, people who lived near the road are more likely to use the road in multiple ways. As described above, those people who lived closer to the road were more likely to advocate it as a Neighborhood street. Thus, the averages are pulled lower based on the structure of the survey.

I found that last bit the most interesting — people who stayed away from Saulter had a perspective that the road should be slower than the average of all responses who selected drive on Saulter. My assumption is that people who stay away from Saulter recognize it as a neighborhood street, and chose other driving routes.

No statisticians were harmed in the creation or inferences of this data — however, they probably had their feelings hurt. The data was collected via a Facebook survey targeted at residents of Homewood, AL in the United States. The data may or may not be valid, but it was not tampered or cleaned for publishing — there was no data cleaning although a small number of responses appeared to be duplicates.

The original survey can be seen here: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdKq2htf7q60vgztuMhjTqN2zfANnUXIySkvoFsI85NyUifqg/viewform#responses

The raw responses can be seen here: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1sMQ3M6IwhqW-dMVHYS6PPIswKxUCiETyD_zTJF1A8Rs/pubhtml?gid=209850634&single=true

The descriptive stats were generated on 4/22/2017 at 8:30 and the survey remained open afterwards.

Thank you for reading. Cheers.|||

Last week, we asked the question: “What is the purpose of Saulter Road?”, and today, we are publishing the survey responses. Long story short, said two different ways: It’s my hypothesis that these…