My One Advice to Hire the Right Techs for Your Startup and Train Them in No Time

From 2013 to 2016 I built a startup. It didn’t amount to much in the end, but we employed nearly 10 techs in total. How did we recruit them? Well we met with many candidates and spent significant time with each of them.

One time we made a mistake and employed an apprentice who did not have the right spirit. At some point things got out of hand and he started taking repeated sick leaves even though he seemed fine and healthy to us and still showed up to his school. This was our mistake. In short, we failed to see beforehand he wouldn’t fit the underlying company’s culture.

In 2015 we recruited a lot of techs at once — developers, devops, and ops. I had been the sole developer on the backend code for a year and a half, and suddenly, in the span of 1 month, we had 5 more people in the team working on “my” code. For 3 months I struggled to transfer the knowledge to them. For a startup, 3 months is forever.

Seems familiar? I’m going to share a practice that could have helped me do better at both moments.

After my startup crashed I applied for a job at Theodo. Here’s how one of my job interviews with Theodo’s CTO Benjamin Grandfond went:

— Today we will both work on a program where the goal is to compute the score of a bowling game. We will use test-driven development and implement the rules of bowling iteratively. I will set a timer to 3 minutes and we will take turns on the keyboard.

— But what do I do while you have the keyboard?

— You will tell me what I should write and I will execute. You will also watch for and correct any mistake I make. At the end of the 3 minutes I will give you the keyboard back. You will then say out loud what you are thinking about and what you are writing.

— Will you also help me detect my mistakes?

— Sure! This is what pair programming is all about: being completely focused on the problem and correcting mistakes early on. Shall we get started?|||

From 2013 to 2016 I built a startup. It didn’t amount to much in the end, but we employed nearly 10 techs in total. How did we recruit them? Well we met with many candidates and spent significant…