Yesterday, MuleSoft, the creators of RAML, announced that they have joined the Open API Initiative. Created by SmartBear Software and based on the wildly popular Swagger Specification, the OpenAPI Initiative is a Linux Foundation project with over 20 members, including Adobe, IBM, Google, Microsoft, and Salesforce.

While MuleSoft has indicated that they are not abandoning their proprietary RAML format, it should be obvious to followers of the API industry that this is a clear signal of convergence on the OpenAPI Specification (OAS). RAML will provide “modeling functionality” on top of the OAS, but ultimately the contract will most likely be via OAS. Apiary — who is now part of Oracle — joined the OpenAPI Initiative in 2016, bringing the OAS to back their documentation-focused Blueprint format.

In looking back, the burning question is, how did the OAS (via Swagger) — with light-weight, community roots — survive as the winning format from the “Great API Description Wars” between 2013 and 2015? (And all this without formal corporate backing until Swagger moved to SmartBear in early 2015?)

There’s marketing, tooling, the (admittedly fantastic) name, etc. But if I step back and ignore all of these factors (which is not easy) and focus on the specification alone, there is a clear reason why Swagger won the war, and the others converged upon it.

Swagger was started with a small number of goals — and covering every use case was certainly not one of them. With that, the founding fathers of Swagger built the project with three simple goals:

While the initial 1.0 Swagger Specification had it’s share of shortcomings, it certainly followed the rules above, and thus we were able to build very robust and valuable tools to leverage it.

Lots! But like the great browser wars in the late 1990’s, I believe we’re seeing a convergence on a single dialect of description for APIs. This is a good thing (some of us can remember the “this site only works in Netscape Navigator” message) as in the end, consumers of APIs typically don’t care how they’re described. If the mechanism is standardized, and more “things” can communicate, then everyone wins.

It is satisfying to see OAS come out in front after a long, but consistent battle. We had many public arguments during the format wars! Thousands of personal hours have gone into the project, and setting the right goals at the beginning turned out to be the key to winning the war.|||

