The way I’ve always thought about hiring is, “They’re making more money, so they can hire more people”. A few things have led me to at least consider the opposite causality, “We have a proven way for employees to make money. Hire more employees and we’ll make more money.”

Let’s look at revenue versus employees for several large tech companies. (Data points are the last ten years of revenue and employee count taken from annual reports.) Here is Google/Alphabet. Aside from 2008, the relationship between employees and revenue has been stable.

Different businesses have different slopes. Apple has managed to shoot ahead of Google in both employees and revenue. Remarkably, Apple weathered the Great Recession with nary a hiccup.

Google and Apple have something about their businesses that link employees and revenue. Microsoft is the exception that illustrates the rule. Despite hiring and firing over the past decade, their revenue has stayed flat. According to this theory, Microsoft should delay big hiring until they have reconnected employees and revenue.

Putting my employer, Facebook, on this map shows a company at an earlier stage of the employee/revenue link. (BTW, this supports my biased belief that Facebook’s revenue can continue to grow.)

A conversation with my friend Ian Saville sparked this line of thinking. We were talking about how the record for “fastest company to N thousand employees” keeps falling. That got me thinking about the direction of the causality of employee growth. Facebook might have done it three years faster than anyone else, but someone else is going to come along and do it three years faster than Facebook. (You could argue that this is what Uber and Airbnb have already done by redefining “employee”.)

Another observation is the strain that Facebook’s employee growth (and Google’s before it) has put on the Bay Area’s infrastructure and job market. The “old” model of corporate headquarters containing a large share of the employees doesn’t scale. The time scale for building apartments and rail lines and schools and hospitals is just too long to match the rate at which companies can now grow.

If it’s true (to a first approximation) that as long as employee count and revenue are linked, then you should hire employees as fast as possible and let them figure out how to earn their paycheck. Growing employee count is a business strategy. It’s not a strategy you are dumb enough to accept at face value because it rests on dubious assumptions, but it has some interesting implications:

Remember, this is just a crazy theory, a hypothetical, and not to be taken seriously by anyone with an ounce of actual responsibility. Still, it’s fun to think about.|||

