Best thing to do, to build up a good intuitive sense for this, is to first analyze what happens when we go from 0 to 1 dimension (point to line), from 1 dimension to 2 (line to square), and from 2 to 3 dimensions (square to cube).

Since we already have good intuition for these transitions, we can dissect what happens during these transitions, regarding boundaries, number of faces, volume, and extrapolate from there, towards the fourth dimension.

We can drag a point along to form a 1 dimensional line;

Its volume is length L, it has 2 faces, which are formed by 2 points.

Now lets drag the line to form a 2 dimensional square;

Its volume is area [math]L^2[/math], it has 4 faces, which are formed by 4 lines.

Now lets drag the square to form a 3 dimensional cube;

But we can also take 2 of its faces, and connect the corners (marked red);

Its volume is [math]L^3[/math], it has 6 faces, which are formed by 6 squares.

Now lets drag the cube to form a 4 dimensional tesseract;

But we can also take 2 of its faces, and connect the corners (marked red);

Its volume is [math]L^4[/math], it has 8 faces, which are formed by 8 cubes.

Now this is hard, so try to find the 8 squares in this one, first;

The small, black inner one, and the large, black outer one are very clear. But there are also 6 oddly shaped cubes (frustum shaped);

They're only shaped this way, because we can't draw 4 dimensional tesseracts on a 2 dimensional surface, only a 2 dimensional impression of their 3 dimensional 'shadow'. For those who read Flatland: imagine how a Flatlander would normally draw an impression of a 2 dimensional square on a 1 dimensional surface, by using highlights and shadings on a line, but now are suddenly presented with a semi-transparant 2 dimensional shadow of a semi-transparant (glass) cube, inside their world;

...that looks different every time we reposition the cube. Square faces of the cube are sometimes not squares at all, but parallelograms (we can even make the shadow of the cube look like a perfect regular square): how would a flatlander draw this 2 dimensional shadow of a cube on its 1 dimensional surface?.

But these 8 cubes we found, are faces or boundaries of the tesseract, and you can slowly flow through all events inside it, by passing from the outer cube to the inner, or left cube to right cube, back to forth, or up to down cube, much in the same way as you can move squares in all six directions through a cube, and pass all events inside the cube in any one of those swipes.

When moving squares through cubes like in the image above, you see the four lines perimeter of the moving square pass through four of the cube's outer squares. These moving squares can pass through all point-like events inside the cube: every square in its path is a fresh new one, that can contain its own set of data, but also crosses the data of the other squares moving through the other directions.

When moving cubes through tesseracts, you'd see the six squares surface area of the moving cube pass through six of the tesseracts outer cubes. These moving cubes can pass through all point-like events inside the tesseract: every cube is a fresh new one, that can contain its own set of data, but crosses the data of the other cubes moving through the other directions.

Try to envision this passing of cubes through the tesseract in all 8 directions. Start with the easiest one: the outer to inner one, and envision the midway position: all 6 frustum shaped cubes have squares 'cut' halfway in them, which form the surface of the midway cube;

Now morph this midway position in the way shown in the following video, and rationalize what this midway position must look like, when moving through the other 6 directions of the tesseract. How would you move across  the other directions of the tesseract?

The midway position should look exactly like a tesseract cut right in half: the outer and the inner cube both have a square in them, and also 4 frustum shaped cubes have a square in them. Those six squares form a perfect cube in the 4th dimension, that has the same volume as the inner, the outer, and all the other cubes. Understand how the following (hard to recognize) cube is the midway position between moving from the bottom cube to the upper, or backwards;

Now try to envision cutting our four dimensional spacetime, which contains causal world-lines of particles that form static four dimensional objects of our familiar 3D objects in motion;

...and find how this can have eight 3 dimensional cubes at its ends, of which 2 are made of pure space (simply two 3D space snapshots in time: first and last), and how the others are mixed with time (2 space, 1 time);

Two space axes and one time axis would show the 'stacked time-line' of what passes through a fixed square in our space, which results in a single, unmoving 3D shaped object. The right cube in a tesseract shows the stacked time-line of a right square, and the left cube in a tesseract shows the stacked time-line of a left square. All in-between cubes show all time-stacked in-between squares.

Normally in science, world-lines (or, in this case, world-volumes) are shown as if the moving objects limited their movements in only these two registered spatial dimensions, so they never 'step out' of the time registered square: world-lines are never shown broken, because the particle left the registered square (or line).

Now, all this is not completely useless brain torturing. Understand that when objects move in respect to you, they always have part of its length of motion hidden in the time dimension (but never further than the space-time angle of light speed), which causes the famous length contraction, although its effect only gets noteworthy at relativistic speeds.

But what you might consider 100% pure time, is in a very real sense actually part of the moving object's space, and vice versa. So time actually has very space-like qualities to it from a physics viewpoint.

Probably an intentional simplification, but Dr. Greene's explanation that time dilation causes the relativity of simultaneity is not correct, since it's the time differences across length of motion that causes this. A phenomenon not mentioned at all in the (pop-sci) video.

The movie Flatland is also much fun;|||

