French people will vote tomorrow, and it’s safe to say that this election has probably been the craziest ever:

The Huffington Post has a poll aggregator allowing us to get a last second picture of the election:

As of today, with only 24h left, a record number of people are not certain of their vote. The Polls are unable to distinguish clearly between the 4 main candidates:

Adding to this, the French have special election rules that forbid the publication of new polls 48h before the closing of the vote.

Fortunately, as I already explained, we can still have a look at Google Trends with 30 days, 7 days and last 24 hour snapshots.

What they tell us is that Marine Le Pen may be overestimated in the polls. Indeed she did not have a very good campaign, and she was weak in the debates.

Then they show a very strong and growing Jean-Luc Mélenchon, so strong that he could well win the first round of the election on Sunday.

But François Fillon is not far away and the 3 main candidates look like they’re way too close to call.

Who will be the two winners? Whatever happens, this is a first in French elections and it will create a strong legitimacy problem for the next French President.

It will be a victory “à l’arraché” as we say in France.

On April 13, 35,6% of Macron supporters were announcing that they were not certain of their vote.

Also, in French elections, the average absolute difference in the margin between the final week’s polling average and the top two finishers’ actual results has been 3 percentage points. And that 3-point error is just the average, given the volatility of the current election, the true margin of error is probably higher.

That’s more than enough for Fillon or Mélenchon to catch Macron in round one.

But it could also mean that Macron is higher than predicted.

In other words, what was supposed to be the most boring election in French electoral history ended up being the most disputed one.|||

French people will vote tomorrow, and it’s safe to say that this election has probably been the craziest ever: As of today, with only 24h left, a record number of people are not certain of their vote…