United Continental Holdings UAL, -1.23% chief executive Oscar Munoz will not assume the role of chariman next year as originally planned, the parent company of United Airlines disclosed in a regulatory filing Friday.

And in another sign that United Airlines’ PR disaster is far from over: the lennies have turned on the company. When surveyed, 42% of millennials said they would no longer fly with United, according to a report released Friday by LendEdu, a comparison site for student loans and other financial products. That echoes a recent poll from media and survey research company Morning Consult that found 44% of people would choose a more expensive, longer flight to avoid giving United business. (The airline did not immediately return a request for comment.)

It would be unwise for United to make an enemy of millennial travelers. Millennials aren’t just flying for vacation. They are now the most frequent business travelers of any generation — millennials took 7.4 business trips last year, versus 6.4 for Generation Xers and 6.3 for baby boomers, according to an October 2016 report from travel and hospitality marketing firm MMGY Global. American millennials are also more willing to spend extra for upgrades on flights, per research from software company Adara.

Don’t miss: These are the times you shouldn’t book a flight with points

United’s recent woes began after videos emerged showing David Dao, a 69-year-old doctor, being forcibly taken off a flight in Chicago to make room for crew on an overbooked flight on April 10. That event (and United’s tempered reaction to it) sank the airline’s brand perception to a 10-year low. (The airline’s chief executive, Oscar Munoz, has since apologized repeatedly for the incident.)

Other recent incidents involving United, including one where a couple was removed from a flight on the way to their wedding, have also drawn scrutiny. When boarding their flight to Costa Rica from Houston, the couple chose to move rows on their half-full flight because a man was napping across their seats, according to a report from local news station KHOU-TV. They returned to their assigned seats after a flight crew member asked them to, but a U.S. Marshall later asked them to get off the plane. ““I think customer service and the airlines has gone real downhill,” Michael Hohl, the groom, told the news station. “The way United Airlines handled this was really absurd.”|||

The airline’s PR nightmare continues.