The immortal trend of cryptocurrency adoption in the consumer and business sectors

Let’s go 3 years back in time, Feb 10, 2014, BTC touches the 100 USD level on Bitfinix, one of the major exchange for the young currency pair.

Who of us did not wonder about getting his hands on a time machine, getting back to those times, and acquiring some Bitcoins?

Naturally, making a decision is the easiest thing to do, retroactively, and in reality, people are driven by panic and emotions.

The famous value investor Warren Buffett calls bitcoin a ‘mirage’, forgetting his own, arguably, most famous quote.

Indeed in the early times, the cryptocurrency was used mainly by early adopters, tech enthusiasts, and for the dark-web market ‘’Silk-Road’’ (that was later shut down by the FBI on October 2013).

Despite the strong association with crime during those early times, exchanges such as Mt. Gox (and no less than 15 others) closing, while leaving customers without their funds, And many other unfavourable circumstances, several legitimate business services rose, such as Blockchain.info merchant, and BitPay.

Those services were merely allowing customers to pay with Bitcoin for their favourite products, thus eliminating both fraud and gateway fees.

Nevertheless the crowd did not hesitate to follow the dreadful sentiment, and the digital asset span into a high speed rollercoaster between the blue skies and the hard brown ground.

In fact, bitcoin had died not less than 126 times by the tongue of different famous Fund Managers and Executives, and subsequently, swiftly rose from the dead.

It’s worth saying that despite it’s alleged robustness and agility, the market cap for Bitcoin and other tradable Blockchain assets is still relatively small, and does not come anywhere near of summing up with NYSE FANG stocks.

Some might say, that the latter is exactly why Blockchain assets are a great, early investment opportunity.

The year of 2016 can be marked as a pivot point, both in price-action, regulation and broad adaptation (wired.com)

Show me the hockey-stick chart — Favourable price action

The price of Bitcoin increased in over 3 times against all major currencies(EUR, USD, JPY, CNY):

In fact, Bitcoin had beaten all major US stocks & indices in 2016 and coupled tightly with gold (1 Ounce per Bitcoin).

Sources: 

Wall Street Journal

 Forbes

Volumes, Volumes, Volumes

Trading volumes on all major exchanges increased, including Localbitcoin.com which is one of the oldest, most trustable peer-to-peer exchanges.

The surge of volumes indicates the growing use of Bitcoin both in the consumer sector, and in the business sector alike.

This phenomenon was accompanied also by a rising interest in Blockchain & Bitcoin in Google searches.

While the Blockchain chart might look more appealing, Bitcoin is still the big winner on volumes, perhaps because of a growing popularity among non-technically-savvy consumers.

Bitcoin’s not the bad guy anymore

According to Coinfox a recent research conducted by the Central bank of Germany, as well as independent researchers, crime is no longer a leading factor in The Bitcoin Economy.

While bitcoin never meant to be tracked by governments, the transparency of it’s blockchain puts it in a more regulatory favourable category, than currencies such as z-cash.

In this post, ISS World Training specifies the numerous techniques of tracking down Bitcoin transactions.

Of course, none of them can overcome their counter-parties, which are the good old Bitcoin transaction mixers.



A more specific explanation on why criminals cannot really hide behind bitcoin can be found on ScienceMag

More reads:

Danish Police claims a breakthrough in Bitcoin criminal usage tracking

Silk road clients ‘busted’

The Bitcoin Economy has ‘matured’

According to venturescanner.com, Bitcoin & Blockchain startup funding grew to 550 Million USD in 2016, which closes a 4th consistent year of growth.

Small as it may be, on a global glance, it should not be overlooked as a fresh trend waiting for a major breakout.

One of those startups, shapeshift.io, is a direct opponent of nexchnage.co.uk in some of the business models we practice.

Shapeshift was able to raise an additional round of funding (10.4 Million USD according Business Insider) in relation with enjoying a significant volume spike lately.

The aforementioned Bitcoin merchant pioneers(Blockchain, Bitpay) were followed lately by industry giants such as BrainTree Payments (PayPal Inc.), and Stripe.

Promising as it may sound, those companies will happily convert consumer Bitcoins to cash as a merchant service, but will kindly refuse to work directly as a payment provider for Bitcoin-oriented businesses using a claim for ‘High-risk’.

Thus, they are eliminating the competition and leaving the business of Bitcoin exchanges and merchants to smaller players as Simplex.com, A Bitcoin merchant service that recently raised 7 Million USD in series A.

According to this slideshare there are currently more than 150,000 merchants that accept bitcoin as method of payment, among them major-scale companies such as:

In fact, earlier this month Bitcoin was certified as an official payment method in Japan, along with further moves towards full regulation in Russia after Bitcoin was fully legalised there Back in November 2016, sensibly applying existing laws and regulations of a plain foreign-currency on the innovative coin.

6. The increase of regulation and government-acceptance

Recently PBOC (china) stepped into the scene of the Chinese Bitcoin exchanges, which were known until that point mainly by their dominant, and as some say, fake volumes.

People’s Bank Of China prohibited speculative activities such as Leverage, Futures options, and the use ‘Fake-volumes’.

They have also ruled that each Bitcoin trading website must be defined as a ‘Website’, rather than an ‘Exchange’, which was the term in use previously (bitcoin.com).

AML regulations were tightened, and as a result of the procedure withdrawals in non-fiat (crypto) mediums were paused for over month by all major Chinese exchanges.

In fact, some of those restrictions still apply till this day, after being extended several times, though the effects of it on Bitcoin price-actions are surprisingly, neglectable in the short-mid term.

This procedure, how unpleasant and unfavourable it may seem for the markets in the short term, is definitely a part of a larger, broader growth and legitimation process which the Bitcoin is undergoing.

However, China was not the first to impose regulatory limitation on the Bitcoin and the Cryptocurrency sphere.

Despite the SEC denying the Winklevoss twins ETF, and no USA federal regulation exists, individual regulation was already existing in states such as New-York and Washington.

The UK took a more permissive path claiming that some Bitcoin related businesses do not require FCA regulation

And in other cases, a simpler and easier to achieve HMRC AML registry regulation can be sufficient to operate a business legally.

This is also the same conclusion that the UK Journal CryptoCarbon has reached in this article.

In other cases, the bitcoin regulation was a continuous and gradual process, such as with Russia, where first, a full-scale Bitcoin Ban was proposed which was later put on hold up to a point where a legalisation(and abuse penalty) plan was drawn, after which Bitcoin was recognised legal by default in an official Federal tax document.

Finally, several days ago, Bitcoin were officially declared fully legal and regulations started to form.

In conclusion, it seems that we are on the verge of the Blockchain era, an age where no election fraud will be possible, and the poor populations of the world will have access to comprehensive financial services.

So keep following, and don’t fall behind ;)

The writer is the Founder of Nexchange.co.uk

an innovative Bitcoin & cryptocurrency exchange that aims at simplifying crypto currency conversion operations for businesses and consumers alike to the highest possible degree.

We are constantly looking for affiliates and business partners

More info can be found on the affiliate section of our site.|||

Let’s go 3 years back in time, Feb 10, 2014, BTC touches the 100 USD level on Bitfinix, one of the major exchange for the young currency pair. Who of us did not wonder about getting his hands on a…