I have always wanted a simple, yet powerful tool to create static pages that allows logic, inclusion and dynamic attributes in static HTML. There are excellent frameworks which achieve the aforementioned on-the-fly, but most require a back-end – which is unnecessary for many applications. With Jekyll, one has the power to have their headers, footers, and layouts all separated into their own HTML files, with everything compiled together using the command. Each page has its own layout, with the Liquid engine powering logic and allowing for yielding content into a site theme or layout. Further, CSS, JS, and other assets can be thrown into an assets folder, all accessible at any time using relative paths - so no matter where your files may be, at compile time the paths are decided automatically.

Jekyll is built on Ruby. Those who have Ruby installed can easy add Jekyll as it is simply a gem. It has Disqus integration for comments and can be extremely powerful.

The primary purpose of Jekyll is blogging and this is what brought me to it. Once you have all the preliminaries set up, blog posts can be created extremely easily. In your Jekyll project’s folder, one simply creates posts following the naming scheme YYYY-MM-DD-title.md . Including meta data at the top allows Jekyll to know what the page should be called, and what layout it should use.

Next, we simply write. Seriously, thats it.

After setup, we have all the power and freedom in the world to simply write articles styled using markdown. When you write an article, and run , your site will be updated. The posts page will show your new article, your RSS feed will be updated and your post will be…posted. No fuss, no worry. For people who only have access to servers serving static pages, or those who want a fast, easy to use, and powerful tool giving you dynamically decided content, served statically. I would highly recommend Jekyll.

The layout is simple and intuitive, plus you can migrate your current site over fairly easily. Also notable is that the Liquid language is very easy to learn once you get over its slightly non-intuitive method/property selector ( in Liquid is equivalent to Python’s ).

Styling in Markdown is easy, this blog post and all relevant files were created just by saving a single file, shown in the editor below.

I have only been using it for a day and don’t fully know if I am doing so correctly but it is working beautifully, regardless. This tool was precisely what I have always wanted and I hope it helps you too!

I am currently working on a series of tutorials on Jekyll, which you will find on my blog (running on Jekyll), or below:|||

I want static pages but want to build content dynamically!