Here's a complete list of arrows of Unicode 9 (released in 2016), grouped by style.

There are about 494 arrow characters. These are from several different sections of Unicode, including:

It took me some 20 hours to collect and organize these arrows. They are scattered in different places, and are hard to find. Also, there are a lot symmetry issues, and some mirror image isn't there. Here's some details of my experience.

Note: each Unicode character has a ID called its “codepoint”. For example, has codepoint 8594 or hexadecimal 2192.

They are scattered in different code blocks. The most common ones are collected in “Symbols, Arrows (2190–21FF)”. In the beginning of Unicode history, there's just a right pointing arrow of a particular style, because left pointing ones are seldomly or never used. But later, it's realized the left pointing ones are important too, for one reason or another, and sometimes there's a need just for completeness because Unicode became more wide spread. So, the left pointing ones get added, in the same block but different neighborhood, or in another block. Thus you have “Supplemental Arrows-A” and “Supplemental Arrows-B”. For similar reasons, other symmetric versions of the same style such as upward and or downward versions are scattered in wildly different blocks.

For example, here's some arrows and their names:

However, there was no “RIGHTWARDS BLACK ARROW” for about 10 years. The closest is this:

You can see that, this right pointing arrow was there first. The others are added later. The names are inconsistent.

Finally, in Unicode 7, a new one with consistent name is added.

Now we have a ugly situation. There are 2 of them { , }. According to Unicode, they should be rendered in the same style as the other 3 for up/left/down. But, currently ( ), only the first one is rendered in the same style.

Lots of these arrows are from math, but some are also used elsewhere. The problem is, it's hard to categorize them into one place. So, in Unicode, the arrows gets into one of these blocks: “Miscellaneous Mathematical Symbols-B”, “Supplemental Mathematical Operators”, “Miscellaneous Symbols and Arrows”. Often, the left/right pair are in different blocks.

Here's a example: . There does not seem to have a vertical version of . The chars are in category “Symbol, other”, while are in category “Symbol, Math”.

Another example: . Note that there is no right pointing version of as of (currently Unicode 8) .

Many arrows do not have symmetric versions. Symmetry here can be reflection thru vertical or horizontal axes, or n*90° rotation, or combination of them. The following are some set of chars missing symmetric versions: .

Also, when trying to order them, i ran into the problem of devising a ordering scheme. For example, usually i order them by left right up down, like this:. . But now look at these: . For the vertical pair, which should come first?

Here's another example of the complexity. There are these chars:

If you analyze their names, you can see that a circle can be divided into 8 arcs: {left, right, top, bottom}, and 4 of the diagonal arcs. Each arc can be clockwise or anti-clockwise. 8 arcs, 2 directions, there are a combination of 16 possibilities. First of all, note that not all of them is present. (For example, there's no char named “TOP ARC CLOCKWISE ARROW”) But given these chars, how do you order them?

Note that some left/right pairs looks very different, even in the same font. For example: RIGHT ARROW WITH CIRCLED PLUS

Here's how it renders on my machine:

How the chars shows up on your screen may be very different from another person. It depends on your operating system, web browser, your browser and OS configuration, and availability of font on your system.

Typically, the rightward version has better font, correctly designed and vector based, because it is far more popularly used. The leftward version, or other directions, sometimes get added as afterthought or extensions.|||

