Here’s how you should prepare for Google Summer of Code — Words of a veteran

I did GSoC in 2016 and will probably be a mentor for GSoC 2017 so I feel apt to answer this question.

Step 1: Get away from Windows. OSX is fine but Linux is the best.

I myself realized this the hard way. So it was March 2016, and almost 15 days remained for proposal submission deadline and I decided to attempt GSoC that time. I was on Windows and was sure that it would be sufficient for my development needs but boy was I wrong. Lots of development tools and technologies don’t run well on Windows and almost all of the organizations in GSoC code for Linux systems or servers. Therefore I realized that Linux was necessary for me to stand a chance and I dual-booted Ubuntu the next day.

Step 2: Learn to love Linux. Okay the first two steps are not needed if you are already enjoying Linux but for the general audience, this point is critical. Explore the command line, understand the file structure and try to appreciate the beauty that is Linux.

Step 3: Become good in a programming language or domain. By domain, I mean backend (API) development, frontend development, Android development, Kernels .. and so on. Pick what you love the most and go explore the field. Find good projects on GitHub to contribute to OR start your own project. Important is that you DO SOMETHING.

Step 4: Find an organization. You should start searching for an org as early as Oct-Nov. Have a look at the previous year records to get a list of orgs that may come in the following year. Once you have the list, go to their GitHub page or related resource to learn more about their projects and what they generally do. Make a list of orgs and projects that you find interesting. This all should happen before November or December.

Step 5: Get Contributing! Decide the orgs and projects which you like the most and start contributing to them. You may be scared as first as most of the orgs have strict guidelines that one needs to follow to contribute to them, but be patient, read their docs, follow what is written and you will be fine.

Step 6: Keep coding on till Feb-March 2018. By this time, the organizations list for GSoC 2018 will be announced along with the project ideas list. Use this information to trim out your target projects list and start dedicated contribution to the filtered projects. You have a BIG positive chance if you have been contributing to the org for some time.

Step 7: Once the proposals period opens, send in your proposal as soon as possible and request feedback from the mentors. The more feedback you get, the better your application becomes and more the chances you will get selected. Keep on contributing even after the proposal has been submitted. This will give a good impression that you are a serious contributor to the org.

So hey, this is my 7-step program for preparing and cracking next year’s GSoC. Prepare for GSoC with full dedication and rest assured, you will be able to qualify it. Google Summer of Code can be the turning point of your career so I recommend that any aspirant shouldn’t take it lightly.

That’s all for now.

If you have any queries, feel free to contact me on Twitter (aviaryan123) or Quora. I would be happy to help.

Cheers and Best of Luck.|||

I did GSoC in 2016 and will probably be a mentor for GSoC 2017 so I feel apt to answer this question. I myself realized this the hard way. So it was March 2016, and almost 15 days remained for…