When your desire has been manifested you can either burn the cord to ensure that it will never become unknotted, bury it where it will disintegrate, or leave it safely in a box where it won’t be touched.

This spell can be used with any need. If you ever wish to undo or reverse the spell, take the cord and untie the knot. This doesn’t always work, so be warned. If you’ve burned or buried the string, the spell can’t be reversed. But this doesn’t really matter, because if your need is true, time won’t change it. I doubt that you’ll look back ten years later and want to reverse the spell.

If there is a situation, problem, possible menace you are facing, there is a knot spell for this. Take the cord and firmly visualize the problem in all its agonizing detail. Become emotional about it; seethe with anger, crumble into tears, whatever works. Then firmly tie the knot. Walk away from it, out of the room if possible. Take a shower, eat, do whatever will get your mind off the spell and allow you to relax.

When your emotions are stabilized return to the knot. With calm and peace untie the knot. See the problem vanishing; dissolving into a dust that is swept away by the cleansing, refreshing North wind. It is done.

Binding is a practical example of how a normally harmful and strictly “hands off” form of magic can be an effective and perfectly harmless magical procedure. If a friend wants to borrow something, and you feel hesitant in letting the object out of your hands but you must, take the object (if it’s something small enough to move around and hold) and a cord. Bind the object to your body – literally, physically tie the object to yourself. Stand or sit a few minutes, visualizing yourself receiving the object back from the person you are loaning it to.

Afterward, cut the cord (do not untie the knot!) and loan the object out, assured you’ll once more have it in your possession. If the object is too large, such as a car, take a piece of cord, tie your hand or arm to a piece of it (such as the steering wheel, antenna, and so on) and proceed as above. Put the cord in a safe place until the object returns.|||

A simple knot spell. Take a cord of any color, provided it is pleasing to you and preferably of a natural fiber. Firmly visualize your need or magical goal