Albany, New York, April 20, 2017: While in the past many medical disorders were misunderstood, with the scientific progress mankind has made, now many diseases have been identified and doctors are researching and working hard to look for their treatment. Bipolar disorder is one such disease. Market Research Hub (MRH) has recently updated its massive catalog of research studies, by adding a fresh study which is titled as “Global Bipolar Disorder Therapeutic Market 2017-2021”. This report examines the global market and finds that Awareness about bipolar disorder in children (pediatric extension) and rising application of combination therapies to treat the disease, is currently driving the market rapidly.

Geographically, the research study focuses on some of the major regions, such as APAC, EMEA and Americas. For each region, the report covers the present scenario and the growth prospects of the therapeutic market for the period 2017-2021. Analysts have forecasted that the global bipolar disorder therapeutic market will grow at a CAGR of 2.22% during the period 2017-2021. According to the study findings, the growing need to reduce the financial burden of bipolar disorder will drive the growth prospects for the global bipolar disorder therapeutic market until the end of 2021.

A patient with bipolar disorder has severe fluctuations in mood from depression to mania. It is characterized by chronic episodes of depression, mania and/or mixed states. Patients may have trouble managing everyday life tasks, at school or work, or maintaining relationships. According to the estimations, 2.9% of Americans are diagnosed with bipolar disorder and more than half of cases start when patients are aged 15 to 25 years. Males and females are affected equally. It is important that treatment for bipolar disorder begin just as soon as it is diagnosed by a qualified health care provider.

Treatment for bipolar disorder comprises a blend of different therapies, which may include medications and physical & psychological interventions. Other treatments include:

Moreover, to calculate the market size, the report considers the sales of drugs in the bipolar disorder therapeutic market. The growing application of combination therapies such as education about the illness, lifestyle management, motivation to come out of the situation; will drive the growth prospects for the global bipolar disorder therapeutic market for the next four years. The research finds that, governments and companies across the globe are progressively organizing awareness camps to raise disease awareness among the public, reduce the burden of mental disorders in vulnerable groups, and make treatment facilities accessible for the people.

At last, the report also includes a discussion of the key vendors operating in this market, such as

Click here to get more info with TOC in a PDF Format : http://www.marketresearchhub.com/enquiry.php?type=S&repid=1063500

Other prominent vendors are Astellas Pharma, GlaxoSmithKline, Allergan and Janssen Pharmaceuticals.

Market Research Hub (MRH) is a next-generation reseller of research reports and analysis. MRH’s expansive collection of market research reports has been carefully curated to help key personnel and decision makers across industry verticals to clearly visualize their operating environment and take strategic steps.

MRH functions as an integrated platform for the following products and services: Objective and sound market forecasts, qualitative and quantitative analysis, incisive insight into defining industry trends, and market share estimates. Our reputation lies in delivering value and world-class capabilities to our clients.|||

Albany, New York, April 20, 2017: While in the past many medical disorders were misunderstood, with the scientific progress mankind has made, now many diseases have been identified and doctors are researching and working hard to look for their treatment. Bipolar disorder is one such disease