The Apocalypedia is a subversive comic-philosophic dictionary, a strangely recognisable, friendly yet disturbing, delight-inducing anatomy of radical self-knowledge that ties nature and culture up with the cunning, mysterious and absurd paraphernalia of the human psyche, using a transdimensional shoe-lace.

The Apocalypedia shows what—the horror of work, dread love affairs, gut-impotence, tongue-tied micro-catastrophes, world-detonating inflows of genius, self-shattering laughter, silent docked she-connections, the intelligence of walls, the wrinkles of a loved uncle, blizzards in the moonlight, anarchic moonwalks through the interzone and friendly festivals of death have in common—why—we do have the broken families, repressive institutions, boring philosophy, miserable history and omnipornographic teeveemedia we feel we could probably do without and why we don’t have the utopian island-states, underwater improvised-theatre domes of baize and burnished glass, river-spanning trampolines, exquisite furniture hand-crafted in factory-cum-cathedrals, warm and liquid freedom sloshing around our ankles, tame zebras trotting through the garden and superbly tailored raiment that we feel, somehow, we should have—and how—to face the tender enormity of the unknown, find a decent fella, instantly overcome all worry, connect up all human knowledge with a transdimensional shoelace, seize never-to-be-repeated moments by their little balls, summon a berserk of glory from the bellymind, impersonate a tree so well that birds land on you, experience the centre of the universe together during apocalyptic intercourse (or apocalyptic gardening), blowtorch the system and find your way out of a me-shaped prison—back into the big room.…

Take a look at an extract of some of the lighter, shorter entries on the images to the right.

Or take a look around the key posts of my blog, which is sprinkled with some of the longer essay-type excerpts. One of the most popular pages on this site, Four Types of Dystopia is an extract from The Apocalypedia, as are a couple of the more serious and involved essays, such as ‘The 5 System Filters’ and ‘Paradox and the Origins of Civilisation’,

Your local [independent] bookshop (the best option — support the little people!)

Green Books  / The Book Depository / Booktopia (aus) / Bol (ned) / Bokus (swe) / Mighty Ape (nz) / Amazon UK / Amazon US… all the other Amazons (although please read this before you buy from them) and most other online bookshops.

Note the ‘look inside’ feature of Amazon doesn’t work; it looks awful on their site, but although the digital version, unlike the physical layout, was not my business, it does look fine on an e-reader.

The Apocalypedia has a Facebook page where I post occasional, general updates about this site.

And any questions, objections or comments, feel free to write. At some point I’ll post and update an FAQ and CRO (commonly raised objections) about the book.|||

The Apocalypedia is a handy, friendly, profound, hilarious, deeply subversive and appallingly original guide to absolutely everything, including you.