EE: first, I’d like to say, i’m a big fan of the juice in a bag. really love the machine i use to gain access to the bagged juice!

JUICEO: thanks, it means a lot that you are one of the people who believes in this juice bag revolution.

EE: what inspired you to invent juice in bag with a computer?

JUICEO: there’s this old story by the keith rabios VC. he’s got his company crunching long hours on a project that will make them many dollars. his management comes to him and says, this is untenable, people are burning out. he challenges them to think outside the bag. then does it himself. he starts this 830pm smoothie thing. it’s refreshing, its innovative, his overworked laborers are enjoying smoothies… at 830pm… made by the CEO!

there’s a market right there. what if i could save executives 30–40 minutes a night of smoothie and healthy juice making. they no longer have to manually squeeze nutrition out into cups.

EE: what are some of the initial iterations you went through before perfecting the juice computer?

JUICEO: my extended family and I went through three years of daily brainstorming and testing. some of the prototypes I’m most proud of are the raspberry-pi based juice-puter and the chevy astro van (btw, those things handle like a truck, i love it!) that runs over a watermelon (we plan to bring that to market in a few years).

JUICEO: well, $120M positions us to really drive the core of our business forward. we’re looking into introducing what we’re calling internally the DMChA, make sure you spell that with a Ch in there because the Ch stands for choppyright. If we lobby effectively, we can put an end to the bag hackers.

people really need to understand, this isn’t just about juice. what if some hypothetical VC wanted an easy way to store and retrieve young blood. we’ll make it easier than squeezing blood from a turnip.|||

EE: first, I’d like to say, i’m a big fan of the juice in a bag. really love the machine i use to gain access to the bagged juice! JUICEO: thanks, it means a lot that you are one of the people who…