As the pre-flight safety video flickered across a 20 year old CRT on a United 757 in January 2012, the smiling face of Jeff Smisek told me repeatedly that while there were changes coming in the months ahead, they’d be ones I’d like. That smarmy, disingenuous series of videos gave birth to a Twitter account called @FakeUnitedJeff.

Over 5000 tweets later, Fake United Jeff (FUJ, to those who know him well) is the most popular parody airline CEO. And, with that popularity came attention from everybody from the New York Times to magazines like Fast Company and Forbes. And of course, over 4000 followers hearted, starred, and retweeted the snarky, bitter, corporate drivel that flowed so naturally. Perhaps the most comprehensive look was from Skift’s Jason Clampet’s 2013 story which began amusingly:

I’ve enjoyed posting as FakeUnitedJeff for the last 5 years, although candidly it’s been less fun since Jeff Smisek was unceremoniously CEO-fired as United CEO in September 2015. That said, I was somewhat surprised to get this email from Twitter on April 15th:

Since the beginning of the account, I’ve always been careful to make it clear the account wasn’t real. After all, the account name is literally “Fake United Jeff”. The bio includes both the word ‘fake’ and ‘parody’. Nobody could possibly mistake this for anything but a parody. And so I replied to the automated email (which bounced 3 days later) from Twitter.

On April 20th, the account was temporarily suspended. I appealed it, opening up a ticket with the Twitter “customer service” system, and provided the requested information to lodge the appeal.

They responded with this tidbit:

I replied again, referring to the parody policy and including a reference to this account’s compliance with it. Again, it’s hard to derive “pretending … in order to deceive” from an account that literally has had “fake” in its name for 5 years, but a few hours later I received an ever-so-useless response requesting “A copy of the impersonated individual’s valid government-issued photo ID (e.g., driver’s license, passport)”.

I replied expressing that I never asserted I was the real person, and referred again to multiple use of the word ‘fake’ and ‘parody’ in both the user name and the bio and received this today:

So, now I’m permanently suspended. I think I might be the only non-Nazi to be in this situation (and even some of those guys got unsuspended). So I asked myself the question: is this how Fake United Jeff goes out?

So, I’m exploring other options to get somebody at Twitter to take a look at the situation and perhaps help resolve the issue. But I’ve also noticed a fair bit of speculation about the situation and I thought I’d offer up a few answers.

I don’t know who complained and have no evidence that it is United Airlines. They’ve presumably been aware of this account for some time, and the username and bio has been unchanged for years. Why this week?

I’m not sure why Twitter decided ‘permanent ban’ was appropriate for a parody site. To be honest, they have a pretty serious problem with harassment and abuse, so while I’m not unhappy to see them taking these things more seriously, I’m a bit confused they decided to start with me.

I hear there was an amnesty for banned white supremacists, perhaps this fake airline CEO can sneak in amongst them. If it helps, Twitter, I’m open to making fun of the CEOs of the Arab-owned airlines a bit more. Those Emirates A380s are ripe for some satire, I think.

I’m also open to doing some interviews — in or out of character. Drop me a line at fakeunitedjeff@gmail.com and we’ll sort it out.

I hope to be back soon, but if not, it’s been absolutely fantastic being Fake United Jeff — even if it was just on Twitter. I hope everyone else had at least a big a laugh as I did.|||

As the pre-flight safety video flickered across a 20 year old CRT on a United 757 in January 2012, the smiling face of Jeff Smisek told me repeatedly that while there were changes coming in the…