After completing the standard audit, our 2015 state and federal tax filings are available. We publish all of our related tax documents because we believe in transparency.

I'm sorry for the delay in posting them: we had everything ready in December, but we had a lot going on at the end of the year (if you haven't seen it yet, check out the Tor at the Heart of Internet Freedom blog post series!), and then time got away from me after the new year.

But the delay brings you something new! Linus Nordberg, one of our new board members, has gathered together a bunch of corporate documents, like the Articles of Organization from founding the organization, our Form 1023 where we applied for non-profit status, and our IRS determination letter where they confirmed it. I've put links to these documents on the same financials page.

From a development perspective, transparency doesn't just mean that we show you our source code (though of course we do). The second layer to transparency is publishing specifications to explain what we thought we implemented in the source code. And the layer above that is publishing design documents and research papers to explain why we chose to build it that way, including analyzing the security implications and the tradeoffs of alternate designs. The reason for all these layers is to help people evaluate every level of our system: whether we chose the right design, whether we turned that design into a concrete plan that will keep people safe, and whether we correctly implemented this plan. Tor gets a huge amount of analysis and attention from professors and university research groups down to individual programmers around the world, and this consistent peer review is one of our core strengths over the past decade.

Some observations to help you read through the 2015 financial documents:

In closing, remember that there are many different ways to get involved with Tor, and we need your help. For examples, you can donate, volunteer, and run a Tor relay.|||

