Lesson one: People will flush anything down a toilet. Curlers. Popsicle wrappers. Combs. I'm not saying they do it on purpose. Maybe they didn't notice the jet-black comb on the blazingly contrasting white porcelain floor of the toilet bowl. Maybe they just flicked the handle and down it went. Accidents happen. But when you're the one kneeling on a damp bath towel on a Wednesday afternoon, fishing around in a toilet with a thirty-foot snake, I'm telling you: You see some stuff. Poker chips. Warning labels. Handfuls of expired vitamins.

There was an afternoon when I, the landlord, stood with a plumber as he ground around for about fifteen minutes until he broke through the offending blockage. Moments later, an artichoke leaf floated up, then another, and another. Seriously: artichoke leaves. "I don't know anything about that," my tenant told me when I called that night. Paradoxically, he then added, "That must have been an accident."

Lesson two: Artichokes can be accidents.

I was a landlord for nearly two decades. In the small college town where we worked, my then-wife and I partnered with two of our best friends and bought a three-story converted nineteenth-century mercantile building. It was the old JCPenney. Four largish one-bedroom apartments and two retail spaces. At the start of things, we created an LLC, recruited financial partners, and hired an architect, then a contractor. By day, men worked, lugging in dry wall, aluminum studs, huge wheels of Romex. It was invigorating. Each of us drove by to watch the construction of a massive staircase, the enclosure of the mezzanine, the piercing of the building's 120-year-old exterior walls. Scaffolds rose and fell. At night we drank beers and ate pizza on-site, then argued about fixtures, firewalls, carpet grades, and systems: intercom systems, alarm systems, HVAC systems. Then on to bathroom vanities, replacement windows, paint colors, shades, cabinet knobs, and light fixtures. It took months and required bridge loans, construction loans, and a couple of refinances.

This was 1999. As I remember it, we were not particularly tense about all this. We had some working capital and a promising market of college professors who found themselves living in rural Indiana, men and women hungry for urban loft-style apartments, even out in the sticks.

But we were aware of the risk. We talked ourselves through budgets and projections. There was planning. We projected optimistic rent increases and steady payments against a large but seemingly manageable mortgage. We talked about our profit margin ($600 a month) and pleased one another by making celebratory references to distant dates, set blindingly far in the future. 2017! The year the mortgage would be paid, and the money would start rolling in in large monthly lumps. 2022! The year we'd sell after five solid years of those unfettered profits. So our comfort lay twenty-three years in the future, beyond any depreciation schedule, perhaps beyond even a normal life span. It felt a little sickening, but we were committed.

And then, after nearly five months of construction, having borrowed nearly the value of our two houses combined, we had something to show for it. We opened for business. Within a week, we had four signed leases, a set of deposit checks, and the promise of income. We had a new coffee shop opening on the first floor and a print shop in the basement. We could no longer call ourselves developers. We were now landlords.|||

You never know a person until you see how they live.