in the first quarter of 2016, while it was 34 billion in the same quarter of 2009 in the US.

Now, you might be thinking that why I’m showing this data to you.

The point here is,

The eCommerce industry is growing like anything. Are you growing at the same pace?

Is your eStore is selling products like hot cake?

If your answer is No, you are at the right place. In today’s post, I’m going to share with you 17 proven ways to boost eCommerce sales.

After reading this post, you will know what exactly you need to do to double the sales, if not triple.

Without further ado, let’s discuss these proven tricks to optimize conversion.

This is the first step of conversion optimization. The more you understand about the background and the needs of your audience, the better you will be at serving them.

This is the main reason why you should create a buyer persona for your business.

Where should you collect information for your buyer persona from?

Here are 5 places that can help you gather information:

What are you waiting for now?

Collect information and create a buyer persona for your business. Depending on the nature of your products, there can be more than one buyer persona for your business. If so, your marketing strategies should rope in all your buyer personas.

Believe me or not, product descriptions can make or break the sales.

“People don’t read online; unless they’re about to spend money—then they scrutinize each word”, says Darren DeMatas in his mammoth blog post on Persuasive Marketing Techniques For Product Descriptions That Sell.

And when your potential buyers are going to scrutinize each word, it matters a lot what you write. So you should make every word count.

Here are a few proven techniques to write persuasive product description:

Follow these tips and write product descriptions that will certainly boost your sales.

Remember, the main objective of product descriptions is not to offer information about the products only, but to sell the products as well.

The products you sell online are non-tangible. So product images become very important for your eStore. Potential buyers can create mental pictures of your products through product images.

Here are the top 4 tips on product images that help you boost eCommerce sales:

Product images play an important role in increasing the sales of an eCommerce store.

Creating a sense of urgency is a good way to boost eCommerce sales. By using urgency psychology, you can improve conversions quickly. But how will you do it?

Here are a few proven ways to create a sense of urgency to catapult the growth of your eCommerce store:

Urgency is something that people respond quickly to. Make use of this human psychology to boost eCommerce sales.

Now, you must be thinking that how catching more email subscribers can help you increase eCommerce sales, isn’t it?

Actually, it can. How?

My friend, the more emails you have in your email list, the more your email marketing campaigns will yield results, as simple at that. So you try to capture more email subscribers.

Once you have a long list of email subscribers, you can easily pitch them your products and boost the sales of eStore.

You must understand that emails are one of the best channels in online marketing. You can use email marketing to drive traffic to your eStore and boost sales.

The needs of your customers vary, so you should offer multiple delivery options to them.

Some customers want free deliveries on their purchases and they can wait for a few days to receive their shipments.

However, some of your customers want a rather short window to receive their products.

In order to cater the varied needs of your customers, you should offer them multiple delivery options. The more options your visitors have, the more chances are they will buy your products.

Gone are the days when people used to take the help of PCs to search online. Now, more than 60% searches are conducted on the mobile phones.

You should make sure that your eCommerce website is mobile-friendly. Else, you will miss a big share of the sales.

So if you want to boost the sales, make your eCommerce website is mobile-friendly. Also, your eStore should be able to display product pictures and information clearly on any device.

A blog not only supports SEO and content marketing efforts, but also boosts the sales of an eStore.

Here is list of a few top benefits a blog for an eCommerce website:

Needless to say, a regularly updated business blog tells visitors of your website that you actually value the needs and interests of your customers. This helps you sell more and boost the sales.

Can you sell products through social media?

The answer is Yes. You can do social selling provided that you have active audiences on different social media platforms.

Doing social selling is a bit tricky. First of all, you should find out platforms you’re your audiences are using. And then, make strategies for social selling.

With 85 percent orders and an average spend of $55, Facebook leads in the US social commerce.

Social selling can contribute a big share to your overall eCommerce sales if you use social media smartly. If you don’t have time to do social selling, you can hire a virtual assistant for the same.

You will be surprised to know that 70% of people check online reviews/ratings before making purchases. And customer reviews have the power to create a 74% increase in product conversion.

If product reviews are so much important, don’t you want to promote them to boost your eCommerce sales.

Here are a few ways how you can promote reviews to sell more products on your eStore:

When it comes to negative reviews, you must manage them. Without negative reviews, your reviews will look fake. And the more negative reviews can affect your business. Actually, negative reviews are not that bad. How you handle them makes a difference.

Shopping experience on your website should be flawless and flexible. If someone wants to pay through PayPal, he should be able to do so. And if someone is willing to make the payment through their credit card, there must be an option for the same.

If you offer multiple payment options on your eStore, there will be very few incidents of abandoning shopping carts.

My friends, believe it or not, multiple payment options will increase the sales significantly.

If you are selling more than one product in the same category, visitors should be able to compare these products. This simple feature can help you sell more as visitors can easily differentiate the products on your website without leaving it.

Also, there are not many eCommerce websites that offer product comparisons. So by offering this feature, you can have an edge over your competitors and sell more products.

People are risk-averse in general. They don’t want to buy something that might not turn out to be as good as they thought it to be. This simple yet powerful, feeling is responsible for thousands of abandoning shopping carts.

If you want to reverse the situation, you should offer a money back guarantee. People cannot feel your products online, so they might have a few doubts about your products. A money back guarantee clears the doubts and helps sell more.

“With a guarantee, they feel confident that they won’t be stuck with their purchase. And the very act of offering a strong guarantee lets buyers know you really believe the product is worth its asking price.”

It will be great if you are able to offer your product shipment for free. But, if this is not possible, you should try to minimize the shipping cost.

There is a fierce competition among eStores. If you want to get an edge over your competitors, you should lower the shipping cost.

Believe me, my friend, minimizing shipping cost will certainly increase your sales.

Tell me the best way to target people who are ready to buy particular products.

Hints: It is not social media, and It is not email marketing.

Kudos to those who hit the target- It is Pay Per Click Advertising. Why PPC?

With the help of PPC, you can quickly launch a marketing campaign and measure the success. And the best thing is you are showing your products to those who really want to buy them.

PPC campaigns, if executed effectively, are a quick way to boost eCommerce sales.

However, you should look for an experienced Internet marketer to run PPC campaigns. Else you will exhaust marketing budget without any visible benefits.

Who doesn’t like discounts? In fact, we all do. Offering discounts is a sure-fire way to boost eCommerce sales.

Here are the benefits of offering discounts to your customers:

It has been observed that offering discounts increases sales quickly.

Make your customers an offer they can’t refuse. This will certainly boost your sales.

Now, you must be thinking that how a website’s speed matters. My friend, it matters a lot.

As mentioned earlier in this article, most people do online shopping through their smartphones. If your website is slow, it will kill the fun. Nobody, these days, has patience. People will leave your website and buy from others.

Optimize your website for tablets and mobile phones. And you will see a difference in the sales.

In today’s cutthroat competition, it is not easy to increase the sales of your eCommerce store. However, if you follow these above-mentioned tips, you will certainly be able to boost the sales of your products.

Also, you should consider your buyer’s journey when you are going to include these pointers in the marketing strategies for your eCommerce store.

Remember, increasing sales is all about conversion optimization.

What about you? Do you want to tell any tip to boost eCommerce sales? Share it in the comment section. I’d love to hear about it.

Anupam Rajey is a seasoned marketer and sales expert. He is the CEO of Acelerar Tech, a leading KPO that offers virtual assistants for social media, Internet research, email & chat support, and more.

 

 

|||

