Jojo Hedaya is the co-founder and CEO of Unroll.Me. His passion for simplicity drives Unroll.Me’s mission to streamline the email unsubscribe process and help users gain control over their inbox. Under his leadership as the head of development, Unroll.Me has gained millions of users in the past five years.

Josh Rosenwald is co-founder and President of Unroll.Me. A born entrepreneur, Josh founded his first start-up as a teenager. Subsequent ventures include a sports content website and working in various roles in the investment banking industry.

There are people that use Google and then there are people that KNOW Google. Our guy Cris is the latter. Cris can out-google Google. His most searched sites: Reddit and Facebook — go ahead, search his history.

As the saying goes, there are only two hard things in computer science: cache invalidation and naming things. Fortunately, our team has the most rockstar namerizer in Silicon Alley. For instance, he came up with the name Courier for our email sending technology and Watcher for our monitoring dashboard, thereby solidifying our comic book theme. He didn't come up with his title, though.

Jack has a strong passion for finding, discussing and building new products. His deep attention to detail helps keep the team on track and organized. Jack oversees numerous projects, with a focus on Unroll.Me's growth and engagement.

With a little inspiration from Bertrand Russell, Marc always says -- science is what you know, philosophy is what you don't know, computer science is both.

Liquid diets, mechanical keyboards, esoteric computer languages, Schrodinger’s cat-in-a-box paradoxes. The world is an infinitely fascinating place. And Sze is a lifelong student to find better ways to do everything.

Jack of Many Trades, Master of not saying "no" Technology is changing on a daily basis, and it's almost impossible to keep up. BUT that doesn't mean you can't try. Travis chooses Udemy over sleep on his lengthy commute into the city and while he usually finds a new class to enroll in before he completes his last, he still manages to retain at least some of what he learned. Automation is his passion and reliability is his goal. But there will always be a soft spot in his heart for some good old-fashioned development.

James sold everything he owned in 2013 and left to travel the world living out of nothing but a backpack. Now firmly grounded, he brings his minimal lifestyle throughout his design and development work. Occasionally you'll find him dressed as a pirate. Yarr.|||

The Unroll.Me iOS app is finally here! Swipe your way to a cleaner inbox.