Many have written about “technical debt”. But in my life, I’ve found it much harder to deal with “relationship debt”.

There are months when the raw passion of creating something new consumes me.

There are other months when it feels like everything is on the line; when all I’ve worked for is at risk of being destroyed.

When that happens, it’s all I think about. I don’t eat right, sleep right, work out, answer the phone, reply to email or texts, hang out with friends, call grandma… or even truly notice the people around me.

I am unable to let go. For example, last week I was having dinner with an old friend in Boston. She was sharing something deep and personal, but I couldn’t force myself to be fully present. I was shouting silently in my head, “Disconnect! Listen! Be here!” It didn’t work; my thoughts would keep drifting back to drama from work.

On one hand, I consider this one of my greatest strengths: complete dedication to the task at hand. I perceive myself as someone who will rise to the occasion through sheer brute force, focus, and willpower. I can spark something to happen; help me, or get out of my way.

On the other hand, my soul is damaged. The sacrifice is high.

I’ve known this about myself since I turned 30 — the year I realized I had lost five years of my life and damaged all my relationships. So I changed. It’s been much better since. I thought I had it mostly figured out.

It sneaks up gradually. One year, you are surrounded by good friends and teammates who throw a surprise birthday dinner. The next birthday, it’s just your team minus the friends, but they all chip in on a thoughtful gift. The birthday after that, you are in your office writing 60 pages of documentation singlehandedly in one day… and just one cofounder shows up.

It sneaks up gradually. You get out of life what you put into it. You get out of relationships what you invest in them. That investment must be continuous; the memories of the past fade.

But what inspired this post is not so much my personal experience. I’ve known about my flaws for years, and I’m sure many founders can relate.

Instead, I spent today thinking about how this has applied to my company — all the complex and convoluted relationships in any organization.

The phrase that came to mind was relationship debt.

Like technical debt, sometimes you have to take short cuts that you’ll get around to fixing later.

When things are going smoothly, the group has more opportunities to bond more closely without making an effort — campfires, dinners, lunch chats, fun off-sites, meaningful one-on-ones, informal talks, train trips, dinosaur digs. As a result, the work seems more meaningful and fun.

When things are not smooth for more than a few months, these things stop happening one by one. The relationships subtly — oh so very subtly — fray. Sometimes you notice it happening, but in the chaos, no one has the time to manage it. It’s just one more thing you don’t have time to do.

Startups are not smooth. There are those times when the group must buckle down and rise to the occasion.

But life is a marathon, not a sprint.|||

Many have written about “technical debt”. But in my life, I’ve found it much harder to deal with “relationship debt”. There are other months when it feels like everything is on the line; when all I…