Is your romantic relationship potted with tears and tantrums? Help is on it’s way.

Scientists are using smart bracelets to track the physiological cues that accompany arguments, and ultimately help couples avoid conflict:

University of Southern California scientists Adela Timmons and Theodora Chaspari unveiled their smart sensor in this month’s Computer magazine.

Designed to monitor couples’ body temperature, heart activity and sweat, this helps the researchers pinpoint when a couple is in conflict.

The duo also collected contextual data; using smartphone location apps to show how close the couple are physically, audio recordings to track vocal tone, and language analysis to pinpoint negative words like swearing.

The academics then compared their analysis with hourly reports from test subjects:

At the time of the study, Timmons and Chaspari had analysed 40 couples. They’ve now studied dozens more and are already experimenting with artificial intelligence to gain minute-by-minute accuracy.

What’s really cool however, is the next step of research: to prevent potential arguments from happening.

Timmons believes it could soon be possible to predict fights and use prompts to stop them from erupting.

“There are lots of ways to intervene,” she told Computer magazine. “One could be to increase positive interaction between the partners […] another potential avenue is to work on resolving the conflict after it occurs.”

The idea isn’t to remove all difficult conversations, though. “It’s important to express your viewpoint and negotiate them,” says Timmons. “We want to work towards preventing excessive conflict, conflict that’s not helpful, or patterns that escalate over time and get out of control.”

Eventually your couples wearable would even be tailored to your unique quirks.

“We also want to move to different models because we know that different couples fight differently – some yell, some withdraw, some people are really physiologically reactive, other less so,” Timmons explains.

The idea of wearing a smart band in the name of love might seem absurd, but Timmons said most of her subjects were surprisingly accepting of the kit: they found it “a little bit uncomfortable and weird, but not overwhelmingly so”.

In the future, she also imagines the technology to be “less obtrusive, smaller, and more stylish”, making it even more comfortable to use.

In a world where we track our fitness, our sleep, and even our pets – a Fitbit for fights could well be the next wearable to shape our future.

The technology is already being developed.|||

Move over Fitbit - scientists want the 'Fightbit' to stop couples arguing.