A former advisor and minister of François Hollande, Emmanuel Macron will go head-to-head against Marine Le Pen in the second round of the French election. It is an extraordinary achievement for him and his supporters. A 39 year-old former banker who has never held elected office, his opponents used to say he couldn’t win because he had no program, no party, and he was not old enough. But he beat the right and the left less than a year after setting up “En Marche!”, his participatory political platform.

With a projected vote of 64% in his favor, he should be the winner and the next French President.

Destroyed by scandals and by a very bad communication, François Fillon failed to build on the impressive successes of the right in the previous local elections. With 6% the Left is no better and suffered a defeat that had been unprecedented since 1969.

But then, a surprising number of supporters from the left explain that they don’t want to vote for him, and that they would prefer to allow Marine Le Pen to win. They explain they don’t want to vote for a banker, or that it’s better to get Marine Le Pen today instead of waiting for 5 more years, or that they don’t really care because they want a new Republic anyway.

The situation is strikingly different from what happened in 2002 when French leftists had to vote for Jacques Chirac. Some could say that they should consider in a better situation since Emmanuel Macron at least used to participate to a Socialist government.

What does it mean?

First of all, French voters massively asked for change. If we add Emmanuel Macron, Jean-Luc Mélenchon and Marine Le Pen, 75% of them voted for a profound transformation of the French political landscape. But only 25% of them chose him to lead and represent this evolution.

They don’t ask for bold reforms.

They ask for more democracy, more decent representatives, less scandals and more social justice.

They ask for alternance, not for a shock therapy.

They fear that, once elected, Emmanuel Macron will achieve the program of François Hollande, and that he will go back to his elitist roots and adopt the same attitude, nominating “énarques”, “sciences-po” graduates, rich entrepreneurs, apparatchiks, old and powerful local politicians.

En Marche may have changed the French political landscape, but as Jean-Louis Gassée has it, it will be much more difficult to govern France, if not impossible. The upcoming parliamentary election might even force him to accept a cohabitation with a more traditional Prime Minister from the Right.

With the success of En Marche, we know how Emmanuel Macron is campaigning.

He should clarify the way he wants to lead.

And people who hesitate to vote against Marine Le Pen should be put to shame.|||

A former advisor and minister of François Hollande, Emmanuel Macron will go head-to-head against Marine Le Pen in the second round of the French election. It is an extraordinary achievement for him…