It’s a seductive pitch: use some automated technology to make your (tiny, over-worked, under-staffed) startup appear more attentive and on-the-ball to your customers. If you run a startup, you’re probably deluged with pitches for tech like this: live-chat integrated into your site, automated support rating tools, and drip email (which is a Dapper Rebrand for the less-sexy term automated marketing emails).

They’ve all got one thing in common: they’re supposed to help you look less like one person having a panic attack in their underwear, and more like a Porsche SUV¹ full of attentive & soothing salespeople, providing your customer with endless personalized attention and white-gloved service. The pitch, of course, is that your customers will love it, you’ll grow your sales and god willing buy some new underwear one of these days.

Here’s the issue: without solving your underlying problem (constrained time), these tools are often just giving your customer the briefest veneer of whatever it is you’re trying to project before they crash back to reality and it’s you in your underwear again.

Consider, for example, the humble trial-expiration drip email:

In my experience, it’s hard enough for people to structure these emails so that they compile and all the templating variables get properly populated. Let’s assume, however, that you don’t end up just emailing out 10,000 stack traces by accident. What’s your best-case scenario here?

When (against my better judgement), I’ve replied to emails like this, it’s almost always gone like this:

It’s gotten to the point where I really shouldn’t be surprised by this, but it amazes me every time. The obsequious “we’d loooooove to hear about your customer support experience” email from a startup that didn’t take the time to read my initial email, the drip emails that tell me excitedly that my plan will be starting soon after I’ve cancelled, or the incessant Chat Now! overlays that cover half the page, only to tell you that “Sorry my dude live chat is currently offline :(“

Without the attentive follow-through, you simply end up highlighting for your customers how inattentive you are. There are lots of problems that can be solved by the smart application of technology, but being an attentive, responsive person is sadly not one of them.|||

It’s a seductive pitch: use some automated technology to make your (tiny, over-worked, under-staffed) startup appear more attentive and on-the-ball to your customers. If you run a startup, you’re…