I have been using Sublime text as my primary editor for some time now. Here I wanted to share my current setup for the editor including all settings, packages, shortcut keys and themes.

First thing you will need to install is the Package Control. This can be easily done by following the directions at their installation instructions.

Once you have installed the package manager and restarted sublime text, now you can install all other packages using the powerful command pallet. Hit ctrl + shift + P and type "Install", choose "Package Control : Install Package". Now you can search for any package that you wish to install, and then press Enter to install it.

Here is a list of packages that I currently use:

Alignment provides a simple key-binding for aligning multi-line and multiple selections. Bracket Highlighter, as the name suggests, matches a variety of brackets such as: [], (), {}, "", '', #!xml <tag></tag>, and even custom brackets. C++11 provides better coloring scheme for c++11 syntax.

Column Select plug-in provides an alternate behavior for Sublime keyboard column selection. The differences are:

DocBlockr_Python makes writing documentation a breeze for python code. GitGutter is a handy plug-in to show information about files in a git repository. Main Features are:

MagicPython is a package with preferences and syntax highlighter for cutting edge Python 3. It is meant to be a drop-in replacement for the default Python package. MagicPython correctly highlights all Python 3.5 and 3.6 syntax features, including type annotations, f-strings and regular expressions. It is built from scratch for robustness with an extensive test suite.

rsub is an implementation of TextMate 2's 'rmate' feature for Sublime Text, allowing files to be edited on a remote server using SSH port forwarding / tunneling. Please make sure you have installed a version of rmate and are using correct port forwarding.

Search in Project lets you use your favorite search tool (grep, ack, ag, pt, rg, git grep, or findstr) to find strings across your entire current Sublime Text project. I personally use the silver_seracher (ag) for this purpose.

SublimeLinter and SublimeLinter-flake8 is plug-in that provides an interface to flake8. It will be used with files that have the “Python” syntax.|||

