Subscribe with makes it easy for subscription businesses to integrate and sell on

--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Apr. 24, 2017-- (NASDAQ:AMZN) today announced a self-service subscriptions marketplace that allows digital subscription providers to reach millions of customers. Subscribe with is a new way for subscription businesses to sell on , offering them targeted customer exposure through popular discovery features such as search and recommendations while also providing customers with a simple way to purchase and manage their subscriptions. Selling on Subscribe with is easy with self-service enrollment. The program allows subscription providers the ability to offer customers flexible pricing including introductory, monthly, and annual pricing options, as well as the opportunity to explore offering Prime exclusive deals. Digital subscriptions currently available span a variety of areas including streaming content, news/magazines, learning, and lifestyle. To learn more about how to become a subscription provider on Subscribe with , visit: www.subscribewithamazon.com.

“Over the years, has gained extensive experience in the memberships and subscriptions space, innovating across programs like Prime and Kindle Unlimited,” said , general manager of Subscribe with . “Today, we’re excited to extend our selection by offering subscription businesses a self-service way to make their subscriptions available to millions of customers.”

Through its self-service tools, each subscription will have its own detail page, and providers can easily manage pricing and take advantage of easy-to-use APIs to receive orders and updates from . Subscribe with also offers the ability to propose Prime member exclusive discounts. For example, Prime members can get a 50% discount on the first six months of a subscription to Texture, a digital service that gives customers access to some of the world’s best magazines. Additionally, when customers purchase their subscription on , they can access it on any iOS, Android or Amazon Fire device supported by the subscription provider.

“Selling on Subscribe with gave us a whole new channel to reach new customers,” said , Creativebug Co-Founder. “The integration process for joining the marketplace was easy. The step-by-step integration guide gave us a checklist of everything we needed to do, and the sample seller account let us see what to expect before we even started.”

Subscription providers of all sizes are selling on the marketplace, including SlingTV, Disney Story Central, , Texture, eMeals, Fitstar by , Creativebug, Headspace, LegalZoom, MileIQ, , , The New Yorker, Consumer Reports and Tawkify, to name a few. To explore the subscriptions storefront, please visit amazon.com/subscribe.

Amazon is guided by four principles: customer obsession rather than competitor focus, passion for invention, commitment to operational excellence, and long-term thinking. Customer reviews, 1-Click shopping, personalized recommendations, Prime, Fulfillment by Amazon, AWS, Kindle Direct Publishing, Kindle, Fire tablets, Fire TV, Amazon Echo, and Alexa are some of the products and services pioneered by Amazon. For more information, visit www.amazon.com/about and follow @AmazonNews.|||

