In this day and age, does the term refer to the century-old technology through which content is transmitted over the air to mass audiences via radio waves? Or does it now take on a new context, referring to any means of distributing content at no cost to the viewer, growing to include free online video as well?

The National Association of Broadcasters’ Show is upon us once again. Members of the FreeCast team are en route to Las Vegas for meetings amid this celebration of the broadcast industry. But here in 2017, the term ‘broadcast’ alone is worth a closer look.

Is a YouTube star like PewDiePie as much of a broadcaster as CBS? To the consumer, how do these modern and traditional sources of free content compare? In a web-first TV world, these questions deserve fresh answers.

Examining free online content sources, it’s easy to see parallels with the early days of television.

Once upon a time, “TV” meant only a handful of broadcast networks. Pay TV delivered by cable or satellite did not yet exist.

The original cable TV systems weren’t serving up HBO and other premium pay channels, not at first at least. They began with a simple value proposition. For a monthly service fee, cable could deliver those free broadcast networks clearly, reliably, and easily to your home. No more mussing with an antenna, no more fuzzy picture or poor reception; it was a convenience.

But with that, soon came the ability to conveniently add additional pay channels to that monthly service bill, giving us the multitude of cable networks that, for a generation, became synonymous with TV.

Over the decades, cable has evolved from a simple lineup of linear channels into what we have today: a built in guide, on-demand options, the ability to add channels or pay-per-view at the push of a button.

Today, a new ecosystem of television has emerged. Free (ad-supported) content exists across the web. Some of it is from the very same broadcast networks that we’ve known for decades. But there are hundreds of thousands of sources in addition to the familiar ones, ranging from amateur content creators up to professional studios and media companies.

Just like the early cable operators, FreeCast’s SelectTV serves the same purpose: uniting all of this free content once available from disparate independent sources into a single convenient and reliable service, for a small service fee.

For $2.99 a month, SelectTV brings all the free online content of the world together into a single robust television package. To that, users can add premium channels, subscription services, and pay-per-view purchases.

Just like the innovations that cable brought to traditional TV.

FreeCast is the cable TV of online television. It’s absolutely an innovation of that magnitude.

And as cable and satellite TV decline, soon this method of accessing content will simply be TV.|||

In today’s web-first TV world, FreeCast’s SelectTV enables the same explosive growth that traditional TV experienced with shit from broadcast-only to cable and satellite delivery.