The world is moving in the direction of technology and the Internet faster that it has ever done. More businesses are hosting their data on cloud services, moving their day-to-day activities from manual and paper based to using software and web services.

The question thus arises: given the global trend of ‘technologization’ (yeah! I just coined that word, you can add it to your dictionary, ha ha!), should everyone learn programming?

Or put it this way:

For sure, this question has crossed your mind, probably when you despaired the idea of programming due to its tedious nature, or awed by its potentials.

To a question like this, it’s quite easy to spill out a No! or a Yes!

Actually, those are the only two answers that you can give to such a question- its either a YES or a NO- we can however make do with some reasons and explanations. In this article I will tell you what I think is the right answer to this question with reasons.

To the question: “Should everyone learn to program?” my answer is a big YES!

Let me get my point clear: by ‘everyone should learn to program’, I do not mean everyone should be a developer- just like saying everyone should learn to drive doesn't mean everyone should be a chauffeur. Everyone that has an access to a computer (of any sort: android phones, tablets, laptops and desktops) should/must learn how to program in at least one language. This is not to say that everyone should be full-time developers.

Everyone should learn to program- including your kids and even your grandpa; it is an essential skill in this century. Learning to code or understanding the syntax and at least the basic concepts in a language has a lot of benefits, they are listed below.

Learning to program has the following benefits:

Compare this to knowing certain things about automobile engines and its working principles as a driver, this will help you offset a lot of problems that you might encounter as you travel with your car. The same applies to learning to program: learning to program in any language will help you understand how the computer works, its capabilities and the awesome things that you can do with it. And when an issue arises with your computer, you will have an idea as to what went wrong and how to go about correcting it.

· Improved Efficiency with using the computer:

Learning to program in any Language will help you use your computer to its highest potential and help you automate a lot of processes which would have taken you long hours to do manually with your computer. Dave McFarland a Blogger on teamtreehouse did justice to this point in his article; The Real Reason Why Everyone Should Learn to Code.

As I pointed out in my previous article, programming is all about problem solving; using what you have to create a solution to a need or solve a problem. There is no doubt that programmers are the world’s best thinkers, mathematicians and designers, this they became by giving themselves to problem solving. I can confidently say this because learning to program has increased my problem solving skills not only with writing codes to create solutions but in solving problems as an elect/elect engineer and in everything else.

There is no joy more than that found in bringing something that never existed to life or in solving a problem and seeing that your solution was effective; this is what programmers enjoy time and again.

And if you finally decide to be a programmer by profession, the money is waiting for you. The world’s yearly demand for programmers is never satisfied, millions and millions of dollars are lost to non-existing programmers who are being sought for and not found.

All point stated, if you’re already learning a language, I encourage you to go on, if you haven’t, start one today, this article on reddit will help you choose which to start with. Encourage you friends, family members and even your ‘enemies’ (*giggles) to learn to program.

What are your thoughts on the importance of learning to program?

Are you already learning a language?

Do you think everyone should learn to program? Please leave your comments and feedbacks below.

Do you have any questions as to how to go about learning to program? I will be glad to help you out, simply leave your questions in the comment section.

Kindly hit the heart button to like this article and share with your friends.

My next article will be on an app that I came across on a chat group that is designed to help you dive into programming as a beginner, follow this channel to get my upcoming write-ups first hand.|||

The world is moving in the direction of technology and the Internet faster that it has ever done. More businesses are hosting their data on cloud services, moving their day-to-day activities from…