We all know that end users experience the internet primarily with mobile devices. From an app development perspective, we know that successfully responding to the needs of mobile customers depends on rapid DevOps – failing fast, in short, until the right solution evolves in your customers' relationship to your business. Whether you’re decomposing an SOA monolith, or developing a new application c... We all know that end users experience the internet primarily with mobile devices. From an app development perspective, we know that successfully responding to the needs of mobile customers depends on rapid DevOps – failing fast, in short, until the right solution evolves in your customers' relationship to your business. Whether you’re decomposing an SOA monolith, or developing a new application c...

My wife and I have a fun dynamic: she approaches situations with surgical precision, while I tend to be more of an imprecise paintbrush. One day, she chastised me for cutting something with a butter knife and insisted that I should be using a paring knife instead. I argued that it wasn't needed. As you can imagine, I was intentionally vague with the description of the situation above in order to i... My wife and I have a fun dynamic: she approaches situations with surgical precision, while I tend to be more of an imprecise paintbrush. One day, she chastised me for cutting something with a butter knife and insisted that I should be using a paring knife instead. I argued that it wasn't needed. As you can imagine, I was intentionally vague with the description of the situation above in order to i...

Five Things Every CEO Should Know About AI Machine learning, AI, cognitive computing, natural language understanding, image recognition, pattern matching, autonomous devices – these are just a few of 2017’s loosely defined catchall phrases. But in practice, they each refer to a significant field of study that is guaranteed to have an impact on the way people live and how business is done. So here are five things that you, as the leader of ... Machine learning, AI, cognitive computing, natural language understanding, image recognition, pattern matching, autonomous devices – these are just a few of 2017’s loosely defined catchall phrases. But in practice, they each refer to a significant field of study that is guaranteed to have an impact on the way people live and how business is done. So here are five things that you, as the leader of ...

Google's Cloud team this week discussed multicloud integration with their own platform and AWS using Google Cloud Endpoints and AWS' Lambda. The Cloud Endpoints let you develop open APIs, and you can then call those APIs up from Lambda. This may be the way forward for businesses eager to get their multiple public cloud providers integrated. We're interested in the network dependency that's now bee... Google's Cloud team this week discussed multicloud integration with their own platform and AWS using Google Cloud Endpoints and AWS' Lambda. The Cloud Endpoints let you develop open APIs, and you can then call those APIs up from Lambda. This may be the way forward for businesses eager to get their multiple public cloud providers integrated. We're interested in the network dependency that's now bee...

Chatbots are taking over the world. They have their own magazine, their own dot-org website, and their own versions of popular "meet someone" sites. Far too often, when we chat with them we think we're chatting with humans. Do you really think all those helpful "live chat" offerings that are popping up on e-commerce sites have call centers full of actual people behind them 24/7? Maybe they do, and... Chatbots are taking over the world. They have their own magazine, their own dot-org website, and their own versions of popular "meet someone" sites. Far too often, when we chat with them we think we're chatting with humans. Do you really think all those helpful "live chat" offerings that are popping up on e-commerce sites have call centers full of actual people behind them 24/7? Maybe they do, and...

The first step to solving a problem is recognizing that it actually exists. And whether you've realized it or not, cloud services are a problem for your IT department. Even if you feel like you have a solid grasp of cloud technology and the nuances of making a cloud purchase, business leaders don't share the same confidence. Nearly 80% feel that IT lacks the skills necessary to help with cloud pu... The first step to solving a problem is recognizing that it actually exists. And whether you've realized it or not, cloud services are a problem for your IT department. Even if you feel like you have a solid grasp of cloud technology and the nuances of making a cloud purchase, business leaders don't share the same confidence. Nearly 80% feel that IT lacks the skills necessary to help with cloud pu...

According to a recent Gartner study, by 2020, it will be unlikelythat any enterprise will have a “no cloud” policy, and hybrid will be the most common use of the cloud. While the benefits of leveraging public cloud infrastructures are well understood, the desire to keep critical workloads and data on-premise in the private data center still remains. For enterprises, the hybrid cloud provides a bes... According to a recent Gartner study, by 2020, it will be unlikelythat any enterprise will have a “no cloud” policy, and hybrid will be the most common use of the cloud. While the benefits of leveraging public cloud infrastructures are well understood, the desire to keep critical workloads and data on-premise in the private data center still remains. For enterprises, the hybrid cloud provides a bes...

Does your team have a testing strategy? In 2017, I have a hard time imagining that wouldn't at least have some strategy, however rudimentary. Unlike a couple of decades ago, you hear less and less about people just changing code on the production server and hoping for the best. At the very least, you probably have a QA group or at least someone who serves in that role before shipping your softw... Does your team have a testing strategy? In 2017, I have a hard time imagining that wouldn't at least have some strategy, however rudimentary. Unlike a couple of decades ago, you hear less and less about people just changing code on the production server and hoping for the best. At the very least, you probably have a QA group or at least someone who serves in that role before shipping your softw...

A key challenge that retailers face today is the difficulty of accurately judging where they are on the digital maturity curve relative to their competitors. There appears to be little expertise in making this assessment; for example, 79% of digital leaders don’t know they are ranked as leaders, and only 56% of retailers ranked as average in our study believe they are at this level. The other 44% ... A key challenge that retailers face today is the difficulty of accurately judging where they are on the digital maturity curve relative to their competitors. There appears to be little expertise in making this assessment; for example, 79% of digital leaders don’t know they are ranked as leaders, and only 56% of retailers ranked as average in our study believe they are at this level. The other 44% ...

In this modern world of IT, you've probably got some new colleagues in your life-namely, the cloud and SaaS providers who now hold your infrastructure in their hands. These business relationships-yes, they're technology-based, but cloud and SaaS are business models-will become as important to your IT team and your company as the hardware and software you used to install. Once you've adopted Saa... In this modern world of IT, you've probably got some new colleagues in your life-namely, the cloud and SaaS providers who now hold your infrastructure in their hands. These business relationships-yes, they're technology-based, but cloud and SaaS are business models-will become as important to your IT team and your company as the hardware and software you used to install. Once you've adopted Saa...

In the hybrid IT era, complexity is the name of the game. In fact, according to the recent SolarWinds IT Trends Report 2017, IT professionals report the number one challenge of hybrid IT is increased infrastructure complexity. Accelerating complexity is just one challenge in how hybrid IT is affecting IT departments. Internet of things (IoT) implementations are a great example of one more unexpect... In the hybrid IT era, complexity is the name of the game. In fact, according to the recent SolarWinds IT Trends Report 2017, IT professionals report the number one challenge of hybrid IT is increased infrastructure complexity. Accelerating complexity is just one challenge in how hybrid IT is affecting IT departments. Internet of things (IoT) implementations are a great example of one more unexpect...

Imagine that you have hundreds of development, testing, and operations teams spread across the globe that rely on each other to execute software testing. You have 245 test environments and you release to pre-production several times a day and deploy to production once a week. How do you manage all the software tests, test data, and test environments? Traditionally, the answer would be to fill out... Imagine that you have hundreds of development, testing, and operations teams spread across the globe that rely on each other to execute software testing. You have 245 test environments and you release to pre-production several times a day and deploy to production once a week. How do you manage all the software tests, test data, and test environments? Traditionally, the answer would be to fill out...

Improve Your UX and See eCommerce Success Commerce has become both digital and global: Online sales are expected to exceed $1.6 trillion dollars by 2020. As a customer preferred way of doing business, ecommerce offers increased selection, value, and convenience. Online shopping also offers merchants increased access to customer data and opportunities to capitalize on that information. If your business isn’t keeping pace with best practi... Commerce has become both digital and global: Online sales are expected to exceed $1.6 trillion dollars by 2020. As a customer preferred way of doing business, ecommerce offers increased selection, value, and convenience. Online shopping also offers merchants increased access to customer data and opportunities to capitalize on that information. If your business isn’t keeping pace with best practi...

Moore's Law, which states that processing speeds will double every two years as we cram more and more silicon transistors onto chips, has been faltering since the early 2000s when the law started to run up against fundamental limitations presented by the laws of thermodynamics. While the chip industry, with Intel leading the charge, has found ways to sidestep the limitations up until now, many are... Moore's Law, which states that processing speeds will double every two years as we cram more and more silicon transistors onto chips, has been faltering since the early 2000s when the law started to run up against fundamental limitations presented by the laws of thermodynamics. While the chip industry, with Intel leading the charge, has found ways to sidestep the limitations up until now, many are...

Digital technology need not fall exclusively in the category of ‘user-facing.’ In fact, any piece of technology, regardless how old it is or where it falls in the enterprise IT environment, is a ‘digital technology’ if it aligns with the customer-centric goal of digital. From mainframes and middleware to cloud computing and the Internet of Things, all enterprise technology might qualify as digit... Digital technology need not fall exclusively in the category of ‘user-facing.’ In fact, any piece of technology, regardless how old it is or where it falls in the enterprise IT environment, is a ‘digital technology’ if it aligns with the customer-centric goal of digital. From mainframes and middleware to cloud computing and the Internet of Things, all enterprise technology might qualify as digit...|||

