During the summer months, people try various ways to beating the heat – wearing light outfits, drinking a lot of fluids including water and juice, staying indoors during the day, going for a swim, taking a vacation in the hill stations, and eating light.

If adults find it difficult to bear the heat of the summer, what about children, especially toddlers? The best tip for them to beat the heat would be to stay well hydrated. Here are some tasty and healthy drinks that parents can give their children this summer.

1) Lemon water: Which child does not like lemon water - the ultimate summer drink? Nothing tastes more refreshing in summer than a chilled glass of lemon water. The prime ingredient of this drink is the humble lemon, which has been recognised for its endless health benefits.

Rich in vitamin C, vitamin B6, vitamin A, vitamin E, folate, niacin, calcium, iron and protein, lemon water helps your toddler stay cool and refreshed. Lemon water also helps strengthen the immune system, cleanse the stomach and purify the blood.

2) Coconut water: Apart from being a delicious and low-calorie natural beverage, coconut water is packed with antioxidants, amino acids, enzymes, vitamin C and other minerals. The various micronutrients present in coconut water help boost the immune system making this drink an excellent thirst quencher for children.

Coconut water is easy on the stomach for toddlers and is used to soothe tummy troubles like indigestion, acid reflux, and gastroenteritis.

3) Gulkand milkshake: Capable of cooling the body and reducing the risk of heat strokes, gulkand milkshake is a healthy drink to give to toddlers in summer.

A rose petal jam, gulkand can easily be made at home and has numerous benefits such as reducing acidity, improving appetite and purifying the blood.

Also check out our article on fruits that can keep your child hydrated this summer right here.



4) Aam panna: Aam panna is a light green-coloured Indian drink made from raw mangoes, sugar and an assortment of spices. It is a useful remedy that counters the summer heat and prevents heat strokes.

Aam panna is rich in vitamin C, prevents excessive loss of sodium chloride and zinc from the body, and is a healthy summer drink.

5) Salted lassi: Who does not love a tall, chilled glass of lassi? It is not only a great summer drink but one of the best health drinks that children can have to beat the heat.

One of the key ingredients in salted lassi is ginger, which is known to aid digestion and it functions as a general laxative loaded with vitamin B12, calcium, and potassium.

6) Buttermilk: Popularly known in India as chaas, buttermilk is a well-known and inexpensive summer drink. Made from curd and spices such as jeera, curry leaves, ginger and salt, chaas has many benefits for children – helps soothe the stomach, aids digestion, prevents vitamin deficiency and is a great drink to prevent dehydration in toddlers.

During the hot months, it may be tempting to give a chilled bottle of soda to your child but the above mentioned drinks are not only tasty, they will boost your child's health as well.|||

