Are numbers real? We all know the use and applications of numbers, they are all around us. Every theory uses numbers to prove it whether it’s related to physics, chemistry or astrophysics. Every scientist uses numbers to explain or to prove its theory; their theories are massively reliable on numbers. But, what about numbers? Are they real? Do they exist in every fabric of reality or they are abstract objects beyond space-time dimensions or they are an abstract object that doesn’t interact with us like other object for examples like a chair or a table or they are the simple concept used for proving other things as they are easily understood by normal people as the first thing a child learns is counting numbers.

Everybody knows 1+1 = 2 or 5 comes between 4 and 6 but how do we know for sure. Or numbers are just fictional characters to simplify our life. Throughout ages, there are debates about existence of a number from Socrates, Plato to Newton to Einstein. Even today’s mathematicians and philosophers are arguing over it.

According to one theory, Platonism numbers are real objects but abstract means they exist but not in same way like a chair or table. They exist beyond space and time dimensions. Now the question arises if they are not present in the dimension then how mathematicians access them, how do they know 2 multiple by 3 is 6?

Another theory Nominalism suggested is number just describes things that exist. For example, if you have 7 sets of 2 balls than you have total of 14 balls. If we go by this theory we can explain simple number but what about the square root of -1, how can you describe this?

Lastly, the Fictionalism theory says that numbers do not exist, they are only a concept to get things going in this reality or as an atheist will say they are like ‘God’ , a fictional character created just to maintain order in this world.

According to me, numbers do exist somewhere in a different dimension where there is no concept of space and time and where you can see infinity.|||

Are numbers real? We all know the use and applications of numbers, they are all around us. Every theory uses numbers to prove it whether it’s related to physics, chemistry or astrophysics. Every…