Using Schemats, you can generate TypeScript interface definitions from (Postgres, MySQL) SQL database schema automatically.

Automatically have the following TypesScript Interface generated

For an overview on the motivation and rational behind this project, please take a look at Statically typed PostgreSQL queries in Typescript .

The above commands will generate typescript interfaces for database with table . The resulting file is stored as .

To generate all type definitions for all the tables within the schema 'public':

Note: MySQL does not have a default public schema, but should it have a schema named public, this will still work.

If neither the table parameter nor the schema parameter is provided, all tables in schema 'public' will be generated, so the command above is equivalent to:

Schemats supports reading configuration from a json config file (defaults to ). Instead of passing configuration via commandline parameter like done above, it is also possible to supply the configuration through a config file. The config file supports the same parameters as the commandline arguments.

For example, if a exists in the current working directory with the following content:

Running here is equivalent to running .

With generated type definition for our database schema, we can write code with autocompletion and static type checks.

Schemats exposes two high-level functions for generating typescript definition from a database schema. They can be used by a build tool such as grunt and gulp.

Instead of generating schema typescript files with

and import them with

It is now encouraged to generate without namespace

and import them with

As TypeScript's documentation describes, having a top level namespace is needless. This was discussed in #25.

Generating schema typescript files with namespace still works in v1.0, but it is discouraged and subjected to removal in the future.

Version 1.0 supports strict null-checking and reflects the NOT NULL constraint defined in PostgreSQL schema.

First off, thanks for taking the time to contribute!

Our project runs automatically on pull requests via CircleCI.|||

schemats -  Generate typescript interface definitions from SQL database schema