From Facebook to Workday, Airbnb to Dropbox, fairytale stories of billion-dollar startups seem to be everywhere. In each instance, there's a particular fascination on two pieces of information: the company's staggering valuation, and the investment they secured to get there.

In fact, the link between funding and startup success seems so ubiquitous that many startup founders race headlong into the maw of waiting investors without a second's hesitation. But to work out the exact relationship between startup fundraising and the phenomenal growth these companies have achieved, we need to dig deep into the world of startup funding.

To get started, we're answering two crucial questions: why do startups actually raise investment? And is startup funding a prerequisite of success?

A startup is a company designed to grow fast. Being newly founded does not in itself make a company a startup. Nor is it necessary for a startup to work on technology, or take venture funding, or have some sort of "exit." The only essential thing is growth. Everything else we associate with startups follows from growth. To answer these questions, we need to dig into the DNA of a startup. Today, the word startup is used to refer to everything from post-IPO tech giants to self-funded artisanal bakeries. In its original use case, the term startup referred to a company with a single defining attribute: it was designed to grow fast. Many of the characteristics we associate with successful startups (like venture funding, a big exit and the software-as-a-service business model) aren't prerequisites, but are actually side-effects of this overall pursuit of growth. To understand how today's archetypal startup evolved, let's consider some of the problems that could limit a new company's growth: In other words, the defining traits of today's most successful startups (companies like HubSpot, Facebook and Snapchat) evolved as solutions to the singular problem of growth. This is why fundraising is part-and-parcel of the trajectory of most successful startups: it provides the resources needed to achieve rapid growth. Funded or not, there are a handful of significant costs that all startups will have to pay for, even in the early days: From MVP to polished product, ongoing development is likely to be one of the biggest costs facing your startup. Whether you need to recruit a co-founder, first employee or VP Sales, top talent is essential for any successful startup. COGS refers to unavoidable expenses associated with selling and delivering your solution. In SaaS, these are expenses like regulatory and licensing costs, application hosting fees and customer support. There's only so long you can work out of your garage. A self-funded (or bootstrapped) company has little choice but to pay for these costs out of revenue, creating a real-life Catch-22 situation: you need revenue to fund product development, and product development to generate revenue. It's still possible to reach the same heady heights as funded companies (Atlassian and Qualtrics were bootstrapped to IPO/near-IPO status), but it'll be longer before you can make key hires, relocate, or ramp-up your product development, sales and marketing spend. ...it takes much longer, usually, to get to Initial Scale ($10m ARR). Usually 4 years longer when you are bootstrapping. This becomes a real problem when you have rival startups that manage to secure funding. They'll have access to a ton of capital, and won't have to make the same compromises as you: While you're building out a beta waiting list, they'll be pulling in revenue. While you're stuck in a basement in the Middle-of-Nowhere, they'll be networking in the Valley, or the Bay Area. Straight from the get-go, a funded company has a huge advantage over a bootstrapped company. Even if you'd be happy to take your time, and grow from revenue, you might have your choice taken away from you if a rival company opts for funding. In a competitive ecosystem, you can bootstrap your startup to success - but it's likely to be quicker, and safer, to accelerate the process with investment. Bootstrapping in SaaS? It Does Work. But Add 4 Years to the Timeline. - Jason Lemkin

Most founders start out owning their company. But to grow as quickly as possible, you'll need investment, and to secure the capital you'll need, your investors will want to own a part of your company. The faster you grow, the greater your burn rate becomes, and the more capital you'll need. You move from pre-Seed to Seed to Series A, but with every cash injection you're forced to give up another slice of your company. Offer too little, and the investment dries up - offer too much, and you'll soon find yourself without a share in your own company. In my experience, it will generally take three to four rounds of equity capital to finance the business and 20-25% of the company to recruit and retain a management team. That will typically leave the founder/founder team with 10-20% of the business when it's all said and done. Company ownership is determined by shares. In the early days, it's likely you (and your co-founders) will own 100% of your startup's shares: But in order to give equity to investors, your startup needs to issue new shares. If an angel invested an amount equal to 20% of the value of the company, you'd need to issue shares to reflect his ownership stake: in this case, an additional 25 shares. You still own your original 100 shares, but now, the company's ownership looks like this: Jump ahead to the next funding round. This time, a VC invests an amount equal to half the value of the company. Assuming equal dilution (which might not always be the case), you'll need to issue 125 shares to reflect the VC's ownership stake. As a result of just two rounds of investment, you've gone from owning 100% of your company, to 80%, to just 40%. If you aren't careful, subsequent rounds of investment can leave you so diluted that you'll lose control of board seats, and even the company's direction. This apparent horror story leads many founders to take staunch anti-dilution measures. But dilution serves a purpose: to attract skilled people and resources to your startup. Whether it's incentivising a respected VC with a sizeable ownership stake, or luring top talent with an options pool, offering equity is beneficial to your startup, and attempting to hold on to as much equity as possible could limit your growth. Taken to an extreme, anti-dilution practices could leave you as the majority shareholder of a worthless company. A balance needs to be struck, between incentives and control, investment and ownership: but how do we find that balance? Let's assume both you and your investor have valued your early-stage startup at $100,000. Your investor is willing to contribute $25,000 to fund the growth of your company. How much equity should they get? This depends on the nature of that $100,000 valuation. If the angel's $25,000 investment is included in the valuation (known as a post-money valuation), they'll own 25% of the company, reducing your share to 75%: If that $100,000 is a pre-money valuation, the company is valued at $100,000 before the investment. That means that the angel's investment actually serves to increase the value of the company to $125,000, reducing their share to 20% and increasing yours to 80%: In both instances you've gained the capital you need to grow, as well as the expertise of a seasoned angel; the only difference is how their investment has affected your ownership. In the first example you've lost 25% ownership and $25,000 in valuation; in the second example you've lost 20%, and maintained the valuation. Jump ahead to the next investment round. This time, promising growth has your company valued at $1 million. Given your current equity split, the value of your ownership stake looks like this: You're talking to a VC who's looking to invest $500,000, for a post-money valuation of $1.5 million. That gives the VC a one-third share in your company, diluting both your shares and the angel's shares proportionately: But valuations, try to account for future value. If your startup is doing particularly well, you may end-up in a bidding war, so what happens if a VC thinks your company is actually worth $2 million? After all, the only real valuation of a company is whatever someone is willing to pay for it, and a VC will pay huge amounts if they think you'll be worth a whole lot more in the future. Let's work through the same example with a $2 million pre-money valuation. In light of this valuation, the value of your existing shares has doubled: That same $500,000 investment now creates a post-money valuation of $2.5 million, reducing the VC's share from one third of the company to one fifth. In this instance, your equity has been diluted by 16%; but 64% of $2.5 million is larger than 80% of $1 million. Despite the dilution, the value of your share has doubled: Better still, you've gained a VC, and the capital required to grow further. This is the basic premise of investment done right: even though your overall share of the company decreases, the company grows enough from the investment to increase the value of that share. Investment decisions can become incredibly complicated, and in the case of successful startups, minute changes to ownership stakes can equate to millions of dollars. Thankfully, there's a simple rule of thumb we can use to work out whether or not we think an investment opportunity is worthwhile. In the general case, if n is the fraction of the company you're giving up, the deal is a good one if it makes the company worth more than 1/(1 - n).



For example, suppose Y Combinator offers to fund you in return for 6% of your company. In this case, n is .06 and 1/(1 - n) is 1.064. So you should take the deal if you believe we can improve your average outcome by more than 6.4%. If we improve your outcome by 10%, you're net ahead, because the remaining .94 you hold is worth .94 x 1.1 = 1.034. An investment deal is worthwhile if you believe the deal will increase the value of your shares in the long-term by more than it reduced it in the short-term. Put another way: The optimal amount raised is the maximal amount which, in a given period, allows the last dollar raised to be more useful to the company than it is harmful to the entrepreneur. Though there are no hard-and-fast rules for separating out a good deal from a less-than-good deal, these heuristics can be useful for understanding what you stand to gain... and lose. As a final word on startup equity, remember: dilution is normal. By the time they exit, successful founders often own as little as 10% of their company - and owning 10% of a billion-dollar startup is better than 100% of nothing. Understanding How Dilution Affects You at a Startup - Mark Suster How much should you raise? An economics approach - Pierre Entremont

Whether it's the capital on offer, the equity investors demand, or simply their willingness to invest, every aspect of startup funding is tied together by one seemingly inscrutable concept: valuation. The perceived value of your startup is the linchpin of every investment negotiation you'll ever have, and understanding exactly how investors value your startup is the first step in securing great investment terms. With that in mind, we're exploring the most common methods of startup valuation, and looking at how they impact your equity, ownership and investment options. Many of these valuation methods are extremely subjective, and even those that rely on bona fide accounting principles still have a subjective element built-in, for one very simple reason: value is subjective. Even with an inscrutable data-set, a startup's value is determined by the amount somebody is willing to pay for it. It's for that reason that startup valuation methods are often blended together, edited and altered to reach a particular conclusion. This is never more evident than in the case of early-stage startup valuations. Large, established startups have the benefit of tangible revenue, and valuations can be driven by their past performance. But investors often invest before companies make profit, or even generate revenue. In these instances, the startup valuation methods used are incredibly subjective, relying on heuristic stand-ins for revenue. As you're about to see, there's no such thing as a truly objective valuation. So if you find yourself on the wrong end of a low valuation, dust yourself off, work out how the investor reached their conclusion, and try again. The comparable method of startup valuation is probably the simplest: find a comparable company to the one you're trying to value, and use its valuation as a stand-in for the new startup. In the same way that two houses might have their size, layout and outside space compared, two startups might have their MAU, churn rates and MRR growth compared to create a stand-in valuation: "Startup X is worth $4 million, and Startup Y is comparable to Startup X, so the same valuation applies". There are obvious problems with this methodology - few startups are likely to be similar enough to warrant this approach as a sole method of valuation - but for many investors, this offers a starting point for assessing the value of early (pre-revenue) stage startups. Startup accelerators like Y Combinator are incredibly oversubscribed, and that affords them the freedom to set their own valuation methodology: a one-size-fits-all approach that massively simplifies investment. This usually takes the form of a fixed investment in exchange for a fixed equity share. To be accepted into the program, the investor's terms need to be accepted - and if a founder doesn't like the deal they're offered, there are a few hundred other founders queuing behind them to take their place. Y Combinator has done a lot to ensure the fairness of their particular deal, and their approach completely removes the problem of valuing early-stage startups. Each startup is offered the same amount, for the same share, giving all Y Combinator companies a pre-money valuation of just over $1.7 million. We have a standard deal - we'll invest $120k in return for 7% of the company's equity. While we may deviate from this in exceptional cases, it will still be the case for almost all of the companies we fund. The Scorecard method is a variation on the comparison method detailed above. It's commonly used by angel investors to compare a new investment opportunity to an "average" startup in a given region and industry, Let's assume that a typical early-stage B2B SaaS startup, in London, is valued at $1.5 million. An angel would create a list of desirable characteristics, outlining the factors they believes impactstartup success (things like founder experience, sales & marketing expertise and industry competition). These factors are then subjectively weighted according to their perceived impact on success. The investment opportunity is then scored across each of these categories, with its score determined by its superiority or inferiority compared to an "average" startup. If a particular criterion is determined to be average, it scores 100%; better than average and it'll score over 100%; worse than average, less than 100%. These scores are then added together for a final scorecard valuation. Returning to our average valuation of $1.5 million, we can see that this particular investor believes the new startup to be more valuable than the average (by 5%), and worth $1.575 million (1.5 * 1.05) as a result. Whenever investment is offered in exchange for equity, the investor needs an exit to recoup their money (and hopefully profit). Both angels and VCs will have a particular return they need their portfolio companies to generate, and the Venture Capital method allows investors to work backwards from their intended return, and calculate the value and equity requirements of a particular deal. Imagine an investor that's looking to invest in your startup, with the intention of an exit in three years. Three years from now, you're forecasting that your company's post-tax earnings will be $2 million. In order to work out how much your company could feasibly be sold for (its terminal valuation), we need to multiply those post-tax earnings by the company's revenue multiple (we'll explore this later). For this example, we're using a multiple of 15: Most investors have an expected return (their Internal Rate of Return, or IRR) they need their portfolio companies to generate: in this instance, let's assume the startup needs to grow by 30%, year-on-year. Assuming an initial investment of $150,000, the investor needs an exit value (the amount their shares will be worth upon sale) of roughly $330,000: We can then work out the percentage of the company the investor would need to own to generate that return when the company is finally sold (at its terminal value of $30 million): To sell their equity for the required amount, the investor needs to own almost 11% of the company. However, subsequent rounds of investment will serve to dilute their ownership, so to finish on 11%, they'll need their starting share to be higher. With an expected dilution of 25% (a common figure for VC investments), we can work out what their starting equity stake would need to be: in this instance, closer to 15%. Lastly, we can use these figures to work out the company's current valuation. Assuming the investment of $150,000 is worth 14.6% of the company, the startup's post-money valuation is just over a million dollars... ...and its pre-money valuation is about $870,000: The Discounted Cashflow Method values a startup by predicting its future cashflow, and then discounting it to reflect: A. the time value of money (typically the risk-free interest the investment could yield over the same time period) B. the risk of that cashflow failing to materialise. In order to predict future cashflow with any degree of certainty, it's necessary to have a stable history of revenue: something which most startups lack. As a result, this type of valuation (and many of the other late-stage valuation methods that follow) is used in conjunction with other methodologies as a starting point for valuation. ...whilst the methodology might be theoretically more rigorous than the simpler working back from projected exit values using a target multiple return, the input variables are sufficiently uncertain that the extra complexity doesn’t bring you any extra accuracy. Revenue multiples are another form of comparative valuation, using data from public companies to draw comparisons to earlier-stage startups. Investors begin valuation by looking at public companies similar (in terms of industry vertical, revenue growth rate, etc.) to their target startup. As these comparison companies are publicly traded, it's possible to find out two important pieces of information: The company's Enterprise Value,  an approximation of the cost of buying it. It's relatively simple to work out a target startup's earnings, but it's much harder to calculate its potential sales value. Instead, we can look to comparable businesses to find the relationship between their earnings and their valuation, and extrapolate that relationship to our own startup. Their are several ways of doing this, each with their own pros and cons: We'll stick to one of the most common methods: Enterprise Value (EV) to EBITDA. For example, let's assume a public company has an Enterprise Value of $220 million, and an EBITDA of $44 million: Applying the formula, the company has an EV/EBITDA ratio of 5: In simple terms, this means the company is valued at 5x its earnings. By calculating this ratio across a broad range of similar companies, we can calculate the median revenue multiple for businesses of this type, and use that to value our own startup: Changes to the median revenue multiple for startup companies reflect changing market trends and levels of investor confidence. From a relatively stable market of 5x revenue between 2004 and 2011, the valuation of SaaS startups exploded to an all-time high of between 12x and 20x revenue in 2013. Since then, multiples have settled back down, but despite talk of a "bubble", SaaS startups are still worth significantly more than they were a decade ago. In 2011, only a few companies traded at greater than 10x, even though one business was growing at more than 150% annually. 2012 was more of the same. 2013 on the other hand saw some astronomical multiples. 35x, 28x, 19x, 18x. 2014 recorded a 45x multiple. And since then, valuations have contracted with every single public business trading under 10x. How Much Is Your SaaS Startup Worth? - Tomasz Tunguz

Starting a business is inherently risky, and, there are serious risks associated with raising investment. However, you're an entrepreneur - the type of person that starts a business when 90% are destined to fail. Armed with a suitable warning, you'll be able to side-step the risks we've covered, and make funding work for you. But risks aside, there are good ways to raise funding, and there are great ways. To get the most out of every funding round, it's important to approach your investors with a game plan, to pre-empt their expectations and raise investment in the best way possible. I would advise entrepreneurs to reverse engineer the end state. As a rough rule of thumb, each funding milestone should last two years. One full year to put heads down on building the business and then pick up your heads to fundraise with the intent of closing six months after. That way, you’re never within six months of being out of cash. 1) Raise Before You Need It It's easy to get capital when you don't need it; when growth is ramping up and revenue is turning from a trickle into a torrent. But leave it too late, and try to raise capital when you're relying on it for continued growth, and you'll have a much harder time convincing investors. Securing investment is usually a long, slow process. A study by DocSend and Harvard Business School found that startups need an average of 40 investor meetings to close a funding round. Seed rounds take an average of nearly 13 weeks to complete, and given the increasing levels of scrutiny and due diligence expected as you raise further funding, expect those timescales to increase through Series A and beyond. Investment should never be a goal in its own right. If that sounds trite, it shouldn't: early company valuations are largely driven by the amount you raise, so the more money you secure, the more valuable your company appears. But investment is designed to be spent. No matter how much money you raise, you'll likely spend it at the same rate - and not always in the smartest way. As Mark Suster argues, over-funding can even stifle creativity, allowing founders to spend their way out of a problem instead of thinking their way clear. Over-raising also makes it harder to raise subsequent rounds. Any investor wants to see the value of your company increase between rounds, but if you've inflated your valuation from the get-go, you've made it much harder to justify your next stratospheric valuation, and the next. ...having limited resources forces you to make hard choices about what you’re build and what you won’t. It forces harder decisions about whom you’ll hire and whom you’ll delay. It forces you to negotiate harder on your office lease and take more frugal space. It forces you to keep salaries reasonable in a market where wage inflation has been the norm for years. Due diligence is a necessary evil of the startup funding process, but that doesn't mean you should bury your head and passively endure it. Most investors will seek out similar types of information, so you can ease the process by preparing data in several core fields: It's hard to find great investors: in DocSend's study, their participants reached out to an average of 20-30 good-fit investors before closing their round. But the laborious process of finding investors doesn't mean you should settle for just anyone. Your investors will be involved in your business for the long-haul. Their ideas and willingness to contribute will shape the direction of your startup in ways you can't even imagine - and as your company grows, their support grows more and more important. With each additional round, you increase the number of people vying for control, so the more investors you have aligned with your vision, the better. Unless you’re one of a very small handful of companies, the heady days of meeting with four firms and then closing a deal are long gone. You need to start broad, make a long list and take a lot of meetings to find the right partner. I use that term precisely - you should pick the partner, not the firm. You’re getting into a 7–10 year relationship with that partner, so you better feel really good about him/her and be very clear on how they will add value. Ethos and attitude aside, it's also essential to dig into the mechanics of any investor's fund. Different types of fund require different sizes of exit to generate a suitable return, and their needs will have a direct impact on the direction they encourage your business to go. If you work with a smaller fund, a more "modest" exit will be acceptable, but partnering with the biggest funds can seriously up the pressure to hit vaunted unicorn status. Let’s take a look at the economics of two hypothetical funds, a $50M and a $500M fund. Assuming each fund seeks to return three times the capital invested in 10 years to provide a good return for investors, the total value of the portfolios must be $150M and $1,500M respectively. The funds have different target ownerships and therefore different average investment sizes. All this boils down to a target value of a company at exit. The larger the fund, the larger the exits must be for the venture investors to be successful. Finally, even if you survive the meetings, pitches, scepticism, scrutiny and final due diligence, don't assume that the deal is done. When Christoph Janz surveyed 110 founders, a significant percentage had experienced VCs backing-out at the final stages of the fundraising process. By the time you sign a term sheet, you should have made up your mind and should be done with your “commercial due diligence”.



Apparently that’s not the case. 14 people, a shocking 14% of the respondents, said they’ve already experienced an investor backing out after a term sheet has been signed. Unless these 14 founders had skeletons in their closets, that’s 14 too many. As one founder said in the comments, if this happens it can kill a company. A closer look at the 6 things to pre-empt 90% of Due Diligence - Christoph Janz Why Raising Too Much Money Can Harm Your Startup - Mark Suster The New Rules of Startup Fundraising - Mehul Patel

VC funds in Europe and in the United States are two very different things. There are probably dozens of perfectly valid reasons as to why. Nevertheless, as the founder of a startup in the email space, the US market was overwhelmingly more favourable to me... We work with startup founders from around the world, including countries like India, Belgium, and our native UK. Some of these founders have successfully raised funding in their home nation, but others have already set their sights on countries like the US and Canada - places they perceive as being far friendlier to the startup cause. In this guide, I've focused on the US funding market for one very simple reason: it's the biggest and most established, and lessons learned from the US are applicable across the world. But what about startups from outside the US? Even within the US, cities like Boston and Chicago are learning lessons from San Francisco and the Silicon Valley. Globally, they're joined by the likes of Berlin, Paris and Bangalore, cities full of fresh-faced startup founders keen to emulate the success of their US counterparts. Each of these cities is a hotbed of startup activity, but crucially, they differ from the Valley in several key ways. So how is startup funding different outside of the US? 1) There's Less Investment to Go Around The US has large and established networks of investors, with thousand of people and institutions willing to invest anywhere from a few thousand dollars to a few billion. Outside of the US, these networks simply don't exist in the same way - and that has a stark impact on investment. Data from CB Insights shows that for every dollar available to a European startup, there are six dollars available to their US competitors. Worse still, there are simply fewer deals being done: in the last quarter of 2016, Europe and Asia saw 468 and 323 deals respectively; small fry compared to the 1,127 deals that completed in the US over the same period. Of the investment opportunities available to non-American startups, the vast majority fall into the category of Seed and Series A investment. The institutional investors that fuel the rampant US economy through Series B and above are fewer and farther between in Europe and Asia, and those that do exist seem to be more risk averse. Though we've seen a big increase in angels, startup accelerators and incubators (particular in Western Europe and India), these changes are yet to filter through to the big-money investors. Overall, this means that there are fewer success stories coming out of non-American countries. Of the latest batch of 182 unicorns, a full 102 are US born-and-bred (with China accounting for the second most, at 37). In 2014, just 0.15% of funded startups became unicorns, and it's safe to say that those odds are even lower outside of the US. This is leading many international startup companies to follow a similar pattern: raising a Seed or Series A round in their home country, before using the investment to establish themselves in the fertile soils of the US startup economy. But it's not all doom and gloom. Though US investment growth significantly outstrips its international counterparts, there are still hugely promising signs of growth in the global startup economy. Established economies like Germany, France and the UK have seen steady growth in startups and investment deals (especially in software-as-a-service), and relative latecomers like China and India have seen their own huge surges. This translates into a steady and significant positive growth trend for the startup economy as a whole. So why the big difference? Silicon Valley has had a head-start over other burgeoning startup hubs, with the current gold-rush of innovation and talent tracing its route back to innovators of their time, Hewlett Packard, setting-up shop in the valley in the 1930s. It's had decades to build up its current concentration of experts and specialists, from developers to investors to lawyers - but there's no reason that phenomenon should be exclusive to the valley. So there is a kind of increasing-returns phenomenon here that people just keep wanting to be here and it keeps drawing great people. The professional service providers are so specialized: the lawyers, the realtors, they’re willing to take equity as payment, they’ve seen everything. So you’ve just got a tremendous depth of talent here that would take a long time accumulate elsewhere. Other cities are hot on the heels of the Valley, building up their own startup communities to provide capital and expertise to those who need it. Though smaller in absolute terms, these startup economies are growing, and growing quickly. Though the valley rules for now, it won't always be so clear-cut. The difference between raising early-stage capital in the US vs. Europe: A founder's perspective - Mathilde Collin Just How Global Is The SaaS Startup Phenomenon? - Tomasz Tunguz What Still Makes Silicon Valley So Special - Harvard Business Review|||

From Pre-Seed to IPO, discover the smartest, fastest ways to raise capital, with advice and explanations from successful founders and professional investors.