3D Blu-ray is actually the best way to enjoy the 3D viewing experience at 3D home theater. Insert the 3D Blu-ray to 3D Blu-ray Player, wear the passive 3D glasses, then you can experience vivid virtual reality world on your 3D-enabled TV. Unfortunately, as of 2017, TV makers are no longer making 3D TVs targeted for the U.S. market, with LG and Samsung the last to pull out. In addition, more and more people tend to watch 3D videos with VR Headsets. Therefore, 3D digital source is getting more popular than 3D Blu-ray disc. To play 3D Blu-ray on VR Headsets, you need to copy 3D Blu-ray to VR Headsets compatible 3D content with 3D Blu-ray copy tool.

What's more, DVD is getting more and more obsolete like VCD. Blu-ray including 3D Blu-ray discs will also have this kind of destiny. Copying 3D Blu-ray can make you store the 3D Blu-ray films on hard drive to keep the movie forever. When we talking about backing up 3D Blu-ray disc, we won't want to lose the 3D effect. So a normal Blu-ray Ripper software perhaps can't fulfill your need. You need a 3D Blu-ray Copy tool. A web search for "3D Blu-ray Copy", you are shown many programs. Here, let's tell you how to choose the best 3D Blu-ray Copy tool for Mac to enable you to copy 3D Blu-ray disc on Mac including macOS Sierra.

Well, a Blu-ray Ripper for Mac that can backup 3D Blu-ray disc with 3D effect retained on Mac is called 3D Blu-ray Copy tool for Mac. So the most important feature of a 3D Blu-ray Copy software is the 3D effect preserving. But apart from the 3D requiement, there should be other criteria to follow when choosing a 3D Blu-ray Copy software for Mac.

3D Effect Retained: As a 3D Blu-ray Copy tool, it should can backup Blu-ray keeping 3D effect. This is the essential requirement. Many 3D Blu-ray Ripper can copy 3D Blu-ray discs but lose the true 3D.

3D Format: A decent 3D Blu-ray backup program is not only able to copy 3D Blu-ray main title but also can convert 3D Blu-ray to 3D SBS video cause that 3D Blu-ray is encoded with MVC codec, which is not supported by VR Headsets. If you want to play 3D Blu-ray with Gear VR, HTC Vive, PS VR, Daydream View, etc, the best way is to convert 3D Blu-rayt o 3D MP4 for these VR devces. Read: Rip 3D Blu-ray to 3D MVC MKV with MakeMKV.

Quick Speed: Nobody will want to cost too much time on a 3D Blu-ray ripping task. When you choose a 3D Blu-ray copier, the ripping speed should be considered.

Mac Compatibility: The update of El Capitan made Handbrake out of work on Mac. And the macOS Sierra enabled many Blu-ray Rippers crashed, as well. The 3D Blu-ray Blu-ray Copier should be fully compatible all OS system including the latest macOS Sierra.

You maybe get too many names and don't know which one to choose even though you know how to pick out a 3D Blu-ray Riper. If you don't have the destination, just give Pavtube ByteCopy for Mac a try. This well-known Blu-ray Ripper won't let you down ever. It is a comprehensive Blu-ray and DVD ripping application to rip Blu-ray disc, BDMV folder, Blu-ray ISO files, DVD disc, Video_TS folder, DVD IFO and ISO files. It can remove Blu-ray and DVD copy protection then extract the main title from Blu-ray and DVD to keep the original video like the 3D films. It can directly copy 3D Blu-ray to 3D M2TS for give you the 1:1 image and sound quality and it also can convert 3D Blu-ray to normal 3D SBS MP4, 3D MKV, 3D MOV, 3D WMV, 3D AVI for various 3D Glasses.

With it, you can copy your 3D Blu-ray to hard drive retained 3D effect and also convert your The Martian, Avatar 3D Blu-ray to Samsung Gear VR, Homido VR, Daydream View, LG 360 VR, etc. Besides 3D Blu-ray, it also can convert 2D Blu-ray and DVD to 3D SBS video. You can adjust 3D depth and choose 3D mode such as Side by Side, Top and Bottom and Anaglyph. You also can configure video resolution, frame rate, bitrate, codec and audio codec, channel, bitrate to make the output video has more vivid immersive effect. It supports macOS Sierra, Mac OS X 10.11 El Capitan, Mac OS X 10.10 Yosemite, 10.9 Mavericks, etc well.

Click “Load from Disc” button to import the inserted 3D Blu-ray disc from Blu-ray drive. After few second, it will be imported successfully and you can preview the whole movie in the preview window.

Now go to “Format” menu to select “Copy” > “Directly Copy For 3D Bluray” from the “Format” menu to copy the . m2ts files only which contains the main movie on your 3D Blu-ray disc.

Launch the program on your computer, insert your 3D Blu-ray disc into an external Blu-ray drive that has been plugged into the computer, click "File" > "Load from disc" to add Blu-ray disc to the program. The main title of 3D Blu-ray video is automatically checked and you can preview it on the window in the right.

For wide streaming choices, you can choose to rip 3D Blu-ray to 3D MP4, 3D MKV, etc. Click Format and select “MP4 Side-by-Side 3D Video(*.mp4)” under 3D Video. In general, mkv is a well-accepted file format for tv, media players or plex and keep up the video quality. Of course, 3D video in .mkv, 3D video in .avi are supported as well.  You can configure video and audio encoder to compatible with your 3D devices. You also can choose Full SBS or Half SBS in "Settings".

Hit the "Convert" button under "Preview" window to carry out the 3D Blu-ray to 3D SBS MP4 conversion process.

Now, you have various chance to view your 3D Blu-ray rips. For example, you can play 3D Blu-ray movies on PS VR, HTC Vive, Samsung Gear VR, etc. You also can transfer your 3D Blu-ray rips to NAS, Plex, iTunes to stream to 3D TV, Apple TV, etc.|||

Let's tell you how to choose the best 3D Blu-ray Copy tool for Mac to enable you to copy 3D Blu-ray disc on Mac including macOS Sierra.