We strongly recommend using the React versions of our components. It is the version that we will be using internally, allows for rich, complex components like Tabs and Popovers, and will not have as many breaking changes as the CSS-only version.

Run the following command using npm:

If you prefer Yarn, use the following command instead:

If React doesn’t make sense for your application, you can use a CSS-only version of our components. This includes all the styles you need for every component in the library, but you will be responsible for writing the correct markup and updating classes and DOM attributes in response to user events.

We have created example applications to document some of the ways you could include Polaris in one of your own applications. Each of these examples includes further documentation on how to install dependencies and run the app:

We’ve also created a simple, hot-reloading playground for these components. You can edit the file to import the components you want to play with, and run in order to start the development server.

If you are new to React, we recommend you start with the official React Getting Started documentation. As you read through the topics we suggest you follow along using their React Hello World CodePen example.

We set out to make our components easy to use. Each of our components has a well-documented (and fully typed) public interface with strong, consistently-applied conventions. This way, developers don’t need to worry about the underlying implementation. Instead, they can focus on creating amazing merchant experiences.

We ensure that our components are made for everyone. They meet accessibility standards and are responsive to any screen or device. We also put a lot of effort into optimizing the performance of the components, so everyone can build inclusive experiences that work.

We make our components flexible enough to meet diverse needs. They present the information you pass in and give you smart callbacks when something has changed, but they do not enforce any structure beyond that. No matter what type of experience you're creating, you can use components as the building blocks of your product or feature.

At this point in time we’re not accepting pull requests. This is something we’ll support in the future. Stay tuned.|||

polaris - Shopify’s product component library