TLDR; Subfolders are the better choice. They can be a challenge to setup, though. Using Fly makes subfolders much easier for you.

,  ,  ,  and  are known as Top Level Domains, or TLDs. These are the domains near the top of the hierarchal decentralized naming system known as the Domain Naming System (DNS). Without the readable clarity of the DNS, we would need to memorize IP addresses to reach our favourite websites —  is much more memorable than !

Following the TLD, we have the Second Level Domain (SLD). The SLD is your brand. It is the , the , or the under the TLD that allows you to have a unique and accessible expression within the DNS. An SLD of and a TLD of  makes you .

Below the SLD is the subdomain. A subdomain is used to compartmentalize the SLD that it is underneath. A common case you may see is when different regions are given a subdomain for their local language. For example, would be a German localized version of .

Before going further, we know that a TLD is near the top; we have our Top Level, our Second Level, and our subdomain. At the very top is the ; the is the at the end of the domain where your application code begins.

We looked at one circumstance where you would apply a subdomain: regional localization. There are other circumstances where you may want to consider a subdomain:

The danger of using a subdomain is teased within its benefits: a subdomain counts as a separate website from the domain! If you are trying to establish a helpful blog to educate potential users, you may consider creating your blog on a subdomain, like . If you take this route, your blog is now a separate entity in the eyes of the search engine.

A subdomain, as a separate site, does not benefit the authority of your primary domain…

In a nutshell, having two separate sites does not harmonize as well as it could. If you are working hard to create useful content or capitalize on fruitful niches, then that work should benefit your primary domain.

The better alternative to using a subdomain is to use a subfolder on the root domain, such as . Your blog content will further endorse the quality of — and be counted among — your primary domain’s pages. Search engines will crawl your new blog content daily, impacting the ranking of the primary domain. Any shares and linking of your blog content will further inflate your rankings.

There has been debate over whether a subfolder is the better option. Most of the resistance towards using a subfolder comes from the relative difficulty in setting one up, compared to the more simple subdomain.

To take a look at set-up difficulty, we will consider hosting an example company blog. We want to use Ghost. Once we have Ghost hosted, we will have an IP address where the blog can be reached.

To create a subdomain, you need to access your domain host and create a new DNS record. You would create an A record, name it blog, then associate the record with the blog's IP address or hostname. Your blog is now accessible at . That was easy!

Using a subfolder has, traditionally, been more complicated. If you use Nginx as your web server, you would need to setup rewrites to serve your second application over the correct URL pattern. The complexity rises depending on what you are using to host your blog or second application and how you plan on scaling your infrastructure.

For example, if you were to put HAProxy in-front of Nginx, you could configure an Access Control List (ACL) entry to route traffic directed at to your blog backend.

If you had Ghost Blog running on its own server, you would then associate its private IP address with the :

Now you have HAProxy to maintain and a variety of self-hosted instances to tend to and manage. Compared to the DNS-editing simplicity of a subdomain record, it's a steep incline. Using Fly, we make applying subfolders just as easy.

Using Fly, you can easily mount any backend as a subfolder on your domain’s root. First, you add and verify your hostname. After that, you attach the Fly agent to your backend — Ghost, in our example. Within Fly, you can then specify whatever path you want that backend to be served from.

For instance, once you have added the Ghost blog as a backend, you can mount it to , , — whatever you like! Adding your hostname to Fly will have automatically generated an SSL certificate for you from Let’s Encrypt; you will have a secure blog accessible at .

With Fly, adding a subfolder is no more difficult than adding a subdomain. You can mitigate the potential risks of using a subdomain, enjoy end-to-end encryption, and reap the SEO benefits of having your blog or other applications ride alongside your primary domain -- indeed!

Search engines consider subdomains to be separate web properties. While this may be useful in some edge cases or for internal usage, for the sake of optimized SEO you may be better off using subfolders. Using Fly, adding a subfolder is no longer a challenge of server-configuration wrangling and scaling logistics.

Given the new ease of using a subfolder to your domain via Fly, it should be your first choice for simplicity, SEO and — as a happy bonus — the best choice to secure your application with topographically load balanced end-to-end encryption.|||

Subfolders are the better choice. They can be a challenge to setup, though. Fly makes...