Months before Donald Trump blew up American politics with his surprise win in November, he did the same thing to the conservative media. Through much of the campaign, two very different media moguls with colliding visions for the Republican Party vied for Trump’s soul: Roger Ailes, the longtime president and CEO of Fox News, and Steve Bannon, the executive chairman of the populist online tabloid Breitbart. Both were angling to be the media Svengali whispering in Trump’s ear.

At one point, it seemed they might have been allies: Bannon worked to insinuate himself at Fox, and Ailes’ network aired some of his populist documentaries. Then came the first Republican primary debate in August 2015, when Megyn Kelly, Fox’s feisty prime-time anchor, hammered the candidate from all sides. It was at that moment that Bannon says his relationship with Ailes began to sour. “The big rift between Breitbart and Fox was all over Megyn Kelly. She was all over Trump nonstop,” Bannon said in an interview. He says he warned Ailes that Kelly would betray him. “I told him then, I said, ‘She’s the devil, and she will turn on you.’”

By the summer of 2016, Ailes’ life lay in ruins: A blockbuster sexual-harassment lawsuit from former Fox host Gretchen Carlson forced his resignation from the network he had founded 20 years earlier. Since then, his legacy has been systematically dismantled, as several of the stars Ailes brought to the network have departed or been shown the door: Greta Van Susteren, then Kelly and, on Wednesday evening, Bill O’Reilly, whose dismissal under a cloud of sexual harassment allegations, some dating back decades, mirrored that of Ailes months earlier.

Trump, who once seemed to augur a renaissance for conservative media, has instead triggered a civil war in its top ranks. Ailes stepped down July 21. That night, Trump officially accepted the Republican presidential nomination in Cleveland. Three weeks later, he tapped Bannon to be the CEO of his campaign. That short period did more to alter the trajectory of the Republican Party than any event since the nomination of Barry Goldwater in 1964, handing the GOP to a populist television star whose style was a rebuke to the intellectual roots of the American conservative movement. The shock played out most immediately in right-wing media, where Trump’s ascension marginalized the elite intellectual outlets that did so much to shape the modern Republican Party. It also settled the tug of war between Ailes and Bannon over who would hold the most sway over the least ideological president in history: Ultimately, Trump rejected the corporatist conservatism that had come to define Fox, draping himself instead in Breitbart’s nationalist populism throughout the campaign.

This account, the result of conversations with nearly two dozen sources inside various news organizations, reveals how Trump’s nomination and subsequent election scrambled the pecking order across the conservative media landscape in ways its leaders are still grappling with. His rise has fractured the once-powerful editorial page of the Wall Street Journal and elevated Breitbart—which enjoys a direct line to the White House, with Bannon perched in the West Wing, and is now struggling with how to wield its newfound power. Meanwhile, Fox News, the network with which Trump feuded bitterly during the campaign, has developed the closest relationship with the new administration of any television network. The result of this overall shift is, in essence, a new branch of the Fourth Estate in which the elites have lost their power, and some of the most central outlets are more closely intertwined with the executive branch than ever before.

For the 89 percent of Republican voters who cast ballots for Trump, their backing represented a departure from many of the principles that have animated the American conservative movement for six decades. Today, those voters remain broadly supportive of the president personally, and as a result, insiders say, the conservative media have been increasingly pulled by a tractor beam that demands positive coverage of the president regardless of how far he wanders from the ideas they once enforced. Producers and editors have been faced with a choice: Provide that coverage or lose your audience.

“I don’t think there are a lot of people who are doing really well on the back of opposing Trump,” says Ben Shapiro, the former Breitbart editor who resigned over disagreements about the editorial direction of the site. The editor of another prominent conservative website told me: “It’s about audience, not about owners.” Several other right-wing journalists echoed those remarks, saying that for the first time ever, traditionally conservative journalists find themselves out of sync with their audience. They’ve found that standing athwart the Trump presidency, yelling stop, to paraphrase William F. Buckley Jr., is a lonely place to be.

Although many expected Breitbart to remain as fervently supportive of the president as it had been of his candidacy, the site—which has at times pounded the president from the right, and at others singled out West Wing aides for criticism or praise—is being tested by its newfound proximity to power and its transformation from a political attack machine into a vehicle for a governing ideology. In many ways, its coverage has come to mirror Bannon’s own personal and ideological feuds inside the White House, as he has struggled to keep the president in line with the nationalist-populist vision he articulated on the campaign trail.





At Fox, Ailes initially tried to act as a check on the impulsive GOP candidate: During the Republican primary, he worked unsuccessfully to rein in Trump as he butted heads with Kelly and unilaterally withdrew from the network’s debate on the eve of the Iowa caucuses. But those sorts of clashes largely subsided once Trump won the nomination. Under Rupert Murdoch, the executive chairman of Fox’s parent company who took over after Ailes’ departure, the network has continued along the pro-Trump trajectory on which Ailes eventually launched it—and Murdoch, too, has developed a close relationship with the president. (Disclosure: This reporter worked as a writer and producer at Fox from 2008 to 2011.)

While both Fox and Breitbart have undergone modest adjustments since Trump took office, his victory has thrown old-line conservative media into a state of genuine crisis. The conservative elite represented by the Wall Street Journal editorial page—whose hawkish, free-market views enjoyed outsize influence in previous Republican administrations—is now struggling to figure out what, exactly, its role is in the Trump era. After helping lay the groundwork for many of the policies of the Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush administrations, the elite conservative media have no place in the Trump White House. “They’re like the Catholic Church during the Great Schism, plagued by deep internal feuding, dancing on the head of a pin because they’re not important anymore,” says one executive of Dow Jones, the paper’s parent company, which is also run by Murdoch.

The roots of the modern conservative movement can be traced to the founding of National Review in 1955, and since then, its most important ideas have sprung from the journals and editorial pages of the right. Trump’s victory shook that landscape, reshaping the existing order and igniting bitter ideological feuds that are still playing out. The way they resolve themselves matters not just for an ideologically flexible president who has a closer relationship with the titans of right-wing media than any of his predecessors, but also for the future of the party he leads.



Bannon’s ascent from Breitbart to the Trump campaign to the West Wing might have made him the most highly placed media figure in the country, and perhaps in the history of the U.S. government. But for most of the campaign, the right-wing media figure who mattered most was Ailes.

Ailes and Trump spoke on the phone frequently during the campaign, sometimes several times a week. The connection between the two men ran deeper than merely an alliance of convenience. Both were children of television who came of age in the post-World War II era, just as TVs were becoming standard in American households. While they were both fixtures of the New York media scene in the 1980s, they developed a closer friendship in the years after Ailes launched Fox News, in 1996. Trump was a repeat guest on Fox, and it was there that, in 2011, he used the network to raise questions about the origins of President Barack Obama’s birth.

Although it’s now remembered mostly in tweets, the birther controversy played out largely on Fox’s air, with Trump gleefully stoking it at every turn. It was in many ways a preview of the campaign to come. His successful presidential run can be viewed as the apotheosis of Ailes’ 1988 communications-advice book, You Are the Message: Getting What You Want By Being Who You Are, which emphasized the importance of establishing an emotional, rather than an intellectual, connection with an audience. Trump embodied Ailes’ ideas about reading a crowd and using humor, body language, facial expression and energy to connect.

On his campaign and in the White House, Trump’s decisions have been informed by a sense of aesthetics he shared with Ailes, one that a Fox News host described to me as more middle American than highbrow. Trump has often sounded more like he was producing a show for a mass audience than filling an administration, telling associates, for example, that then-Indiana Governor Mike Pence was a vice president out of “central casting”; he later used the same phrase to describe former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney when considering him to be secretary of state.

One of Trump’s most curious media habits also has the former Fox executive’s fingerprints on it. NBC News’ Chuck Todd has told Politico how, after Trump sat down for interviews during the campaign, he would request to see them played back with the sound off. “He wants to see what it all looked like. He will watch the whole thing on mute,” Todd said. Ailes was famous among Fox News producers for sequestering himself in his expansive office and watching several television screens simultaneously—all on silent. He followed his eyes, and wherever they wandered—whichever screen compelled him to stand up and turn on the sound—was producing the best television.

Despite their friendship, Ailes found himself unable to control Trump during the campaign, according to one Fox News host. As the candidate would, say, berate prime-time host Kelly as a “bimbo,” Ailes would “tell him, ‘Hey, Donald, settle the fuck down,’” the host told me. Ailes was known as a control freak who kept the lid on problems at Fox by instilling fear in his subordinates, but Trump wasn’t a subordinate and couldn’t be kept in line. Ailes vented privately to at least one associate, telling him that Trump was crazy. (Susan Estrich, Ailes’ attorney, denied this.) But Ailes also worried—from a business perspective—that tilting the network against Trump was just as crazy. And he “became legitimately afraid Trump would start his own network” if he lost the race, says another on-air personality.

By the time Ailes stepped down from Fox in July, it had been clear for months that Trump would be the nominee. And although the network has always maintained a Chinese wall separating news anchors like Shepard Smith, Bret Baier and Chris Wallace from its prime-time lineup of partisan opinion and commentary, much of its coverage had already taken a friendlier turn toward Trump.

Over the course of the campaign and into the beginning of his presidency, anti-Trump voices slowly receded from Fox’s air, while those favorable to him began to appear more often. This has been most evident in the transformation of the panel segment on Baier’s 6 p.m. newscast, “Special Report,” once the premier venue for conservative thought on television. As the political reality on the right shifted, Baier made an effort to include more pro-Trump voices on the panel. Trump critic Jonah Goldberg of National Review and Weekly Standard editor Stephen Hayes, once fixtures on the panel, began to appear less frequently; the network also declined to renew the contract of George Will, another panelist and a reliable Trump critic. Trump-friendly pundits like Washington Times columnist Charles Hurt, American Conservative Union chairman Matt Schlapp and his wife, Mercedes, and Republican strategist Lisa Boothe now appear in their stead. In late March, Fox announced it had signed the Federalist’s Mollie Hemingway, a reliably pro-Trump commentator, as a contributor. Through a spokeswoman, Baier said he works to represent a mix of views on the panel: “Throughout the election cycle and transition period, we have tried to represent all perspectives so viewers can make their own decisions. Balance is always the goal on ‘Special Report.’”

Uniquely among the television producers and newspaper editors who report to Murdoch, Ailes had enjoyed total editorial control of Fox News, and when Murdoch stepped in for Ailes after his departure, he allowed the network to continue on its pro-Trump glide path. Despite initial public disagreements with candidate Trump over immigration, Murdoch had become a Trump supporter when his victory in the GOP primary began to seem inevitable. In March 2016, Murdoch tweeted that the GOP “would be mad not to unify” behind the candidate. Murdoch tapped Tucker Carlson—the buoyant, Trump-friendly host—to replace Greta Van Susteren, the anchor of the 7 p.m. hour who had announced her departure from Fox in September. Network executives moved Carlson into the 9 p.m. slot held by Megyn Kelly until she departed for NBC in January, and then to the 8 p.m. slot held by O’Reilly for two decades. In the 9 p.m. hour, Carlson’s ratings have surpassed Kelly’s, nearly doubling year-over-year in the coveted 25-54 age demographic, with which Fox News has traditionally struggled.

If the network, broadly speaking, had ever been a serious venue for interrogating conservative ideas, that mission fell by the wayside as it became clear that Trump-friendly programming meant more viewers. “Nobody needs to put out an edict to producers to try to win their hours,” says the on-air personality. “They don’t need to be told to do anything but win, and the Trump shit rates through the roof.”|||

The right-wing media won the presidency—but lost control of their audience. Inside the new power dynamics roiling Fox, Breitbart and the Wall Street Journal.