Even if you’ve been a marketer for years and years, you know there’s always something new to learn. This is especially true to those who work in content and influencer marketing. One way to get ahead of the curve is to listen to marketing podcasts during your commute. For those interested in expert interviews, actionable insights, and fresh takes on recent research, we compiled a list for your listening pleasure. Here are our picks of some of the best marketing podcasts out there.

Sometimes, the best way to learn is to look at how other people achieved success. Every week, the Growth Show podcast from HubSpot provides an in-depth look at how a business or individual achieved noteworthy growth — or at least tried to. The podcast is available on a range of platforms, including Stitcher, iTunes, and RadioPublic.

Fans of the podcast have praised it for its storytelling and ability to draw a listener in. If you’re new to marketing or are a brand that’s looking to grow, the podcast is a helpful tool and can allow you to learn from the successes (or failures) of others.

While interviews with experts are definitely helpful for marketers and brands, and can be a great way to create engagement, they aren’t the only way to help people learn or to tell a story. Relate by ZenDesk is has shaken up the world of marketing podcasts by focusing on human connections rather than straight-up opinions and advice.

Episodes of the biweekly podcast focus on specific themes. For example, the podcast from March 29, 2017, zeroed in on the theme of conflict. In it, a pair of people who served in the Iraq war shared the story of how they became friends in the midst of war. In the same episode, a referee with the NCAA shared tips for resolving conflict and a former gang member tried to reconcile with his former fellow members.

Duct Tape Marketing is a marketing agency that also happens to offer fantastic advice to small and mid-size brands. One of the ways the company offers advice is through its marketing podcast. The target audience for the podcast is newbie brands and entrepreneurs. But more experienced marketers are also likely to find something worthwhile in each episode.

Recent topics tackled by the program include producing content on a small budget, how to network, how to negotiate better, and “making data sexy.” Usually, each episode features an interview with an expert in a particular field or area.

While marketing isn’t the sole focus of The Fizzle Show podcast, it is a topic that comes often. The Fizzle Show is targeted at entrepreneurs and independent creatives.

Every week, the marketing podcast offers realistic, down-to-earth advice on topics relevant to small business owners and entrepreneurs. Topics include choosing a target audience and finding a niche, whether blogging is dead, and how to be successful. The podcast has become a hit thanks not only to its useful advice, but also because it’s actually funny and entertaining.

If you have half an hour or an hour to spare, load up a podcast on your smartphone or tablet. It’s a great way to pass a dull commute while also gaining lots of useful information.

Our marketing podcast, ShareWorthy, is available on iTunes and Stitcher. Each month we deliver thoughts and commentary on the past, present and future of Content and Influencer Marketing. Still a new kid on the block, ShareWorthy’s premiere episode took in-depth look at the 2017 State of the Creator Economy study. Episode two brought in best-selling author and motivational speaker Erik Qualman who touched on topics ranging from Wikileaks to the Snapchat clone war.

Future episodes promise to feature new research, insider tips for marketing, and exclusive, expert interviews. If you haven’t checked it out yet, now’s the perfect time to do so!|||

Get ahead of the curve by listening to these top marketing podcasts filled with expert interviews, actionable insights, and fresh takes on recent research.