A powerful earthquake of magnitude 7.1 has struck off the west coast of Chile, rocking the capital Santiago and generating at least two significant aftershocks.

No major damage was immediately apparent, according to an assessment by Chile’s emergency services. The Chilean navy and the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center said the quake was not expected to cause a tsunami.

The quake was centered 22 miles (35km) west of the coastal city of Valparaíso at a shallow depth of 6.2 miles (10km) below the seabed, the US Geological Survey said.

Chilean authorities initially ordered a preventive evacuation of the coastal area near Valparaíso, some 60 miles west of Santiago, in case of a tsunami, but canceled it shortly afterward. Local residents reported panic on the streets of Valparaíso.

A magnitude 7.1 quake is considered major and is capable of causing widespread and heavy damage, but the effects of this one would have been tempered because it was offshore.

At least two aftershocks of magnitudes 5.0 and 5.4 were recorded in the same spot and could be felt in Santiago.

Chile, located on the so-called “Pacific Ring of Fire”, has a long history of deadly quakes, including a 8.8 magnitude quake in 2010 off the south-central coast, which also triggered a tsunami that devastated coastal towns.

That was the sixth-largest earthquake ever recorded, according to the USGS. The largest recorded temblor in history was also in Chile, a 9.5-magnitude quake in 1960.

A major 7.6 magnitude earthquake jolted southern Chile on Christmas Day 2016, prompting thousands to evacuate coastal areas, but no fatalities or major damage were reported in the tourism and salmon farming region.

The long, slender country runs along the border of two tectonic plates, with the Nazca plate beneath the South Pacific Ocean pushing into the South America plate, a phenomenon that also formed the Andes mountains. 

|||

Authorities initially ordered a preventative evacuation of the coastal area near Valparaíso before quake of magnitude 7.1 hit 22 miles off of the west coast