In his annual letter to shareholders, Jeff Bezos wrote:

We’re probably not yet in the middle. We’re just getting started in shaping up the next industrial revolution with AI. This post is a deep dive into the why and the how Analytics and Marketing SaaS products will use Artificial Intelligence (AI).

Even if I didn’t plan to correlate the two, this post almost comes as a natural follow-up to what I wrote last week. You can read my last post here: The Modern SaaS stack and the Unexploited Amount of data.

In the mid-2000’s, the digital media ecosystem – born from the traditional publishing industry – began to transform. Back to those days, the world was web-centric. Today’s world not only is not anymore web-centric because people consume more time than ever on their mobile devices, but it’s constantly evolving. The shift we’ve been recently witnessing, from a GUI-driven world towards a CUI world (Conversational User Interface) with new devices like Amazon Echo and Google Home is proof of that.

At this year’s F8 conference, Facebook revealed the intention to double down on his Messanger Platform.

The way users interact with products is much more different than it was a decade ago. This much more complex landscape (both in terms of user interactions and new distribution channels) leads to an unusual SaaS marketing and analytics products proliferation. The result looks like huge disassembled puzzle.

If you want to have a relevant impact, you need an integrated approach to see what is happening at all customer touch-points and understand how effective you are.

Now, how this has an impact on marketers and analysts?

Most of the today’s marketers are soothsayers. Oracles that don’t know what they’re doing and why they’re doing it. But mostly, they don’t have a precise idea of the impact they have. This is why Silicon Valley distrusts marketing, demeans it, and devalues the people who practice it. Yet, today’s marketers are convinced they’re data-driven.

Analysts from the other side of the coin, are good at managing and manipulating data, but lack at finding patterns, coming up with hypotheses, testing them, and taking (or suggesting) actions on the results.

The more SaaS products you use in your stack, the bigger your data volume will be. All your customers’ data are siloed in all the tools you’re using in your stack.

In this post, I’ve thoughtfully explained the 1-year journey that (almost) every startup does, when it comes down to support marketing and product activities with data.

This is what looks like the final stage after an organization adopted dozens of fragmented tools across their sales, marketing, product, customers support departments.

To perform analysis on your data this is the sad and long carousel you have to take. First (1) extract the data sources siloed in each one of the SaaS product in your stack, second (2) merge those data with your OLAP and OLTP data, third (3) merge those data with your clickstream data. Cluster your data and create some charts on a BI tool (4).

Et voilà, you (think) you’re done!

Bad news, you’re only half-way. Yes, you’ve checked the Data-Informed point, but it takes another 50% for you to have a sense of what the word data-driven really means.

There is still a long way to go. This is

How can modern organizations bridge that gap?

With millions of data points (e.g. when someone presses play, when someone presses pause, what parts they skip, what parts they watch again), they understood how big the interest is going to be for a given show, with a given cast of actors, at any given time.

Massive data volume generated from a side. The inability to decipher that data chaos and pull out actionable insights from the other side. This is where Artificial Intelligence comes in as a connecting link.

One of the techniques widely used to reach Artificial Intelligence is Machine Learning.

Machine learning relies on two key elements: algorithms and data sets to train those algorithms.

When products with access to proprietary datasets meet advanced algorithms, the magic happens.

What we’re going through right now, is a discovery moment where startups want to use AI to better serve their customers. Soon we’ll reach out the moment where startups will need AI either to meet customer needs or new needs that can’t be met without AI.

Every time I read articles on AI destroying and/or replacing jobs I always think to Sir. William Lee.

William Lee was an English inventor lived in the early 1600s. He built his fame on top of to the first stocking frame knitting machine. Lee’s machine has been used for centuries even after his death.

But when he submitted his invention to the Queen, she declined to issue a patent on the grounds that the technology might cause unemployment among textile workers. He has been refused by Elizabeth’s successor James I for the same reason.

Artificial Intelligence will erode demand for some marketing skills but will increase the demand for others

While a lot of marketing and analytics operations will be automated (e.g. identifying your target keywords, optimizing your ad budget for Adv platform, setting up your ROI metrics in Google Analytics, etc..) others will be created.

A few weeks ago Rich Barton, investor and founder of companies like Expedia and Zillow, predicted in this post that we are entering a new golden age of marketing.

According to Barton, the future is a diverse and modern marketing team, made up of the clever analytical marketer who uses big data to make smarter decisions, and technology will facilitate this change.|||

AI Marketing and Analytics applications are infinite. This post is a deep dive into the why and the how AI will shape these two industries.