I have no love for drama but over the last couple of years I’ve witnessed some shameless abuse of OWASP by commercial interests and feel it's important to call this out.

This is a surprising and distinctly out of place addition to the top 10; every other entry is a serious vulnerability that poses a notable risk by itself, whereas failure to detect attacks is only hazardous when combined with a real vulnerability.

Furthermore, addressing any other entry in the top 10 provides a clear net positive to a webapp’s security posture, whereas complying with A7 can easily cause a net harm. Complying with A7 makes it extremely awkward to run an accessible bug bounty program, since it will hinder researchers trying to help you out. It also increases your attack surface (much like antivirus software) and introduces the risk of denial of service attacks by spoofing attacks from other users.

I wonder why Contrast Security made this suggestion? Well, we can find a clue on their website - they’ve already started using A7 to flog ‘Contrast Protect’, their shiny attack protection solution:

Still, perhaps I shouldn’t rush to assume Contrast Security is acting in bad faith and abusing the OWASP brand name to sell a product. It’s not like they’ve done anything like this before is it?

In 2015 Contrast/Aspect released a tool to evaluate vulnerability scanners dubbed “ OWASP Benchmark ”. This is much lower profile than the OWASP Top 10, but I work for a web scanner vendor myself so it caught my attention. Just like the new OWASP Top 10, there was something a bit odd about it - it ranked Contrast’s scanner vastly higher than all the competition, something they made sure to point out in marketing materials.

Here’s what Simon Bennets, the OWASP project leader for ZAP had to say:

Here we have a company that leads an OWASP project that just happens to show that their offering in this area appears to be _significantly_ better than any of the competition. Their recent press release stresses that its an OWASP project, make the most of the fact that the US DHS helped fund it but make no mention of their role in developing it.

Simon's post caused extensive discussion on the OWASP leaders mailing list, eventually leading to Jim Manico (an OWASP board member at the time) calling for the project to be demoted to 'incubator' status , in order to reflect the project's immaturity. The project is still in the incubator status. This hasn’t stopped Gartner from using it to compare scanning vendors, so I guess Contrast still got their money’s worth.

All in all I think it’s pretty clear why Insufficient Attack Protection has suddenly appeared. Perhaps the OWASP Top 10 should be demoted to incubator status too :-)|||

