Where and how can savvy IT pros distinguish themselves in a crowded cloud? Where are the best opportunities to be found? Here are the platforms worth betting your paycheck on.

The cloud has turned “pay as you go” computing from a pipe dream into a daily reality. Gartner uses the term “Cloud Shift” to describe how companies and organizations of all sizes are switching from on-premises computing and services to cloud-based computing and services, in addition to balancing that transition with existing data centers.

Just how big is the cloud? Last year Gartner estimated that the so-called Cloud Shift in IT will affect more than $1 trillion in related spending. With this much at stake, there will be many opportunities for IT pros. Indeed, demand for qualified, cloud-savvy IT professionals is likely to exceed supply for the foreseeable future.

Cloud and distributed computing led LinkedIn's 2016 list of the Top 10 Skills, according to LinkedIn spokesperson Sophie Sieck. "Employers need employees with cloud and distributed computing, statistical analysis, and data mining skills to stay competitive," Sieck says. She notes that cloud and distributed computing has remained in the No. 1 spot for the past two years and is the top skill on almost every list—including in France, Germany, India, Ireland, Singapore, the United States, and Spain. Statistical analysis and data mining ranked second last year and first in 2014.

Read on to learn what IT skills are most likely to result in cloud-related employment.

I started my research where the jobs are, checking with a select list of job sites. I focused on four sites: SimplyHired, Indeed, LinkedIn Jobs, and TechCareers. I started with a list of more than 70 cloud-related IT certifications. For each certification, I compiled job counts on three sampling days. I summed the day’s totals across all four sites and averaged the totals to learn which credentials are mentioned most in current job postings.

The results of my search appear in Table 1, which lists the top 11 cloud-related IT certifications. I listed 11 because one of the entries is a basic skills cert from CompTIA. Listing the top 11 certifications lets you see where the CompTIA cert sits (at No. 7), but it also shows you 10 credentials that can directly enhance your earning power. As a purely foundational cert, I don’t think CompTIA Cloud Essentials makes that cut.

A leader in cloud computing technology certifications, the Arcitura Cloud School offers several cloud credentials, including the CCP rating. The CCP validates basic skills in virtualization, cloud characteristics, administration, software as a service (SaaS), platform as a service (PaaS), infrastructure as a service (IaaS), cloud deployment models (public, private, hybrid, and community), and more. Candidates must pass two CCP exams to earn this credential.

The CCA certification is designed for senior IT pros. Candidates need expert-level knowledge and skills related to design, support, and management of cloud-based solutions and platforms. Five exams are required to earn the credential. Exam topics include cloud computing fundamentals, cloud technology concepts, and cloud architecture (including advanced cloud architecture). Successful completion of a cloud architecture lab is also required.

The Amazon Web Services CSA–Professional cert is useful for cloud pros who support clients that use AWS. It validates the skills and expertise necessary to support an AWS client environment, including design, deployment, implementation of best practices, and management of AWS applications. Additional required skills include a thorough understanding of concepts such as hybrid architectures, security, storage, cloud migration, business continuity, and scalability. To earn this credential, candidates must first obtain the AWS CSA–Associate credential (one exam required) and then pass the AWS CSA–Professional exam.

One of the most popular Oracle cloud certifications is OCA–Java Cloud Service. As with most Oracle certs, a single exam is required to earn this credential. This certification validates a candidate’s skills in six key areas: Java Caching System (JCS), Development and Deployment, User and Instance Management, Co-existence and Extensions, Monitoring and Troubleshooting, and Security. As with all Oracle certs, training is available but not mandatory.

The CCNA–Cloud cert is a must-have for IT professionals who support Cisco cloud products. CCNA–Cloud validates skills such as cloud provisioning, support, networking, and system administration and management. Two exams are required to earn this credential.

To earn the CCTP cert, candidates need a thorough understanding of cloud terminology and computing concepts, as well as the risks, advantages, and disadvantages of various cloud computing mechanisms and security issues. Candidates must also demonstrate the ability to implement and deploy on common cloud platforms that use IaaS, SaaS, and PaaS models. The certification process includes three exams covering cloud computing fundamentals, cloud technology concepts, and a cloud technology lab, respectively.

The CompTIA Cloud Essentials certification is an entry-level certification geared toward nontechnical staff members such as business professionals, managers, and other decision-makers who need to understand the fundamentals of cloud computing for business reasons. Candidates are tested on their understanding of cloud principles such as risk, contingency preparedness, security threats and threat response, and ability to apply technical information in a real-world environment. A single exam is required.

The COA has the distinction of being the first—and only—certification offered by the OpenStack Foundation. A midlevel credential, the COA targets professionals who manage and operate OpenStack cloud environments on a daily basis. Candidates must pass one exam that tests basic knowledge of OpenStack, identity management, the OpenStack Dashboard, computing, object and block storage, networking, heat and orchestration, troubleshooting, and image management.

The EMCCA credential is available at two levels: Specialist and Expert. The EMCCA Specialist credential is focused on cloud infrastructure, planning, and design. The Expert-level cert (EMCCAe) targets cloud services. Both require either the Dell EMC Information Storage Associate (EMCISA) or Cloud Infrastructure and Services Associate (EMCCIS) credential as a prerequisite. EMCCAe candidates must also obtain the EMCCA before attempting the EMCCAe exam.

The RHCA cert is Red Hat’s highest and most prestigious credential. To earn the RHCA–Cloud designation, candidates must first obtain either the Red Hat Certified Engineer (RHCE) designation or the Red Hat Certified JBoss Developer (RHCJD) certification. They then need to obtain a minimum of five additional cloud-based certifications. RHCA–Cloud cert holders can perform advanced tasks such as using CloudForms to manage cloud infrastructures (private, virtual, and hybrid), use hybrid or on-premises cloud to create storage solutions, manage cloud applications with OpenShift Enterprise (create, configure, and manage), and use Satellite Server to manage multiple systems. Note that Red Hat is also heavily invested in OpenStack and endorses its COA credential as well.

Offered by (ISC)2, the CCSP is an advanced-level credential targeting IT professionals actively engaged in cloud information security. The CCSP validates a candidate’s skills and knowledge in key security areas including information security design, daily operations, security risk identification and mitigation, auditing, governance, compliance, and security architecture. Candidates must have at least five years of experience before attempting the exam.

As you can see from the number of mentions in the chart, several of these certifications are actively in demand. A job description may not say a certification is required, but if it’s mentioned, it will likely help you land the job.

So how do you get the knowledge necessary to take those certification tests? That leads me to the opportunities and outlets for certification and other cloud-related training, including several popular—and free—Massively Open Online Courses (MOOCs).

HPE currently offers five cloud-focused certifications across two career ladders: Data Center and Cloud, and IT Management. All five are designed for experienced practitioners who possess skills at the professional (Accredited Technical Professional, or ATP) or expert (Accredited Solutions Expert, or ASE) level. While not required, training is strongly recommended for most HPE certifications. Candidates must secure an HPE Learner ID to register.

In addition to professional certifications, HPE offers a series of Partner Restricted certs, which are available only to HPE employees and partners. HPE offers a single cert in this category, the HPE Technical Certified II Software for Cloud Automation in SME (2014) credential. It requires a single hands-on exam, the Implementing Cloud Services Automation Hands-On Assessment (HP0-M206P). Professionals should understand the impacts of design on implementation, plan for and implement integrated implementation flows (including SAVA, OO, and CSA), and manage and automate a cloud services lifecycle.

HPE Education Services also offers comprehensive cloud training courses for OpenStack and HPE Helion.

How do those certifications stack up in terms of job demand? This table shows how much HPE certification can make a difference.

The other cloud certification providers also offer comprehensive training, including self-study, traditional instructor-led learning, virtual learning, and everything in-between. Many providers also offer hybrid learning solutions, access to mentors, communities, blogs, documentation, white papers, and other learning events. Sometimes you can get a subscription that enables access to courseware across multiple certifications, which makes it easier to maximize an educational investment.

Training on cloud computing is easy to find. A simple Internet search reveals literally hundreds of opportunities worth consideration, as well as DevOps- and cloud-related conferences worth attending. With so many options to choose from, it’s easy to get overwhelmed.

To help you get started, I pulled together information from a few of the many choices available. The tables below organize information about learning opportunities offered by certification providers and a few select third-party training providers. Note: ILO stands for instructor-led online training, and ILT stands for instructor-led training in a physical classroom.

But you don’t need to look only at training provided by featured certification providers. Numerous third-party vendors offer training for the featured certs, along with general training on cloud-related issues or their own platform-specific certifications. For example, Google has several courses specific to its platforms, including fundamentals and system operations as well as its own Google-specific Cloud Architect credential.

Cloud training isn’t limited to certification or third-party training providers. Many colleges and universities are jumping on the cloud bandwagon with certificate or degree programs designed for undergraduates, graduate students, and practicing IT professionals. Some of these options (in no particular order or preference) include:

In addition, you may want to check out Coursera for a number of cloud computing courses from institutions such as the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Yonsei University. Still can’t find what you’re looking for? Docurated’s list of the top 50 cloud computing degrees worldwide is another excellent resource. As with all things cloud-related, there’s an embarrassment of riches here, too.

MOOC (Massively Open Online Course) training is extremely popular, and why shouldn’t it be? MOOCs offer learners the opportunity to study at some of the finest universities and institutions worldwide from the comfort of their own homes, or in the office or learning environments of their choice. All MOOCs are free to learners, which removes financial constraints, enabling everyone open access to quality education. Some organizations charge fees for "added value" services, such as certificates of completion; look at the paperwork carefully.

Plenty of MOOC lists are available, but I particularly like the MOOC Search Engine. MOOCSE is a robust site with links to almost 43,000 MOOC learning opportunities. Naturally, that includes an abundance of cloud topics, ranging from introductory courses for the merely curious to advanced, specialized courses. Readily available courses cover topics such as mobile and cloud computing, cloud infrastructure technologies, cloud TV, Google cloud, OpenStack, and much more.

One pleasant surprise is the sheer variety of MOOC providers. Allison and edX are featured prominently with a number of cloud computing MOOC offerings. A number of cloud industry leaders are leveraging the power of social media with established YouTube channels where learners can find an endless stream of cloud training videos. Some interesting channels with cloud media include IBM InterConnect 2017, Edureka, ProfitBricks (cloud computing TV), and Oracle Cloud. Of course, you don’t want to miss the Club Cloud Computing.com channel, which is dedicated to all things cloud (as the name implies). IT professionals with limited time to devote to video learning may want to check out iTunes. Apple offers a number of cloud computing related podcasts, such as Ingram Micro’s "Cloud Computing: The Power of the Cloud."

Microsoft, Cisco, and Dell EMC are also in the MOOC game: Each of them offers at least one or two MOOCs on cloud computing or related topics (big data, data science, data analytics, and more). Chris Roy, director of learning services at Microsoft Learning, told me his company already has an extensive curriculum of Azure MOOCs, with many more on the way. HPE just began a MOOC pilot program for application security and big data; you can sign up to be included in its next round.

With so many MOOC opportunities available, you’re certain to find one that meets your areas of interest and focus.

As you work your way through this material, be smart and careful about how you spend your time and energy. With so many options to choose from, and a dizzying array of channels for learning, study, and practice, it’s easy to get lost in the weeds.

I suggest you look at the certs and training here, and then cast about to see which ones interest you. Put together a short list of candidates worth investing in, and then the real work begins. Ask around in your personal networks. Look around online to get reactions and ratings from former students or practicing professionals who’ve already done what you’re thinking about doing. Only then will you be ready to make your final choices, roll up your sleeves, and get to work. Enjoy!|||

Where and how savvy IT pros can distinguish themselves in a crowded cloud:  the platforms and certifications worth betting your paycheck on.