A security panic button program is heavily sought after safety measure in today’s society. Businesses around the world are altering their stance on the way they look at security. In the United States, many companies are utilizing technology to help make their facilities safer for employees. There are a large number of safety and security tools out there to choose. When shopping for the perfect device to fit your facility’s needs, be sure that you take into consideration whether the product is innovative or traditional.

Traditional notification systems often become outdated relatively quickly. These types of notification systems can be rather expensive to install. The construction alone can disrupt daily activities and decrease productivity within your facility. Furthermore, these traditional panic buttons do not offer free system updates or rapid mass notification. These small details could leave you with a system that renders your facility vulnerable.

Meanwhile, an innovative security panic button is most often able to adapt to your security needs. Security panic button systems, when incorporated into an active crisis incident response plan can save lives. Also, these wireless panic button programs are always evolving, while striving to increase workplace safety. A security panic button program is rather inexpensive, which will not drain your company budget. Saving money is always a plus for every company.

The crime rate is skyrocketing all across the nation. Violence is more prevalent now than ever before. We go through our day never actually thinking about the danger that moves past us. However, if you turn on the news, the heartbreaking devastation is laid before your eyes. For instance, In Dallas, Texas on July 7, 2016, 14 people were shot.  Five Dallas police officers died, and seven other victims wounded, leaving behind a wake of sadness. Reporters say this is the worst mass shooting since 9/11.

In the last decade, the world has experienced acts of terrorism and violence that have shaken the very core of governments and citizens alike. With that said, be proactive about your facilities safety and security. Have an incident response plan in place to train staff on how to react in situations of crisis. Consider the option of technology-driven security panic buttons that offers mass notification as well as desktop alerts.

Being proactive now can substantially lower the chances of a tragedy within your facility. However, don’t rely on technology alone to protect your employees. Give your staff the knowledge and the tools needed to react responsibly in a dangerous situation. There is no independent, foolproof way to handle any given crisis. Although the most compelling evidence points to taking advantage of all resources that are available to you.|||

A security panic button is rather inexpensive. Innovative technology driven products are most often able to adapt to your security needs.