Silicon Valley Needs to Stop Pimping Out Patients to Alleviate White Guilt This startup uses crowdfunding to “provide healthcare for every person in the world.” But are patients really better off?

The link came with a half-hearted one-liner from a former colleague: “Either way patients will benefit, eh?”

I clicked on the link, not really sure what to expect given the tone of the introduction. I soon found myself on the shiny, Squarespace-y landing page of Watsi, a San Francisco-based startup closely linked to the accelerator Y Combinator. According to its site, Watsi aims to “provide healthcare for every person in the world.” Specifically, they seek crowdfunding for individual patients around the world. A person in the Bay Area can choose between alleviating the plight of a two-month-old baby in Guatemala, a 32-year-old woman in Burma, or hundreds of other suffering human beings.

How does this actually work?

Let’s look at a hypothetical example. A sick patient — let’s call her Faith — arrives at the hospital and can’t afford the treatment the doctor prescribes. She is informed by the doctor that this is a “Watsi facility” and is asked if she would like to “share her story with the world.” Faith, who is economically vulnerable and facing a non-choice between externally-funded treatment and continued disease, agrees. Her photo is then taken and uploaded, along with her sob story, to the Watsi site. A few moments later, charitably-minded voyeurs can flick through photos of her and hundreds of other desperate looking men, women, and children from around the world and play God — i.e., fund the saddest case they can find and feel good about themselves.

It may seem innocuously altruistic, but there are bigger implications of this work. If Watsi donors are paying for the healthcare of individuals in developing countries, what incentive do those developing country governments have to build functioning health systems?

Getting individual donors to pay for care does not help address the structural barriers that exclude many poor people from accessing health services. It does not incentivize poor communities to demand their governments fulfill their commitment to the World Health Organization to allocate 15% of their annual budgets to healthcare. And it certainly doesn’t ensure that patients will benefit when donor interest (and dollars) fade away.

Instead, it creates a long-term cycle of dependency and exploitation.

This model, not that different from of Kiva.org, exploits vulnerable people made even more vulnerable by their medical condition. In its current state, the model seems to exist more to alleviate “white guilt” than to increase access to care.|||

The link came with a half-hearted one-liner from a former colleague: “Either way patients will benefit, eh?” I clicked on the link, not really sure what to expect given the tone of the introduction…