How many miners get injured in mine accidents? And how many of them survive, while others get trapped waiting for rescue to arrive?

Turkey is a well-known mining country with more than 10,000 mines (coal, lead, zinc, copper) across its territory. At the same time, it tops the global list in terms of number and severity of mining accidents.

The worst mine disaster in Turkish history - the Soma accident - happened in May 2014. During the explosion, 787 people were underground, of which 301 people lost their lives.

Several years later, the Turkish government enacted new regulatory measures aiming at improving safety and security of miners in the country. The new regulation stipulates that all mines take additional safety measures, and provide real-time location tracking of miners in the event of a catastrophe. Knowledge of an employee's precise location within the mine will help rescue teams locate and rescue victims, thereby minimizing casualties and ultimately saving lives.

Later this year, TagVance - a leading system integrator from Turkey, contacted Leantegra in search of a comprehensive solution that would satisfy the new mining law requirements.

The Leantegra team, in turn, offered a BLE Real-time Location System (RTLS), where BLE beacons (WiBeats) are to be used as location tags worn by workers, and wireless sniffers (WiRanges) - as gateways which collect location data and pass it over for indoor positioning calculation of a person's X and Y coordinates.

As of today, TagVance and Leantegra have successfully completed deployment of the solution in a 250 meter-long tunnel of a Zinc mine, located 75 meters below ground level. The accuracy achieved in this indoor location environment is 1-2 meters.

As part of this project, Leantegra's WiRange Bluetooth gateway was equipped with a special water- and dust-proof casing, which makes the device IP-68 compliant, and, therefore, suitable for rugged use in the harsh environmental conditions found within mines.

Currently, the companies are planning to expand their activities to cover 600 meters of the tunnel's length (and reach 120 meters under the ground), as well as commence with a new 5 km project located in the Taurus mountains.|||

Learn how Leantegra improves personnel safety by providing employee tracking in underground mines in Turkey, and helps the latter meet the new law requirements.