There’s no shortage of marketers, anywhere. Especially as a growing number of people proclaim they’ve taken up this craft every year. Either by becoming the next Instagram influencer with 10000 followers. Or after reading through Ryan Holiday’s Growth Hacker Marketing (which I also loved).

Yet, there’s no great marketers. At least not enough of those who could single-handedly take care of this important part. Leading to companies telling semi-hard stories. Shutting their doors, too early.

Why is it so that those holding excellent products still cannot find great marketers?

In today’s world, anyone could become a great marketer. Without spending three years learning the theory at any university. Because it’s all about understanding human behaviour and telling good stories. All while day trading attention, term coined by Gary Vaynerchuk.

However, these are exactly the skills that most of us are missing. Not being able to understand why women buy new dresses. Or how to engage strangers that doesn’t want to be disturbed. In the end, overpaying to use wrong channels.

It’s not that marketers don’t want to understand all this. Nor are they lazy, not willing to go through all the materials. Rather they’re not brave enough to take responsibility needed for growing the business. At the same time working with executives that are pushing outdated beliefs.

Yet, there’s no one really to blame. One either is willing to take more risks, while owning the department. Or doesn’t have enough experience and ambition to do so.

Nothing much! For it’s hard to light the fire in someone’s eyes when they haven’t got vested interest to make the thing succeed. Especially in the case of them not being a hustler that always finds a way.

Moreover, there’s no point on-boarding those that aren’t self-motivated to everyday test new concepts. As they’ll stick to the comfort zone, not taking the whole thing to the next level.

Thus, in most cases marketing ought to stay managed by the CEO or any other executive. Someone that understands what’s happening, while always taking the first step. Either writing a post on Medium or figuring out Geofilters on Snapchat.

Meanwhile, it’s still smart to take an apprentice. Someone that has the fire, but no skills. Hoping the padawan will one day evolve to take over this responsibility.

In any case, every company seeking to grow big needs a hustler. Be it whoever!

If only there’d be another way. Perhaps a full service marketing agency that’s experienced in all channels. Willing to take the risk of leading all marketing related topics. PS! Please, let me know if there’s any!|||

It seems like all starting companies struggle with hiring decent marketers. That’s my observation after chatting with over twenty of such.