In July 2016, we made a leap, moving our Wistia Community from a forum we built with Ruby over to Slack. It was a big move both strategically, organizationally, and personally. We had decided to switch the way we had communicated with our members for years, to a platform that was still very new for many people. Slack was never made to be a community platform, but in it, we saw a future where communication was more real-time, live, and in the moment. We took the leap.

Lucky for us, our community thrives on Slack, although the migration was not easy—we had several issues to overcome—but overall, the results were staggering. In almost one year (July 2016-present), our active user number grew by over 500%!

Slack is not a community forum—it’s a chat app for teams. Using Slack for community purposes is a new and exciting application of the product, and it comes with several benefits (as well as a few pitfalls, which I’ll elaborate on later).

Although Slack has its benefits, it also has some major complications that community managers need to address and fit into their strategy.

Slack communities can easily fail for lack of engagement. Because the community is so real-time centered, a lull can snowball into a complete silence. Folks thrive off of conversations and excitement in the community—and it’s a community manager’s job to foster that engagement and growth, but they can’t do it alone. The community members themselves have to want to connect.

When moving a community over to Slack, make sure to move strategically. You want to make sure that the folks in the community create the culture you want to see moving forward. In the Wistia community, I moved our 10 most engaged members in first and gave them a week to see the new digs, bring up their ideas, and voice their concerns. We spoke about everything from new community guidelines, how we want conversations in the new space to go, what constitutes an offense, what the new norms in the community will be, made our core channels, and so on. Folks spoke about what worried them with the new format, and how the community could grow.

These conversations were crucial for us to start the building blocks of this new culture and make sure that we could get ahead of the issues. These 10 members became our community admins. Today, they’re still just as engaged in the community as they were previously, and our growth can very much be traced back to their efforts and how much they care.

After spending the week in Slack with our admins, we invited 100 or so of our most engaged community members, giving them a week to hang out and chat, build trust, request new channels, present ideas and concerns, etc. After that, we invited the entire community. We waited a week with them as well, making sure that everyone felt comfortable, was able to learn from folks in there earlier and get a vibe of the culture they presented, etc. Then, we opened the floodgates on the old community site. These waiting periods allowed for the culture the admins first created to move into following groups. Because of this slow period of moving, our community boasts 0 bans, only 1 spam post, and 0 warnings or talks in its Slack history.

One of the biggest concerns our community brought up was the difficulty of saving the information that folks brought to the table. In web forums, you can always go back to the thread that helped you in the past, and new folks can find existing threads that answer their questions. In Slack, finding an answer to a question is much more difficult, and folks want to know that the work they put into delivering an answer isn’t lost.

There’s more to a Slack community than building it up and leaving it to fend for itself. Your community members have to know that they’re looked after. They should feel a sense of belonging, and a sense of worth. They need to be heard and understood. Luckily, Slack allows for several opportunities to show your community investment.

Using Slack as a community platform may not be for every company, but if the topic fits, and it’s done correctly, a Slack community can bring your members together in a way that encourages trust, communication, and evangelism.

Creating a Slack community comes with many other issues that I don’t cover in this article. If you have any questions, please reply and I’ll answer them as best I can. Building, or thinking of building a community and need help? Shoot me an email at margotmazur@gmail.com. I’m looking for freelance opportunities.|||

In July 2016, we made a leap, moving our Wistia Community from a forum we built with Ruby over to Slack. It was a big move both strategically, organizationally, and personally. We had decided to…