In November 2016, a tram derailed in Croydon, killing seven people. At the time, that was the only thing that we knew about the incident. Locals reported that they knew the corner where the tram had crashed well, and that they often saw drivers going too fast around it. An investigation into the tram crash found that the tram had been speeding and that the driver may have “lost awareness.”

The mechanism for driving a tram is quite simple - you push forward on a lever with 1.5lb of force and the tram moves. If you apply less than 1.5lb of force, the tram stops. Trams have in built brakes and track brakes, but this mechanism, known as a “dead man’s handle” is meant to activate and stop the tram in the event of the driver becoming incapacitated.

Today, four drivers have come forward and admitted that they fell asleep while driving a tram, and that the “dead man’s handle” appeared to fail to operate. While there is no suggestion that the failure of the “dead man’s handle” played a role in the Croydon Tram Accident, it highlights an important truth about systems design.

If Quality Assurance fails to pick up a bug in the design of a system, the users of that system are the first line of defence. It’s important that you can rely on users to report bugs, particularly where those bugs involve critical safety features. In this case, drivers were afraid to report that bugs in the system because they feared being sacked over falling asleep at the wheel.

One driver said "You're asking somebody to come forward and admit to something that could cost them their job," adding that he thought that most tram drivers had fallen asleep at some point in their career.

Humans are the intersection between technology and the real world. Users are the last, and in some cases, the most important line of defense in reporting bugs. Tram drivers will cover millions of miles while QA can only ever cover very few. As such, it’s vital that you are able to rely on the feedback of users. You can’t do that if the act of giving feedback requires the driver to admit something that will cost them their job.|||

