WASHINGTON—President Donald Trump has ordered White House aides to draft a tax plan that slashes the corporate tax rate to 15%, even if that means a loss of revenue, according to people familiar with the directive.

During a meeting in the Oval Office last week, Mr. Trump told staff he wants a massive tax cut to sell to the American public, these people said. He told aides it was less important to him that such a plan could add to the federal budget deficit, though that might make it difficult to sell to GOP lawmakers who are wary of such a large tax cut. Mr. Trump told his team to “get it done” in time to release a plan by Wednesday, the people said.

Mr. Trump’s willingness to let deficits run higher also could hinder the passage of tax cuts that are permanent. Congressional Republicans plan on using a procedural tool known as reconciliation that would allow the tax legislation to pass with a 51-vote majority in the Senate, instead of the usual 60 votes. Under those rules, changes can’t add to deficits beyond a decade.

“It’s the same discussion they had about the Bush tax cuts in the previous administration: Are you better off having a smaller cut that is permanent, or a larger cut that is temporary?” said Mick Mulvaney, the president’s budget director, in an interview last week.

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and National Economic Council Director Gary Cohn are scheduled to meet Tuesday to discuss Mr. Trump’s tax proposals with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.), House Speaker Paul Ryan (R., Wis.), Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch (R., Utah) and House Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady (R., Texas). The meeting comes in advance of a Wednesday announcement by Mr. Trump about his principles for tax policy.

“This is part of our continuing dialogue with the Trump administration on tax reform,” said AshLee Strong, a spokeswoman for Mr. Ryan.

During the campaign, Mr. Trump proposed to cut corporate rates to 15% from 35%. There likely aren’t enough business tax breaks that could be repealed to offset the fiscal cost, meaning such a move would increase budget deficits. Roughly, each percentage-point cut in the tax rate lowers federal revenue by $100 billion over a decade, so a 20-point cut would cost the government $2 trillion over a decade, according to the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation.

If such a deficit-financed tax cut passed under reconciliation, the provisions would expire after 10 years, because bills passed that way can’t increase deficits beyond the typical 10-year time frame against which tax and spending policies are projected.

Some White House advisers have warned that changes that aren’t permanent would undercut the rationale for a corporate-tax cut, which is to boost business investment. Businesses are “making long-term capital decisions. People are deciding to move this to the United States, and…they need some permanence of the tax code,” Mr. Cohn said at a conference last week.

Democrats are against large tax cuts for corporations, especially when Mr. Trump is already proposing cuts to government spending programs that Democrats prioritize, such as housing, arts and the environment.

“They will lose a boatload of revenue that we can’t afford to lose and far more than this team will offset by closing loopholes,” said Jared Bernstein, who was an economic adviser to former Vice President Joe Biden. Cutting marginal tax rates for businesses could generate some economic growth, Mr. Bernstein said, but not nearly enough to pay for itself with increased revenue.

“These promises about all kinds of growth and investment that are going to be triggered by these tax cuts never appear, and the empirical historical record is clear on that,” Mr. Bernstein said.

Mr. Trump’s call for a 15% corporate tax rate puts him below the low end of recent proposals. Former President Barack Obama sought a 28% rate for most companies. A 2014 Republican plan had a 25% corporate rate. And House Republicans want a 20% rate, with the cost covered by including a border-adjustment feature that taxes imports and exempts exports. Mr. Trump’s White House has sent mixed messages about whether it would support the border-adjustment plan.

Asked Monday if the president’s tax plan would be revenue-neutral, meaning it wouldn’t add to the debt, Mr. Mnuchin told reporters that it would “pay for itself with economic growth.” By that, he meant that the administration expects to be able to project faster growth due to tax cuts, which would in turn increase revenue and avert the risk of bigger budget deficits. Many economists say that without a big pickup in productivity and labor-force growth, though, it is uncertain whether the tax-policy changes could drive an economic expansion on a sustained basis.

So far, Mr. Trump is sticking with core elements of his campaign tax plan, showing no signs of molding political promises to legislative dynamics in Congress or any significant fiscal constraints.

Mr. Trump’s aides have been working on a detailed tax proposal, but that isn’t ready yet. The announcement on Wednesday is expected to focus instead on broader principles, including proposed changes to the individual tax rates. Mr. Trump has said he wants to reduce the number of brackets for individual payers and to deliver tax cuts to the middle class.

Mr. Trump’s statement last week that he would announce details of his plan later this week caught his team off guard, said people familiar with the matter.

In an interview with the Wall Street Journal on April 12, Mr. Trump said he wouldn’t release even a set of tax principles before Congress passes major health-care legislation, which hasn’t happened.

The timing also was a surprise because, for weeks, top advisers in the White House have said they would like to forge consensus with lawmakers on a single plan before releasing more details.

The U.S. has the developed world’s highest statutory corporate tax rate, and advocates for lower corporate rates say the system discourages job creation and investment in the U.S. Including state and local taxes, the U.S.’s corporate rate is 39.1%, according to the Congressional Budget Office.

Over the past decade, other countries have been lowering their tax rates to attract corporate investment, while the U.S. has left its federal rate at 35%. American companies have thus increasingly found ways to book their profits in low-tax foreign jurisdictions.

The gap in corporate tax rates between the U.S. and other countries is smaller under a measure that looks at taxes as a share of income after deductions and other breaks, also known as the average rate. In 2012, the U.S. average tax rate was 29%, according to a recently released CBO study. That still ranked third-highest in the G20, and the U.S. rate was more than 10 percentage points above Australia, Canada, Germany and the U.K.

The actual tax rates paid by companies vary widely, with global high-tech and pharmaceutical companies paying relatively low rates and retailers and primarily domestic firms paying higher rates.

Write to Michael C. Bender at Mike.Bender@wsj.com, Richard Rubin at richard.rubin@wsj.com and Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com

Appeared in the Apr. 25, 2017, print edition as 'President Seeks Corporate Tax Cut.'|||

President Trump has ordered aides to draft a tax plan that slashes the corporate tax rate to 15%, even if that means a loss of revenue and exacerbating the plan’s procedural and partisan hurdles.