With CedCommerce’s fresh up-gradation to its integration solution, selling on Walmart now becomes completely plain sailing. The entire process, comprising from importing products to getting it published is swift and easy like never before and certainly unmatchable.

Keeping in view, if proper standards, are matched and the information entered is appropriate the product may get published within few days.

The point to be noted here is “what major shortfalls of the existing sellers are”, and their existing confusion associated with the “Product Identifier” criteria on Walmart.

And with this, the blog aims to clear up the prevalent confusion:

– Sellers having different types of ID needs to convert as per the following Walmart Standards.

-Sellers having multiple ID’s have both option either to go with single Product ID or entering multiple ids.

– GS1-Certified, valid and approved GTIN, UPC or ISBN must be used for setting up the item.

– Product ID should be used only by entering numbers, and dashes or spaces should be avoided.

Further Walmart restricts and does not consider other code based identifiers such as:

because they being non-universal.

Locating is easy and can be checked/noted from above – below the barcodes from item packaging an Example is attached here for reference.

Manufacturers willing to sell on Walmart, need to have product ID’s for the item they produce, in order to get their product identifiers created, they may contact the organization that may assist them to generate ID for their item.

For products having complementary items such as packs or cases, these must pertain to their own respective ID’s and product ID would not be applicable to them.

Further, a Product ID applying to the entire product may also be used a whole.

While listing a product, “Identifier” quoted with the original product must be used, not to the paired/compatible product.

Such as in the case of:

While selling a Mobile Phone the Identifier of the sole mobile should be used, in place of battery or so.

To mark greater insight and clarity ‘Manufacturing Part Number’ can be used for the compatible product with description.|||

With CedCommerce’s fresh up-gradation to its integration solution, selling on Walmart now becomes completely plain sailing.