Have you ever felt that you are one of the protagonists in science fiction movies? Have you ever had that feeling that you were closely watching an accident that happened in your favorite animated movie? If it’s a “yes”, congrats you are already experiencing the effect of AI or Artificial Intelligence! A technique that holds massive potential to change the development of mobile app devices.

Mobile devices are getting smaller each day and the embedded technology is becoming bigger. Although they (devices) are small but the devices are getting smarter each day. And, all thanks to the celebrated Artificial Intelligence technology. This trending mobile app technology is influencing the mobile application development and marketing to a greater extent. It is also changing the ways we interact with smart gadgets today.

The future of AI as a trending mobile app technology holds prominent future. Virtual digital assistance in combination with AI offers a whole new perspective for users to play the gaming gadgets. The technology enhances user’s overall experience when interacting with certain interfaces.

Mobile app marketing has embraced all the changes that AI is offering to the users in the form of virtual games we play online or the movies we watch in theaters. Here is more on how AI is going to revolutionize mobile app marketing.

Tools like chatbots have already promised a bright future to AI in eCommerce. As these tools help users do their financial transaction with ease, Artificial Intelligence in eCommerce apps is only going to get better in the days to come. Integration of AI into retail app is another domain where this technology can offer exceptional assistance to the users.

Artificial Intelligence as the trending mobile app technology will make mobile marketer’s job much easier in the times to come. The idea is to tailor the ads as solutions for user’s particular requirement. Just to earn the revenue from the same. The AI will help to increase the efficiency of ads in targeting the users. The past data and the user’s ad browsing patterns will guide marketers to increase their ad revenue.

Artificial Intelligence is a way for marketers to offer assistance as per user’s requirement. Think about Apple’s Siri, one of the best AI examples we have till date. It offers you assistance depending upon your specific requirements. With more innovation in this category, AI will grow bigger as a technology in order to offer more specific assistance to the users.

The trends in the mobile app industry especially Artificial Intelligence is sure to dominate the app world in the near future. The technology has already shown brighter colors with some of the best innovations. As mobile marketing is flourishing, AI, too holds a prominent future.|||

2017 has already been awarded the year of innovation in context of mobile application development and marketing, including Artificial intelligence.