We swallow the expense for the benefit it will bring; a fresh start and hopefully, a better life, often overlooking a move’s potential to wallop our budget.

Moving can’t be avoided and nor can the expense, but there are many ways to save money on that next big shift.

Clutter equals cost on moving day and it’s the most common mistake removalists see, Discount Backloading spokesman Conrad Hill says.

“People take things that they really should just throw away like 15-year-old lounges. Don’t take it, your move will be a bit cheaper, and use that as your opportunity to upgrade at your new home,” Hill says.

Put absolutely everything in a box for a quicker and cheaper move, and where possible dismantle furniture, he says.

“If you break things down, they will travel better, save you space and reduce the removalist’s time and therefore your costs,” Hill says.

For local moves, midweek is usually cheaper. The day of the week doesn’t affect the cost of interstate moves but December and January are the priciest months. Peak hour and Saturday morning moves should also be avoided.

“Generally there’s about a 20 per cent increase in rates during December and January and a 5 to 10 per cent increase at Easter (for interstate moves),” Hill says.

When moving locally, most removalists charge by the hour; so to save money it needs to be performed like a well-oiled machine

Interstate moves are charged on volume so reducing the quantity of items will cut the cost.

Weight equals money so hold a garage sale, leave books with friends, the local library or sell them to a used bookstore and put the proceeds towards your other costs. Anything you can’t sell, give to a local charity.

Pack yourself, rent boxes as packaging is expensive, and put everything in removalist-supplied boxes — supermarket boxes can fall apart putting your belongings at risk of being damaged.

For interstate moves, look online for backload deals where you share the cost of a removalist having to travel long distance with others who are also sharing the truck space.

The sooner you book your mover, the less likely you are to be charged a higher rate.

If you’re willing to work within a removalist’s time frame, ask if you can get a better deal in exchange.

Ask about possible charges such as return to depot fees and those attached to expedited moves.

You will pay extra if moving companies have to help pack last minute items.

If you’re renting, use professional cleaners recommended by your real estate agent as they know the standard required so you don’t risk having to clean twice.|||

MOVING always means money out of your pocket, with the enormity of the task often distracting us from cost-saving tactics.