As America’s FBI director James Comey builds better seeing five eyes.

France’s election process punched  out all mainline party candidates and pulled  into the ring an  independent centrist Emmanuel Macro and the darling of “death to the EU” Marine La Pen  in a run off set for May. La Pen pledges to fix the immigrant mess and lead France out of the EU. Her Rival Micron would strengthen EU ties and continue with current immigration policies.

Fbi Needs Fives eye to see this all more clearly

Fbi director lands in australia for the hush hush meet up with four other countries including he Aussies, New Zealand and of course The Brits for spy guy buddy buddy hook up. CIA director Mike Pompeo was also believed to be attending the conference.

An Orbital ATK Cygnus spacecraft  with  7,600 pounds of supplies and science experiments arrived safely at the International Space Station early Saturday morning. The SS John Glen is said to include 38 cube satellites and plant growing experiments, also some wonder if crispr gene manipulation tech will be included now or in the next round.

WOBAMAASHINGTON — Former President Barack Obama will return to his adopted home on Monday for his first public event since leaving the White House, holding a conversation with six young people in front of an audience at the University of Chicago.

As new wikileaks release gives hacker groups like anonymous buzzing with console testing CIA built Cadillacs of Code.  Malware exploits are already being fixed by the white hat hackers  and other groups plan on reinjecting modified versions of their own with the goal of learning better blocking techniques from spying eyes of nation states.

Nothing else to see here move along.|||

France Marches To The Right As America's FBI director James Comey builds better seeing five eyes. France's election process punched  out all mainline party candidates and pulled  into the ring an  independent centrist Emmanuel Macro and the darling of "death to the EU" Marine La Pen  in a run off set for May. La Pen…