The Juicero was a joke even before this week. It’s the apotheosis of everything people mock about Silicon Valley: a $400 (£313) wifi-connected juice machine, which can only be refilled with single-purpose pods full of crushed fruit and veg that cost $5-8 per 230ml cup.

Oh, the pods can also only be shipped to 17 western states because they only have a shelf life of around a week.

That this offering has somehow raised $120m in venture capital funding is already testimony to the amount of money splashing around Silicon Valley. But it got worse when Bloomberg News got hold of the Juicero, and found that the machine isn’t required to actually make the juice at all. Simply squeezing the pods with your hands is enough to get the juice out, because the contents have been so thoroughly mashed up before shipping.

The Juicero’s in good company. If there’s one thing the technology community loves, it’s an over-engineered solution to a problem that isn’t really a problem. Double points if the root of that problem is: “I’m a young man with too much money who needs technology to do for me what my mother no longer will.”

Take Washboard, a startup that launched in 2014 to solve the awful problem of not having enough quarters to use the washing machines in your local launderette. For the low price of $27, the company would send you a bag of 80 quarters. That’s just 33 cents per 25 cent coin! A bargain!

Perhaps it’s not surprising that Washboard was soon outcompeted by startups that actually promised to replace your mother doing your laundry: companies such as Laundrapp will pick up your clothes, wash them and drop them off within 48 hours.

If outsourcing basic hygiene has left you feeling like a powerful, adult human being, why not bring a bit of responsibility to your life? A potted plant can add colour to a living space, and provide the emotional fulfilment of caring for another living thing.

And if that’s all a bit too stressful, well, the £130 Parrot Pot will monitor the amount of water, sunlight and heat your plant is getting, and even top up its liquid if it gets a bit dry. So long as you remember to top up the pot itself, you need never accidentally kill another plant again. And since the pot will text you when it’s running low, you have no excuse.

Emotional needs satisfied, you can turn your attention to the physical. Companies such as Deliveroo and UberEats advertise themselves to customers who are too lazy to cook, but maybe you want to feel like you’ve made something yourself? In which case, HelloFresh and Blue Apron can ship you individually wrapped slices of cheese, meat and veg that you can assemble into something that is technically a home-cooked meal.

As a thrusting wannabe tech entrepreneur, maybe the entire concept of meals, eating or gaining satisfaction from flavour or nourishment is too much of a timesink for you. If so, there’s Soylent, which could answer all your prayers. A weird, chalky liquid that can provide all the calories you need to have a nominally pleasurable existence for just $16 a day, Soylent calls itself “Food 2.0”. Sure, it had a bit of bad press when it had to recall its solid-food bars after they made customers ill, but who doesn’t want to be a beta tester for a future without food?

Efficiency is the name of the game. Dave Morin, the founder of erstwhile social network Path, used to carry two iPhones, one for day and one for the night (he also didn’t use a ringtone on his phone “so that I am always on offence and never defence”). If that’s too much hassle, you could always back the Eye, a $189 iPhone case that is also an Android phone strapped to your iPhone, on Kickstarter. Or duct-tape two phones together.

It would be a disservice to pretend that any of this is new, of course. The US technology industry has a long history of over-engineering complex answers to problems that others can deal with fairly easily. During the space race, Nasa had to work out how to deal with the fact that ballpoint pens relied on gravity to work by dragging the ink down the tube and on to the page. While Nasa itself didn’t invest in specific research, Fisher, a pen company, spent $1m developing the space pen, which used pressurised air in a sealed cartridge to force the ink out of the front instead. It could not only work in space, it would write upside down on earth, or even underwater, at temperatures from -35C (-31F) to 120C (248F).

• This article was amended on 24 April 2017 to clarify that it was Fisher, not Nasa, who spent a large amount of money developing the space pen. Also, Russian cosmonauts switched to the pen not too long after Nasa.

|||

After a widely mocked $400 wifi-enabled juice machine, here are five more over-engineered solutions to non-problems, courtesy of the tech industry