Do you love to edit videos to product a fantastic personal production before posting them to YouTube? Do you dream of becoming a film director to show your thought in a film? Then, everything can be started by Sony Vegas Pro. Edit video in Sony Vegas Pro and show what you want to show.

Sony Vegas Pro offers support for everything a professional video editor requires. You can import media from multiple devices (including HD video), use more than 300 filters and special effects, and use specific tools to work with text layers and subtitles. The app also lets you easily optimize the image quality of your content with various tools. Now, let's see what video and audio files Sony Vegas Pro support and then you will know what files you can import to Sony Vegas Pro for editing.

As shown above, Sony Vegas Pro can't handle any video and audio file. How can you do when you want to import some Sony Vegas Pro unsupported files to edit? For example, you have some MKV, AVI files and want to edit MKV/AVI in Sony Vegas Pro. In this case, you can use some video converters to convert these unsupported video to Sony Vegas Pro supported video and audio formats.

A web seach for "Sony Vegas Pro Video Converter", you will be recommended for many video converter applications. Among these software, Pavtube Video Converter is suggested strongly. It can convert any video and audio files to Sony Vegas Pro. It can convert Sony Vegas Pro unsupported MKV, AVI, TS, Tivo, OBS recordings, iPhone recordings, etc to Sony Vegas Pro and also can compress unsupported 4K video to 1080P video for Sony Vegas Pro when you are runing a low-end computer that can't handle 4K video. You can change video and audio encoder, resolution, bitrate, frame rate, sample rate to make the output video more compatible with Sony Vegas Pro 14/13/12.

In addition, Pavtube Video Converter is also an excellent video editing tool with some simple video editing function. You can trim video, crop video, merge video, split video. You also can add subtitle/watermark, rotate/flip video, edit audio.

For Mac users, you can turn to  Pavtube Video Converter for Mac  to solve all Sony Vegas Pro media loading problems.

Start Pavtube Video Converter on your computer, click "File" > "Add Video/Audio" or "Add from folder" to load unsupported source video files into the program. Or directly drag and drop the source file you want to the sftware. Then you can preview the whole videos in the preview window on the right.

Step 2. Choose Sony Vegas Pro supported format

 

 Click "Format" option to choose the output format. To make your Sony Vegas Pro 14/13/12 to readthe output files, just choose the most Sony Vegas accepted "WMV (VC-1) (*.wmv)" or MPEG-2 under "Adobe Premiere/Sony Vegas" option as output format. Since Sony Vegas Pro also accept HEVC codec video, which offer the same video quality with smaller size comapring to H.264 codec video. So you also can choose H.265 MP4 here for Sony Vegas Pro 14. For lower version Sony Vegas, HD MP4 is recommended.

a. If the default settings do not fit your needs, you can click "Settings" button to customize output video parameters like bitrate, channels, frame rate, etc, such as to set higher bitrate to get much better image quality. In general, the higher video bit rate, the larger output file size, and vice versa.

b. You can use the video editor designed in Pavtube Video Converter to edit your original videos. Click "Edit" on the main interface, and edit your videos by trimming (get/cut off video clips), cropping (remove unwanted areas), adding text/image/video watermarks, inserting subtitles, adding special effects, etc.

Step 3. Encode video to Sony Vegas Pro

 

 Hit the "Convert" button at the bottom right corner to start encoding unsupported video to Sony Vegas Pro. Once finished, hit "Open" button to get the generated files, and then drag it to the Vegas Pro timeline or into the Trimmer window where you can mark you in and out points before you add it to the timeline.

Once you’ve set up your Project, you will need to import video clips. Before you do, take a look at Sony’s simple but powerful Project Media Window:

Each folder is called a ‘Bin’, and you can create as many as you want by selecting the Media Bin>Right Click>Create New Bin.

This is important, because once you’ve setup your project into bins, you can search (Right Click on a bin>Search Media Bins…) these bins and you can even save your results into a ‘Smart Bin’ for future use!

There are two simple ways to import video into Sony Vegas Pro:

Once you have imported your video clip, you can right click it and select Properties… to view its properties. You will also get a snapshot of it at the lower end of the Project Media Window, as shown in the above image.

Sony Vegas Pro allows native editing of many file formats, including R3D. For Red Media, if you right click the clip you will have the option of selecting File Format Properties… to get extra settings to ‘correct’ your R3D files.|||

Let's see what video and audio files Sony Vegas Pro support and then you will know what files you can import to Sony Vegas Pro for editing.