As I wrote about in the previous blog I am on an ice class vessel in the Arctic Ocean.  Life here continues as described previously and the days are going by quickly.  As I write this I am amazed that another week is coming to a close.  In my previous blog I told you then I boarded the vessel on the 31st of May, it is now the 25th of July but it feels like I have only been here for a couple of weeks.

I was able to check off an item on my bucket list, I finally got to see a polar bear in the wild.  Actually, we have had several sightings of polar bears.  They have not seemed bothered by us, they have continued with their hunting of seals among the ice flows as we watched.  We are seeing more walrus and seals on the ice in the broken flows.  In the open water, we occasionally see whales blowing and breaching.  Whaling season in the villages along the northern coast occurs here in the Arctic from the first breakup of the ice in the spring and continues with the different species of whales until the fall migration of the Bowheads south in October.  There is a whaling push in mid-August.  Whaling here is a way of life for the villages.  When a whale is taken the meat is distributed throughout the village.  Even those who are unable to hunt due to their age or health are provided for.  Family, community, and nature are at the center of life in the villages.

Several days ago we were about 20 miles off shore in the ice, on the horizon, we could see a Canadian icebreaker heading East toward the northern Canadian coastline.  Several miles behind the icebreaker was something that surprised most everyone on the bridge.  The mast of a sailboat under full sail could be seen on the horizon.  The sailboat was in among the ice flow, I would guess that he was among the broken ice along the path that the Canadian Icebreaker had made a short time earlier.  The officer on the bridge looked at the sailing plan for the sailboat, this is similar to the flight plan a pilot of an aircraft would file, it should that the sailboat was headed to Barrow Alaska and had an expected arrival of Saturday, July 23rd.  We were at enough of a distance that we could not see the sailboat its self but just the mast and sail so I know nothing about its construction.  I know up through the early 20th century the Arctic was explored and traveled by sailing vessels, but those were constructed for the ice travel.  Modern sailboats that we see in the harbors along the pacific coast are made of light weight wood or fiberglass and are designed for speed and maneuverability not the abuse they would see in the ice flows of the Arctic.

We still have daylight 24 hours a day.  The sun is setting below the horizon but is just over the horizon so it gets dusky but not dark at night.  Because it still is not getting totally dark we still are not able to see the Aurora Borealis, Northern Lights.  Sunrise and sunset does not occur again until August 1st according to the National Weather Service.  I think we will be gone from the arctic before it is dark enough to see the Aurora’s.

Moral remains high among everyone onboard although people are starting to talk about going home and what they will do when they get there.  One of the scientists onboard is talking about buying a house another is having a new house built.  Another of the guys is looking forward to going home and buying a new ATV.  One of the crew will be leaving the boat when we get back, he has a new job as the captain of a vessel along the east coast of the USA.  I myself have been compiling a list of things that I know I need to take care of at home when I get there.  I have only been home a total of 6 weeks since the first of January.

Today we are above the ice pack is beautiful clear water.  If it were not for the occasional piece of ice floating by and an outside temperature of only 33 degrees I fooled into thinking that I was not in the arctic.  We are traveling between major flows, ice can be seen on the horizon to both the north and south of us.  The have been more polar bears seen along with seals and walrus.  Whale sightings have been few in this area but they say the migration will reach this area over the next two weeks.

This morning I could see a large ship on the horizon to the northeast of us, there was a haze which obscured the ship enough that it could not be identified.  The cold temperatures can bend the waves of light creating mirages.  At times it appears that we are headed toward a range of mountains but when you look through binoculars you can see the horizon and realize that what you are seeing above the horizon is not mountains but rather the ice flows that are over the horizon being reflected upward into the sky.  This is much the same as the illusion that you are seeing water in the middle of a desert on a hot summer day.  In that case, the heat is causing the illusion.  Last night I saw the ship from the morning again.  We were about 20 miles off shore, it was the Canadian Icebreaker headed tot eh east.

We are about 10 miles off shore this morning and sticking above the fog that is hugging the coast line are the mountains on the northeastern end of the Brooks Range.  The Brooks Range is a mountain range that starts near the coast at the Alaska-Canada border and runs to the west-southwest across the state.  The flat land on the northern side of these mountains it what is referred to as the north slope.  This area has only one road, this is the haul road, Dalton Highway, from Fairbanks in the south to Deadhorse, Prudhoe Bay on the north.  Prudhoe Bay is a generalized area that has been a major oil production center since the 1970’s.

The villages that are in the area we call the north slope do not have road access.  The villages are scattered and there is a great deal of distance between them so they are not connected by road.  In the summer the ground is a bog, very spongy with a lot of standing water.  There are rivers running from the mountains to the Arctic Ocean.  These rivers in the winter drop with little water flow and freeze over, sometimes several feet thick.  In the summer with the snow melt in the mountains the rise and become swift and impossible to cross.  Because the ground is a bog and the rivers flood in the spring the Dalton Highway has been built up many feet above the surrounding terrain.  This is an impossible feat to accomplish in an area that is so pristine and with such a fragile ecosystem.  The growing season on the north slope is only a couple months long.  When I left Deadhorse the first of May this year is was still going below freezing at night and there was still snow on the ground.  Last year we had snow falling and sticking to the ground in mid-August.

To get supplies to the villages on the north slope everything has to be flown in year round, brought in by boat in the summer when the water is free of ice, or a crossed the snow in the winter.  Needless to say living in these communities is very expensive.  Gasoline can reach $10.00/gallon.  Milk is 8-10 dollars a gallon a loaf of bread is 8 dollars and eggs when you can get them are 8-10 dollars a dozen.  Makes what I pay at the grocery store at home look cheap.  Is it any wonder that the residents of these villages still live the way their ancestors did by living off the land?

Some of you may wonder about utilities, something most of us take for granted where we live.  With these villages being so remote and without a road system there is no power grid.  Each village has its own power plant, diesel generator that produces the electricity for the village.  Once again the fuel has to be brought in during the summer and stored with enough to last until the next year.  Electricity cost are 3 to 4 times what I pay for electricity in Colorado.  Some villages are trying to find alternate energy sources and have the diesel generators for backup and emergency use.  Options are hydroelectric, if they are on a river or wind generators.  Solar is not an option here because of the lack of light in the winter and the snow cover that would accumulate on the panels.  Even in the summer, the sun is so low in the sky that it is not an efficient producer of electricity.

I expect to be headed south in a week or 10 days with our first stop being Dutch Harbor.  There about 20 of the people on board the vessel will leave and fly home.  We will have a few crew members from the vessel who will change out as well.  From Dutch Harbor, we head south to central America and through the Panama Canal and then north to the Gulf of Mexico.  More about that portion of the trip as I get there.  I am very excited about what lies ahead of me.|||

