People ask me, what is my daily life on a boat like. Well, I came on board the vessel in Seattle on the 31st of May.  Shortly thereafter, we put to sea with a brief stop in Dutch Harbor Alaska which is on the North side of Amaknak island.  Amaknak island is part of the Aleutian chain of islands that separates the northern Pacific Ocean and the Gulf of Alaska from the Bering Sea.  After just two days in Dutch Harbor for a splash of fuel and another pallet of groceries, we were off again for the Arctic Ocean.  This might be a good time to describe the vessel I am on.  The vessel is 360’ feet long and 80’ wide, it is a vessel designed to break ice.  We are a big vessel with a lot of horse power but we do not go fast.  Our average speed is only 9 knots with a top speed of 10.5 knots.  This is approximately 10-12 MPH.

We are currently staffed with 47 people; we are a floating city fully self-contained.  Before we left Seattle our grocery delivery arrived.  Some of you reading this may think of your big grocery shopping trips and filling a cart to overflowing, well our grocery delivery filled a semi-truck.   On delivery day groceries were brought on board using a crane to swing pallets from the dock to the main deck of the vessel.  Here a gang of guys broke down the pallets and hustled the frozen and refrigerated products off to the walking coolers and freezers.  The dry goods were taken by elevator up one level to the two walk through pantries off of the galley (kitchen).

To give you an idea of size these pantries are 18’ wide and 36’ deep each.  The staff in the galley cooks 4 meals a day, breakfast at 5:30 AM, lunch at 11:30 am, dinner at 5:30 PM, and midnight meal at 11:30 PM.  There are people working 4 primary shifts on board the vessel 6AM to 6PM, 6PM to 6AM, noon to midnight and midnight to noon.  The officers and bridge staff work 4 hours on and then 8 hours off with a minimum of 2 officers on the bridge at any one time.

Fuel is a major item for this vessel, we have the ability to carry close to 850,000 gallons of fuel.  Our propulsion system consists of four main engines totaling 21,600 horsepower although unless we are in heavy ice we normally run on just two engines.  Our power plant consists of four generators once again driven by 5400 HP diesel engines, we have backup emergency generators that will provide limited lighting and navigation equipment in the case of a catastrophic failure in the engine room.

Our engineering department, they guys who make the ship run consists of 10 people, they keep everything running from the engines to the heating and air conditioning, lights, water and yes even the toilets.  This is a big job and they are always busy.  These men are in charge of making our water, we take in sea water and it is processed to remove the salt and then is purified and used throughout the vessel.  Waste water is also treated and purified before being discharged.  Our trash is collected and burned in an incinerator that is fed with diesel fuel and waste oil from the engine room.  This incinerator is so efficient that there is little visible smoke discharged from the stack.

So that is the brief basics of the boat, but what about life on the boat you ask?  Like I said I came onboard the 31st of May so as I write this I have been aboard for 45 days.  I have found that I have fallen into a routine with daily activities and meetings.  Everyone here has their own routine with their work time and their off time.  About half of the people onboard make use of the onboard gym and exercise on a regular basis.  We all share movies and books that we brought with us.  We have internet service and phone service but both of these go through a satellite and there is limited bandwidth that everyone has to share so there is no streaming of movies.  Our rooms have TVs in them but the channels are limited and once again this is satellite TV and this far north and with the movement of the boat we often

We have internet service and phone service but both of these go through a satellite and there is limited bandwidth that everyone has to share so there is no streaming of movies.  Our rooms have TVs in them but the channels are limited and once again this is satellite TV and this far north and with the movement of the boat we often lose the signal.  Phone calls home are kept short as there are only a few phones setup to dial out and they go through the satellite as well.  Forget your cell phone, it is only good as an alarm clock we are too far from shore to pick up a signal.

Our rooms have TVs in them but the channels are limited and once again this is satellite TV and being this far north and with the movement of the boat we often lose the signal.  Phone calls home are kept short as there are only a few phones setup to dial out and they go through the satellite as well.  Forget your cell phone, it is only good as an alarm clock, as we are too far from shore to pick up a signal.

I am somewhere most people will never have a chance to go, so what am I seeing?  This is my second time here in the Arctic Ocean, I was here 3 years ago with a group of scientists who were doing a study on marine mammals.  So here I am, I have the best job ever, I am getting to see the world.  The trip from Seattle, WA to Dutch Harbor, AK was pretty uneventful, but we had nice scenery as we passed out through the Puget Sound.  The transit North also was uneventful with just an occasional passing cargo ship or tanker.  We did see an occasional group of dolphins and one pod of

The transit North also was uneventful with just an occasional passing cargo ship or tanker.  We did see an occasional group of dolphins and one pod of killer whale, Orca whales.   As we approached Dutch Harbor we met a ship carrying cars from Japan to the United States.  The vessel looked like a big floating bathtub, it did not have the bow and stern that one would expect to see on an ocean going ship.  We arrived outside of Dutch Harbor in a heavy fog but as we held position outside the anchorage awaiting the harbor pilot the fog lifted.  I never imagined that the island would be so green.  I had always thought of Dutch Harbor as being cold and snowy but the mountainside loos like a green carpet.  In the

We arrived outside of Dutch Harbor in a heavy fog, but as we held position outside the anchorage awaiting the harbor pilot the fog lifted.  I never imagined that the island would be so green.  I had always thought of Dutch Harbor as being cold and snowy but the mountainsides looked like a green carpet.  In the anchorage, there was a fuel tanker on anchor waiting to enter the harbor to unload fuel for the fishing fleet.  Around the tanker, we could see Humpback whales blowing.  We would see the cloud of water they would blow out as they surfaced to take a breath.  As we watched a whale started breaching, jumping up out of the water.  I went to the bridge wing where I was able to get some action shots as he passed by us.

A little while later there was a whale behind the boat that was bringing its tail out of the water and would slam it down creating large splashes.  We eventually entered the harbor and passed by 3 fish processing boats, large vessels that take the catch from the fishing boats, prepare it and package it for shipping to the grocery stores.

We left Dutch Harbor headed North on a foggy rainy morning.  We were traveling with the current and the wind was behind us so we made good time the first day.  Two days into this portion of the trip we passed by St. Lawrence Island, we were to the East of the island.  Later in the day, we entered the Bering Strait, the narrowest point between the United States and Russia.

Nome Alaska was to our East, Nome is famous for two things, one Nome is the finish line for the Iditarod sled dog race, and second it is where Bering Sea Gold is filmed for the Discovery Channel.  As we continued North off of Point Wales we saw Grey Whales and Bowhead Whales.  Fairway Rock, a granite rock about 4 acres in size passed by our port side.

Next came Diomede and Little Diomede Islands.  They were on our port side as well as we continued North.  Diomede Island belongs to Russia while Little Diomede Island belongs to the United States, there are only 2.5 miles of water between the islands and in the winter the sea freezes over so it is possible to walk between the islands, although I would not suggest this.  Through binoculars from the vessel bridge which is 80’ above the water, we could see the Russian mainland.

We finally reached the ice, now there is something to see.  It is not smooth but rather broken and jagged.  There are areas that are snow covered and white, some is a dirty brown from blown dirt that has settled on the snow.  There is blue ice, which the ship captain told me is old ice, ice that formed several years ago and the salt has leached out.  We come upon ice flows that have standing water on them, some of this water is a captivating blue.  Our ice advisor, an old Russian ice captain, tells me this is fresh water, water without salt in it.  He tells me that in the old days the ships would come along side of these flows and someone would go out and collect the fresh water from the flow to replenish the ships water supply.  We break through ice and as it rolls you can see the layers of how it developed.  Layers where it froze and where the snow fell, where the snow melted and refroze, it is like looking at the rings of a tree, it is looking back in time.

But what about the animals.  On the ice flows, we come upon seals.  I always thought a seal was a seal until I started this job.  The scientists have been teaching me about the different seals… ring seals, spotted seals, bearded seals.

I knew there were different whales but once again I did not realize the number of different whales until I started doing this.  Orca whales, which aren’t really a whale but actually more of a dolphin, Grey whales, Blue whales, Humpback whales, Bowhead whales, Beluga whales, Sperm whales, and the whale that I really want to see… The Narwhal whale.  This whale is the unicorn of the whale species; it has a horn that grows out of the top of its head.

We have seen walrus swimming in the ice flows and laying out sunning themselves on the ice.  Twice we have seen a polar bear, the one day he walked across the ice flows and would swim from flow to flow as he passed by the boat.  We were just drifting at the time and he checked us out but kept his distance.

So that is a bit about life on a vessel heading for the Arctic Circle on and what I have experienced thus far.  I have been onboard for 45 days so far and in the Arctic for 3 weeks.  The days are going to be getting shorter soon, currently, the sun does not set, it just gets lower on the southern horizon.  Once we actually have full darkness here we will be able to experience the Aurora Borealis, the northern lights.  They occur year round but can only be seen in the darkness.  I have seen them before but will save that experience of another blog.  Also to come is my experience transiting the new Panama Canal, the new locks just opened to shipping traffic.

So stay tuned to see how this adventure wraps up…|||

My journey about life on a vessel heading for the Arctic Circle and what I have experienced thus far. The things I have seen and where I am headed.