This is an attempt to give a quick guide to the top few levels of the Tricki. It may cease to be feasible when the Tricki gets bigger, but we might perhaps be able to automate additions to it. Clicking on arrows just to the right of the name of an article reveals its subarticles. If you want to hide the subarticles again, then you should click to the right of them rather than clicking on the name of one of the subarticles themselves, since otherwise you will follow a link to that subarticle.

What kind of problem am I trying to solve? Techniques for finding algorithms and algorithmic proofs How to use Euclid's algorithm Randomized algorithms front page Elementary randomized algorithms Brief summary ( This article is about algorithms that exploit the fact that repeated trials of the same experiment almost always give rise to the same approximate behaviour in the long term. A famous example of such an algorithm is the randomized algorithm of Miller and Rabin for testing whether a positive integer is prime. ) Random sampling using Markov chains Brief summary ( Suppose that you want to generate, uniformly at random, some combinatorial structure or substructure. If the structure is simple enough, then there may be an easy way of converting random bits into the structure you want, with the correct distribution. For example, to choose a random graph one can just pick each edge independently at random with probability 1/2. However, a trivial direct approach like this is often not possible: how, for example, would you choose a (labelled) tree uniformly at random? A commonly used technique in more difficult situations is to take a random walk through the "space" of all objects of interest and to prove that the walk is rapidly mixing, which means that after not too long the distribution of where the walk has reached is approximately uniform. )

General problem-solving tips Mathematicians need to be metamathematicians What can a lower bound say about potential proofs of the upper bound? Which techniques lead to which kinds of bounds? When does reformulating a problem count as progress? If you are getting stuck, then try to prove rigorously that your approach cannot work Two proofs of the same theorem usually have deep similarities

Front pages for different areas of mathematics Algebra Group theory Basic examples of groups Quick description (This page contains descriptions of a number of groups that can be used as tests for the truth or otherwise of general group-theoretic statements.) How to use group actions Proving results by letting a group act on a finite set Quick description (There are a number of group theoretic statements that do not mention group actions, but which can be solved by defining a set on which a given group acts and studying that action. Typically, the set is defined in terms of the group itself. This article gives several examples, and tips for choosing an appropriate action.) Actions on topological spaces Quick description (If you want to study a group , try to realize as the fundamental group of a topological space. This works best when is infinite and discrete, especially if is finitely presented and torsion-free.) Algebraic geometry Dimension counting via incidence varieties Quick description (There are many situations in algebraic geometry in which one wishes to compute dimensions of various spaces, such as the space of all lines contained in a given surface in projective space. One approach to doing this is via so-called incidence varieties. An incidence variety is essentially the graph of a relation (for example, the collection of all ordered pairs of lines and surfaces of a given degree , where the line lies on the surface), but thought of itself as a variety. Since the incidence variety is a set of ordered pairs, it admits two natural projections, onto the first or second member of each ordered pair. Playing off the information that one obtains from considering these two projections, it is often possible to make non-trivial deductions.) How to compute the dimensions of the fibres of a map of varieties Use finite fieldsQuick description (If you have an algebraic problem about the complex numbers, it might be possible to solve it by solving a similar, but easier, problem about finite fields.) Analysis Real analysis How to use the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem Quick description ( The Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem asserts that every bounded sequence of real numbers has a convergent subsequence. More generally, it states that if is a closed bounded subset of then every sequence in has a subsequence that converges to a point in . This article is not so much about the statement, or its proof, but about how to use it in applications. If you come across a statement of a certain form (explained in the article), then the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem may well be helpful. ) Constructing exotic sets and functions using limiting arguments Quick description ( If you want to construct a set or function with a strange property (for instance, you might want a function that was continuous everywhere and differentiable nowhere) then a good way of doing so is often to define your object as a limit of a sequence of objects that exhibit the behaviour you want on smaller and smaller distance scales.) I have a problem to solve in real analysis Quick description ( This is a page that tries to understand what kind of problem you are trying to solve, so that it can take you to appropriate advice on the Tricki.) I have a problem to solve in real analysis and I do not believe that a fundamental idea is needed I need to find a real number with a certain property I have a problem about the convergence of a sequence I have a problem about a supremum or an infimum I have a problem about an infinite sum I have a problem about open or closed sets I have a problem about differentiation in higher dimensions

How to use mathematical concepts and statements How to use the Baire category theorem How to use Bayes's theorem How to use the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem How to use the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality How to use the central limit theorem How to use the classification of finite simple groups How to use cohomology How to use compactness Convergent subsequences and diagonalization Quick description ( A topological space is sequentially compact if every sequence has a convergent subsequence. One form of the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem states that a closed bounded subset of is sequentially compact. More generally, compact metric spaces are sequentially compact. These facts have many applications. Also, some useful diagonalization techniques can be interpreted as saying that certain topological spaces are sequentially compact – as a result, one often hears the phrase "by compactness" when no topology has been specifically mentioned. ) Discretization followed by compactness arguments Quick description ( Often one proves a theorem about a continuous structure by finding a fairly dense finite subset of it and proving a finite statement about that instead. For this one needs the continuous structure to have a suitable compactness property. ) Using the fact that a continuous function on a compact set attains its bounds Quick description ( A continuous real-valued function defined on a compact topological space is bounded and attains its bounds. This fact has many applications, as this article demonstrates with some varied examples. ) How to use the continuum hypothesis How to use correlation inequalities How to use duality How to use entropy How to use fixed point theorems How to use the Fourier transform How to use generating functions How to use group actions How to use the Hahn-Banach theorem How to use the inclusion-exclusion principle How to use Janson's inequality How to use the Lovász local lemma How to use martingales How to use the max-flow-min-cut theorem How to use the mean value theorem How to use ordinals How to use the pigeonhole principle How to use the Riemann-Roch theorem How to use spectral gaps How to use Szemerédi's regularity lemma How to use Talagrand's inequality How to use ultrafilters How to use Zorn's lemma.|||

