Business, Internet and Businesses Online, Self Improvement, Reference and Education

We may assume that, on different occasions of your existence, you have wondered about your level of self-confidence and desired it to be greater. Many of the choices and decisions you make, both subconsciously and consciously, affect your feeling of security.

To boost your confidence, you should create new opportunities as well as healthy and active experiences entirely new to you, and see challenges through to the end instead of abandon after only trying once or twice.

Let’s go over some of the different possibilities. You may or may not recognize yourself in all or some of them, but I am pretty sure that there will be at least one of them.

You must have absolute faith and trust in the fact that you are a confident person because the primary key here to raise self-confidence is to believe in yourself.

You have to imagine yourself at your entire best. The challenge is to value the time that you spend doing this process because you need to embed it within your mind.

Here is a short animated video talking about “The six pillars of self-esteem” by Nathaniel Branden to improve your self-confidence.

The most damaging thing you can do to your self-image is to compare yourself to others. Do not look at your body in contrast to actors, singers, athletes or models.

You could copy some of their attributes, but you should be aware of your beauty and discover your style. Know that you are a wonderful and unique person, and by comparing your appearance or features to others it would make it more difficult for you to develop confidence.

To begin with, you must respect yourself for the person you are right now before wanting to admire who you wish to be in the future.

We all start with developing many negative beliefs early in life, but most of them can be adjusted or changed. These beliefs are primarily founded and fabricated through any negative life experiences, undesirable self-evaluations, and unreasonable expectations you had.

Can you identify a link place, event, or a particular person of the past which had any negative influence on your life? Maybe some negative beliefs you have about yourself? If you do, why do you believe it to be the truth based simply on opinions of people, or a negative moment?

Let go of the past and start afresh, and get rid of these beliefs by writing a small letter telling how you feel and by stating that you forgive it all, and you are now letting go. Seal the envelope and burn it. Just watch it burn as you release all feelings and are saying goodbye.

Any confident person would never think or say hurtful things about themselves. Observe your words or thoughts when you think or talk to yourself. Say only nice things to yourself that are positive, safe, fun, and make you feel good.

So to improve your self-assurance, examine the words or negative thoughts you have and make sure that they are remotely positive at all times.

Pay attention to what you read, watch, and listen because it affects your mindset. You should reduce the hours of TV you look at each day.

Read a book instead or something about a subject you are interested in. You should challenge the beliefs you have so you can raise your awareness and self-confidence.

In your daily life, it can be so easy to overlook how solid, attractive and talented you are as a person. But remember to take five minutes each day to practice self-awareness of your personal strengths.

In order to improve your self-confidence, you could make a list of your strengths and achievements. Read the list out loud on a regular basis and in front of a mirror as it makes more impact when you look at yourself.

You could even ask a close friend or anyone who cares about you to make a written list of what makes you the unique person that you are, why they care, and what you do better than anyone else.

Keep this list with you all the time and read it whenever you feel like you have little confidence.

If you have low self-confidence, it is perhaps because you have not taken the time to care about yourself. We all have physical and emotional needs, and if we do not meet those needs, we have a tendency to feel bad.

You should take at least 10-15 minutes just to meditate or pray about your life. Spend time each day on your personal hygiene. You should also eat a healthy and balanced diet. Make sure you are naturally getting enough vitamins and nutrients from fruits and vegetables.

Find a way to get some exercise, at least every day, like walking instead of driving to go to the store, or aim for a cardio by running twice a week.

Figure out whatever make you feel comfortable and confident, and wear these confidence cloaks as often as you can.

A significant way to feel more confident and secure about yourself is by achieving your goals. Too many people beat themselves up when they cannot realize their targets, so consider them by accomplishing them.

You should dream big! Your goals should challenge you. Measure your progress by your results, not just by what you do. Look at the progress you have made on the journey towards your final goal.

Rejoice in the small victories along your journey. To keep self-confidence at high levels, do not expect results overnight, but do not also procrastinate before putting in some effort. The best way is to hold yourself accountable.

To build more confidence, have a mentor or someone you admire for their skills or their achievements. Observe what they do, the way they handle any conflict, communicate with people and face challenges.

Copy some of the things they do and make it your own. Do not dwell on the past, see what you can do differently now. The current instant is the only thing you can change because the future does not yet exist and the past is already gone.

Focus on being the best version of yourself, and discover ways to make such version a reality and self-confidence will soar.

You should reflect on the people and events that have made your life what it is today. Try to remember that you would not be who you are now if some people had not cared and if it had not been through the circumstances you have been through.

Know that no life is perfect all the time. A mark of improving confidence is to be grateful for what you already have. Many of us struggle in this world, and many would like to have the simplest things you do have.

Your life might be difficult but remember that other people have it worse, and these people probably admire your life. Learn to appreciate the little things in life. Watch the sunrise, listen to the birds sing each day or sit in a park, and realize the fact that you are alive.

There are a lot of people who cannot say the same thing.

Hard times come and go, and all things do pass eventually, good or bad. So take comfort in knowing that you can improve your self-confidence at any time, get stronger and believe that things will get better.

Sergei VanBellinghen, Founder & CEO of First-Class Lifestyle and sergeivanbellinghen.com, Success & Self-Improvement Coach, Freedom entrepreneur & business partner of Stuart Ross, also counselor in East Europe-West relationships, a passionate Globetrotter and an avid audio booker|||

Learn to improve your self-confidence so that you may reach greater opportunities and success in life.