Yale’s famous School of Art doesn’t specialize in social practice. So when students at the School of Management teamed with an artist, hoping to use art to cultivate community leadership skills among its crop of future CEOs, they had to do it their own way. The result is “ESPEJISMO: A Festival of Borrowed Reflections,” a show that asks the public, “When people see you, what would you like them to know?”

The show gathers both personal narratives in response to that question, as well as actual mirrors donated from people in New Haven and beyond: students, artists, writers, homeless people, foreign dignitaries, and recent immigrants to name a few. The resulting display includes mirrors donated by notables including painter Hiroshi Senju, Nobel Prize-winning economist Robert Shiller, and Pulitzer Prize winning composer Du Yun.

The submissions, laid horizontally on the floor end to end, are on view in the school’s Bekenstein Atrium through April 30.

“ESPEJISMO” is the brainchild of Colombian-American artist Yazmany Arboleda, who is trained as an architect but frequently incorporates social engagement into his practice, working with student leaders Elaine Dang and Gayla Burks.

Dang said fostering civic engagement is part of the school’s mission. “As they contemplated the current cultural polarization, they felt that art would be a powerful catalyst to help bridge divides between communities, leveraging openness and empathy to create greater understanding and acceptance. They felt that community-built art would be a powerful catalyst to bridge divides.”

Arboleda explains that they reached out to Yale School of Art to see if their artists could be commissioned, but found that they didn’t have a focus in the field. They then reached out to limeSHIFT, a start-up Arboleda has worked with that brings artists into communities to co-create work.

“I quickly learned that the entire community wanted to engage, honestly, with the rest of the world beginning with their neighbors in New Haven as well as focusing on communities that are not being seen around the United States,” the artist told artnet News.

“The act of self-reflection can lead to self-improvement,” says Arboleda. “Reflection on the lives of others leads to empathy, awareness and the strengthening of community through curiosity. This garden of mirrors will be a monument to this considered forward movement.”|||

A project opening at Yale School of Management today invites viewers to submit personal objects and narratives that reflect who they are.