I thought some people here might be interested in a recent freedom related (not software related though) arrest that occurred the other day. I was essentially arrested for filming a police checkpoint in Manchester, New Hampshire (police invoked non-existent law to interfere with recording, made multiple contradicting and confusing requests, and were quick to obstruct and damage video recording equipment). Papers please. I don't think I'll be posting this to the ThinkPenguin blog as its irrelevant to free software / the company / etc. However I thought people here might be interested in following the case. The entire trial will be highly publicized, recorded, etc. One of the officers humorously threatens me with a motor vehicle violation. To be clear I was not drinking, not driving, had no car nearby (got there via another driver which had his car parks two or three blocks away), and in no way under the influence of drugs or alcohol.

Most likely I have a slam dunk case against the Manchester police department for violating my rights to record (Glik v. Cunniffe), violations of their authority to conduct the checkpoint (they'll likely end up in contempt once appropriate paperwork is filed with the superior court under which they had authority to operate said checkpoint), and interfering with the freedom of the press. There are multiple related parts to the incident including lawsuits, prior notices to quit harassment of us (the media), further complaints (required to bring a lawsuit in New Hampshire), motions to the superior court in regards to illegal police activity in relation to the checkpoint itself (the authority under which a checkpoint can legally be operated), a possible criminal trial (if it does not get dismissed or similar), etc.

Assuming the charges don't change before my arraignment it's a Class A Misdemeanor with up to a year in jail. This would entitle me to a jury. If instead it gets dropped to a Class B Misdemeanor I'll be denied my right to a trial by a jury of my peers. Provided nothing changes the charges shouldn't stick as I did not violate the all encompassing 'disorderly conduct' charge. To be specific it's a "disorderly conduct" charge that I was arrested for, but this can be changed before the arraignment (doesn't usually happen though). If your interested you can hear more about the arrest on the Free Talk Radio show that I co-host on Friday nights:

There will also be video posted of the incident leading up to the point of my arrest at http://www.freetalklive.com/ (my video was seized, but experienced correspondents bring back up, as I did, we had several people apart from the nearly 20 activists protesting the checkpoint with video cameras)

You can also watch other police accountability videos here:

You can find a similar 'stand your ground' video of me in a different context that was posted a few weeks ago (no arrests were made, as again, I'm an experienced media correspondent and aware of the laws, and police tactics, plus it doesn't hurt when you are with people who've already won numerous lawsuits against the police):

Also there are probably hundreds of police, state house hearings, and similar (where I and others have testified on freedom-connected issues like Bitcoin, crypto currency deregulation in relation to money transmitters, and drones particular concerning for drone operator privacy to more mundane issues including drug decrim and bureaucratic employer regulations making employers ask permission for and file paperwork to pay employees every two weeks instead of one- of which only a few states even require), and similar encounters over the past year + mostly of me yet-to-be published (though others have published videos of whom I was with in many cases see above two links).|||

