Kevin Lewis pointed me to this article:

There are several methods for building hype. The wealth of currently available public relations techniques usually forces the promoter to judge, a priori, what will likely be the best method. Meta-hype is a methodology that facilitates this decision by combining all identified hype algorithms pertinent for a particular promotion problem. Meta-hype generates a final press release that is at least as good as any of the other models considered for hyping the claim. The overarching aim of this work is to introduce meta-hype to analysts and practitioners. This work compares the performance of journal publication, preprints, blogs, twitter, Ted talks, NPR, and meta-hype to predict successful promotion. A nationwide database including 89,013 articles, tweets, and news stories. All algorithms were evaluated using the total publicity value (TPV) in a test sample that was not included in the training sample used to fit the prediction models. TPV for the models ranged between 0.693 and 0.720. Meta-hype was superior to all but one of the algorithms compared. An explanation of meta-hype steps is provided. Meta-hype is the first step in targeted hype, an analytic framework that yields double hyped promotion with fewer assumptions than the usual publicity methods. Different aspects of meta-hype depending on the context, its function within the targeted promotion framework, and the benefits of this methodology in the addiction to extreme claims are discussed.

I can’t seem to find the link right now, but you get the idea.

P.S. The above is a parody of the abstract of a recent article on “super learning” by Acion et al. I did not include a link because the parody was not supposed to be a criticism of the content of the paper in any way; I just thought some of the wording in the abstract was kinda funny. Indeed, I thought I’d disguised the abstract enough that no one would make the connection but I guess Google is more powerful than I’d realized.

But this discussion by Erin in the comment thread revealed that some people were taking this post in a way I had not intended. So I added this comment.

tl;dr: I’m not criticizing the content of the Acion et al. paper in any way, and the above post was not intended to be seen as such a criticism.|||

