Truck Bed Mats are used on the surface of the vehicle to make them free from scratches and dents that occur due to loading and unloading or goods shifting during transport. The effective and affordable truck bed mats are easy to buy and maintain. I will provide you with the list of best truck bed mat. From the list, you can easily make out the positive and negative points of the products. You can choose according to your requirements. The best brand is Dee Zee Bed Mats which comes in the number of varieties. You will better understand by reading the product description.

Dee Zee is one of the best truck bed mats that checks the vehicle from damaging due to shifting or transportation. If your vehicle faces any harm, then you feel like as if the value of your investment is hurt. It is made in USA and measures 5.5 feet, and the thickness is 9.52mm.

Genuine Bed Mat is one of the bed mats for trucks which you will find as the bestseller on Amazon. The size is 59 ½” L x 52 ½” W x 3/8” H, and the brand is Toyota. It comes in black color. The model is PT580-35050-SB and is suitable for short bed truck.

If you are looking for best truck bed mat, then Dee Zee Bat Mat (DZ86973) is the right choice. It is extra thick having 9.52 mm rubber compound construction. The weight is 45.00lbs.

BedRug is the truck bed protector that is designed for exterior use only. It contains 100 percent polypropylene and is 6’6” long. Its dimension is 69 x 12 x 12 inches, and weight is 9.8 pounds.

Genuine bed mats for trucks fit 5 feet x 8 inches’ short box. Easy to install and features GM logo. It fits 2014 GM Silverado Crew Cab and is black rubber black mat.

Occasionally the mat comes in used condition so for this you have to check carefully.

Some stains or dirt can be seen on mats.

Dee Zee is the rubber mat for truck beds that has the extra thickness of .375”, it is the rubber compound construction. The tailgate mat is sold separately. It is made in the USA and has limited lifetime warranty. For short bed applications trimming may be required.

Loadhandler Pickup Truck Bed Mat fits all full-size trucks and trims to fit all midsize or compact trucks. The length feet and width feet is eight and four respectively. It is constructed of high-density polyethylene and is black in color.

The “best truck bed mat reviews of 2017” have highlighted the pros and cons of the products. They are crucial as they protect the bed floor from dents, scratches, and cuts. The thick and durable product will offer satisfactory service. The bed floor of your truck will be saved by using best quality bed mat.|||

If you are looking for perfect truck bed protector, then check these reviews of best truck bed mats and get your most suitable pickup bed mat.