This is a simple blog built with Node/React/Redux. It is Dockerized, has server-side rendering and auth. It will also be federated with ActivityPub(still work in progress).

It can be useful as an example of integrating these technologies, as a starter project, or as a beautiful and simple blogging tool =)

I have tried to extensively comment the code, so you could easily understand what's going on, and apply it to your own projects.

This is my first project built with all this tech, so if you have suggestions on how to improve it - I'd really appreciate them. I will keep gradually improving this blog and adding more features. Feel free to contribute to this project, report bugs, or fork it and use it for your purposes. I hope you will find it useful!

You can always contact me at raymestalez@gmail.com, and you can check out the other stuff I'm working on over here.

Installing and running this blog is very simple. Clone this repo, and then simply run:

After that, the blog will be running on the localhost:3000. Isn't Docker amazing? =)

You will also need to create a user for yourself:

Now you can go to , login and begin blogging!

To deploy it online, go to Digital Ocean, create a Docker droplet, point your domain to it, and repeat the same commands.

For security, you will need to enter a unique secret key into .

You can modify the file to enter the information about your site - title, description, about page, etc.

To serve the blog on the port 80, I recommend setting up nginx to proxy all the requests to port 3000. You can see an example of nginx config here. This config is setup to serve the blog over https, so you will also need to follow this simple tutorial to configure SSL for your domain.

The database data is configured as a volume, so you can see it in the folder .

You can also run these commands to export things from db:

That will generate the file containing all of your posts.

To modify posts or edit db, you can sh into the db container:

And execute mongo shell commands. For example this one will find a post by slug and modify it:|||

vertex - Node/React/Redux blog. Dockerized, Isomorphic, has Auth. Will be decentralized.