Clayton Christensen wrote “The Innovators Dilemma” in 1997. What a buzz it has caused. So many people and publications use it, in fact, that I wonder if this very article will be lost amid the noise. The popularity of the theory speaks to its value, but society certainly uses it loosely. Consider this quote from The Economist, which refers to a Harvard Business Review article that Christensen co-authored:

The Economist continues on to argue that Christensen has gone too far in defense of a rigorous definition of the term by disqualifying Uber as a disruptive innovation.

I spent a few hours one day reading several of the opinionated attacks and counter-attacks about the theory. The confusion arises because there really isn’t an objective, clear definition of Disruptive Innovation.

Christensen, in the original book, points out that disruptive innovations are new technologies that start out by having worse performance than existing technologies. Importantly though, these disruptive innovations eventually come to dominate the market. It seems simple enough, but there is a problem: you can only define something as disruptive retroactively. If you label something as “disruptive” early on, and it never disrupts, then the label is wrong. Looking backward, it all works fine, but it causes major confusion when looking forward.

There are other problems: innovation that upends current technology and comes seemingly out of nowhere needs a name, whether it’s worse at the beginning or not. According to Christensen, the “initially better” ones don’t count as disruptive, but the application is altogether too tempting for most people. Uber wasn’t worse when it started, so it doesn’t fit the original definition, but it still disrupted the market in a big way.

It turns out these problems are solved in a little known paper, and the paper does much more than clear up terms: it delivers insights about how disruptive innovations work.

The paper is by Ashish Sood and Gerry Tellis, two marketing professors. The first key benefit they provide is a definition that is not retroactive, and one that decouples the “disruptive” part from the “initially inferior” part of Christensen’s. It requires preliminary definitions:

Read the paper for details, but findings are amazing:

The findings are much more nuanced than you might expect. I appreciate this kind of research, because it sets a valuable theory on a solid foundation. Christensen’s theory is extremely important, and always will be, because it explains why some well run firms suddenly collapse. But this paper sure helps clear up some of the conceptual mess that popularity can sometimes bring.|||

Clayton Christensen wrote “The Innovators Dilemma” in 1997. What a buzz it has caused. So many people and publications use it, in fact, that I wonder if this very article will be lost amid the noise…