Applications deployed in the cloud need memory, computing power and an operating system to run. Creating and administering these items can take a lot of work and maintenance. AWS Elastic beanstalk can take a lot of the setup work out of development/deployment and can save developers and companies time and hassle. AWS Elastic Beanstalk is an orchestration service that abstracts away some of these hardware resources and details (e.g. setting up AWS components), while still allowing the developer a range of choices when it comes to OS and programming language.

AWS Elastic Beanstalk supports multiple languages, which, includes, but is not limited to, Java, PHP, .NET and Docker. AWS Elastic Beanstalk provides tools to automate background tasks. Elastic Beanstalk employs Auto Scaling and Elastic Load Balancing to scale and balance workloads. It provides tools in the form of Amazon CloudWatch to monitor the health of deployed applications. It also provides capacity provisioning due to its reliance on AWS S3 and EC2. The AWS management console provides the option of using the Beanstalk API or Command Line Interface and has multiple Toolkits and SDKs for development. This creates a formidable and reliable infrastructure for deployment of cloud applications.

AWS Elastic Beanstalk actively separates the cloud from local systems in order to provide added security. HTTPS endpoints are used for access to services and enables encryption across accounts and the use of AWS consoles is restricted to people with the credentials. Additionally, a DMZ (Dematerialized Zone) can be set up with the help of Amazon Virtual Private Cloud by the developer so that a private subnet is created for AWS resources for more security. Access can be limited to read – only for some users with the help of Identity and Access Management. Deployed subnets show up on the dashboard as below:

Like most AWS services, AWS offers multiple regions where their servers are present.

Load Balancing is used to provide resources in cases where there are multiple instances that need to be run at the same time. This is necessary to provide the requisite resources to each instance and helps Amazon Auto Scaling to optimize the manner in which the application scales.

Beanstalk can be used alongside the Amazon S3. This provision is useful in cases the application is present in the cloud already in an S3 bucket, and can be called by its URL.

An alternative to the AWS Beanstalk is the AWS CloudFormation. This service provides a host of abstraction techniques whose focus is concentrated on the development of the application rather than how resources are handled.

CloudFormation is a simple resource handler that can manage multiple Beanstalk environments, as well as other AWS resources at the same time. Both have their own uses. While Beanstalk provides ease of use, CloudFormation provides greater control over resources one can deploy.

Many developers want to avoid the hassle of dealing with deep background details of the infrastructure. Elastic Beanstalk provides a simple environment in which they can develop and deploy their applications while letting Beanstalk handles a lot of the nitty gritty details.|||

AWS Elastic Beanstalk features explored and explained