The community has decidedly said yes, that Libreboot should apply to re-join the GNU project. We will therefore submit an application soon, while continuing to work on technical improvements to Libreboot.

It should be noted that I am merely the one who consulted the community to ask whether a re-join is in order. I wont actually be handling the re-join or anything else related from this point. Libreboot's spokesperson, Alyssa Rosenzweig, will be handling all communications with the GNU project. I will be sticking to the sidelines, focusing on technical developments in Libreboot and will not be handling any public relations at all.

I have stepped down as leader of the Libreboot project, while still remaining as a contributor. More information, including a page on the website detailing exactly who has what responsibilities in the project, will be published soon (Alyssa is working on it as I write this). Libreboot is run collectively by a team of people, with several people having direct SSH access and push access on the Git repository. Decisions (such as this) are taken democratically, with community approval.

It should be noted, that I have apologized directly to John Sullivan (executive director of the FSF) and Richard Stallman (founder and leader of the GNU project, and president of the FSF). Both have accepted my apology, and are happy that I am doing this and that Libreboot will once again work with them. This is irrespective of whether GNU does accept Libreboot again as a member, which is yet to be determined.

To those who do not support this decision:

For those in the community who may feel uncomfortable with this decision, due to my continued presence in the project, don't be. I mean it when I say that I am no longer leader of this project. I merely contribute to it, and help improve it as I did before. The only reason I ran this petition myself is because as the person who took Libreboot out of GNU, causing all this chaos in the first place, that it should be me who puts it back into GNU, to fix all of the damage that I had previously caused. Not only have I improved considerably as a person and not only is my enthusiasm for joining GNU real, it is highly unlikely that a repeat of previous events will happen again. Further, it would be impossible for me to do such a thing again, as I am no longer exclusively in control over this project. Others could stop me.

To repeat previous events would also be counter-productive anyway. Libreboot is about Libreboot, and nothing else. No politics, just code. There will be no more drama. My only crusade from now is porting more hardware to Libreboot, through my own efforts and by funding other developers. That's what joining GNU is all about.

It is uncertain whether GNU would actually accept this and allow Libreboot to re-join. We'll see.

The original text of my proposal is below:

I, Leah Rowe, am seeking to submit a proposal to GNU for Libreboot to re-join the GNU project. It was previously a member of GNU between 14 May 2016 to 15 September 2016.

Before I make this decision, as a result of democratic decision making in Libreboot nowadays, I need to see a lack of overall opposition from other maintainers (willingness to remain in the project after joining GNU, means that there is no meaningful opposition), and a substantial level of support by the public. The purpose of this Reddit thread is precisely to gauge public support for this decision, and based on that, whether to proceed. This is different than before, and reflects Libreboot's new democratic style of decision making. It will only be done with community approval.

Libreboot left GNU on 15 September 2016, with a string of allegations and slander thrown at the FSF for a topic unrelated to Libreboot. Chaos ensued, and Libreboot's relations with FSF and GNU were heavily damaged. All of it was unnecessary. What happened should not have happened, and I'd rather not talk about it in detail in this thread, but suffice it to say, Libreboot should have never left GNU.

On April 2nd, 2017, Libreboot issued a letter of peace to the community. It can be seen here, along with my own public apology for certain actions which I took during the period of September 2016 to the end of March 2017:

Libreboot now has a more democratic leadership, and major decisions are made with direct community involvement. Several people have access to the Libreboot project via SSH into libreboot.org, and push access to the Git repository. Patches (including those from me) are now pushed to branches and go under code review before being merged into the main development branch.

Libreboot is now operating in the same way that it was before joining GNU, with the exception of the above infrastructural changes, working closely in alliance with FSF and GNU, while being separate in its own administration and acting under its own independent guidance. While this is healthy, it is far from ideal for the LIbreboot project. In my opinion, we are better off operating directly under GNU.

I am strongly considering whether to submit an application for Libreboot to re-join the GNU project, and I'm leaning towards a "yes" decision. The current stable release (version 20160907) of Libreboot is from while Libreboot was a GNU member, and the infrastructure that Libreboot used from GNU (mailing lists, and the redirect from gnu.org/s/libreboot to libreboot.org) is still in place. If Libreboot were to re-join GNU, then it all falls into place and the project can continue as though it never left GNU in the first place. The conditions under which I removed Libreboot from GNU would not, if similar issues came up in the future, cause a 2nd exit. If Libreboot re-joins GNU, it joins GNU permanently and a repeat of prior chaotic events will not occur. Similar drama will not happen again. Libreboot is now only about Libreboot development, and nothing else.

The benefits to being part of the GNU project are numerous (and the same benefits as when Libreboot joined, and the reasons why Libreboot initially joined):

This would benefit the community as a whole, not to mention Libreboot and the GNU project itself.

Libreboot should have never left GNU in the first place!

There are no meaningful disadvantages to joining GNU. Except, perhaps:

The goal of GNU is 100% free software everywhere. Libreboot has the same goal.

The only other project similar to Libreboot is Librecore. However, it is unlikely that Librecore would ever join GNU, due to several issues, namely:

Libreboot already has a focused development effort, a long-term vision and a large community, and was very recently a GNU member. It can once again be a member of the GNU project, if the public and the GNU project itself would support such a decision to take place.

At present, GNU has no hardware initialization platform. It did have one, and that was Libreboot. What I propose today is for that to once again be the case.

Work is currently being done in Libreboot on the following, and could be released under GNU, if Libreboot were to re-join:

Generally, this would be a huge boon for GNU and for Libreboot. It is mutually beneficial, with just these facts alone. But there's more:

Other work, which currently cannot be done due to focus on the X220 port and an upcoming release (but they will be completed in future releases of Libreboot, potentially under GNU):

Being a member of GNU is beneficial for this purpose. GNU provides this possibility for other projects.

I am calling for discussion in the community, by members of the public, to gauge public opinion on whether this decision should be taken to re-join GNU. I have consulted the other lead maintainers in Libreboot, on IRC:

Generally, the leadership is "compatible" with re-joining, and would be appointed as GNU maintainers for Libreboot, if Libreboot were to re-join GNU.

If Libreboot does re-join GNU, the following changes will be made to the current Libreboot project:

The title on the homepage will change from "Libreboot" to "GNU Libreboot" All documentation will likely be re-licensed to use the GNU Free Documentation License, instead of CC-BY-SA (with permission from each respective copyright owner, of each section in the documentation). GNU FDL has several benefits, namely: requirement for documentation source files to be made available (e.g. Markdown sources) when compiled into another format, and anti-DRM clauses. CC-BY-SA lacks these features in its own license text. Points of contention are: Invariant clauses. Libreboot would reject any documentation patches that add Invariant clauses. This policy was in force while Libreboot was a GNU member, when it used GNU FDL for documentation. The documentation will remain in Markdown format, but steps will be taken to make it easier to convert the Markdown files into TexInfo, possibly using Pandoc. GNU's own standards recommend that, if a project does not use TexInfo for documentation, that it should ideally use a format that easily converts into TexInfo. This is the case in Libreboot. Libreboot has a new build system for ARM, which complies with GNU standards (this fact is yet to be determined, as we have not yet attempted to officially re-join). The old build system is still used for x86, and will be ported to the new build system. The term "Open Source" will be removed from the Libreboot homepage (currently, it is there for search engine optimization, and nothing else). Existing project infrastructure will continue to be hosted on libreboot.org, with gnu.org/s/libreboot redirecting to it. This redirect still exists since we left (the GNU project kept the redirect in place for us). GNU's own infrastructure for website management requires use of CVS, where the Libreboot project currently uses Git and has no plans to change that. The link to my FOSDEM 2017 talk on the Libreboot homepage will be deleted. I spoke negatively of the GNU project in that talk. I will simply hold another presentation about Libreboot, in the future. Or at the very least, point out next to the link that Libreboot is no longer hostile to GNU - quite the opposite. Libreboot will re-adopt GNU infrastructure for mailing lists (currently, the Libreboot project does not have a mailing list). GNU infrastructure for Git hosting, provided by Savannah, will be re-adopted. However, the main Git repository will still be hosted on notabug.org, where coe review is performed. GNU infrastructure for hosting release archives, provided by their FTP servers, will be used. This will provide Libreboot with a global network with which to host release archives. Existing mirrors will also still be used; Libreboot releases will still be made available on the existing rsync repository, for existing and future mirrors to sync from, while also using official GNU mirrors. Upcoming releases of Libreboot will once again be GNU releases, and will be announced in all of the standard GNU channels, including the "info-gnu" mailing list. The above will likely be required by GNU, for us to re-join, if they do re-consider Libreboot's GNU membership. We will also comply with other requests that they make, within reason. Libreboot will not assign copyright to FSF, nor will it require contributors to do so.

Any new requirements that GNU sets on Libreboot in the future, beyond the ones set if it does re-join, will be put to the community for discussion before adoption. However, this is unlikely to be needed, in most cases. Libreboot as a project will veto anything that will affect it negatively. This is unlikely to occur, however.

Libreboot's leadership will not change, with or without GNU membership. But it's leadership will possibly expand further under GNU.

I ask that all community members tell me what they think. I would like to ideally see at least a few hundred people explaining this, here on Reddit and elsewhere on the Internet.

regarding my FOSDEM 2017 talk, I could simply have that part of the talk which discusses Libreboot's prior exit from GNU removed from the video recording, so that the FOSDEM 2017 presentation for Libreboot does not contain anti-GNU sentiments in it.

In response to public feedback, I would like to make it clear that I am indeed stepping down as leader of the LIbreboot project. I am still working on improvements to Libreboot, including new hardware ports, but I am no longer the "face" of Libreboot and I no longer handle PR. I am simply a developer.

The only reason that I am handling public relations in this case, and handling Libreboot's possible re-entry GNU myself, is because I feel that since it was me who caused all the damage by taking Libreboot out of GNU, that the onus of responsibility lies on me to fix the damage that I caused, to re-build the broken relations and to bring Libreboot back into focus so that it can resume working on many important technological changes for the community, so that more libre hardware becomes available in the future. It would be unfair to leave this responsibility to other Libreboot maintainers, just as it was unfair of me in the past to place the burden on those people when Libreboot left GNU.

This public feedback solicitation is to gauge the public's support for Libreboot re-joining GNU. If Libreboot does submit an application to re-join (and it looks like it will, based on public feedback so far that this is the correct decision for the project), and GNU accepts Libreboot again, things will be very different than they were before.

I have already let go of leadership in this project, allowing others to have access to the site and to the project, so that the project is run democratically, by a collective team effort.

Whether Libreboot does re-join GNU (whether GNU will accept Libreboot again is still yet to be determined), I will very very much lay low after this initiative is finalized, regardless of which direction it takes. My only responsibility is to write code. Contributions that I do make, including large changes (such as new hardware support) for instance, is no longer simply pushed to the master branch in the Git repository. It is pushed to my own branch, subject to code review where others have to approve my patches for merging in the official Libreboot development/master branch.

Changes to the website are done with community involvement, and this includes all other Libreboot maintainers.

My only interest is improving Libreboot, helping the libre hardware and free software movement generally, to advance and to progress, in the interest of both Libreboot, the GNU project, the FSF and all others involved.

Regardless of whether Libreboot re-joins GNU, I obviously wish that all anti-GNU sentiment is deleted in the Libreboot project.

The Libreboot homepage links to the FOSDEM 2017 talk that I did about Libreboot, and there's a section in that talk with a slide about the GNU project, where I talk about Libreboot's departure from GNU. That part of the talk is very negative about GNU.

I've emailed the FOSDEM team, asking them to delete that section of the video, so that the video of my FOSDEM 2017 Libreboot talk no longer contains anti-GNU sentiments.

I currently await FOSDEM's response to this request.|||

UPDATE: The community has decidedly said yes, that Libreboot should apply to re-join the GNU project. We will therefore submit an application...