In order to eliminate back pain that already bothers you or to stay away from injuries that may occur from day to day activities, it is important to keep the core strong and flexible. There is a number of exercises doctors and personal trainers advise you to do, but how about that time of the day when you are not able to attend a gym or hit the floor for some “ME” time?

There is a solution – SpinaliS chairs for active sitting. As a matter of fact that is the BEST SOLUTION because you don’t have to do anything, but sit. At the first glance the SpinaliS chair looks like a well designed regular office chair, but there is a difference – a spring under its seat, which forces your body to keep itself in the balance thus working out your core muscles that in return will help you to get rid of the back pain and will improve your posture.

Check out SpinaliS Apollo Series chairs, which is an ideal choice for women or men with a smaller body type:

 https://www.spinalis-chairs.ca/spinalis-chairs/apollo/

What the Core Does?

The area of the body, which is commonly referred to as the core, is your midsection and it involves all your muscles in that area including the front, back and sides. The core includes the traverse abdominis (TVA), erector spinae, obliques and your lower lats.

These muscles work as stabilizers for the entire body. Core training is simply doing specific exercises to develop and strengthen these stabilizer muscles.

If any of these core muscles are weakened, it could result in lower back pain or a protruding waistlines. Keeping these core muscles strong can do wonders for your posture and help give you more strength in other exercises like running, walking or sitting on a SpinaliS chair.

For more info call 844 777 0489

 or drop by any of our three stores

Order online at https://www.spinalis-chairs.ca/spinalis-chairs/ and we will deliver any of the SpinaliS chairs of your choice right to your door!

FREE Shipping Anywhere in Canada

 Alberta AB, British Columbia BC, Manitoba MN, New Brunswick NB, Newfoundland and Labrador NL, Northwest Territories NT, Nova Scotia NS, Nunavut NU, Ontario ON, Prince Edward Island PEI, Quebec QC, Saskatchewan SK, Yukon YT (Alberta, Colombie-Britannique, Nouveau-Brunswick, Terre-Neuve-et-Labrador, Territoires du Nord-Ouest, Nouvelle-Écosse, Nunavut, Ontario, Île-du-Prince-Édouard, Québec, Saskatchewan, Yukon)

Medical Device

 SpinaliS chairs were developed with a help of doctors and evaluated as a Class I medical device. Clinical evaluation of the medical device was processed by multiple clinics in Europe. However, in Canada, it is not possible to claim SpinaliS chairs to write your taxes off and they are not covered by any kind of medical insurance or health plan, yet.

Abs and Back Workout

 Work out while sitting on any of the SpinaliS chairs and performing your daily tasks at the office or home.

Back Pain Relief

 SpinaliS Chairs will work out your core muscles for you. Just sit, do your thing and leave everything else up to SpinaliS.

Stylish Office Chairs

 Design of the SpinaliS Chairs is an eye candy – your customers will definitely notice them!

Yoga Ball Alternative

 It is recommended not to sit longer than 2 hours on a yoga ball, but on the SpinaliS chairs you can sit all day long.

Standing Desk Alternative

 SpinaliS chairs will actually make your body to work out and get you into a great shape without the hard task of standing or exercising.

Who does use SpinaliS?

 Google, Dubai Airport, SONY, IBM, DELL, Skoda Auto, CSOB Bank, Unicredit Bank, Vodafone and many more.

Ness Op Media Ltd. offers powerful web marketing and marketing solutions for the medium size businesses and start-ups. We guarantee rapid growth of your company without spending money on expensive Google AdWords and Facebook Newsfeeds. Tell us what you want and see the difference within a month .. guaranteed!

Call us now at 778 938 9883 for a FREE CONSULTATION!|||

Check out SpinaliS Apollo Series chairs, which is an ideal choice for women or men with a smaller body type.