Mobile application development has gone far beyond than expectation of the developers. These trends are contributing more to the overall advancement.

Smartphones have become an important part of our lives, all thanks to the evolution of mobile app development trends. Be it listening to your favorite music or reading the latest news, apps have contributed to make the experience a better one. The latest count of people using smartphones have gone beyond 2.1 billion worldwide. The count is expected to grow more with the amazing trends being developed every single day.

The use of smartphones is only going to grow in the current year. And, the popularity of apps will always add more to these trends. Appdexa, being a research and review firm keeps analyzing the trends in different domain. Here comes an insight of the trends that are prevailing in 2017. A brief on these trends have been summarized briefly here. Keep on reading to know everything about these trends!

Accelerated mobile pages or AMP is contributing to change the landscape of app development this current year. Being an ambitious Google project, accelerated mobile pages or AMP has been created to support the apps that load slowly. The idea behind the development of this app is to reduce the bounce rate of applications and help them load quickly. It also helps to increase the app visibility and extend the number of visitors for any particular app.

Apple’s Siri is the best example of artificial intelligence embedded in smartphone devices. The way it assists the users is not less that an imagination coming into reality. As compared to the last year, there is nearly 300% increase in the investment in the area of artificial intelligence. Companies are using smart analytical approach to boost the machine learning and providing new offerings to the users.

The evolution of enterprise apps along with micro-apps is on a rise for the current year. The prime goal of such apps is to manage the crucial business process from an integrated app. Micro-app, on the other hand, aims to target specific operations in order to take less load. Evernote is an example of enterprise app and Facebook’s messenger is the best example for micro-apps.

Security is getting the most important concern for app developers globally. As hackers keep on developing new tricks and techniques, app security is getting crucial. Gartner has predicted that more than 75% of apps cannot even pass the basic security test. This is a direct loss to the apps and the business related to them. Thus, the measures for app security will keep on growing so that applications must be secured from hacking attempts.

These innovative mobile app development trends are going to get more prominent in the year 2017. As the approach of developing mobile apps have gone innovative in the approach, a continuous development is going around to make the approach more prominent. Thus, following all these trends will help developers to grow their skills.|||

Mobile application development has gone far beyond than expectation of the developers. These trends are contributing more to the overall advancement. Smartphones have become an important part of our lives, all thanks to the evolution of mobile app development trends. Be it listening to your favorite music or reading the latest news, apps have contributed…