How to develop a successful app for Chinese market

Chinese mobile apps market is quite different from others. That is why it’s not enough simply to translate your interface into chinese to create a successful app for this market.

Let’s find out how to create a hot cake app for China. Our team used many features mentioned in this article to create analogues of Russian apps for Chinese market.

First of all, let’s look at some numbers that can explain while it’s so important to conquer China with your app. According to QuestMobile statistics in December 2016 China got more than 746 millions of active Android users and no less than 276 millions of iOS users. Top apps in China are actively used by more than 50 millions users every month. Users purchase most of the items with a help of mobile apps.

It means that China is not just a wide audience to look at, it’s a whole country of financially reliable users that are open to mobile business.

Chinese mobile market has some features that make it stand apart from other countries. It’s necessary to know these basics before you can start an actual development.

4. Promoting iOS app, on the contrary, has little differences from working with any other apps store.

5. Every mobile or web business in China needs to acquire a special license. Depending on the type of the service you may need some additional documentation. Remember to consult on this matter before you start working on the app. It’s important to remember that this license is given to Chinese companies only and you’ll need a chinese partner in any case. All your servers also need to be placed in China.

6. For new players on the market it’s also important to сonsider some payment differences. Every payment in China is made with mobile transactions or with help of electronic wallets. There is only a small percentage of people who use credit cards.

Even if your app is carefully structured and works well on other markets, you’d better revise your app’ logic and architecture. It’s not enough to translate your screens into Chinese. Moreover, translation agencies are often lack the knowledge of dialects needed which you cannot review without great orientalists in-house.

You need to be very careful with this issue, — bad localisation will grant you no impact. Moreover, don’t forget that you will still need someone who will manage tech support in Chinese. People there like to call the support in every case possible, and you cannot ignore this detail.

Don’t forget that many popular international apps such as Youtube and Facebook are banned in China. Even if you can download it in stores, they won’t work without using VPN. That is why while integrating various services into your app and adding some functions it’s better to look for chinese analogues. Especially when there are so many of them.

I remember that somewhere around 10 years ago the was a meme flooding the internet with various examples of how chinese keyboard supposed to look. In real life the situation is even more complex and it’s not a matter of one keyboard only.

Chinese people use many various methods to enter hieroglyphs. Methods vary by time and place of birth of every user. The most popular one is Pinyin — type of writing based on latin characters that creates hieroglyphs after inserting some parts of it.

There is another interesting type of text insertion. Some apps offer you to type latin words in Search and then show you results in Chinese. Such apps use heuristic algorithms to offer you various replacements in case of misspelling.

Still, to create such solution you need to dwell deep into the question. If your app will support all types of characters’ insertion, if it will have partial-match retrieval search — it will be noticed. However, in most of the cases such approach is too time-consuming. It’s easier to avoid text usage.

In China you can easily use voice messages, voice search and chats instead.

In our country the culture of voice messaging is not spread so well as in China. Russians become awkward when they need to answer voice messages, especially while going through the crowd of people. In China the situation is much simpler. You can often see a person who has a phone over his mouth while pressing the ‘Record’ button with his finger. Most likely such person has a conversation via voice messaging.

People in China love using voice while chatting in various messengers like WeChat (analogue of Facebook and Snapchat at the same time). By adding this function every app also add older generations, who don’t know much about various text insertion options, to their audience.

Voice search is also available in most of the apps. For example, Baidu mentions that 10% of search over their platform is made with voice.

Chinese mobile messengers have various company’ accounts which interface is based on regular chat. Such accounts are used way more frequent than stand-alone apps for the companies.

In such chat you can send any message to the company (text, voice, image, emoji ones, etc.) and receive an automated answer or answer from the employee. The interface of such chat has almost no differences from the ones people use to chat with their friends. That is why no additional training before using this app is required. In such chat users receive news, special offers and upgrades.

It’s important to know before starting your own app development because this model had a huge success on Chinese market. It was so trendy that many developers began to create UI of their apps around chat interface. Such interface is used by Sina Weibo and QQ, for example. It’s also used for the tech support screens.

Don’t reinvent the wheel while creating a new pack of your own smileys. QQ service created an unified Chinese standard pack of smiles years ago. This pack consists of something around 80 icons and depicts many basic and some very specific emotions. No wonder, that other apps began to use these emoticons right after it was copied by WeChat. China also uses animated stickers, but it’s not so widely popular.

Often you can see an element of interface that is unique for chinese apps.

It’s a standard red (or other sole-colored) icon that we often see in apps that need updates, but this icon has no number written over it. Such icons are used everywhere: you can find it in any menu section, in any list or even in tabs on the bottom of the screen. If you didn’t open your app for a while, almost every section of menu can be powered with such icons.

If you ever used one of the popular worldwide apps like Meitu, then you have probably seen such icons even in your localization.

Historically, these icons appeared because chinese apps have many functions and services mixed together and the structure of every app is complex. It’s harder to navigate user towards his goal. To make it easier such additional elements were added.

There are several meanings behind these red icons:

In China such red icons can be used together with number icons. In such cases the number icon is main and shows the new features that user needs to install in order to continue using this app.

In Russian QR-codes never became popular, but China use it actively. Such codes are used to spread the link to marketing sites, to add new users to the contact lists, to authorize on certain sites.

No wonder that QR-codes in China are printed everywhere: on billboards, on the restaurant menus, business cards, on the back of the train seats and even on the WC doors.

Most of the apps have their own QR-reader built-in. You can encounter such codes that work only in one certain app, that is why usually there are several codes available and printed in a row for various apps. Usually such codes contain links that cannot be scanned by any other app except the one they were created for.

For Russia it’s typical to have two types of authorization process: traditional one with confirmation of email and password insertion, and another one with authentication with third-party such as Facebook or Google.

In China it’s also possible to authorize by scanning QR-code with the help of the app. This code contains encrypted identification with limited operation time. If you scan it with a mobile app, it associates certain browser session with authorized account in the app.

Such type of authorization is ideal for situations when you don’t need user to enter the password.

Many apps offer users to authorize with their accounts in partner apps like WeChat, QQ, Sina Weibo, etc.

I’ve mentioned already that online payments in China are a little bit different from other markets. Online payments struggled their way to access China for a long time due to some difficulties with banks. Instead of simple card number insertion, user needed to choose his bank from the list, to fill a long form and only then his account becomes chained up to his card.

Such process required every app to have the unique solution for integration with every bank in China. That is why third-party payment options quickly spread around China. Almost every chinese app is using such third-party options from distributors like Tenpay and Alipay.

Some apps connect your profile right to the bank account and this profile is later used as a third-party by other apps. In such case you don’t need to connect your name to your card in every app, it’s enough to make it once to use it all over the various apps.

Outside of China I rarely see this function.

You can manage your payments from one screen where you can also make a purchase offline (by scanning QR-code that you’ve seen in the city), send a payment to a friend, make additional purchase (if you making the same purchase over and over again, for e.g. paying for mobile operator services, it goes into this list where you can easily repeat it).

Usually e-wallet interface is unified and differs only a little from app to app. It’s convenient to use because people don’t need to adjust to a new service.

Sometimes there are additional protection measures upon registration in chinese e-wallets. Most of the time it’s CAPTCHA field that you need to fill in order to process with your work. On the other hand, this element isn’t crucial and you can create an app without it.

Chinese apps are full of various characters and mascots that are not necessary correspond to the main brand image. It’s not necessary to create a special character for your app, but it may become a cute addition that your users will like. It usually a win-win option for an entertainment app.

In Russia geolocation used mostly in delivery services and services that call a specialist to your home. In China usage of geolocation data skyrocketed to a completely new level.

There are many apps that help you to connect with complete strangers passing nearby. And people are ok with it. This function is widespread and commonly used in China.

There is also an app called Momo, that was created exactly for such goals. With its’ help you can meet new people living near you and find out more about the current events in your area. This app is so popular that it has more than 60 millions of active users per month.

Almost every chinese app has some additional features based on geolocation data.

Chinese messengers started to conquer this road the same time as Facebook or even before it. WeChat and QQ, for example, have such feature as ‘People nearby’ that shows you the list of users close to your location and gives you access to their photos and newsfeeds.

Most of the music, video or TV apps show you what users are watching or listening to currently. This feature also gives you opportunity to share your playlists.

Every app, that is somehow connected to receiving of information, gives you an opportunity to download content to use it in offline mode. Advertisement of such apps is fully focused on such features. Moreover, such apps often ask you to choose the quality of content you wish to download no matter what type of content it is, — song, movie or even a text.

In Chinese subway you can often see people who use this option to its’ max: they are watching their favorite shows or movies on they way to their work. And all it’s possible thanks to content download option.

In Russia, on the contrary, there are almost no apps with such feature, at least because Moscow subway has it’s own Wi-Fi network and there is no need to download content anymore. Still, many news apps in China give you such option even now. The same functionality you can see, for example, on Netflix, where you can download your favorite series to watch it later.

In China you can also download various vocabularies that will help you to translate from Chinese to English and back offline. There are many services that offer you to save and use offline maps of your city or the whole country.

It’s also necessary to mention that such apps in China always notify you about how much space of your device’ storage every material is going to use. It’s important feature — chinese like such details to be provided.

Monetization of apps in China is similar to the same process in other countries in the region. Usually you can monetize your app with in-app purchases and ads.

I advise you to try banner and video advertising.

There are some apps that show you pop-up full screen banners upon loading, but there are very few of them. Sometimes these banners have useful info about content that you can purchase within an app, sometimes they advertise some special offers or events.

Most of the time such advertising isn’t connected to the app itself, it’s just a set of common ads and notifications that you can see on billboard or in transport.

Video advertising may simply show some videos to the users or offer them to see a video for in-app bonuses. You can also ask users to install an app or recommend it to a friend in exchange of inner app currency.

Paid apps in China are also common. Moreover, in China, Japan and South Korea users are comfortable with paying for mobile applications.

I hope that this article gave you the insights needed to start your mobile business in China. If you have some additional information to cover for this topic — please, send me a note, I will add it to the article. If you liked the story I’ll be thankful if you’ll give us a heart.|||

Chinese mobile apps market is quite different from others. That is why it’s not enough simply to translate your interface into chinese to create a successful app for this market. Let’s find out how…