For $85 a night, the Airbnb listing boasting the “best view” of the University of Massachusetts — complete with laundry room access and upscale amenities like a microwave — might seem like a steal.

But university officials didn’t agree with one overzealous student who tried to make a buck off her dorm room earlier this spring, according to the Daily Hampshire Gazette, which reports the school shut down the listing before she could make any cash from the dorm room in the Southwest Residential Area of the school’s campus in Amherst.

The student, who was not identified, listed the space as a “Luxury Room in Southwest” with a single bed for rent on the popular website, which has since been removed since renting out a dorm room violates the school’s residence hall contract, according to university spokesman Ed Blaguszewski.

“It’s against our policy for lots of good reasons,” he told Western Mass News. “We don’t want people who are not a part of the university community to be in those buildings unless they are a friend or guest of someone. You really can’t make money off of [the] university.”

School officials declined to elaborate aside from saying that the student was contacted by the school and that the room was never rented to anyone. The female student used only her first name in the Airbnb listing and asked the Gazette not to identify her since she was being harassed and feared for her safety, she said.

“I used my room as a way to make money and meet other people,” she wrote in an email interview via Airbnb cited by the Gazette.

The listing, which noted the room’s proximity to dining halls, warned against partying, however, saying anyone who didn’t comply with that directive would be “written up and asked to leave,” the Gazette reports.

Some students at the school said they admired the ingenuity behind the failed scheme.

“Go get your money, I don’t have a problem with it,” student Terrence Agyare-May told Western Mass News. “College is expensive and she is doing what she has to do to make a coin, I’m all for it.”

Another student said he might’ve done it himself had he thought of the subletting scheme first, while another said he found it to be an “odd thing” to try to pull off.

“I think it would be kind of crazy,” student Kyle Daluz said. “I think it would be a funny idea to try and make some extra money and try to do some different things. But I think it’s kind of odd … It’s just kind of an odd thing to do.”

Messages seeking additional comment from university officials were not immediately returned Thursday.

It’s not the first time a college student saw their dorm room as a possible way to make money on Airbnb.

A student at Emerson College rented his single, private dorm room to three people last January before university officials learned of his Airbnb listing. The company refunded the student $150 for an automatic cancellation charge he incurred after removing the listing at the request of university officials, the Boston Globe reported.|||

For $85 a night, the Airbnb listing boasting the “best view” of the University of Massachusetts — complete with laundry room access and upscale...