Samsung Galaxy S8 smartphone was launched in March 2017. The phone comes with a 5.80-inch touchscreen display with a resolution of 1440 pixels by 2960 pixels at a PPI of 570 pixels per inch. Some Samsung fans prefer to change this new one. Here we will focus on Galaxy S8 data recovery. The best way to protect your Samsung data is to backup it regularly. However, data loss always happen unexpectedly. If unfortunately you do not have a backup file, there is also one way to get back the lost or deleted S8 data. In addition, it is also the only way - that is using a third-party software. There are many Samsung data recovery software in the market. If you want to retrieve your lost data from Galaxy S8 with these software, you must root your device first. Only rooted device can authorize access to the third-party software. But we can not find a way to root S8 now. That means you can not restore all your missing data via third-party data recovery tool. In this article, we will take Jihosoft Samsung Data Recovery software for example. This Samsung data recovery tool has good reputation among users. It can recover contacts, photos, videos, sms, call history, music, WhatsApp, Viber from rooted Samsung phones and tablets. For today's situation, you can also use Jihosoft Samsung Phone Recovery software. You are allowed to scan and restore lost contacts, messages, call logs in Database from your S8 without rooting. 1. Download, install and run this software on your PC or Mac. 2. Select "Database" file type to continue which contains your contacts, messages and call logs information. 3. Connect your S8 to computer via USB cable and enable the USB debugging. 4. Start to scan your S8 information, preview the result and selectively recover according to your needs. Note: If your Android USB driver not working on computer, you should check the state of drivers. Your lost S8 data should be back on your computer after following the above steps. If you still have doubt about , contact . It helps recover data from S8 due to factory reset, deletion, virus attack, system upgrade, system crash. It helps recover data both from S8 internal memory and SD card. It supports most Samsung phone types like Samsung Galaxy S8/S8 Plus/S7/S7 Edge/S6/S6 Edge/S5/S4/S3/S2, Galaxy Note 7/5/4/3/2, Galaxy J series, Galaxy C series, Galaxy A series, Galaxy On series and etc. How to Recover Data after Factory Reset Android

 Top 5 Best Android Recovery Software to Restore Data on Android

 Two Ways to Recover Deleted/Lost Data on Samsung Galaxy Note 2/3/4/5

|||

Read story Recover Contacts, Messages, Call Logs from Samsung Galaxy S8 by Oliana2016 (Free Android Data Recovery ) with 8 reads. samsung, galaxy, data. Samsun...