Are License Plate Covers Illegal?

Hey what’s up guys and welcome back to Cops Court and Coffee, I’m Darnell Eason. Now its seems like there is a lot of enforcement technology out there that’s generating a lot of revenue for city’s across the country…such as red light and speed cameras. But it seems that as this type of enforcement increases, so do the ways that people try to defeat them. 



So I’ve been asked many times, are license plate covers like this one…illegal. And the answer to that question is yes. Now just about every state has a law concerning license plate covers, but I can tell you with absolute certainty…that they are illegal here in New York. 



The law which can be found under New York State’s Vehicle and Traffic Law section 402 1 B states that :

Number plates shall be kept clean and in a condition so as to be easily readable and shall not be covered by glass or any plastic material, and shall not be knowingly covered or coated with any artificial or synthetic material or substance that conceals or obscures such number plates or that distorts a recorded or photographic image of such number plates, and the view of such number plates shall not be obstructed by any part of the vehicle or by anything carried thereon, except for a receiver-transmitter issued by a publicly owned tolling facility in connection with electronic toll collection when such receiver-transmitter is affixed to the exterior of a vehicle in accordance with mounting instructions provided by the tolling facility. 



So what does that mean? Well basically what that means is that nothing can be covering your license plate unless you have a bumper mounted ez-pass tag, which normally that goes on the front of your vehicle. Keep in mind that if you get stopped by law enforcement…you could be subject to a traffic summons and fine. And please don’t say that you didn’t know that is was illegal…because #1 you are supposed to know the vehicle and traffic law as a license driver, and #2 you should read the packaging these things come in because the warning on the package tell you that this product is for off road use only and that you should check your local law before using this product. I hope this answers any questions you may have. 



If you guys have any questions for me, please leave them in the comment section below. Please give this video a thumbs up and don’t forget to subscribe. 



JOIN ME ON MY JOURNEY TO 1 MILLION SUBSCRIBERS!!!

SUBSCRIBE, COMMENT AND SHARE ON FACEBOOK AND TWITTER!!!



Support The Cops Court and Coffee Channel:

https://shop.spreadshirt.com/copscour...



Subscribe To Cops Court and Coffee:

https://www.youtube.com/copscourtandc...



Like Us On Facebook:

https://www.facebook.com/copscourtand...



Follow Us On Twitter:

https://twitter.com/Copscourtcoffee



Check Out The Blog:

https://www.copscourtandcoffee.com



Are License Plate Covers Illegal|||

Are License Plate Covers Illegal? Hey what’s up guys and welcome back to Cops Court and Coffee, I’m Darnell Eason. Now its seems like there is a lot of enfor...