Frequently, marketing teams face the old question of social media ROI: "What is this really doing for the company, on the bottom line?" Much of our work with metrics and signals is meant to prove that social media marketing really does make a difference, especially when there is buy-in throughout the company. Today, we're going to talk about one of the most direct types of ROI possible, the sale, and how It's now easier on Facebook than ever before.

Shopify has been working with Facebook for some time to bring a goal to fruition: Selling directly on the Facebook site using Messenger, the popular Facebook messaging app that's built right into the news feed. The result is a new Shopify feature that companies on Facebook can use to inform online customers about their products, and then facilitate a sale.

So, if you've been trying to convince your boss to increase your presence/budget for Facebook, this is a development that you absolutely need to use. If you're already working on your Facebook profile and interactions, this is a tool that you should incorporate ASAP – as long as you have products that can be sold through a social media. Let's get into more specifics so you can tell if this is a good plan or not.

The first step is creating a messaging conversation with a customer on Facebook. This is accomplished through the Shopify Messenger sales channel: With Shopify downloaded, this allows customers to open up (when prompted) a Messenger window that's far more advanced than the typical IM Messenger format: Customers here can actually peruse a shopping catalog and search for basic product terms to see what's available, read product descriptions, and see product sizes.

Even if you don't intend to sell via Facebook, this is an excellent feature to include in your Facebook profile, and a good reason to pick up the Shopify service.

All right, so Shopify allows you to create a little search-and-find Messenger product catalog. It's fun, but the real monetary advantage comes in when people actually want to buy. Here, the app allows customers to choose a product and process the payment right from the Messenger window. Popular online payment options like PayPal are supported, as are popular credit cards and similar methods.

Now, you may be thinking, "So do we need someone on Facebook duty at all times to help make these sales?" In business hours, this could be an effective strategy to answer customer questions (which the app allows for). However, there's another solution on the rise that we've been talking about – the chatbot. An effective Facebok Messenger chatbot can facilitate simple sales automatically, up to and including payment options, so you don't necessarily need to have a real person keep an eye on Facebook at all times. Shopify's new features is basically a very simple chatbot as it now stands, so you don't technically need a real time rep to complete the sale!

Even if you don't plan to sell much directly on Facebook, we suggest you take a look at the other benefits a Shopify sales tab can provide on your Facebook page. Sales and products aside, these tools allows users to:

The key is convincing customers to opt into the Shopify settings, so we suggest sparing space for a quick blurb explaining how your company uses Shopify and why it's safe to use to get updated information. Remember, the more people you can encourage to use these services, the more your Facebook traffic and signals will also rise as people spend time on your profile. There are multiple benefits here, especially if you've been wanting to give your Facebook strategy a shot in the arm. Try it out!|||

Companies can us the Shopify feature integrated with Facebook messenger to inform online customers about their products, and then facilitate a sale.