Will Chinese Governments and other foreigners dump USA assets because of the exposed SEC “Securities Exchange Commission” data being exposed allowing for any hacker to execute the below tools to extract highly sensitive data? According to reports, Gigabytes if now Terabytes of SEC data can be extracted as of now throw this method to simply extract financial information for criminals to steal. The data however was not secured using the correct access control list options to secure files with inside the directory. Tools such as scp “secure copy”, ftp “file transfer protocol, sftp, and other arbitrary hacking tools can be used to query the Securities exchange commission directory since it’s not secured with “ACLS” and extract massive amounts of data quickly to any offsite Server, which would or will cause financial collapse because SEC data will be of no good use. The following link you can visit SEC “Securities Exchange Commission” link, which is a FTP share that should have been secured and download a archive of 10-k data that turns out to be over 100’s of Billions of dollars (“FORBIDDEN FTP SHARE TO ACCESSAT SEC “SECURITIES EXCHANGE COMMISSION”)(FORBIDDEN SEC FTP SHARE)(FORBIDDEN FTP SEC SHARE TO EXTRACT DATA)(FORBIDDEN SEC SHARE ACCESSIBLE)(2017). The previous server tools can be used to extract the high powered Securities Exchange Commission to any location however this can be sent through proxies that will be crowded through Millions of servers, but we have seen all the data being extracted. The Hacker News previously reported “SEC CIK Confirmation Codes to Retrieve Funds on the Web”, which researchers from “POGO” a federal misconduct agency that fines company’s 100 of billions of dollars however we found a tweet from various investigative researchers that located articles, which stated Hewlett Packard and Google assisted 5 Million businesses to secure their data, but since then a massive security glitch erupted to exposing over 200 Million sensitive, classified, confidential, and do not distribute data. (Tweets from POGO federal agents) (2014). In 2014 Hewlett-Packard today agreed to pay a total of $108 million to the Securities and Exchange Commission to settle civil and criminal charges over violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, but in this case it is much deeper fines that can result in seizure of corporate assets and property as we located the CIK and CCC codes on Onion Deep Web. We was able to located 100 of millions of corporations CIK and CCC codes to be able to gain access to financial securities and the ability to execute illegal trades. Most of the topics that are of interest in the Deep Web are illegal credit cards, drugs, sex, illegal identity, and other miscellaneous activities (The Deep Web) (2015). In the pastHewlett Packard have engaged with SEC on illegal handlings involving IT contracts, but in this new shocking find we was able to parse 100 of Millions of CIK and the CCC codes exposed. This CIK and CCC is used to access 20 Million sensitive corporate filings, which Cyber Criminals and Terrorists can extract to gain control over US financial securities. Our Investigators was able to extract sensitive corporate data used to access their accounts and passwords contained in the database at the following link ( SEC sensitive coded data to be accessed ) (2015). The amount of times all files was downloaded is overwhelming however these files are floating on the underground with cybercriminals. The following link shows that the data directory is not allowed to be browsed however highly powerful data used to extract sensitive account information can be obtained to obtain financial access to resources ( No directory browsing link) (2015). Our researchers from “POGO” a federal misconduct agency that fines company’s 100 of billions of dollars however we found a tweet from various investigative researchers that located articles, which stated Hewlett Packard and Google assisted 5 Million businesses to secure their data, but since then a massive

and do not distribute data. ( Tweets from POGO federal agents) (2014). In

2014 Hewlett-Packard agreed  to pay a total of $108 million to the Securities and

Exchange Commission to settle civil and criminal charges over violations of the Foreign

Corrupt Practices Act, but in this case it is much deeper fines that can result in seizure

of corporate assets and property as we located the CIK and CCC codes on Onion Deep

Web. The deep web allows for cyber criminals and terrorists to exchange any type of

information for financial benefit, sex, drugs, and false identity, which in this case this

type of information was never seen before and is being used to funnel cash out of

corporate accounts. We was able to located 100 of millions of corporations CIK and

CCC codes to be able to gain access tofinancial securities and the ability to execute

illegal trades. Most of thetopics that are of interest in the Deep Web are illegal credit

cards, drugs, sex, illegal identity, and other miscellaneous activities (The Deep Web)

(2015). In order to sign up for the Deep Web you must know how to configure

your operating system to configure the .onion files. The following site

explains what CCC confirmation code is used for however tons of CCC/CIK code

information and PIN is accessible through millions of businesses however even a

homeless man can easily get funds, but one must know how to disguise themselves

to steal ( Meaning of CCC code restricted to be seen) (2015). We recently found several

articles, but the most interesting is from Hackbusters that shows HP engaging with 5

confidential documents however the link leads to Databreaches.net, which is a

top recommended source for the worlds most largest data breaches. (Hackbusters

exposes HP and partners) (2015). The following link shows the CCC confirmation

codes, but we was able to simply Google what we needed and quickly become

instant Millionaires and Billionaires to sell this information off on the Under

codes defining its meaning and forbidden access to documents with this information to|||

