This is a list of product management blog posts, podcasts, and other resources that I've found useful in learning and growing as a product manager. Shoot me a note if you have resources you love and don't see here. Back to our blog Do you wish you had time to gather all the quality videos on Product Management so you can learn more? Well your wish came true. These videos are collected from all around the web, in a hunting spree that lasted for over 30 hours! ProductHunt stopped producing new podcasts in July 2016 with the departure of Erik Torenberg :'(but there are still some great ones in the archives worth listening to. My recommendation: Episode 48 with Chris Sacca AngelList scores lower on my list… A look back at early interviews with Facebook and Uber CEOs illustrates an ingenious way to communicate hard-to-describe products. As a founder, I spent countless hours refining my elevator pitch and practising it every chance I got. I learned that… Last week, I was asked by a student how I became a Product Manager and what was the right training to become one. Tricky question. Because, as pointed out last week by Ellen Chisa in her great history of product management, there's a lack of… The product/market fit (PMF) concept was developed and named by Andy Rachleff (who is currently the CEO and co-founder of Wealthfront, and is a co-founder of Benchmark Capital). The core of Rachleff's idea for PMF was based on his analysis of the… You can be given a market sizing question as a standalone case (though less frequent) or as a part of a broader business situation case like “ entering a new market ”. Market Sizing can be tricky since there is not one correct answer… Machine learning is going to change the world more than any other technology, over the next several decades. To take advantage of the machine learning revolution we (aka product managers) should move quickly to equip ourselves with the necessary… ac·ces·si·bil·i·ty: the quality of being able to be reached or entered. In a diverse world like ours, we cannot simply assume that all the users access and experience digital products in the same way. That's when… Estimation questions test your ability to approximate a value. Here are some examples one might encounter in an interview: What is the market size of disposable diapers in China? Estimate annual sales for Starbucks' retail stores in the United…|||

Tue, Apr 25 2017: venturewires (venturewires) Newsletter on Nuzzel. Subscribe to venturewires' Nuzzel Newsletter