Unroll.me got some bad press lately for selling customers’ emails to Uber. So, in this post, I’ll show you how to unsubscribe from all your inbox cruft at once & ditch unroll.me at the same time.

To skip the narrative, head to the “Cleaning up your mess” section.

Unlike some friends of mine, I don’t mind a few unread emails. But after a decade of online shopping & newsletters, my ‘few unread emails’ have gone all Jurassic Park (or tribbles , I guess), running amok, taking over & leaving me to feel unsafe in my own inbox.

So what to do? Unsubscribing could’ve worked, maybe, 100,000 emails ago, but now? Change my name? Go retro & dust-off my old high school email (still can’t believe I snagged “limpbizkit4eva@aol.com”)?

Like so many other problems, I’d gambled that if I waited long enough & did nothing, some startup would come along & solve my overflowing inbox problem. Unroll.me heard this prayer & built software to help.

Basically, you give the company unfettered access to your inbox, they take inventory of all your bad decisions, and give you a few options to clean up your overflowing subscriptions.

I tried the service a year or so back, but quickly hit a weird design flaw: you have to click ‘unsubscribe’ for each item — individually — with no ‘select all’ in sight. “If I’d had the wrist stamina [*ahem*] to unsubscribe 1-by-1,” I thought, “I wouldn’t need your product.” I emailed support & asked about a ‘select all’ feature, but they told me I was outta luck. No problem: we’re a startup too, so I get early-stage design trade-offs. I chalked this up to startup growing-pains & forgot about the service, leaving it open in hopes of one day coming back and finishing what I’d started.

Come to find out: this was less a growing pain than it was a feature of the business model. If I could’ve unsubscribed in one fell click as I’d wanted, I’d have probably closed my Unroll.me account & cut them off from my sweet, sweet datas:

As you might’ve guessed, a year after my first trial, Unroll.me still hasn’t added an ‘unsubscribe all’ feature. But with a dash of Javascript & a bit of moxie, we can build our own, clean up our email subscription mess, and wash our hands of slimy data brokers (well, one of them, at any rate).

The first thing you’ll need to do is, regrettably, set up an Unroll.me account. Finish the signup, let the fox into your email hen house, and come back here for further instructions.|||

Unroll.me got some bad press lately for selling customers’ emails to Uber. So, in this post, I’ll show you how to unsubscribe from all your inbox cruft at once & ditch unroll.me at the same time…