Raise up your hand if you want to succeed as a blogger?

With over 87.6million post per month, it takes careful planning and the right resources to succeed as a blogger. Simply setting up your blog is not enough and seriously, even if you are not careful, you can setup your blog to fail. That is why I have carefully curated this list of the best resources on blogging.

In this guide, you will learn what blogging is all about and how to successfully start a blog and make it profitable. Either you want to use blogging to achieve your corporate aim or you are a freelancer working on your own, you will find great resources to help you.

The Ultimate List of The World’s Best Blogging Resources

Want to add a resource? Email me info@hustle.ng with the subject “blogging tips”.

To understand what blogging is, it is important to start from what a blog is. A blog is a frequently updated personal journal chronicling links at a website, intended for public viewing. Blogs are used to chronicle anything that interests the blogger whatsoever. Blogging on the other hand, is the act involved in starting, maintaining and writing a blog. The life of blogging is the blog post. That is what keeps a blog functioning. Opening a blog and not engaging the world by writing blog posts defeats the purpose of blogging.

Many companies and organizations have caught up but quite a number still do not understand that a blog does not only belong to the Paris Hilton’s of this world. A blog can be developed as a marketing engine of a company. A blog has many qualities that make it easy to be used to market your content or product as the case may be. It is important therefore to maximize the potentials a blog provides. The main reason why you should grab the opportunity to market your contents through a blog is that unlike other social media platform where you are subjected to the owner’s principles, you are in control of your blog. Whatever you say goes. So you can touch it any way you want that you see can help.

It is not surprising to find many bloggers who are just blogging because they have a passion for the content they are bringing out and love what they do but have no idea how they could make money from their blog. Of course, there is nothing wrong in loving what you do and doing it with all dedication. As a matter of fact, that is the first key to success because when one is faced with challenges, passion is what would keep one going.

If you want to succeed in your blogging career, then you need to understand the challenges you are likely to face and what you can do to overcome them.

For many beginners, they are faced with the problem of the best blogging platform to employ so as to get the best design and easier navigation. It is not an easy decision to make but one that is important nonetheless. The obvious solution is by going through the pros and cons of each of the platform so as to make an informed decision

#6: How to Grow Your Blog’s Traffic Without Breaking A Sweat

The problem many bloggers face is how to grow their blog traffic. The growth of your blog would depend largely on the traffic. The ads would only be guaranteed when you generate enough traffic for your blog. That is why you cannot afford to take generating traffic with levity.

#7: How to Monetise your Blog

It is possible to generate income from your blog. Many are doing it and you can join as well.

It is normal to make mistakes in life but some mistakes are more grievous than others, so it is necessary to avoid those kinds of mistakes. And apart from learning from your experiences, you can also learn from the experiences of others. Some of the common mistakes to avoid are

Building a successful blog takes time but with the proper guidance, you are sure to successfully grow your blog to achieve your aim.|||

The complete guide to blogging. This expert guide covers how to start and monetize your blog and the top blogging mistakes to avoid