

 

 Okay, here's the scoop, thanks to everyone who contributed!!

 Sorry for the very long email too, it's good reading. LOL

 (Miva, I put a possible wish/support request at the bottom)

 

 Internet Explorer 6 will never request the P3P policy

 from a 3rd party site that is trying to send it cookies.

 It does not matter how nice your policy is, IE does not

 care and won't retrieve it. What it does like to see is

 a P3P header added on to your web server's HTTP response.

 This takes the format:

 

 P3P: NOI DEVa TAIa OUR BUS UNI STA

 

 That's my exact header for one of my store sites that

 people reach through a static site on another domain name.

 When they hit the static site, I attempt to give them a

 reference to the Merchant site so that they can have a

 session ID that Ivo's mmhtml module will later use to tell

 me the customer's original referer so I can see where they

 came from and what advertising ventures are working out.

 

 So this whole time, I'm trying to figure out why this

 header is not making IE6 store my 3rd party cookie at the

 static storefront page. I am using a .htaccess file

 under Apache to tell it to send the P3P header out with

 my compact privacy policy in the headers on the static

 site and on the Merchant site. I even used a sniffer

 to verify that the header was indeed being sent out with

 the response from the web server...

 

 Well it turns out I was not thorough enough in my

 inspection of the actual web server response, I only

 checked the static site for the header. What was actually

 happening all along is that my P3P compact header is fine,

 but it was NOT being served to the client IE6 from the

 shopping site, it was missing from the header even though

 I did everything correctly via the .htaccess file. It

 seems that the .htaccess file is ignored when Apache is

 asked to serve a request that needs processing by the

 Empresa binary. So people were being sent to the 3rd

 party site to get the cookie but the P3P compact header

 was not coming back with it so IE6 rejected it. I had

 to remove my .htaccess file and put the apache 'Header'

 command into the apache config file directly for that

 site instead, that allowed Apache to send back the P3P

 header with Empresa-processed documents and the P3P header

 now allows default IE6 to accept my '3rd party' cookies

 from my Merchant site to my static site.

 

 Miva, if it's possible, I think Merchant should be able

 to tell Empresa to send back custom HTTP headers. I

 believe it should be able to do this, not positive though.

 If that could be done, a box could be added to Merchant

 so that sites that have created P3P policies, could

 generate their corresponding P3P Compact Policy to be

 placed into the P3P header for their site. This might

 be required for users who need P3P headers but do not

 have administrative rights to the web server.

 

 Other site admins, although it has the ability to

 create a policy file that is in violation of the standard,

 IBM's P3P policy editor is very helpful. It will create

 you a policy, possibly from templates, and then generate

 your P3P xml policy file, your P3P policy reference

 file (/privacy/policy.p3p#name), an html file that outlines

 the policy in human readable form, and your P3P compact

 policy headers for use with your web server. Just make

 absolutely sure that if you choose to add in explicit

 included and excluded URL's of sections of your site

 covered by the policy, that you don't refer to any other

 domains, I made this mistake thinking I could make a multi-

 site policy, that is not allowed by the P3P spec.

 

 Thanks, good luck to all, feel free to email me any questions

 you have about this, I'd love to keep any of you from having

 as much trouble, :-)

 

 David

 Hostasaurus.Com

 

|||

