Progressive web applications are the future. And more and more big companies are starting playing with them (such as Twitter: https://mobile.twitter.com/).

Imagine a Web Application that you can browse in the subway, that keeps engaging its user through notifications, up-to-date data and that offers app-like navigation, and you get an overview of PWAs capabilities.

A Progressive Web Application (PWA) is a web application that offers an app-like user experience. PWAs benefit from the modern Web technological innovations (Service Workers, Native APIs, JS frameworks) and raise web application quality standard.

If you want to learn more about PWAs, please visit this great Google developer page.

Look at the following PWA ! It looks like a native app, doesn’t it?

From the developer point of view, PWAs have huge plus on native applications. It’s basically a website, so:

However, in early 2017, PWAs still face some restrictions:

This tutorial aims to create a basic but complete progressive web application with VueJS and Webpack, from scratch. Our application will meet all the requirements announced in introduction: progressive, responsive, connectivity independant, etc. I want to give you an overview of what can be achieved with PWAs: fluid native-like application, offline behaviors, native features interface, push notifications.

To keep things challenging, we are going to build a cat picture messenging app: CropChat! Cropchat users will be able to read a main flow of cat pictures, open them to view details and post new cat pictures (first from internet, then from device drive or camera).

The tutorial will be split in several parts, that will be published successively:

Our Progressive Web Application is based on modern components you are going to like!

If you are not familiar with VueJS 2, I strongly recommend that you take a look at the official tutorial

We are going to use Vue-cli to scaffold our application:

Vue-cli comes along with a few templates. We will choose webpack template. Webpack is a modern module bundler for Javascript application that will process and build our assets. Vue-cli is going to create a dummy VueJS application with Webpack, vue-loader (hot reload!), a JS linter, and a test suite.

You will be asked a few questions. Here is the configuration I used:

This process creates a project folder with following subfolders:

This will open your browser on :|||

Progressive web applications are the future. And more and more big companies are starting playing with them (such as Twitter: https://mobile.twitter.com/). Imagine a Web Application that you can…