Landing pages are a huge part of any inbound marketing strategy for lead generation. Each campaign you run should have its own landing page. There are several statistics out there back up the fact that the more landing pages you have, the more leads you will receive. So, let’s take a look at some tips on how to build your landing page to convert!

Have one offer? Good, keep it that way! Multiple offers on a single landing page decreases conversions.

The layout of your landing page should be consistent on every front with a clear headline, body copy, and CTA. Use contrasting colors for the CTA and be sure to A/B test everything you do. Don’t go overboard with testing though, start off with a simple color change for the CTA or even a new headline for the page. Be sure that your landing page doesn’t have navigation as well, the whole point of the page is to direct your user to a specific action.

You could claim to be the Queen of England selling her priceless swans! However, if there is no proof of that, it will only serve to turn away visitors. There are five categories of social proof and having any forms of these proofs on your website will increase conversions:

If you follow these best practices you should see an uptick in conversions, be sure to track every change you make while testing and see what variants of the page works best. If you need help designing your web experience, feel free to ask us any questions in the comments below.

User proof: approval from current users of the product (customer testimonials, caste studies, etc).

Wisdom of the crowds: approval from large groups of other people

Wisdom of your friends: approval from your friends or people you know

Over-the-top images usually distracts site visitors and increases the load time of the website. And we all know what happens when the load time increases for a site page, the conversions drop.

75% of users in the U.S access the internet on mobile devices, keep that in mind as you are creating your page. Be sure there is enough padding from the edges on mobile devices, make sure elements of your page are appropriately large enough, and strip away as many unnecessary design elements as possible.

If you follow these best practices you should see an uptick in conversions, be sure to track every change you make while testing and see what variants of the page works best. If you need help designing your web experience, feel free to ask us any questions in the comments below.|||

Landing pages are a huge part of any inbound marketing strategy for lead generation. Each campaign you run should have its own landing page. There are several statistics out there back up the fact…