The bells and whistles in washington will begin to blow and HHS  will  “coordinate a mock nuke explosion over manhattan.  Operation Gotham Shield, an exercise involving FEMA, Homeland Security and a myriad of law enforcement and military agencies. The exercise will be conducted across a widespread geographical area. According to the release, the regional exercise will be staged at six sites in the District of Columbia, suburban Maryland and Northern Virginia, and will involve hundreds of police, fire, and emergency medical service personnel and volunteer actors.

According to Scott Boggs, Managing Director of Homeland Security and Public Safety at COG, “Law enforcement officials practice and exercise their skills on their own regularly because that’s the best way to ensure we are always ready to respond quickly and professionally. On April 26, we’ll go one step further and stage a very realistic emergency event involving multiple sites and actors posing as the casualties.  However, there is no reason for residents to be alarmed because the exercise will occur in a controlled environment.”

April 26 is also when the entire Senate will be briefed by Donald Trump and his four top defense and military officials on the situation in North Korea at the White House, an event which Reuters dubbed as “unusual.”

April 26 is also when the USS Carl Vinson is expected to finally arrive off the coast of the Korean Peninsula.

In the past we have seen HHS conveniently stage similar drilsl near a place were “Real” terrorism takes place. Such as the San Bernardino shootings in 2016.

We strongly advise our patriot readers who live in the area to stay watchfull and keep a camera handy to record any thing news worthy.

That is all

please like, share, emulate, capitulate or plagiarize this  in any way you wish.|||

The bells and whistles in washington will begin to blow and HHS  will  "coordinate a mock nuke explosion over manhattan.  Operation Gotham Shield, an exercise involving FEMA, Homeland Security and a myriad of law enforcement and military agencies. The exercise will be conducted across a widespread geographical area. According to the release, the regional exercise will…