The rapid development of communications technologies in the last quarter of a century has indeed transformed how people interact with each other — unfortunately, sometimes new technologies introduce inappropriate behavior. Sending sexually explicit text messages is one of these behaviors, it is called sexting.

Do not let the name fool you as it is not a laughing matter nor is it isolated to teens. Sexting can happen anywhere at any time. Anthony Wiener, a former member of the United States House of Representatives, was involved in three separate sexting scandals. If you google “Sexting and Car Dealerships,” you will find many lawsuits with employees accused of sexting to dealership customers.

Our company, AdvantageTec, has signed up several dealerships (all texts are monitored, stored and sent through a dealership texting number) due to dealership personnel requesting dates with clients via text from personal phones. Furthermore, legal restrictions are in place to prevent and govern the before-mentioned behavior.

The word “sexting” was listed for the first time in Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary in 2012, with the following definition:

By its origin, it is a blend (or portmanteau) of two words: “sex” + “texting,” and its first recorded use was in 2005.

However, as technologies developed from cell phones to smartphones, tablets, phablets and other mobile devices, its meaning can now be broadened to include all mobile devices and their instant text messaging apps (such as Snapchat, Viber, WhatsApp, Skype, only to name a few).

Sexting raises a question of ethics and how this practice can be stopped, not only among youth but also in business. According to a recent Brain Statistics survey, 59% of young adults (ages 20-26) have sexted. Moreover, sexting carries social and legal ramifications.

In the U.S., 20 states have enacted sexting laws for minors under 18 years old. For more information about U.S. sexting laws see Mobile Media Guard which shows an interactive map by state.

Let’s hope it has not happened in your business. Make sure to address texting in your employee handbook and preferably state only company-approved solutions can be used to contact customers. Assure your business is in control of the message, its storage, and access. Be clear that no client’s personally identifiable information can be used (without appropriate software) from a personal device.

Should an explicit text message be sent, you need to react. Not merely respond, but react. Law enforcement should be notified; the client should be informed and apologized to immediately. Keeping customer’s private information secure is not just proper business etiquette, the law requires it.

The best cure is prevention. Advantage txt is an FCC-approved and TCPA-compliant texting app which provides your dealership with the safeguards needed to make communication easy and fun. We refer to advantage txt as “Simple, intelligent texting for car dealers.”

Send us your questions on info@advantagetec.com or text “DEMO” to (415) 300-2002 to learn more about advantage txt.|||

Sexting is a major issue in business today. Learn what it is and how to prevent such behavior at your dealership with these simple tips.