At LinkedIn, our “members first” philosophy helps guide every decision we make, including how we gather and respect your personal information. Today, we’re giving you an early look at LinkedIn’s updated Terms of Service - our Privacy Policy and User Agreement - so that you can understand what’s changing before it takes effect on June 7, 2017.

It’s been a little while since we updated our Terms of Service and we’ve taken this opportunity to shorten and reorganize our Privacy Policy to make it even clearer and easier for our members to understand. What hasn’t changed is our commitment to giving you control over your personal information.

Our updated Privacy Policy enables and provides information on new LinkedIn features, and choices over how your information is used:

Increased visibility of your LinkedIn Profile - Similar to the way your profile shows up in search engines, we will allow certain third-party services to show your profile to their users, so that you can be more easily found for opportunities and connect with people. You can opt out of this broader distribution of your profile, and you control what you share on your profile. Easier to share accomplishments with your network - To make it easier to update your profile, we’ll look for and suggest positive and public professional accomplishments, like awards or industry recognition, to share with your network. You can opt out if you decide you don’t want these recommendations. Productivity bots and similar tools to improve communication with your network - You can opt-in to use our automated systems that can help you with messages by suggesting responses, assisting in scheduling meetings with connections, generating ice breakers, or offering insights to help you connect with other professionals more easily. Easily meet up with other members - You can choose to use an upcoming feature that helps you find nearby LinkedIn members, who have also opted-in, at a conference, event or meeting. Keep learning new skills on Lynda - Your learning account on Lynda continues to be covered by the Lynda privacy policy.

Our updated User Agreement will look familiar, with a few changes that are highlighted in our summary, including:

Dos and Don’ts - We’ve added clarity about the activities allowed on LinkedIn. For example, we prohibit both the act of scraping others’ content from our services, and the development and support of tools to scrape LinkedIn services.   Payment Terms - If you choose to purchase some of our Premium services, we have added additional clarity around our payment terms. Irish Law - Our members and visitors outside the U.S. will now be governed by Irish law (rather than California law) and can have disputes settled in Irish courts.

You might have heard that at the end of last year we became a part of Microsoft, but our services are still provided under a separate Terms of Service. We’re excited about leveraging Microsoft technology and resources to offer more valuable features and services to you. We’ll always be transparent about what’s to come and will continue to offer you choices and control over your information.|||

