I’d wanted to create some sort of digital product for years leading up to this but never followed through because every idea I had was too ambitious or intimidating.

Once I convinced myself I was just putting together a 30–40 page mini-book, getting started and making progress became a whole lot easier.

Sure, it turned out a lot bigger than I planned, but if I knew that from day one, I never would’ve mustered up the motivation to actually write the damn thing.

I find making progress is a lot easier when I feel like I’m letting someone down by not delivering what I promised.

For this book, that started with putting up a landing page and collecting emails.

I’d promise a sample chapter on Twitter before it was finished, just to make sure I’d get it done:

When those techniques got me far enough along, I promised a launch date, and busted my ass every night trying to hit it.

If you have a hard time with distractions or procrastination, set yourself up for embarrassment if you don’t get things done. It definitely works for me!

Instead of just working on the book in private, I did my best to share everything I could possibly think to share.

If I came up with a great way to phrase an idea, I’d share it on Twitter:

When I finished an example I was really excited about, I’d give it away to the mailing list for free:

Just finished a screencast? I’d tweet out my to-do list so people could see where things were at:

This really helped people get excited about the book, and the feedback I got kept me motivated to keep working.

There’s a limit to what people will spend on a PDF.

Even though I truly believe the ideas in Refactoring to Collections are worth the $179 price tag of the top tier, books as a category have an established market rate.

No matter how much time it saves someone nor how much effort it took to write, it’s almost impossible to get someone to spend more than about $50 on a digital book, even when they believe it’s worth the price.

I can’t even convince myself to spend $179 on a book!

So if you want to make a full time living from digital products, you need to help people justify paying what your product is really worth.

The easiest way to do that is to try and take your product out of the “book” category. Add screencasts, sample projects, or exercises; or include access to a forum, or a 30-minute coaching call.

Make it easy to evaluate your product as its own unique offering, not just another eBook.

Here’s what the revenue breakdown looked like between my tiers at the end of the 3-day launch sale:

That’s an average selling price of $67.84; more than double the price of just the book.

Writing the book took me about 9 weeks, the screencasts about one week, and the sample project was something I already had lying around.

If I didn’t let anyone pay more than $29, I would’ve only made $26,245 from the same number of customers. That’s less than half the revenue for a lot more than half the work.|||

Last May I released my first digital product, a book called “Refactoring to Collections” that teaches PHP developers how to use functional programming ideas to write cleaner code. Within the first…