Gemini is a utility for regression testing the visual appearance of web pages.

Gemini allows you to:

Gemini was created at Yandex and is especially useful to UI library developers.

Put the file in the root of your project:

Write a test and put it in the folder in the root of your project:

Start in a separate tab before running the tests:

To install the utility, use the npm command:

Global installation is used for launching commands.

Gemini is configured using a config file at the root of the project. Gemini can use one of the following files:

Let's say we want to run our tests only in the locally installed .

In this case, the minimal configuration file will only need to have the root URL of your web app and the WebDriver capabilities of : For example,

Also, you need to run manually in mode:

If you are using a remote WebDriver server, you can specify its URL with the option:

You can also set up each browser to have its own node:

See the details of the config file structure and available options.

Each of the blocks that are being tested may be in one of the determined states. States are tested with the help of chains of step-by-step actions declared in a block's test suites.

For example, let's write a test for a search block at yandex.com:

We are creating a new test suite , assuming that we will capture the element from the root URL . We know that the block has two states:

States are executed one after another in the order in which they are defined, without the browser reloading in between.

See the details of test creation methods.

To complete the test creation procedure, you need to take reference shots using the following command:

To launch a test (to compare the current state of a block with a reference shot), use the command:

To see the difference between the current state of a block and a reference picture more clearly, use the HTML reporter:

When all tests are completed, you will see a link to an HTML report.

You can use both console and HTML reporters at the same time:

See the details of interaction with CLI and available options.

You can use the graphical user interface instead of the command line. It is located in the gemini-gui package and must be installed additionally:

Gemini can be extended with plugins. You can choose from the existing plugins or write your own. To use a plugin, install and enable it in your :

To use Gemini in your scripts or build tools, you can use the experimental programmatic API.

To learn more about all events in Gemini, see the events documentation.|||

gemini - Utility for regression testing of web pages using screenshots