AUSTIN, Texas—Writer, director, and actor Ron Howard is very careful when considering his place in the geek-media universe. Over 20 years ago, his film Apollo 13 kicked off a trajectory of major science-and-heart storytelling, which recently crystallized as an ongoing series-development deal with National Geographic's TV channel.

This Tuesday's premiere of TV mini-series Genius, which sees Geoffrey Rush playing the role of Albert Einstein, won't be the last of that deal, either—and Howard laughs at how that fact might look to people in his past.

"My tenth grade science teacher, Mr. Dowd, would be, you know, rolling over in his grave!" Howard says with a laugh during an interview at last month's South By Southwest festival. "No, no, he'd enjoy it. He had a great sense of humor. The fact that I'm telling stories about science"—and saying this makes Howard laugh uncontrollably—"well, he thought I was a nice guy. He knew I didn't get it."

The first episode of Genius could very well make Howard's former teacher squirm. It opens with a cold-blooded murder, followed by a scene in which Rush's Einstein, er, boffs his secretary against a chalkboard.

But the hour, despite a decent amount of melodrama, concludes with a nimble weaving of drama, history, and science, all sprinkled with timely political tensions and solid acting. Which is to say—we're clearly in Ron Howard territory here.

Howard admits that this project landed in his lap precisely because of his reputation for making scientifically minded films. In Genius' case, the specific starting point was Walter Isaacson's biography Einstein: His Life and Universe, which came out nearly 10 years ago (before Isaacson's Steve Jobs book took the world by storm).

"Einstein's life was a high-wire act," Howard says. "That's what people don't really know, and what I didn't know until I read Walter's book. I realized, not only is this a story of discovery, but it's also the story of discovering pressures being directed at Albert Einstein from different places. Sometimes, he was generating his own pressure with the choices he was making. That becomes fascinating, suspenseful, intriguing, and yes, by the way, what is his field? Theoretical physics!"

Apollo 13 convinced Howard that audiences had more hunger for science stories than he'd assumed. "It surprised me pleasantly how interested people were in the science of it. The irony that there were virtually no computers then, and they had to use slide rules... I realized that none of these things were lost on the audience. In fact, it was very engaging. I learned that it wasn't just the adventure or the emotion. There was an intellectual component to what was entertaining and engaging the audiences." He then quoted Neil Degrasse Tyson to remind me that TV's CSI broke the dam open for an even wider audience given the series had major characters applying scientific thought, as opposed to "odd characters hidden away in a room somewhere with a lab coat on."

In Genius' case, Howard winds time back and forth between Einstein's formative university years and his late 1930s brushes with rising fascism. On the show, the younger parts of Einstein's life tend much more toward the melodramatic, with actor Johnny Flynn frequently standing up to professors and family by way of elaborate rebuttals. Isaacson's historical record is liberally twisted on occasion. For example, one classroom anecdote from the book is retold, but in Howard's version, Einstein rebuts a teacher's condemnation by walking up to the front of the class, writing an elaborate equation, and loudly declaring, "Speaking truthfully, sir, your mere presence spoils my respect for the future of Prussian mathematics."

But the younger Einstein stories are ultimately saved by a deft combination of intriguing relationships and Einstein's scientific theories, like when a leisurely bicycle ride is narrated both aurally and visually with Einstein's explanation of how this ride relates to the theory of relativity. It's a clever show-don't-tell moment for expressing a major scientific theory in a sneaky, digestible way. That, by the way, is another reason Howard was so attracted to the project as a TV series.

"The great thing is, Einstein was a visualist," Howard says. "So this is a huge cinematic advantage. We didn't have to invent thought experiments. In A Beautiful Mind, I show a thing where John Nash is looking at geometric shapes on a tie, and I lifted that from [Nikola] Tesla. That's not something John Nash ever did. Einstein did these! Throughout the series, we're able to basically bring those to life in interesting ways."

The pilot episode sees these distinct Einstein eras explored chronologically, and for older Einstein, that means facing the changing political climate in Germany and taking steps toward immigrating to the United States. (Rush, I should add, is absolutely masterful in his performance as the older Einstein, with snark, wit, and charm rolled together in a delightfully light German accent.) Howard insists that the entire sequence, which includes a rise of German nationalism and public hatred for immigrants and scientific thought, had already been locked down before the last American Presidential election concluded.

"It's suddenly politically prescient, which we were... aware of this as we were shooting," Howard says. "Of course, it's not just the United States. There's a call to conservative nationalism [worldwide]. Closing borders, blocking immigrants, imposing controls. That's been going on around the world for some years now—but one of the pressures, the surprises for me, in reading Walter's book, that we really depict episode after episode, are the times when institutional thinkers would impose a barrier to Einstein. And sometimes a threat. Imagine how close we came to not benefiting from his genius! That's shocking. If there's a cautionary element to this story, I hope it's that."

The most intriguing part of the series—Einstein's younger interactions with other great scientific minds, including Mileva Marvic—is only teased at in the series' pilot episode. Actor Samantha Colley knocks her brief pilot moment out of the park, which mostly makes up for the cheesy confrontation scene in which she is introduced. We'll have to wait and see how the rest of the series handles the physics and scientific luminaries with whom Einstein partnered and quarreled throughout his career.

Ultimately, the first episode sets the table for a well-acted and tolerably dramatized look at our era's first scientific "rock star," as Howard describes him—not to mention an inadvertently timely look at history possibly repeating itself. Between that and his Breakthrough series of brief documentaries on modern innovators, Howard believes his work on the National Geographic Channel won't just entertain. He hopes to also inspire our current generation—or, at least, those who might stand up to professors, thinkers, and leaders alike.

"The greatest challenge [to young innovators] is going to be finding communities of risk-taking intellectual adventurers," Howard says. "If you are going to be a part of that, it will be the same kind of high wire that Einstein walked. But that's where the action is going to be. That's where the great achievement is going to be. Not retreating behind walls of fear. That's not the way progress has ever worked. When human beings become frightened, we tend to clench and dig in and trust the thing we have in our hands right in this moment and nothing else. We're going to need those thought leaders and action takers who can push through that fear."

Genius premieres in the US on Tuesday, April 25, on National Geographic TV. It premiered in the UK on the National Geographic TV channel on April 23, and the next episode airs on Sunday, April 30.|||

As anti-science rhetoric looms, Howard's new series reminds us that history repeats.