believe me, You’ve got to know the rules to play the game because this will help you overcome the fear of street photography and start taking action! I am not a lawyer so I can’t give legal advice plus every country has its own regulations and rules when it comes to street photography because it’s related to privacy laws which are a very sensitive and delicate topic. so asking help from legal experts in your country is a must!

Photographing people and places in public is legal in some countries to protect the journalistic freedom but on the one hand, There are usually limits on how photos of people may be used and most countries have specific laws regarding people’s privacy so you should definitely check your country laws before jumping to any street photography activities. Asking a lawyer is the best way to be sure that your photography activities do not interfere with your county laws!

we always get the fear of shooting in the streets and more specifically when we shoot strangers that are the core of the action and source of emotions that we want to capture with our lens.

the fear is generated for 1 main reason, you simply feel that you interfere with the privacy of others. You take a picture of their face of their emotions and you simply make it yours and you will never know what the reaction of the person in front of you.

we have a misconception that most of the people will have a negative reaction but the reality is actually different. a few people will angry and might ask you delete the photo but of course, this depends on the country culture you are trying to capture.

shooting on the street may seem overwhelming at first so start getting out of your comfort zone slowly. Get your lens away from people as a starting point and shoot

Ok, not to this point because you will scare people! just be cool because when someone knows that you took a picture of him and look at you, my only advice is to just smile. this is an indication that you are not trying to hurt his personal image by any means and you are just a nice person that his doing the right thing. keep it simple and short and then move on.

a smaller camera body is less noticeable and people get less scared when they see it. My go-to camera is the sony a6300 it’s a compact mirrorless camera and it’s just amazing. So when it comes to street photography a DSLR camera with battery grip attached might not be the best tool for the job.

seriously people freak out when they see that long bulky white lens. they start acting in a unnormal way and unless you are going to shoot people from an airplane people are definitely going to notice you. so your best choice here is just a 50mm lens it’s small, it’s a great focal length to capture the action around you and they generally come in a wide aperture so you can get that lovely bokeh.

many cameras have this feature and it’s useful because that clicking sound when you take the shot can make you noticed and this is the last thing you want. when you use a silent shutter your chances of getting multiple shots of the same subject is way higher and therefore increasing your chances to get a better face expression or sharper image with less movement blur.

sometimes using the viewfinder make it extremely clear that you are pointing your lens at someone and this is considered a more aggressive behavior towards people than holding your camera away from you when using the rear live view display to take the shot. I feel comfortable using the viewfinder but the live view mode seems to win here in some cases when it comes to street photography.

it does not matter if you find out that other people around you are looking at you as long as your subject doesn’t notice you yet and is still acting normally because at this point nothing matter other than the end result. people staring at you around and behind the camera will probably never see them again and they will forget about you the moment you disappear of their vision field.

finally I want to leave you with the most important tip, you should have the courage and take your camera with the mindset that I am doing this and what will happen will happen and I don’t care!  it takes consistency, shoot repeat and shoot again until you feel comfortable in your own skin and forget about the fear of street photography, you will look back one day and ask yourself. What was I scared from again? believe me, you won’t remember.

till then keep shooting keep practicing because photography is nothing than a lifestyle! See you in the next blog post so don’t forget to join Soumesto photographers mailing list!|||

fear of street photography can be a hard thing to overcome but it takes simple tips to get you started and leave it way behind. Here are 7 golden tips!