It’s official, you can now discover the brand-new Guitar Pro 7 for Windows and Mac!

Dear users, our team is happy to announce the release of a seventh version of Guitar Pro.

Many of you have submitted your ideas for improvements and we thank you. We hope you’ll enjoy this new version, the result of several years of coding and coffee to meet, looking to meet our users’ expectations.

The software’s user-friendliness has been entirely redesigned and modernized to support creativity and make audio fine-tuning ever easier. The program is now smoother, faster, and compatible with high-resolution screens.

The standard music notation has been improved and we also focused on guitarists who do not master conventional music notation by offering them the ability to edit and play all the instrumental tracks in guitar tablature, thus making reading and writing music easier.

New Interface with main features accessible via a Toolbar, and right-hand inspector window listing the properties of the song and track. Tablature for all tracks – In addition to guitars and other fretted instruments, standard notation gets automatically transposed into tablature — this on all tracks, including piano, voice or drums. Simplified RSE-track set-up – now by directly selecting a sound preset made of a soundbank and an effect chain. Connect your guitar to Guitar Pro – Plug your guitar in and play through the effect chains of the active track (requires an audio acquisition card). New musical notation elements – Notation now includes golpe, pick scrape, and dead slap. The writing of bends in standard notation has been enhanced, and we have improved the management of conflicts between the various elements of the score. Software performance improved – Software startup and file loading have been enhanced. Scrolling and zooming are now both smoother. The install/update process is also improved. Polyphonic tuner – Simply brush down the six strings together to check their tuning in a single stroke. Imports and exports improved with a particular focus on MIDI and MuiscXML. Click here, to discover all of the Guitar Pro 7 new features. Download our trial version and enjoy all of the Guitar Pro 7 features for 30 days.

We have been working hard to make this new version as stable as possible with the help of a team of beta testers. Inevitably, there may still be some minor bugs to fix and our team is dedicated to doing so. A first update will be available this week and others will follow soon. If you have any problems with your Guitar Pro 7 or if you wish to report a bug, please use this form and provide as much information as possible.|||

