They are talking about us

If you are an enthusiast or a student passionate about space like us, but you have no knowledge of electronics this is a kit specially designed for you. The CatSat I kit contains everything you need to completely assemble a CatSat. Inside, you will find the necessary pieces to assemble and from your home or classroom you can learn to plan, create and carry out your first mission.

Welcome to CatSat1, the suborbital mission specially designed for you student or enthusiast passionate about space. This is a mission that will allow you to experience and recreate all the necessary steps to carry out a space mission.

Our kit has everything you need to build a "pico-satellite", better known as CanSat. The CaTSat 1 has two payloads which are integrated by the flight computer, as sensors and communications, which give you the necessary tools to perform a series of experiments and measurements in the stratosphere of our planet; To give you an idea, you have in your hands more processing power than the one used in the space mission Apollo I.

You can find in our wiki the guide to take the appropriate steps to get a successful mission, from theory, planning, simulation, arming, launching and recovery of the mission.

We remind you that the whole design of CatSat1 is open source hardware, so you can study it, modify it and even create your own payloads. All this information can be found in the project repository in GitHub, do not forget to leave your questions there too.

Are you excited? We also! In Electronic Cats we wish you success in the mission, that you learn a lot, but above all you have fun!

"To infinity and beyond" -Buzz Lightyear

This is a modular satellite that has 3 types of payload:

Board with basic sensors of temperature, humidity, pressure, altitude, gyroscope, magnetometer and accelerometer.

This card has a GPS to know the position of the CatSat at all times, plus a LoRa RM95 module to communicate with the earth station (range ~ 50km).

Easy assembling and soldering, with preloaded firmware to test, and completely OpenSource, if you're a teacher this is a great classroom kit to inspire your students to start in the space world.

Ready for your next mission? Meow!

Are you a hacker or Makerspace? 20% off with the coupon: Hackerspace

Support up to 32GB TF card ( not included )|||

Picosatellite CatSat 1 from electroniccats on Tindie