The term could be used in conjunction, or as a synonym to ‘’Ponzi-scheme’’, an empty facade presented to the public as a brilliant financial plan to get rich easily.

Though mentioned extensively in literature (Mainly Dickens Martin Chuzzlewit and Little Dorrit).

However The first one to become famous for implementing this technique in real life, is, surprisingly enough, no other than, Charles Ponzi, who offered investors to participate in his masterplan of arbitrage of international reply coupons for postage stamps, which was evidently no more than a facade for using investors money to pay himself, as well as early investors.

As I am writing this story, the dim sound of my A4 ‘’Dominotor’’ miner accompanies me from my porch outside of my home office, so you can say I’m biased, but I prefer the term ‘experienced’.

So, as you all may know, hundreds if not thousands of different HYIP ‘businesses’ pop-up every week, just like mushrooms after the rain, the poisonous kind.

There is one question which can save you lots of funds in life, and direct you to the few correct digital investments that are still out there.

The answer then will become evident.

Unfortunately, not everybody is blessed with critical thinking, and some people still nite the bate, enough to feed this growing industry of decorated stealing.

Another unfortunate truth about this ‘business’, is that they typically use cryptocurrency funding to anonymously receive funds from their victims and thus affect the reputation of cryptocurrencies unfavourably.

Each one of those questionable ventures, has more or less the same properties:

Aside from the several other red bulbs that already lit up during the past few paragraphs, there is essentially one main problem with the HYIP model.

It is a debate similar to the one raised numerous time along the history by philosophers of various streams, as a tool of empirically enough determining the morality of one matter or another.

Whilst not all online MLM, Pyramid and cloud-mining offers are scams,

they all share the same problems.

Buy risk, or more specifically your own ASIC(Algorithm Specific Integrated Chip).

As we established well enough till this point, there is no money on the floor, and the only way to make money is venture to take the risk of loss, for the change of possible profits.

Purchase your own miner, have control over your own hardware, control where you send your hashing power and which coin do you mine.

Yes, some will say it is a waste of electricity, but in fact, it is the very activity that secures the blockchain of any coin, and the very essence of allowing transactions to take place, and thus, it is value-creating.

Below is the profitability chard of my A4 terminator (1 unit out of 2) that costed me $1250 including shipping and taxes back in December, and was making since then 1–0.5 LTC.

Let’s take the lower end of this chart, $5 daily profit after electricity, that’s an ROI after 250 days, or, if you like 146% per year.

Of course, cryptocurrency price may vary, difficulty can grow, but this the risk you must venture to take, and frankly, it is probably your best shot at this industry.

Lately, Bitamin introduced a new chip called L3+, which is not currently in stock for purchase.

However, it is my suspicion that some of those units starting conduction PoW(proof of work mining), since both mining difficulty and network hash rate rose over 20% between April 19 through April 21.

With that said, the current ASICs are already at the 14nm silicon technology, and a further leap to 10nm chips(accompanied by another major difficulty increase) would probably take several years.

So now is a good time to enter this world, like any other.

More importantly, this happens on your home (or office / warehouse) network, at your full and exclusive control, and does good for the cryptocurrency community and the sustainability of the network.

On a side note, the larger part of my personal profit from crypto-currency lies in simply holding it, rather than mining and selling it.

If you are looking for a possible investment perspective without the hassle and the noise, it might make more sense to buy some cryptocurrency and hold on to it (buy-and-hold).

I will conclude with yet another quote

Who else, if not Warren Buffet

On the next article in the series, I will cover the difference between various hashing algorithms, their corresponding types of hardware and various techniques to make your mining more profitable (multi-mining, merge mining).

Our company, Nexchange offers cryptocurrency acquiring services, as well as real, hardware, miners, shipped to you from mainland Europe, shipped immediately once payment is cleared and without the hassle of dealing with customs.

It is also possible to acquire a hosting contract for your physical miner(with full access & control including SSH and control panel) and leverage our discounted electricity rate and team of experts.|||

The term could be used in conjunction, or as a synonym to ‘’Ponzi-scheme’’, an empty facade presented to the public as a brilliant financial plan to get rich easily.
Though mentioned extensively in…