To go on further, The Journal of American Medical Association reported in 1998 that an estimated 220,000 deaths per year in America alone can be attributed to properly prescribed drugs (i.e. right dose to right person at the right time according to accepted treatment protocols). I’m not saying drugs are completely useless, they’re lifesavers sometimes, but I do believe that today's mainstream medicine is deeply flawed to its core. Do you really think a bag of medication will actually make you healthier? Do you really believe that degeneration and the slow decline in both physical and mental health are a normal part of ageing? Don’t be fooled because it’s not true.

If you’ve read the article this far it’s most likely that you’ve either completely bought the idea, disapproved it or confused. Don’t judge for the time being and understand that the aforementioned definition of health is mine and it doesn’t necessarily have to be yours. But the next piece of information is, however, valid for all of us.

Being healthy is expensive and wellness is a new luxury. Whether you know it or not, we are programmed into believing that the lack of symptoms equals health and wellness. Despite its fallacies, our current healthcare model is difficult to replace because drugs are cheap, efficient and give instant results. But did you know that reactive healthcare is much more expensive than proactive health care? For example, the Singapore government more than doubled its spending on healthcare in 4 years:

Elderly healthcare costs in Singapore is expected to rise tenfold by 2030 to average SGD$52,000 (US$37,427) per person per year. The article goes on to state that “elderly healthcare across Asia-Pacific region will cost more than US$20 trillion between 2015 and 2030 and calls for urgent action from government, insurers, health care providers, corporates and individual citizens.” SGD$52,000 per person per year just for healthcare? If you have a partner, kids and even parents to look after, that sums up to be a lot of money just to get by. Who has that kind of money on a yearly basis? The reason for this ever increasing healthcare costs is multifactorial. The growing elderly population increased longevity and the society’s mindless addiction to quick fixes. I’ve mentioned it before but I’ll give you an example so it makes more sense.

When you place yourself in a pathologically chronically stressful environment your body goes through a series of physiological changes and adaptations. For example, if you live in high altitudes, your red blood cell count increases to adapt to the environment. If you eat unhealthy foods and smoke cigarettes, your blood pressure goes up in order to pump blood through the thickened blood vessels (atherosclerosis). Your intelligently designed body adapts to the dynamic environment, and it is a survival mechanism. Adaptation (i.e elevated red blood cells or blood pressure) is not a disease nor is it pathological, the chronically stressful environment is. This is what today’s mainstream medicine has a problem with. They “treat” patients by artificially altering the body’s intelligent physiological response to chronic stress rather than to solve the stress itself.

What are the major killers of our society? They are heart diseases, stroke, cancer, diabetes and pneumonia. All of them are diseases of stress and lifestyle and I can confidently tell you that they are all preventable (there may be some of you that are thinking “What about genetic predisposition and inheritance?” That’s another can of worms but in short, read up on ‘Epigenetic’) The reason why healthcare costs are increasing and expected to do so exponentially is that we see our physiological adaptations as diseases. Let’s talk about blood pressure again. If you go see a doctor, he or she will take a blood pressure reading and if it’s high, you would be prescribed a drug to artificially lower it. Because they know (and it is true) that high blood pressure leads to increased risks of heart diseases. However, the flaw is in the false belief of thinking that high blood pressure is a disease rather than the body’s intelligent adaptation to stress. Taking pills will lower your blood pressure and give perceived increase in health but it’s a trap. The underlying issue (chronically pathological environment) is still there. It could be your diet, smoking or the lack of exercise. And because now we’ve forced our bodies to shut down its natural physiological response WITH having the chronic pathological environment still there, your body develops ill-effects not just from the drugs but from increased demands and stress in the body. What happens next? People start developing anxiety, depression and fatigue which of course leads to a new diagnosis and prescription of new drugs.|||

The current healthcare model is flawed and failing, and that's probably the 
reason why it continues to make so much money. People just get sicker by 
the day. It's not just about longevity but the quality of life that 
matters. Regular exercise, meditation and chiropractic care are some of 
many health-conscious choices you can make today to lower your health care 
costs. Read: Health is Wealth: Why Mainstream Medicine Is Failing But 
Remains A Successful Business.