In 2014, Brad Feld published a very heartfelt blog post on depression in startups called Founder Suicides. If you haven’t read it, please do.

Seriously, you have to go read it right now.

So, I was in an emotionally vulnerable place when I came across Brad’s article, and it moved me to tears. It also moved me to write publicly about my own struggles with depression for the first time, and I did so in a lengthy comment at the bottom of the article. After reading my comment, some of my colleagues (including my wife Michelle Wetzler — probably the only person in the world to whom my comments didn’t come as a surprise) encouraged me to surface these remarks in a more accessible location, so other entrepreneurs could find them.

I deferred and demurred and delayed because, frankly, I was terrified of sharing this “unfortunate aspect of my brain chemistry” with you all in a more public forum — I was afraid of what it would mean for my reputation and for my business, but most of all, for my own internal sense of identity. Every time you say a true thing out loud, it becomes even more true.

Sure, what I had written was already out there on the World Wide Web, but it was buried at the bottom of a post on someone else’s blog, behind several clicks of the Load more comments button. Given its placement, even the people who did find it were sure to be supportive (and they have been). I felt comfortably distanced from it, and I couldn’t find the courage to reduce that distance and stand by what I wrote.

But today, I sat down with a good friend who’s a founder of a local startup and was seeking my advice. In our conversation, I realized that I was re-hashing many of the concepts from my post on Brad’s blog, and that it was helping this person. It hit me that people really needed to hear this stuff, and I needed to buck up.

So in the hopes it can help more people, I’ve reproduced my response to Brad’s blog below (you can also read it via this direct link).|||

In 2014, Brad Feld published a very heartfelt blog post on depression in startups called Founder Suicides. If you haven’t read it, please do. So, I was in an emotionally vulnerable place when I came…