Saudi Arabia will obtain a massive weapons arsenal and missile defense system in a deal pushed by H.R. McMaster, Gary Cohn, and Dina Habib Powell. Under this deal, which is set to be announced in May, Saudia Arabia will obtain technology to build civilian nuclear reactors.

President Trump has expressed skepticism of this deal despite continued pressure from McMaster, Cohn, and Powell.

Saudi Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal, who has ties to terrorists, once called President Trump a “disgrace to all America.”

Sources suggest that McMaster, Cohn, and Powell seek the Saudi’s good graces as part of their larger plan to involve the U.S. in another ground war in Syria. “These guys want a ground war,” one person with knowledge about the matter said, “whether that’s in Syria or Iraq doesn’t matter. This is Petraeus’ second war.”

Among the big winners in this Saudi arms deal would be former CIA director David Petraeus. Petraeus, who had his security clearance pulled after leaking classified information to his mistress, has nightly calls with McMaster. The nightly calls between Petraus and McMaster are facilitated by the White House situation room.

Sources close to situation room personnel reported that they are tired of “playing secretary” for McMaster, and that “Petraus had his clearance pulled. These calls are probably illegal.”

Steve Bannon and Jared Kushner, despite fake news reports about a feud, are against the McMaster-Cohn-Powell plan. Stephen Miller and Wilbur Ross also oppose arming the Saudis. Derek Harvey, Joel Rayburn, and other Petraeus proteges support the arms deal with Saudi Arabia.

Former employees from Harvey’s office, who were dismissed in early April, have complained about harassment.

One former employee has obtained legal counsel and is in the process of filing a harassment lawsuit against Harvey.

Mike Cernovich is the journalist who broke the Susan Rice unmasking scandal and first reported that H.R. McMaster wants a massive U.S.-led ground force in Syria.|||

Saudi Arabia will obtain a massive weapons arsenal and missile defense system in a deal pushed by H.R. McMaster, Gary Cohn, and Dina Habib Powell. Under this deal, which is set to be announced in May…