Judge rules in favor of “Drone Slayer,” dismisses lawsuit filed by pilot It was around sunset on Easter Sunday, April 16, when Brad Jones took his DJI Inspire 2 out for a flight in front of his home. Jones hoped, as he does on most nights, to capture some of the forested and hilly scenery in the environs of his hometown, Oliver Springs, Tennessee—about 30 miles west of Knoxville.

“I flew down over my aunt’s house, and I heard a gunshot within the first three to four minutes of flight,” Jones told Ars. “So I sped up and flew back towards my house.”

After a few more minutes, he flew back westward. He had just switched the drone’s camera mode from video to taking still photos in RAW format.

“I took two pictures then I heard the gunshot, and all of a sudden my drone started spiraling down—I’m sitting there trying to keep it aloft and there was no lift.”

A nearby neighbor, who was also in the front of his own home, turned to Jones and exclaimed: “That hit it! You just got shot! It’s going to crash!”

Indeed, Jones watched as his beloved drone came plummeting straight down onto the property of the Coalfield Seventh Day Adventist Church—right next to a neighbor’s home, where young children were playing in the backyard.

“It didn’t hit the ground as hard as it could have,” Jones said. “When it hit, it broke the left landing gear arm, snapped the molding off the Inspire. But it was still running. Didn’t damage batteries, rotors were intact. Everything was fine, except the left rear motor with a bullet hole in it.”

Jones became the fourth reported drone shooting incident that Ars has been made aware of in nearly two years.

Woman shoots drone: “It hovered for a second and I blasted it to smithereens.” Just last month, a federal judge dismissed a lawsuit filed against William Merideth, the Kentucky man who shot down a drone that Merideth believed was flying over his own property in 2015.

However, the Federal Aviation Administration considers drones to be aircraft—and under federal law, shooting at aircraft is a crime.

“An aircraft is an aircraft,” Rocky Davidson, of the FAA’s Nashville Flights Standards District Office, told Ars. “We have the same rules and regulations for shooting a regular aircraft.”

However, to date, no prosecutions have been brought against those who shoot down drones.

“It would seem that, in theory, you could prosecute an individual for destroying a drone.” That’s according to Ryan Calo, a law professor and drone expert at the University of Washington. “That seems a rather draconian approach, so I’m not surprised the FAA has not pursued it. This is a flexible enough statute that they could bring a case.”

While some on the ground may feel that their “airspace” has been invaded if a drone flies in or near their property, American law does not yet recognize the concept of aerial trespass. In fact, as the consumer drone age has taken flight, legal scholars have wondered about this exact situation. If a drone flies over private property, is it trespassing?

The short answer is that American courts have not addressed the question adequately. The best case law on the issue dates back to 1946, long before inexpensive consumer drones were technically feasible. That year, the Supreme Court ruled in a case known as United States v. Causby that a farmer in North Carolina could assert property rights up to at least up to 83 feet, and perhaps further. But he could not assert property rights indefinitely.

As the Supreme Court ruled at the time: “We need not determine at this time what those precise limits are.”

“If it’s a crime, I want it to be prosecuted,” said Jones. “If it’s not prosecuted, then what’s to keep them from doing it?”

Jones alleged to Ars and local law enforcement that he suspected a neighbor, Doug Lively, as the shooter. (Ars was unable to reach Lively for comment.)

“I fly the same route almost every day,” Jones said. “[But], for some reason, Easter Sunday, I don’t know if the guy had too much to drink, or whatever. I never crossed his property—I looked back at my flight log—I never once crossed his property.”

Jones, who is a high school basketball coach who also runs a local television station, told Ars that “85 percent” of the land he flies over is owned by members of his extended family. He said that he had never heard anyone complain about his flights.

“I didn’t see [Lively] do it,” he said. “So I can’t say [with] 100 percent accuracy that he did. He was the only person that was standing outside of where the sound of the shot came from.”

Jones said he approached Lively but did not cross onto his property.

“I saw him standing out there and I said: ‘Hey, did you shoot my drone down?’ and he said ‘No, I didn’t. I heard some shots over yonder.’”

Jones responded that he was confident that the shots came from nearby where Lively was standing.|||

“Everything was fine, except the left rear motor with a bullet hole in it.”