A product designer and venture capital partner took apart a Juicero to see what made the notorious $400 juice presser so expensive. What he found was eight separate machined parts and a slew of custom plastic pieces that likely made the presser more expensive than it needed to be.

Juice wars: Juicero has sued another juicer maker for patent infringement Juicero came under fire last week when Bloomberg reporters found that they could press juice out of the company’s proprietary juice bags with their hands, eschewing the expensive cold-press juicer. Some investors said they assumed the Juicero would press large chunks of fruit and vegetables, but instead the heavily funded startup delivered bags of pre-cut pulp to Juicero owners.

In his teardown, Ben Einstein notes that Juicero seems to rely heavily on custom-designed and complex parts, all of which add considerably to the appliance’s cost to build. Some of the eight machined parts (parts that are cut from a larger piece of material) even have rounded surfaces, which makes the parts even more expensive. Einstein calls out the Juicero for “unnecessary complexity.” He points out that the juice press uses what seem to be an excess of components just to keep the press door sealed, including “10 custom injection molded parts,” two stamped steel parts, a gear, two custom dowel pins, and more.

The Juicero also requires a drivetrain capable of applying equal pressure to the proprietary juice bags across their 64 square inches. “On the contrary, when a human hand squeezes the same pack, we naturally use a very different technique,” Einstein writes, offering a photo of a human hand applying pressure to smaller parts of the bag repeatedly. “I have to believe the engineers that built this product looked at other ways of pressing the juice,” Einstein continued, “but if the primary mechanism could apply force in a more focused way it could easily save hundreds of dollars off the shelf price of the product” (emphasis Einstein’s).

Juicero has pointed to its pressing mechanism as one of the primary value propositions of the appliance. In a letter from the CEO last week, the company defended the expense of the juice press. The letter asserts that the Juicero provides “consistent pressing of our Produce Packs calibrated by flavor to deliver the best combination of taste and nutrition every time.”

But Einstein takes issue with the idea that such a high-quality press is necessary in a startup’s first product. “Juicero spent $120M over two years to build a complex supply chain and perfectly engineered product that is too expensive for [its] target demographic,” he writes.

Einstein, who is also a general partner at venture capital firm Bolt, wrote that he hopes his critique of the Juicero instructs other hardware-central startups. “Constraints during the earliest stages of a hardware company’s life force founders to carefully allocate resources to find creative solutions. I hope this post serves as a lesson to other hardware startups that spending tens of millions of dollars on product development prior to shipping a single unit is a goal that’s not worth striving for.”|||

Machine applies equal pressure across the surface area of the juice bags.