There are some things you are doing on your android smartphone, which are not only unnecessary, but those are wrong things followed by myths. Let’s see what are those things you are doing wrong.

So, if you are an android user, this blog is a must read blog for you.

I am going to show you number of things you are doing wrong on your android smartphone, whether those are followed by myth or by ignorance.

There are number of applications available on Google Play Store, which shows that how they clean RAM by removing applications from recent. Well, whether you do it manually removing from recent or you use RAM cleaner Apps, that is wrong thing to do.

When you remove any application from recent, surely you do exit from that application, but after removing that application, when you open it again, it takes more time.

When you are multi tasking on your android smartphone, you would be using multiple applications simultaneously. In which those applications allow you to access easily and speedily. So, that not only saves you from the trouble of waiting for application to start, but it also allows you to resume whatever task you were doing.

Basically, Android has its own way of handling multi tasking. So, leave handling applications to your android system. Which will not only save your work, but it will also disable application, which is unused from quite some time.

This is pretty common question that, Do I need anti virus application on my android device? Well, I think it is unnecessary. Android provides quite the security to their users, not only on local storage, but it provides good security on cloud level as well.

Your device and data are secured from any harm, till you install applications only from Play Store. Even those anti virus application developers know this. That is the reason that they provide extra features with Anti virus.

For example, Anti Theft protection, call blocking and many more like these. You can get your data secured by just using android system but without installing apps from unknown source.

Whenever you install application, Google ask you to give permissions to applications. But you should check it properly. Because there might be some applications, that demands unnecessary permissions.

For example, UC Web Browser. UC browser is a browser same as chrome, which allows you to surf the web with use of it.

But, let me tell you one thing, that UC browser is one of the applications who can get your personal data with ease.

Among the permissions UC Browser demands, there is permission to access storage devices, which include your contacts, photos and videos too.

There is also a permission demanded, which is to allow UC Browser to make and manage phone calls. And last but not the least location access.

Those permissions are unnecessary for a Browser to surf website, when it comes to location there are few websites which ask you for location permission, but it is totally on you that you want to share it or not.

But problem is you can’t install UC Browser without providing those applications. Thus, it is a threat to your privacy. So, do not use applications which demands unnecessary permissions.

Well, if you are using any third party application to clear caches which let you clear your internal storage, than start by uninstalling that application first.

There are some third party applications, that suggest you to run a cleaner to free up your storage, you should start freeing your storage by uninstalling that application first. Because those application won’t only occupy your storage but will also consume your internet data by fetching advertisements.

Cache is saved data, which you access regularly, which allows you to access application easily. And speed up process.

You should not use application to clean caches, because Android provides you with the option of cleaning application manually.

There you will find all applications installed on your device, select the application, of which you want to clean caches, scroll down and you will find there clear caches option.

But before you do clear that caches, keep in mind that whenever you will open it again, it will take some time to gather up all the data again. Which will not only slow down process of loading application but it will also, consume your Internet Data.

If you want to clean caches that badly than, just go to Settings > Storage > Internal Storage

Double tap on internal storage, it will shows you the list that which thing occupying how much of your storage.

Click on the Caches, it will ask you to confirm, accept and just like that your caches are cleared. Do not use third party applications.

There are many websites, which are sources of applications, those websites provides applications which are paid applications on Google play store, for absolutely free.

Not only that there are some websites, that provides MOD apks and hacked versions of Games, like getting free Points and all. But those are unknown sources.

Not only unknown but also untrustworthy, did you ever thought that, why would someone give you a paid application absolutely for free?

Well, there are some reasons, they can get your data with taking some extra permissions, like accessing contacts, accessing storage device. So, there would be no safety left for you on your smartphone.

So, do not download and install applications from unknown and untrustworthy sources. Specially for paid applications.

There are various cool applications that use your device’s sensor to bring you some great functionality. For example, there are applications like Wave Control and Kin Screen.

Wave control lets you control media playback using your Proximity sensor and Kin Screen that lets you unlock your device using gestures over the Proximity sensor.

These apps do bring cool features to your smartphone, but that bring one more thing with it too. That is battery consumption. These applications drain your battery fast. Which make your battery backup worst and always on low battery mode.

Kin screen application is useful when your lock screen button is not working. It lets you to unlock your device using gesture over the proximity sensor.

But after some time you will feel like, it would have been better, if I get lock screen button fixed. Reason behind that is kin screen keep using sensor and drain your battery. Which makes you to charge your phone all time.

So, do not use sensor based applications just for features in phones with lower battery life.

One of the biggest myth of the android world is “Battery saver applications save battery life of your phone”, Well, this is nothing but a big lie. In fact that will drain your battery even faster.

The various battery saver apps save your battery is by killing applications running in the background, keeping brightness low and turning Wi-Fi, bluetooth and Internet data off.

Well, those things you can perform manually too. There is no need of those applications, not only that those applications will also consume your internet data constantly to bring you Advertisement and that will drain your battery too.

So, in the end it will only end up bothering your battery even more. Just do those things manually, eventually you will end up saving your battery life.

Well, Android smartphones are designed to powered on for all the time, but rebooting your smartphone once in a while is better for your android device. Rebooting your smartphone make sure that your battery is healthy.

Battery on the phone have finite life span, so more you use them faster they ran out. Rebooting your phone also resets the caches in the system and helps with the diagnosis.

So, Restart your smartphone once in a week, that would be good enough to keep your phone healthy.

So, these are the things you should not do on your android smartphone, what do you think about this? Let me know in comment section.|||

There are some things you are doing on your android smartphone, which are not only unnecessary, but those are wrong things followed by myths. Let's see what are those things you are doing wrong. So,…