As we know about Neo4j, it pulls out developers life from the trouble and black & white screen of the databases. It doesn’t give freedom from the old databases also provides best support with it’s predefined procedures.

As we know that in the Relational Database, Procedure provide advantages of better performance, scalability, productivity, ease of use and security and Neo4j also provides some amazing tool which can perform as mention above.

Yes, I am talking about the Apoc and using of Apoc with Neo4j, is a blessing for the developers. It provides many predefined procedures or user defined functions/views so that we can easily use it and improve our productivity in very simple manner.

APOC is stands for ‘Awesome Procedure On Cypher‘. APOC is a library of procedure for the various areas. It is introduce with the Neo4j 3.0

There are many areas where we use APOC and the lit of areas are :

When you are using APOC there are two ways to get it and use with Neo4j :

Now you are ready to use APOC with Neo4j. Today we will discuss about the data migration between the other data base to Neo4.

We use many databases for storing the data. But when we have a large amount of data and tables that time it becomes so hard to make query and execute them on the database. We have to be extra cautious to perform the task and we get bored to see same screen without any fun 🙂 . When we worked on any other database and think to use neo4j that time we face the issue for migrating data into Neo4j. We are going to discuss migrating data from some famous and use databases.

We are in the last database to migrate data to Neo4j but as obvious not least. We can download JDBC .jar file (Download) and keep it in the $Neo4j_Home/plugins and restart the Neo4j. We can provide URL in the $Neo4j_Home/conf/neo4j.conf as :

We want to migrate data from the MYSQL as before we have to download JDBC .jar file (Download) and keep it in the $Neo4j_Home/plugins and update $Neo4j_Home/conf/neo4j.conf as:

Restart the Neo4j server and we are set for migrating the data from the Cassandra to Neo4j.

When we use PostgreSQL, we have to download JDBC .jar file (Download) and keep it in the $Neo4j_Home/plugins and restart the Neo4j. After restarting the Neo4j server we are set for migrating the data from the PostgreSQL to Neo4j.

We can now fetch data direct. We don’t need to load driver also.

Now we migrate data from the Cassandra to Neo4j. Now we first import data into the cassandra if we don’t have data in the cassandra or we can use it for test also.

Restart the Neo4j server and we are set for migrating the data from the Cassandra to Neo4j.

After importing the data in Neo4j, we have to thing about the sync of data. We can use schedule process which can be timebase and automatically sync data between the databases. We can also used event based integration where we will defined the event at which we want to update the database.

Note : As we discuss I want to notify again if you do not update driver name into $Neo4j_Home/conf/neo4j.conf then you have to load driver in Neo4j otherwise you have to provide only driver name into the query.

This is an basic example for using the APOC and it is also a first step when you start using Neo4j and want to replace it with your old databases that time you don’t want to use loose your data. After migrating the data you are ready to use Neo4j with your data which was exists in the old databases.

If You have any questions you can contact me here or on Twitter: @anuragknoldus|||

Hello Folks, As we know about Neo4j, it pulls out developers life from the trouble and black & white screen of the databases. It doesn't give freedom from the old databases also provides best support with it's predefined procedures. As we know that in the Relational Database, Procedure provide advantages of better performance, scalability, productivity,…