In the past months we've seen the rise of a very interesting tactic called "Instagram pods." These groups of people are trying to tap into the Instagram algorithm for their own benefit. Take a look at our FAQ to learn more!

An Instagram pod is a group of people that have banded together to improve their Instagram post visibility. These are informal organizations (think dedicated Facebook Groups or forums online) where members all follow each other on Instagram, and let each other know when they have new posts up. Then, en masse, they like, comment on, and share the Instagram post, which in turn makes it more visible to the audience outside the pod.

In many ways, it isn't! A "pod" is very similar to other informal groups that gather around blogs and common interest stories to promote them. There are two reasons that this Instagram version is interesting. First, it's organized specifically to increase Instagram post visibility, which means members are expected to vote for all other members' content just as their own is voted for. There's rarely a firm law, but brands participating in pods believe in quid pro quo.

Second, Instagram pods are focused on gaming the Instagram algorithm. Pods started appearing after the significant March 2016 update to the photo network. Before this date, Instagram visibility was mostly first come, first serve. Afterward, it was a lot more like Facebook: Posts moved to the top of the feed based on followers, social signals, and general post interaction. So, pods started to form that maximize these variables, pushing the posts of everyone in the group to the top.

We don't know the precise Instagram algorithm, but we do know that social signals from your group and popular posters with followers tend to increase visibility both on feeds and in the "explore" section. However, experts have been hesitant to say whether the pods are entirely successful or not. Other variables, like the time of posting and image quality, can also make a big difference, and just because the pod sees higher visibility doesn't necessary mean the general audience will, too. But overall, people in pods feel that they are effective.

An Instagram pod does come with a time commitment: You need to follow the other Instagram users in your group and like their posts when possible. Sometimes this can lead to awkward choices, such as, "How will sharing this photo affect my own brand?" This is why most Instagram pods are made from people in the same industry with similar interests – then there's less tension when supporting everyone's posts.

Instagram probably isn't a fan of people gaming their algorithm. Google's updates to the search engine algorithm, for example, are often designed to discourage this type of behavior. However, Instagram doesn't have the same tools or reach that Google has, so it's unclear what can be done. Possibly Instagram will choose to give reciprocal likes or back-and-forth shares less weight to minimize the effect of pods. At this point, the good (more community involvement, more social activity) probably outweighs the bad, even from Instagram's point of view. When people start charging for pod membership or demanding fees for higher pod boosts – that's when to watch out.

There are many types of pods: Some are organized by platform or site like Instarevealed, while others are invitation-only blog groups that are incorporating Instagram. We suggest asking around your LinkedIn and Facebook industry groups for any news about an Instagram pod. Reach out to bloggers and Instagrammers in your community as well. It's far better to start with someone you know rather than join a pod filled with strangers, where you're rolling the dice on content.|||

Learn how to tap into the Instagram algorithm by becoming part of an Instagram pod. FAQ's on how to become part of one and what will be required when you join.