industry's apex organisation has said that the two top -- and -- got only 8.8 per cent of the H-1B visas for placement of workers in the United States.

"Of the six companies, software majors (Tata Consultancy Services) and received 7,504 H-1B visas in FY 2015, which is 8.8 per cent of the total H-1B visas," said the National Association of Software Services and (Nasscom) in a statement here.

The apex body's clarification was in response to a official last week accusing top firms and of unfairly cornering majority of the H-IB visas, by applying more in the lottery system.

Only six firms were among the top 20 recipients of the H-1B visas in fiscal 2015 for their professionals to work in the US, said

President Donald Trump signed an executive order last week to reform the H-1B visas norms by replacing the lottery system with a merit-based immigration policy.

"Every reputable data source in the has documented a growing shortfall between the supply and demand for computer science majors in the workforce, especially in cutting-edge fields such as cloud, big data, and mobile computing," asserted

The Department of Labor estimates that there will be 2.4 million unfilled STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) jobs by 2018, with 50 per cent of the vacancies in IT-related positions.

" firms account for less than 20 per cent of the H-1B visas; although Indian nationals get 71 per cent of them, testifying their high skill levels, especially in the very coveted STEM skills category," stressed

Noting that the annual number of specialists working on temporary visas for service firms was 0.009 per cent of the 158-million-member workforce, a survey also found that the average wage for visa holders is $82,000 besides a fixed cost of $15,000 incurred on each visa, including its fee and related expenses.

"The average wage for visa holders is over 35 per cent higher than the minimum prescribed exempt wage of $60,000," pointed out the statement.

All companies, including the US, Indian and others, hire locally and bridge the skills gap by bringing in highly skilled professionals to temporarily work in the on H-1B and other visas.

" firms follow the global delivery model with and global counterparts working with 75 per cent of the Fortune 500 companies, to enable them become more competitive globally and creating jobs locally in the US," reiterated the statement.

The Industry is a "net creator" of jobs in the and supports half a million jobs directly and indirectly.

Refuting the American accusation, said it was committed to helping its clients leverage technology to transform their businesses, empower their employees in new ways and become more competitive.

"To do this, we invest in the local communities in which we operate, including hiring local American top talent, bringing education and training to our clients to shrink the skills gap and work with policymakers to foster innovation within states and across the country," said in a statement to IANS here.

Responding to reporters' queries on the issue on Monday in New Delhi, Commerce Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said India is taking up its concerns with the on the H-1B visa issue and not about individual

"No one is questioning America's sovereign right to issue visas... we're only talking about their commitments made in their understanding with on issuing visas to Indian professionals. There is no talk of individual companies," she said.|||

Read more about TCS, Infosys got only 8.8% of total H-1B visas: Nasscom's rebuttal to US on Business Standard. Indian IT firms account for less than 20 per cent of the H-1B visas