Late one night in November 2015, Connie Dabate texted her husband, Richard, a photo of her in sexy lingerie with the words, "I'm ready for u big boy."

A day before, Richard Dabate had texted his pregnant girlfriend to assure her that he and his wife have "talked about the divorce and are on the same page." He told the woman two days later that he and Connie were "getting a slow-moving divorce to make it easier on the kids."

A month later, Connie Dabate was shot dead in the couple's Ellington home with the .357 Magnum her husband had purchased months before. Richard Dabate told police he struggled with a masked intruder until the suspect subdued him by applying pressure to his wrists. The killer then chased his wife into the basement and shot her, he told police.

More than a year later, with the help of information from electronic records, including Connie Dabate's Fitbit movements on the morning of her death, police charged Richard Dabate with his wife's murder.

The warrant for his arrest and interviews with people who knew the couple reveal that few were aware of the turmoil in their marriage. The records show that there were signs the Dabates had a loving relationship marked by arguments over money.

State police detectives, however, appeared immediately suspicious of Richard Dabate's version of what happened the morning his wife was killed. On that morning, three dogs picked up no scent other than Dabate's outside the home, there didn't appear to be any point of entry for an intruder and the house was remarkably organized given the struggle Dabate described.

One of the first questions detectives put to Dabate as they interviewed him at Hartford Hospital was whether their investigation would reveal any issues with his marriage.

Dabate took a deep breath as the detectives awaited his response.

"Yes and no," he said.

Richard Dabate was a 1995 graduate of Manchester High School who went on to attend technical school and worked as a computer network administrator in Bloomfield. He has no criminal convictions.

Connie Dabate graduated from Ellington High School in 1995 and received an undergraduate degree from the University of Connecticut in 1999. She was a pharmaceutical sales representative for Reckitt Benckiser, according to her obituary. She also was a past vice president and member of the Ellington Ambulance Corp.

They were married on July 4, 2003, and had two sons, ages 9 and 6.

State police interviewed nearly 20 witnesses, many of them friends and family of Connie Dabate. Most said the same thing: She never talked about getting divorced, although some said she was stressed about the amount of money Richard Dabate spent.

Connie Dabate didn't like guns, and there was no indication she knew her husband was having an affair and had gotten another woman pregnant, they said. Friends contacted by The Courant said they didn't want to be quoted because they feared reprisal from Richard Dabate, who was released from prison on bond earlier this week.

One friend said Connie never talked about them having marital problems. Every once in a while, she would hear that Rick's credit was bad, but the money issues didn't appear to be any different than what many married couples experience.

Rick Dabate always seemed "odd" and "quirky," but not capable of killing his wife, she said.

"He was definitely an odd character," she said. "I would say Rick is Rick. He was kind of quirky."

"Quirky" could explain his infatuation with Superman. He dressed as the superhero for the Manchester Road Race in 2015 and occasionally ended text messages to his girlfriend with the line, "thinking of you from Superman."

But not every acquaintance was in the dark about problems in the marriage. One friend of Richard's told state police that he was aware of the impending divorce and that Richard Dabate had "confided" in the unidentified witness that he had been having an affair with a woman who was 10 weeks pregnant. Richard Dabate told the witness that he was concerned that Connie would divorce him, the warrant for his arrest states.

The revelation that Richard Dabate had a pregnant girlfriend had come to detectives' attention early in the investigation, and the warrant indicates that he provided an interesting, if somewhat cryptic, explanation.

Richard Dabate said Connie and he wanted to have a child, but that Connie couldn't. He said they discussed artificial insemination, with the unidentified other woman giving birth. But, he told detectives, he instead had done some "untraditional things" and gotten the woman pregnant. Then he said Connie was all right with the situation and was going to "co-parent" the baby.

Ultimately, Dabate told police that the pregnant woman was a high school friend of his and that there was " a lot of cheating going on in the beginning on both sides." He acknowledged that the pregnancy was "unexpected."

"This situation popped up like a frickin' soap opera," he said.

He told detectives the mother of his unborn child was expecting him to divorce Connie. But he also said that his wife and he were working to salvage their marriage and that his girlfriend was not aware of those efforts.

If the Dabates were working to save their marriage, they had much to overcome. A December 2014 entry in the "Notes" section of Connie Dabate's cellphone — titled "Why I want a divorce" — listed reasons why she wanted to end her marriage to Richard Dabate.

The list included claims that her husband took money "from a lot of accounts that don't belong to him," is an unfit parent, is uncaring toward her, doesn't come home on time and "acts like a kid constantly," according to the warrant.

Richard Dabate had taken out a credit card without his wife's knowledge and used it to pay for flowers for his girlfriend and more than $1,200 at a Tolland strip club and stays at a nearby Motel 6, the warrant says.

Detectives learned that, five days after the shooting, Richard Dabate tried to cash in Connie Dabate's $475,000 life insurance policy but the insurance company denied his claim. Two years earlier, he had stopped making payments on his own policy. In January 2016, he withdrew more than $90,000 from a Fidelity investment account that belonged to his wife.|||

