To celebrate International Women’s Day, we’ve made a list of some of the most exciting engineers, community leaders, managers and contributors in the container ecosystem.

Jessie Frazelle — Software Engineer at Google and previously a Software Engineer at Docker. Jess has served as a Maintainer of Docker, Contributor to Runc and Golang as well as other projects.

Chen Goldberg — Director of Engineering at Google, Container Engine & Kubernetes. Chen was previously Director of Engineering, Cloud and Automation at HP.

Michelle Noorali — Software Engineer at Deis. Michelle currently works on Helm, a Kubernetes package manager. Michelle is also a Container Camp AU 2017 speaker.

Alice Goldfuss — Site Reliability Engineer at New Relic, organiser of DevOps Days Portland and technical reviewer of Docker: Up & Running and Effective DevOps.

Marianna Tessel — Senior Vice President of Engineering at Docker. Marianna runs the engineering organisation at Docker, which actively contributes to the open source project and is also responsible for Docker’s commercial product offerings.

Bridget Kromhout — Principal technologist for Cloud Foundry. A frequent speaker at tech conferences, Bridget helps organise tech meetups in Minneapolis, serves on the program committee for Velocity, and acts as a global core organiser for the devopsdays. She also podcasts at Arrested DevOps and blogs at bridgetkromhout.com.

Laura Frank — Director of Engineering at Codeship and Docker Captain. Laura’s primary focus is making tools for other developers. At Codeship, she works on improving the Docker infrastructure and overall experience for all users of the CI/CD platform. Previously, she worked on several open source projects to support Docker in the early stages of the project, including Panamax and ImageLayers.

Sarah Novotny — Program Manager of Kubernetes Community. She has long been an Open Source community champion in communities such as NGINX and MySQL and ran large scale technology infrastructures before web-scale had a name.

Garima Kapoor — Founder of Minio, an object storage server built for cloud application developers and devops. Garima is also the curator of Storage Weekly.

Mackenzie Burnett — Product at CoreOS. Founded Redspread which was acquired by CoreOS in 2016 and was named one of Forbes 30 under 30 in Enterprise Technology.

Liz Rice — Technology Evangelist at Aqua Security and Founder of Microscaling Systems. Liz is also a frequent speaker at tech conferences and is a featured speaker at Dockercon 2017.

Isabel Jimenez — Software Engineer at Mesosphere. Isabel is building the datacenter operating system with Apache Mesos and leading development in areas around containerisation, and big data frameworks.

Mindy Preston — Software Engineer at Docker. Before moving to Docker, she worked on the MirageOS library operating system at the University of Cambridge.

Julia Ferraioli — Senior Developer Advocate for Google Cloud Platform. Julia’s blog series on Running a Minecraft server on Google Compute Engine with Docker is genius.

Mandy Waite — Senior Developer Advocate for Google Cloud Platform. Google from Sun Microsystems where she worked with partners on performance and optimisation of large scale applications and services before moving on to building an ecosystem of Open Source applications for OpenSolaris

Megan Kostick — Software Engineer for IBM’s Cloud and Open Source Technologies team. She focuses on IBM cloud solutions leveraging the OpenStack, Cloud Foundry, Apple Swift and Docker open source projects.

Robyn Bergeron — Community Architect at Ansible. Robyn has been a sysadmin, program manager, business analyst, and developer advocate in past lives, and started her career in open source at Red Hat, where she was the Fedora Project Leader.

Anusha Ragunathan — Software Engineer at Docker. Anusha currently leads the effort on plugins, a mechanism to enable Docker Engine deployments to be integrated with third party infrastructure.

Alissa Bonas — Software Engineer and a team lead in the container management initiative in Red Hat, Alyssa is also a contributor and maintainer in several open source projects.

Is there someone we should add to this list? Let us know in the comments below.|||

To celebrate International Women’s Day, we’ve made a list of some of the most exciting engineers, community leaders, managers and contributors in the container ecosystem. Jessie Frazelle — Software…