Everything becomes grand by the time we reach the Munchkin Village, and it stays that way as Dorothy and Toto move onward towards Emerald City. The sets and the staging are nicely arranged, with beautifully painted backdrops that add to the vastness of the land. There are also huge casts of characters that greet Dorothy on this adventure, all of whom have unique designs that follow the theme of the town they are from. I have to give it up for the production crew and designers, as it was clear that a lot of work was put into crafting a brand-new world that audiences would fall in love with. And it’s safe to say they succeed in that goal. It feels like you’re watching a completely different movie once we switch settings.

And that’s the way it should be! For the latter half of the film, we momentarily break from the norms of reality and dive into the realm of dreams and imagination. Everything suddenly becomes over-the-top, from the acting, down to the amount of musical numbers that accompany the long journey. Most of the songs use the same melody and simply change up the lyrics (both Scarecrow’s and Tinman’s song come to mind), but overall the tunes are fairly catchy and fun to listen to.  If anything, the melody is repetitive in order for audiences to identify the specific rhythms of these songs, which in turn makes it easier to sing-along. And the music does help push the narrative forward. Dorothy and friends have a long road ahead to meet the Wizard of Oz, but it doesn’t feel so long when you’re dancing and singing every step of the way!

Though, with all this time devoted to the song and dance numbers and the continual addition of new characters along the way, plot remains fairly simple. Maybe too simple. Things just seem to resolve themselves with one convenience after another, and there are many divine interventions that help Dorothy and her friends when they find themselves in deep trouble. But in the end, this is practically a children’s story, a story that never gets too grim on its journey.|||

Widely considered to be one of the most iconic movies of all time, The 
Wizard of Oz captured the imaginations of audiences across generations.