Umar has always been the most prominent figure in our industry when it comes to exposing the powers of the Chrome Devtools, and his collection of tips have been my single reference and “source of truth” when it comes to learning about how I can improve and speed up my workflow using the different devtool features. Since the first day I followed him, I’ve learned more about what I can do with devtools than I ever thought was even possible. He has been sharing literally the most extensive and most useful tips that I’d never seen anywhere before. It’s always been like getting insider access to features as soon as they landed. If you care the slightest bit about improving your everyday dev workflow and getting not only better but also faster and more efficient at what you do, then I highly recommend taking his course. I can’t think of anyone else I’d trust to have the latest and greatest on this topic than him. Don’t miss out on what he has to offer. It'll be 100% worth it.

Umar has always been the most prominent figure in our industry when it comes to exposing the powers of the Chrome Devtools, and his collection of tips have been my single reference and “source of truth” when it comes to learning about how I can improve and speed up my workflow using the different devtool features. Since the first day I followed him, I’ve learned more about what I can do with devtools than I ever thought was even possible. He has been sharing literally the most extensive and most useful tips that I’d never seen anywhere before. It’s always been like getting insider access to features as soon as they landed. If you care the slightest bit about improving your everyday dev workflow and getting not only better but also faster and more efficient at what you do, then I highly recommend taking his course. I can’t think of anyone else I’d trust to have the latest and greatest on this topic than him. Don’t miss out on what he has to offer. It'll be 100% worth it.|||

Premium DevTools video course, advanced performance debugging, service workers, front end security and more