Clight is a C daemon utility to automagically change screen backlight level to match ambient brightness.

 Ambient brightness is computed by capturing frames from webcam.

 Moreover, it can manage your screen temperature, just like redshift does.

It was heavily inspired by calise in its initial intents.

Note that optional build deps are automatically disabled if they are not installed at build time.

Clight tries to be a 0-conf software; therefore, it installs a desktop file in /etc/xdg/autostart. This way, no matter what's your DE is, if it is xdg-compliant, it will automatically start clight. User has to do nothing but reboot after installing clight.

 This is needed to ensure that X is running when clight gets started, as on systemd there is no proper way of knowing whether X has been started or not.

 Note that desktop file will execute "systemctl --user start clight"; user service will then kick in clightd dependency and will restart itself in case of crash.

Finally, a desktop file to take a fast screen backlight recalibration ("clight -c"), useful to be binded to a keyboard shortcut, is installed too, and it will show up in your applications menu.

For cmdline options, check clight [-?|--help] [--usage].

 Please note that cmdline "--device" and "--backlight" switches require only last part of syspath (eg: "video0" or "intel_backlight").

 If your backlight interface will completely dim your screen at 0 backlight level, be sure to set in your conf file (or through cmdline option) lowest_backlight_level option.

A global config file is shipped with clight. It is installed in /etc/default/clight.conf and it is all commented.

 You can customize it or you can copy it in your $XDG_CONFIG_HOME folder (fallbacks to $HOME/.config/) and customize it there.

 Both files are checked when clight starts, in this order: global -> user-local -> cmdline opts.

Clight makes use of Gnu Scientific Library to compute best-fit around data points as read by clight.conf file.

 Default values are [ 0.0, 0.15, 0.29, 0.45, 0.61, 0.74, 0.81, 0.88, 0.93, 0.97, 1.0 ]; indexes (from 0 to 10 included) are our X axys (ambient brightness), while values are Y axys (screen backlight).

 For example, with default values, at 0.5 ambient brightness (6th value in this array) clight will set a 74% of max backlight level.

 By customizing these values, you can adapt screen backlight curve to meet your needs. Note that values must be between 0.0 and 1.0 obviously.

Gamma support is only available on X. Sadly on wayland there is still no standard way to achieve gamma correction. Let's way with fingers crossed.

 Consequently, on not X environments, gamma correction tool gets autodisabled.

As clightd getgamma function properly supports only 50-steps temperature values (ie if you use "setgamma 6000" and then getgamma, it will return 6000. If you use setgamma 4578, getgamma won't return exactly it; it will return 4566 or something similar.), do not set in your conf not-50-multiple temperatures.

 Moreover, since there is still no standard way to deal with gamma correction on wayland, it is only supported on X11.

 If you run clight from wayland or from a tty, gamma support will be automatically disabled.

You can only run one clight instance per-user: if a clight instance is running, you cannot start another full clight instance.

 Obviously you can still invoke "clight -c" from a terminal/shortcut to make a fast capture/screen brightness calibration.

 This is achieved through a clight.lock file placed in current user home.

Every functionality in clight is achieved through a "module". An inter-modules dependencies system has been created ad-hoc to ease development of such modules.

 This way, it does not matter modules' init calls sorting; moreover, each module can be easily disabled if not needed (eg: when --no-gamma option is passed.)

Clight is available on AUR: https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/clight-git/ .

Deb package for amd64 architecture is provided for each release.

 Moreover, you can very easily build your own packages, if you wish to test latest Clight code.

 You only need to issue:

A deb file will be created in "Debian" folder, inside Clight root.

 Please note that while i am using Debian testing at my job, i am developing clightd from archlinux.

 Thus, you can encounter some packaging issues. Please, report back.

This software is distributed with GPL license, see COPYING file for more informations.|||

Clight - A C daemon that turns your webcam into a light sensor. It will adjust screen backlight based on ambient brightness.