Forecasting MRR for Next 12 Months with Stripe Data & Prophet in Exploratory

The moment I mention ‘Forecasting’ you would become suspicious and you should be. Predicting the future is super hard because there are a lot of things that would influence our future. Same goes for the businesses, and especially for startups, we don’t even know what is going to happen in the next month, if not next week! So how is that possible to forecast our revenue in future? Crazy.

But there are sometimes you wish you still want to do such exercise. For example, you or some stakeholders of your business might want to know the next 12 months revenue projection, not necessarily counting it as a precise number, but understand the scale or momentum of the business, which is essential for raising capitals, planning the business strategy, budgeting, hiring, etc.

There are many ways to forecast the revenue for the future time period, but it usually takes experts to get the result that is actually useful. And this means it’s not available for most of us. However, thanks to ‘Prophet’ package from a Facebook team, who built this amazing time series forecasting algorithm and open sourced it recently, we can quickly forecast such data and get a pretty good quality of the result with just a matter of a few clicks in Exploratory. If you want to know more about how ‘Prophet’ package works in Exploratory, take a look at this blog post I’ve written before.

Anyway, in the previous post, we looked at how we can calculate the MRR segmented by New, Recurring, and Churn. Today, let’s try applying this forecasting algorithm on top of this data and get the forecasted MRR over the next 12 months.

We have data that looks like below. It starts from January 2016 through March 2017.

First, let’s get the total MRR with the following calculation.

We can quickly visualize the total MRR with Bar chart like below.

Now, let’s apply ‘Time Series Forecasting’ algorithm from ‘Prophet’ on top of this data to forecast the MRR for the next 12 months.

You can select ‘Run Time Series Forecast’ from ‘Add’ button menu.

In the dialog, you can select ‘recurring_month’ for ‘Date / Time Column’ and set ‘Month’ for ‘Aggregation Level’.

And you can select ‘Recurring’ column for ‘Value Column’. Lastly, you can set 12 for the ‘Forecasting Time Period’. Since we have selected ‘Month’ as the aggregation level, this ‘12’ means the next 12 months.

We can leave all the parameters at the right hand side as they are since the algorithm does pretty good job figuring out how to fit the model automatically with the default configuration.

Click ‘Run’ button and you will get the forecasted values calculated for the next 12 month periods.

There are many columns generated automatically. Take a look at this introductory post about ‘Time Series Forecasting with Prophet’ for more details.

We can quickly visualize the forecasted values by assigning the newly generated column ‘forecasted_value’ to Y2 Axis. The orange colored bars are the values forecasted by the model.

It might be easier to see the trend by switching to Line chart type instead. Here, I’m setting the Y1-Axis for ‘Recurring’ column to use ‘Circle’ as Marker type to make it easier to see both the original ‘Recurring’ values and ‘Forecasted’ values together.

We can show the confidence interval range by selecting ‘Range’ from the Y-2 Axis menu and checking ‘Show Range’ checkbox.

Since the ‘forecasting’ algorithm also generates ‘Trend’ values, we can show that as Y3-Axis. This will make it easier to understand the overall trend.

Here is the final chart I have published to Exploratory Cloud and embedded here by just copying & pasting the URL.

Now we can see that this business will hit about $3M MRR by next year if it keeps growing the similar way it has observed for the last 12 months.

Again, this is just one of many scenarios that can happen to this business. And most likely it is not going to turn out exactly how it is shown here unless this happens to be the kind of businesses that Warren Buffet wants to invest, which are so called ‘even idiots can run’.

But at the same time, if you are planning for financing, investments, budgeting, hiring, etc., then this is probably one of the most useful information for such planning and further discussion. And, most likely it is better than any other ways you could possibly do including hiring the experts. ‘Prophet’ package (available in both R and Python) is that good, and I highly recommend you make it your close friend regardless of whether you use Exploratory or not! 😉|||

The moment I mention ‘Forecasting’ you would become suspicious and you should be. Predicting the future is super hard because there are a lot of things that would influence our future. Same goes for…