This week, Nir Eyal, who wrote the book Hooked: How To Build Habit-Forming Products and has a consulting business that teaches software makers the same, published an essay: The Morality of Manipulation.

The centerpiece of the essay is a “Manipulation Matrix” that Nir created:

Eyal created this matrix to help entrepreneurs, employees, and investors decide if ensuring their software triggers frequent dopamine releases in its users’ brains is moral or not.

If the maker concludes that the answer to both of those questions is “yes,” they are a facilitator: as long as they will use their own products AND believe those products will help users’ materially improve their lives, they should feel free to write software that turns its users into addicts.

And if the makers will use their own products BUT can’t reasonably claim that these products improve users’ lives, then the makers are entertainers. And they, too should feel free to turn their users into addicts.

After all, Eyal argues, entertainment is a form of art:

What’s more, even if the entertainment offered by an addicting product is so shallow that it borders on non-entertainment, that’s ok, too, because the fate of any “hyper-addictive” piece of entertainment is to flame out and die.

Eyal points to Farmville, Angry Birds, Pac Man, and Tetris to make that point, adding:

To sum up Eyal’s argument (as fairly as I can), any maker who plans to use her own products AND believes that these products provide meaningful value or entertainment to their users should have no qualms about turning those users into addicts.

Now, while I don’t know Nir Eyal personally, I believe from the reports of professional acquaintances and various things I’ve read that he is a genuinely kind, well-intentioned man who sees himself offering services in the “facilitator” quadrant.

But with all due respect to Nir’s reputed kindness and good intentions, the core arguments in his essay and the moral logic of his Manipulation Matrix are complete nonsense.

Here’s the hard truth: any business whose revenue model is built on a direct correlation between “engagement” and revenue has every incentive to find new, faster, and more efficient ways to make their products addicting.

Likewise, any founder, executive, and rank-and-file employee of such a company has every incentive to tell themselves AND the public that their products are “materially improving their users’ lives,” “just entertainment,” or “simply meeting the market’s demands.”

This is true for cigarette and alcohol companies and meth dealers. It’s true for junk food brands. It’s true for slot machine manufacturers and the casinos who buy from them.

It’s equally true for “free-to-play” games that monetize with in-app micro-transactions and online social networks that monetize with advertising.

And while the harms inflicted by cigarettes, booze, meth, and junk food on their most “engaged” users are both well-documented and blatantly visible, the harms inflicted by slot machines, free-to-play games, and addicting social software on theirs are not.

Specifically, cigarette addicts end up with fucked up skin, yellowed teeth, and diseased lungs. Alcoholics ruin their skin and their livers and frequently destroy their lives and the psychology of the people who love them. Meth addicts become toothless trainwrecks and junk food addicts end up with failing pancreases and fat bodies full of clogged arteries.

But gambling addicts tend to suffer less visible, quieter devastations. Sure, they’ll occasionally destroy their finances, lose their jobs and alienate their loved ones. But the visible damage to their bodies is a second-order effect of their gambling addictions: the ravages of chronic stress.

Likewise, people hooked on addicting games like Clash Of Clans or addicting social apps like Facebook don’t tend to suddenly explode in weight or lose half their teeth in one go. Sure, you’ll hear occasional stories of new parents literally letting their babies starve to death while they raised a virtual child in a game, but those are the wild and crazy exceptions.

The damage experienced by mobile gaming and social networking addicts tends to be much more subtle: feelings of anxiety while away from one’s phone; bigger propensities to procrastinate; harder times sticking with challenging but essential tasks; and recurring failure to be mentally present while spending time with family and friends.

Yes, those harms are FAR LESS severe than, say, lung cancer, cirrhosis, meth mouth, or chronic obesity, but they are still harms. And unlike the harms from cigarettes, liquor, meth, and junk food, the harms from addictive technology are have not yet been researched enough to prove.

But the “anecdata” is bountiful. And as someone who experiences sharp pangs of anxiety when I force myself to leave my phone at home when I take a walk, and whose girlfriend is persistently frustrated by my addiction to my phone, I’m pretty sure they’re real.

Upton Sinclair’s famous line applies perfectly here: Counting on the makers of any product to be objective about their own products’s value is utterly unrealistic at best.

And expecting the managers, employees, and investors of any business that profits directly from engagement to make accurate moral judgements about the means of fostering and increasing that engagement is so naive that it’s hard for me to accept that Eyal really believes what he’s proposing.

All of us humans want to believe that we are good people, doing the best we can with the circumstances we’ve got.

Indeed, the human propensity and desire to believe in one’s own innate decency is strong enough to keep tobacco companies staffed with employees who spend their days figuring out how to grow demand for tobacco products and fight anti-tobacco regulations in developing countries around the world.

It’s powerful enough that, despite mounting evidence that sugar is toxic to human health, dozens of super competent people with high degrees of self-regard can spend months working to undermine taxes on sugary drinks around the world…and wake up feeling good about themselves and the job they’re doing.

And it’s persuasive enough that software developers, product managers, marketers, and executives at multi-billion dollar technology companies can devote tremendous resources to finding new and better ways to hook new users and keep their existing users addicted and engaged…and still tell us and themselves and they’re making the world a better place.

Near the beginning of his essay, Nir Eyal writes:

There are lots and lots of explanations for the creation and persistence of the many multi-billion dollar industries that rely on users submitting to manipulations that turn them into addicts.

Almost none of them start with happy, balanced, well-functioning and fully-informed humans consciously deciding to hand over their willpower, control of their own attention, and the contents of their wallets in exchange for whatever.|||

This week, Nir Eyal, who wrote the book Hooked: How To Build Habit-Forming Products and has a consulting business that teaches software makers the same, published an essay: The Morality of…