

This section is about how people in the past have tried to explain the causes of disease and infection

and how they have tried to prevent and to cure them.



Evidence about the prehistoric period is limited but comes from two main sources:



‐ Archaeological finds, e.g. bones and the remains of tools and plants

‐ The culture of current peoples whose lives haven’t changed much since p rehistoric times,e.g. the aborigines of Australia



Based on this evidence, historians can draw some fairly reliable conclusions:

Therefore, prehistoric people had a supernatural approach to disease and infection.





Egyptians also had a supernatural approach to disease and infection. They had temples of healing

and several gods and goddesses to whom people prayed to get better. Sekhmet was a goddess who

could cause and cure epidemics and Imhotep was a god of healing. Other Egyptian sources mention

people going to see ‘priest‐magicians’ in search of cures.



Other supernatural ideas the Egyptians had to prevent or cure disease and infection were:



However, the Egyptians also developed a natural approach to disease and infection. They observed

the River Nile and how the irrigation channels from the river brought life to their fields. They

developed the theory that the body has channels through which blood, air and water flow. They

believed that you became ill when these channels were blocked. One cause of blocked channels

they thought of was rotting food. They believed that this is why you are sick when you are ill – your

body is trying to get rid of the rotten food. The rotten food could also cause other symptoms such as

wind and diarrhoea.



Other natural ideas the Egyptians had about how to prevent and cure disease and infection were:



Some of the Ancient Greeks had a supernatural approach to disease and infection. They believed

that illness was caused by the gods and that the only way to get better was to pray at an Asclepion

which was a temple built to worship Asclepius, the god of healing.

At an Asclepion they would:



These things would have helped people to recover as well, but they believed it was the

power of the god that was curing them.



Other Greeks rejected supernatural ideas and developed more natural approaches. They used herbal

remedies in the same way as the Egyptians had. The best known of the Greeks’ natural approaches is

the Theory of the Four Humours which was developed by Hippocrates.

This theory said:

- The body is made up of four liquids (humours) – blood, phlegm, black bile and yellow bile.

-  If the humours are in balance then you are healthy, however, if there is too much of one

humour then you are ill.



The Theory of the Four Humours seemed to be a very good idea because:

Therefore, Hippocrates is important because he set out the methods which doctors use even in the

present day – careful observation and recording; rejecting supernatural beliefs; maintaining high

standards of professional behaviour. However, Hippocrates did not come up with many treatments to

cure diseases – he could recognise and name many illnesses but he couldn’t effectively cure any. The

most common treatment based on his ideas was bleeding, which was done to get rid of excess blood

in line with the Theory of the Four Humours.



The Romans had strong supernatural beliefs in the gods. As a result they also had temples of healing

and prayed to different gods to cure illnesses. Salus was a goddess of healing. The Romans even built

temples to Asclepius as they had heard of his supposed healing powers from the Greeks.

The Romans also had natural approaches to disease and infection. They used herbal remedies and

because their Empire stretched so far they were able to get hold of a wider range of natural

ingredients for their medicines. A Roman medical book lists 600 different herbal remedies.

Early on, the Romans were very suspicious of Greek doctors and their theories. The Romans liked to

think of themselves as practical people who did not get carried away with fancy ideas. Their attitude

towards Greek theories began to change with the arrival of Galen in Rome in AD 161. Galen is

important because:



- He was trained at Alexandria in the natural ideas of the Greeks including the importance of

careful observation and recording and the need to lead a healthy lifestyle.

- He introduced the Theory of the Four Humours to ancient Rome.

-  He added his own Theory of Opposites which explained many more treatments that could be

offered based on the theory of the four humours, e.g. giving patients dried pepper to balance

out too much phlegm. Galen was enthusiastic about the use of bleeding as a treatment.

-  He became the doctor to the Roman Emperor which allowed him to spread his ideas quickly.

- He wrote many books which eventually became the most important medical textbooks in

medieval Europe 1000 years later and were still being read in the Renaissance.



The Roman Empire collapsed around the year 500 AD. The period that followed is called the Dark Ages

because there is not that much information about it. During the Dark Ages the standard of medical

care and knowledge declined. People relied more heavily on supernatural approaches to medicine

and did not continue the Greek and Roman interest in finding out more about the human body. In the

Dark Ages, Europe was taken over by warlike tribes.

This led to a decline in medicine because:

As a result most people relied on prayer and religion to explain and cure illness. They would still have

used herbal remedies passed down through families but not a lot of other natural treatments.



Whilst Europe was in a period of decline during the Dark Ages, the Islamic Empire in the Middle East

was far more advanced and civilised. There was one strong ruler – the Caliph – who was able to invest

money in universities and hospitals because he did not have to spend as much of his money on war.

The best example of this is the new university and hospital built next to each other in Baghdad in

about 800 AD. At the same time a centre for the translation of Greek and Roman books was set up.

This centre translated the work of Hippocrates and Galen into Arabic.



Al‐Razi (Rhazes)

The first great Islamic doctor was Al‐Razi.

Following the ideas of Hippocrates, he stressed

the importance of careful observation and

recording. Using this method he was able to

identify the difference between smallpox and

measles. He became the first director of the new

hospital in Baghdad. Al Razi was a great admirer

of Galen but he also prepared to criticise him

where he thought Galen was wrong.



Ibn Sina (Avicenna)

The second great Islamic doctor was Ibn Sina. He wrote a million‐word encyclopaedia called ‘The

Canon’. In it he summarised the whole of medical knowledge up to the year 1000, including

Hippocrates, Galen and Islamic doctors. Ibn Sina was an expert on drugs and he listed the properties

of 760 different drugs, some of which are still in use today, e.g. camphor and laudanum.



‐ Islamic beliefs prevented the dissection of human bodies

‐ Most Islamic doctors did not believe it was right to dabble in surgery

‐ The Islamic Empire suffered as much from the Black Death as medieval Europe did



The Middle Ages were dominated by the Church, which was the most powerful and wealthy

international organisation. The Church controlled all of the universities and therefore the training of

doctors. The Church helped medical progress in some ways but hindered its development in others.



The Church helped by:

‐ setting up universities where doctors could train, e.g. Salerno, Padua. After the Dark Ages, the books

of Galen and Hippocrates were slowly rediscovered and doctors could study these.

‐ running and paying for hospitals. These were often part of monasteries or cathedrals and offered

some medical care by the monks or nuns who had some skill with herbal remedies.



Doctors in the Middle Ages

Doctors in the Middle Ages had both natural and supernatural approaches to disease and infection.

Their natural approaches included:



In 1348, the Black Death struck western Europe. It had already swept across Asia and the Middle East

killing millions of people. The disease was the bubonic and pneumonic plagues which killed 90% of

people who caught within about five days. The people of medieval Europe were desperate to avoid

catching the plague and to cure it if they got it. They tried both natural and supernatural methods:

Their natural approaches included:



The Renaissance was very different from the Middle Ages because the power of the Church was

reduced. This meant that the restrictions on dissecting bodies at universities were slowly lifted and that

doctors could now challenge Galen’s ideas openly. One good example of a Renaissance doctor is

Paracelsus, he is a good example because:



Overall, the Renaissance was a period of significant advances in the understanding of anatomy (Vesalius and Harvey) but there wasn’t much progress in the understanding of the causes of disease or discovering effective cures. Supernatural approaches continued alongside natural ones. Most doctors continued to believe in the Theory of the Four Humours.



During the Renaissance and after, the training of doctors at universities increasingly focused on using a

scientific approach based on careful observation and recording of patients’ symptoms and on carrying

out experiments to test new ideas and theories. One doctor who used this scientific method to make

an important breakthrough was Edward Jenner.



Through his work as a doctor in a countryside area of Gloucestershire, Jenner came across several

famers who rejected the offer of being inoculated against smallpox, an horrific killer disease. They did

this because they believed they were already protected having suffered from the much milder illness,

cowpox. Jenner decided to test this idea out scientifically:



1. Jenner observed and took careful records of milkmaids who had suffered from cowpox. None of

those he examined had ever caught smallpox.

2. Jenner then decided to test his theory. An 8‐year‐old boy called James Phipps was given cowpox

by Jenner. After this disease had passed, Jenner then gave him a dose of smallpox but there was

no reaction – it appeared that the boy was now immune to smallpox.

3. Jenner tried this out a further 23 times and each time the patient did not develop smallpox.

Jenner called his discovery ‘vaccination’ after the Latin for cow – ‘vacca’. He published his findings but

immediately faced a lot of opposition.

People were concerned about vaccination because:

‐ Many people were uneasy about new ideas in general but especially one that involved giving

humans and animal disease.

‐ Jenner could not explain how vaccination worked which worried some people.

‐ Doctors who made a lot of money out of the old method of inoculation were against vaccination

because it would put them out of business.

‐ Vaccination was not totally safe and some doctors did not take as much care as Jenner. Their

patients’ cuts became infected or they went on to catch smallpox anyway.



Jenner was helped in overcoming this opposition by support from the government and other prominent

people:

- Parliament granted him £30,000 to set up a vaccination clinic in London

- Thomas Jefferson, President of America, promoted vaccination in the USA.

-  Napoleon had all of his soldiers vaccinated in 1805



In 1852, the British government made vaccinations compulsory. Some people resented being told what to do by the government and refused to be vaccinated, however, by 1900 smallpox had nearly died out in Britain as a result of Jenner’s work. Smallpox was eventually eradicated completely from the world in 1980 as a result of a mass vaccination programme organised by the World Health Organisation.



Since the 17th century scientists had used basic microscopes to observe tiny micro‐organisms invisible to

the naked eye. They had observed that there were more microbes on matter that was rotting and

wondered why. The most popular explanation for a long time was called spontaneous generation. This

theory said that as matter rotted or decayed it turned into the microbes. Therefore, they thought,

germs were the result of disease and decay.



Some scientists disagreed. They thought that germs were the cause of disease and decay. This idea was

called Germ Theory. One scientist who believed this was Louis Pasteur and he was able to prove it by:

Pasteur suffered a stroke in the late 1860s which prevented him from following up his work. He had

shown that germs cause decay in liquids, and also disease in silkworms. The next step was to show that

germs could cause human diseases too.



Robert Koch

Koch was the first scientist to identify a specific bacteria which caused a specific human disease. The

bacteria he identified was anthrax in 1878. He did this by:

Robert Koch went on to identify the septicaemia bacteria later in 1878. Using his methods other

scientists also discovered typhus, tetanus, pneumonia, meningitis and plague. Koch also developed agar

jelly as a better medium for growing and observing bacteria. He also invented a way of staining

bacteria using chemical dyes and photographing them through a microscope.



Pasteur and Koch became great rivals. France and Germany had recently been at war and there was still ill‐feeling between them. The French and German governments gave Pasteur and Koch large sums of money and created huge research teams for them in order to make the next breakthrough and claim the glory for their country. Pasteur came out of retirement to try to surpass Koch’s achievements:



1879 ‐ Pasteur discovered how vaccinations work. One of his assistants had left a petri dish of chicken

cholera out over the summer holidays. When they came back to the lab, Pasteur injected a

chicken with these germs but it did not die. When they injected the same chicken with a fresh

batch of cholera it still did not die. Pasteur made the connection that maybe the chicken had

been accidentally vaccinated by the weakened form of the disease which had been left out.

1881 ‐ Pasteur now understood how vaccinations work – a weakened form of a disease allows the

body’s immune system to learn how to fight off the infection. He developed a new vaccine for

anthrax and demonstrated it in public. He vaccinated 25 sheep and left another 25 alone. Two

weeks later he gave all 50 sheep a deadly dose of anthrax. The 25 vaccinated sheep survived

and the 25 others died. This experiment made front page news all over the world.

1882 ‐ Koch identified the tuberculosis bacteria

1883 ‐ Koch identified the cholera bacteria

1886 ‐ Pasteur tried out a new vaccine for rabies successfully. He had spent four years developing the

new vaccine which was very difficult because the rabies bacteria is very small. A boy who had

been bitten by a rabid dog was brought to him. The boy was certain to die, so Pasteur tried out

his vaccine – it worked because the disease was not yet full‐blown in the boy. This also became

famous around the world.



By 1900, therefore, scientists had discovered the true cause of disease – a massive breakthrough. They

also now understood how vaccines worked and had produced several new ones. However, no‐one had

yet invented a cure for a disease that had already taken effect in a person’s body.





Florence Nightingale was from a rich family and was not expected to work but due to her strong

religious beliefs she was determined to work as a nurse and improve hospital care. Her opportunity

came during the Crimean War (1854‐56) when she persuaded a contact of her family in the

government to allow her to travel to the Crimea with a team of nurses.



Nightingale struggled to get the Army doctors to let her implement her ideas but she was a very strong and persuasive personality. Eventually she introduced changes which reduced the death rate in the military hospital from 42% to 2%. She achieved this through:

Nightingale became a national heroine for her work in the Crimea but she was determined that this

should be the start rather than the end of her work. On returning to Britain she transformed the

nursing profession from a very low‐status and unskilled job to a highly respected and professional

occupation. She did this by:

1. Writing a book on nursing which became a best‐seller

2. Setting up a training school for nurses which insisted on the highest standards

3.  Advising new hospitals on how to set out their buildings



Mary Seacole

Mary Seacole was the daughter of a Scottish army officer and a Jamaican woman. She had some

knowledge and skill at nursing and wanted to help out in the Crimea just like Florence Nightingale. In

the Crimea, she set up a ‘British Hotel’ which offered medical care and a shop for troops. She was

rejected as a nurse by Florence Nightingale due to the colour of her skin. Mary Seacole was also

celebrated after the war for her work with injured soldiers and was given a medal for her service.

However, a few years later she was largely forgotten and she did not have the huge impact which

Nightingale had back in Britain. Reasons for this are:

-  She was black and society in Victorian Britain was racist

-  She was not from a rich and well‐connected family like Nightingale

The stories of Nightingale and Seacole are a good example of the factor of war in the history of

medicine as well as the influence of other factors such as race and wealth on the impact an individual

can have.



Ehrlich had been a member of Robert Koch’s research team. He had used the method of staining

bacteria to observe them more easily. He thought that he could find a chemical which both stained

bacteria but also killed them. If it could kill the bacteria then this would be the first cure. He nicknamed

this idea ‘magic bullets’ because the chemical would seek out the bacteria and kill them without

harming anything else.



Ehrlich and his team painstakingly tested hundreds of different chemicals on syphilis bacteria (a sexually

transmitted infection). In 1909, Ehrlich became convinced that chemicals based on arsenic would be the

most effective. The 606th arsenic compound which they tested seemed to work. Even then they only

spotted it when they were double checking every test. They called the chemical Salvarsan 606.

This was the first ever cure – a very important breakthrough BUT Salvarsan 606 only worked on the

syphilis bacteria and not on any other diseases. Also, because it was derived from arsenic it proved to

be too dangerous to be used widely as a drug. When the First World War broke out more money was

invested in other types of medicine especially surgery and Ehrlich’s work was not developed for a while.



In the 1920s and 30s, another German scientist – Gerhardt Domagk – decided to try to find another

chemical cure like Ehrlich had. In 1932, he tested the chemical dye, Prontosil, on mice and found that it

had an effect on the bacteria which caused blood poisoning.



One day, Domagk’s daughter cut herself by accident in his lab and developed a severe case of blood

poisoning. She was likely to die, so Domagk decided to try out Prontosil on her. It worked. He had

found the second cure.



In the 1930s, a new electron microscope had been invented. This allowed scientists to analyse

chemicals like Prontosil to discover what the active ingredients were. They discovered that the active

ingredient in Prontosil was a sulphonamide. Sulphonamides are found in coal tar. It turned out that

there are lots of different types of sulphonamides and that some of them were useful in curing other

diseases. Drugs companies invested huge amounts of money into researching sulphonamides and soon

cures existed for scarlet fever, meningitis, gonorrhoea and pneumonia.



1928 ‐ Alexander Fleming was a British scientist researching bacteria in the 1920s. One day in 1928 he

was tidying up his lab and noticed that in one petri dish there was a circle where the bacteria

had been killed. When he looked closer he found that a spore of penicillin had got into the dish

and had killed the bacteria. He thought the penicillin must have blown in through the window.

1929 ‐ Fleming published a research paper about his discovery of penicillin but he lacked the funding to

continue his research any further. It was very difficult to grow and harvest enough penicillin to

make a useful drug.

1937 ‐ Two scientists working at Oxford University – Howard Florey and Ernst Chain – read Flemings

paper on penicillin and decided to try to develop it as a drug.

1939 ‐ With the outbreak of the Second World War, the British government was prepared to put more

money into research for drugs which could save soldiers’ lives. Florey and Chain were given

money to develop penicillin. They did this by:

- Using new freeze‐drying technology and some milk bottles to grow and harvest some

penicillin.

- Testing the small amount they had harvested on eight mice. All the mice were given deadly

microbes. Four mice were then given penicillin and survived, the other four mice died.

1941 ‐ By now Florey and Chain had just about enough penicillin to test it on a human patient. One

patient in the hospital was seriously ill with an infected head wound. They gave the man

penicillin and his condition improved. They had so little of the drug that they even recycled the

penicillin which passed out of the patient in his urine. The man was getting better but they ran

out of penicillin and he died, however, they had proved that it worked on humans.

1942 ‐ The USA entered the war and also wanted a drug which would save soldiers’ lives. Florey and

Chain moved to America where they were safe from German air‐raids, but also where there

were huge drugs companies with the money and technology to develop mass‐production of

penicillin. The American government provided $80 million for this.

1944 ‐ By the time of D‐Day in June 1944 there was enough penicillin to treat all of the wounded Allied

soldiers in France.

1945 ‐ By the end of the war the US Army was using 2 million doses of penicillin a month. It is

estimated that another 15% of wounded Allied soldiers would have died without penicillin.





The Discovery of DNA

In 1953, Francis Crick and James Watson, discovered the ‘double‐helix’ structure of DNA. They also

discovered how DNA can ‘un‐zip’ and make copies of itself. They were able to do this using the latest xray

photography technology developed by Maurice Wilkins. Since 1953, scientists have gained more

and more understanding of how DNA holds the genetic code to the human body. This has led to some

very important developments in medicine, for example:

Genetic engineering is a controversial subject and there are several objections raised by different groups

in the modern world:

‐ Religious groups are concerned that genetic engineering is messing with God’s creation.

‐ Other people worry about the unknown long‐term side effects of tampering with the DNA of

plants, animals and humans. For example, there are worries about the impact of genetically

modified crops on the environment.

‐ The cost of developing drugs based on genetic information is a problem.



The Development of New Drugs

Since the Second World War there has been an explosion in the development of new drugs. Large drugs

companies invest huge amounts of money into developing new medicines. Most of these new drugs are

very effective at curing diseases. However, there have been problems:



‐ A few drugs have had very bad side effects. The most famous is the drug Thalidomide which

was given to pregnant women to ease morning sickness in the 1950s. Unfortunately, many of

the babies these women gave birth to had seriously deformed arms and legs.



‐ The cost of new drugs is a problem for the NHS but also for poorer countries in the Third World.

This means that many people struggle to get hold of drugs which could save their lives.



‐ The over‐use of antibiotics has led to the evolution of ‘superbugs’ such as MRSA which are

resistant to modern drugs.|||

Disease and Infection This section is about how people in the past have tried to explain the...