Collection of Apple Support files related primarily to Macintosh, from the download.info.apple.com site. Moves to App Stores and iTunes have largely precluded the future of sites like this, resulting in its discarding by Apple. This collection is meant to ensure the continued availability of the software. The collection can be browsed here . 



This is a mirror of only the software (no website text) available for download from the VETUSWARE.COM abandonware site. I don't know how complete it is or what if anything was missing when this was current. This was compiled by old-dos.ru and found on their public FTP at ftp://old-dos.ru/VetusWare Most folders have a modification date of 2012 so I assume this is when this was made. It may be missing newer things that have been contributed to the site since then. 

 Topics: archiveteam, VetusWare, Abandonware, ftp boneyard, old software, vintage software, old-dos.ru,...



The file section of the long-lived Metripoli BBS, a Finnish BBS that transitioned to an ISP, is a treasure trove of older drivers, documentation, and support software. Some files date as far back as 1990, with other additions through 20 later years. 



Full download of the entire contents of FTP.LOTUS.COM, the support FTP site for legacy Lotus products by IBM. Besides the Domino, Notes, 1-2-3 and other projects, a number of shareware and historical documents and programs are included. In recognition of IBM's move away from the Lotus brand after acquisition in the 1990s, this mirror has been generated to ensure historical availability. It is easiest to browse this .zip file using the online browser . Textfiles of the contents have also been... 



The idgames archive is the Internet's largest collection of Doom WAD files and fan-made mods. Containing over 30,000 files collected over an almost 20 year period, the idgames archive is the product of thousands of individual fans of the Doom games. The archive also covers material for other games based on the Doom engine: Heretic, Hexen and Strife. This snapshot of the archive was made in July 2013. For brevity, the archive here does not include the full contents of the idstuff/ subdirectory... 



Welcome to the Atari FTP Archive! We're glad to see you enjoy the best computer ever. We are striving to archive as much atari/8bit/demoscene related material as possible. The archive is around 95GB at the moment. Some highlights: - ASMA, HVSC, YM, MOD, MP3 of atari musics. - OFFICIAL mirror of Fading Twilight and NO FRAGMENTS - Photos/Videos from major parties/cons. - Demos, Zines, TechNotes, Hardware Schematics. - Nir Dary CD-ROM collection. - Atari Forever CD-ROM collection. - Musicdisks... 



Archived version of the FTP site ftp.logos.md , section /Biblioteca , containing scanned books in Romanian language, subject: orthodoxy. Zip version of the files: https://archive.org/details/mirror_of_ftp.logos.md , where you can see the contents of the zip file - at https://archive.org/download/mirror_of_ftp.logos.md/ftp.logos.md.zip/ File list: Index of /Biblioteca/ Name Size Date Modified [parent directory] Apologhetica(Apologetika)/ 6/10/11 12:00:00 AM Biblia(Biblija)/ 7/1/12 12:00:00 AM... 

 Topics: orthodox, arhiva-ortodoxa, ftp.logos.md, biblioteca



A panic grab of ftp.abit.com.tw made around January 4, 2009, shortly after the annoucement that they would be closing. Contains BIOS updates and drivers for many of their products. 



FTP site capture of ftp.ubisoft.com from January 17, 2014 This site's content covers the beginning of Ubi Soft's presence on the Internet from the 1990s to the beginning of the 21st century when it changed its company name to Ubisoft. 

 Topics: Ubi, patch, Ubisoft, ftp



Grab of contents of the FTP.PARC.XEROX.COM ftp site, collecting papers and software related to the Xerox PARC research facility. Grab conducted using wget in January of 2014. Click here for an index of this site. 

 Topics: FTP Site, Xerox, PARC, Scientific Papers, Software



Collection of files at the ftp.nekochan.net FTP site, roughly 27 gigabytes of data dating back to 1987. Includes mirrors of the sites freeware.sgi.com, ftp.arl.mil, ftp.komkon.org, ftp.whtech.com, and www.msxarchive.nl. To browse the collection, click here . 



Full mirror of the "mac", "others", "puzzle", "run", "shooting", "simulation", "sports", "table", and "typing" categories of the Japanese-language freeware/shareware game site Freem (ふりーむ！) as of 2012-06-11, containing 973 game archives and installers for Windows. Obtained from ftp://ring.yamanashi.ac.jp/pub/pc/freem/ using lftp. Browse mac/ (Macintosh games) Browse others/ Browse puzzle/ Browse... 

 Topics: Windows games, Freem, Ring Server



Large collection of various Websites and Filesites, grabbed in 2008. To browse and work with the collection, click here . 

|||

