This is a re-compiled and transcribed version of a talk I’ve given at Data Kind UK & Data+Visual event at Skills Matter in March 2017. Video of the talk is available at Skills Matter website. Let’s start with data. If you look at the definition of the word data we can say that data is a set of values of some kind of measurements. Data /ˈdeɪtə/ is a set of values of qualitative or quantitative variables With a definition like that the first thing that comes to your mind is probably a spreadsheet or a database. Data is just the most bottom layer, the atoms from which you can construct information. By combining pieces of information together we can build knowledge. If we are lucky we can experience the data in a more visual way, through maps, graphs and diagrams.

I believe that data has a shape — an internal characteristic that can be extracted and exposed thought data visualization techniques and combining them with generative design systems. I’ll be talking about the shape of data in the context of algorithmic skin, a concept describing the layer of algorithms that nowadays live between our bodies and the interactions with the real world. I’m interested in the quantified-self movement myself and I find it fascinating to be able to constantly learn more about ourselves through personal data. Couple of years ago I had a pleasure to work with Nike on a project involving Nike FuelBand. FuelBand is now discontinued but it was a device that instead of just tracking your steps it gives you fuel points for any kind of movement: walking, running, dancing, hand waving, you name it. In this project we looked at the data of 7 female runners preparing for a race. We wanted to create “a digital award” to celebrate their efforts. If you think about 24h day as a cycle you can represent it as a circle. We then put the fuel points you have collected on that circle next to the time of the activity (video). This looks quite cool but I was more interested the total amount of points that you collected that day. What I did is as you collect more and more points I extrude the line higher and higher. As it grows it starts to resemble a branch of a growing tree. When we then combine 7 of them, one for each day of the week for me they started to look like a muscle. Next step was to look at the data of all the 7 runners together. Here we see a fuel graph for the each day of the week. Red colors represents no activity and green spikes are the times when the person was physically active. Additionally some of the days are highlighted in red as for them the minute to minute data was missing (lost FuelBand, forgot to sync etc.)

Taking all that into consideration I came up with the idea of a data garden. Using a similar algorithm to Fibers I displayed weekly data next to each other. This way we could see not only the daily patterns but also trends over longer periods of time. He loved the idea. Representing the data as a garden had another side effect where he started to exercise more again by caring about digital plants as a proxy of himself. I called this concept “Quantified Other” as I was learning more about him through his data. You can see the video of the garden here http://marcinignac.com/projects/quantified-other/.

Representing data in a 3D space immediately brings a wish to be able to “be there”. To visit that digital space and be surrounded by the data. I want to interact with it and be able to see both the detail and the big picture. We had a chance to explore the idea of spatiality of data when working on the Twitter Museum Week project. The idea behind the Museum Week is to promote cultural institutions that use Twitter as their medium of communication. We were commissioned by Bright to create series of digital artworks driven by the Museum data. There is no space without people. Therefore there is no museum without visitors. We envisioned our visualization as a 3D sculpture representing museum responding to the followers interacting with it on Twitter. The inspiration came from the concept of Ville Spatiale series by architect Yona Friedman — a modular vertical city where it’s inhabitants have influence on the shape of the space they live in.

The solid, architectural core representing the museum as a permanent institution. The number of years the museum is on Twitter twists the DNA-like spiral shape of the structure. The small modular elements are determined by profile id and the number of followers that the museum has is influencing the complexity of the whole structure. Additionally we show every tweet by the museum itself as a spherical shape inside it’s structure. Every time somebody tweets #museumweek a burst of energy spreads across the museum structure and whenever somebody mentions the museum we add a stroke flowing around. See the project page for animated versions. Each museum had its own unique artwork available on the web available both for desktop and the mobile browsers. The artworks were customized with the colors taken from the institutions profile picture and used real-time streamed data.

The digital <-> physical loop between data and place was then closed by placing the artwork in the museum itself when we exhibited it live at Cité de l’Architecture et du Patrimoine in Paris. What was missing in the previous project was that we are still an external spectator. As I mentioned before I wanted to be surrounded by the data. That opportunity came when working on a project for Dropbox. Here is a visualization of all the files I store in Dropbox with a color represented their type. It’s mostly images with couple of code projects and quite a large number of backups both binary and text.

Here is a frame from the final animation. Each block represents one file and it’s scale is proportional to the file size. As you fly through the files they are sorted by how deep in the directory structure they are stored. You can see the final video at http://variable.io/timespace/. Of course this is still a very simple and straight forward representation of the data that sparks more questions than gives answers to. E.g. how would we interact with it in VR? What other senses could we involve to “read” the data once we are immersed in it?

Representing complex datasets always comes with a challenge of explaining the data and the interface to the user. Otherwise we need do depend on lots of assumptions about his/her domain knowledge and the context. What if we could design a system that feels natural and leans on our previous experiences. Synesthesia is a phenomenon in which experience perceived through one of the senses creates and a reaction in another sense (e.g. you can feel colors or taste sounds). Enter Halo — a 3D data driven system that can represent patient health status, gaming performance and stock fluctuations designed for people who monitor and interpret massive quantities of complex data in real time. Halo is completely parametric: its shape and behavior are controlled by the data and can dynamically adapt to the changing values that come from the data stream. Halo is collaboration between Variable, Ora, Peter Crnokrak and GMUNK.

There was couple of unexpected findings in this project. First the engagement from the participants was very high as they found the conversational interface very natural. The asynchronous aspect of the interaction was well suited for their busy life and many people responded to the questions send in the morning late at night when their kids were asleep. Having a short moment of time during the day to stop and reflect on what happened was very satisfying to our participants. We decided to build on that and designed a data diary — a visual summary of your conversations. It also included a community section so you could share tips with other parents to build sense of community.

Overall during the 48 of the beta testing of our chat bot we engaged with 24 users and total of 2675 messages has been sent. Anonymous aggregated data was then shared with the service workers monitoring their community in order to influence their decisions on how to help people in need and what are the factors influencing their wellbeing. We believe that such system proves that using data for mutual benefit is possible and it’s something we would like to investigate more in the future.

As you can see we covered quite a wide spectrum of data driven systems. So how do you call those things? Is it Data Art? Liam Young and Memo Akten called it Data Dramatization, Tom Corby named it Un-visualization as an opposition to scientific and precise types of visualizations. For me it’s still an open question. As all the examples above are an expression of trying to better understand the world around us and project one of possible points of view. So instead of data visualization vs data art I would rather talk about re-representing systems in order to foster understanding. Those representations can come at varying levels of abstraction depending on the context and what message we are trying to communicate.|||

This is a re-compiled and transcribed version of a talk I’ve given at Data Kind UK & Data+Visual event at Skills Matter in March 2017. Video of the talk is available at Skills Matter website. Let’s…