Do you want your company to be strongly associated with the emoji? Do you feel like the poor semicolon and the equals sign never get any respect? Do you want to declare your love with a or dedication for your spouse?

Now you can adopt a character! Show your business or hobby with , honor your Asian heritage with , or give your niece Olivia the gift of capital letter O. For sports enthusiasts, there are , , , and more. In fact, more than 128,000 characters can be adopted. At the same time, adopting a character helps the non-profit Unicode Consortium in its goal to support the world’s languages. It’s also a tax-deductible donation in the United States, to the extent allowed by law—and your company may provide matching funds. You could even be able to adopt an additional character with an employer matching gifts program: see Double the Donation!

Here are some of the new possibilities from Unicode 9.0 and Emoji 5.0:

When you choose a character you’d like to support, you’ll get the satisfaction of knowing you’ve contributed toward making digital space more inclusive—as well as a custom digital badge you can add to your website or online profiles. The badges are an easy way to show and spread awareness of the importance of digital infrastructure—all the way down to the scripts it supports.

Here is how some of our gold sponsors have shown their support:

We’d like to thank all our sponsors: due to their support the Adopt a Character program raised almost $187,000 from inception through 2017Q1!

Grants made under the program in 2016 include:

Adopting a character is easy. Simply choose your sponsorship level, select your character, and make your donation. That’s all there is to it! There is no limit to the number of characters you can adopt. Adopted characters at the Bronze ($100) level make truly unique gifts. The Silver ($1,000) and Gold ($5,000) levels demonstrate a strong commitment on the part of the sponsor. These levels are ideal for small or large businesses and other organizations, as well as strong supporters. All character adoptions are permanent. Adoption of a specific character at the limited gold and silver levels is on a first-come, first-served basis.

All sponsors are acknowledged in Sponsors of Adopted Characters and our public Twitter feed with their level of support, and will receive a custom digital badge for their character. (Thanks to Jake Giltsoff of Adobe for the designs!)

Want to be the sole sponsor of a character at the gold level? Choose the gold level and you or your business will be the sole gold level sponsor for your character (note that others may still sponsor the character at a lower level). Gold sponsors are listed on the Sponsors of Adopted Characters page with their characters. They may include a URL or a hyperlink on their name.

You or your designated recipient will also receive a custom-engraved thank-you gift with the name you supply and the character you are sponsoring.

Looking for something special but not quite ready for a gold level adoption? The silver level is perfect for small businesses and individuals, too. Sponsorship at the silver level is limited to at most five silver-level sponsors per character. (Note that others may still sponsor the character at another level.) Silver sponsors are listed on the Sponsors of Adopted Characters page with their characters. They may include a URL or a hyperlink on their name.

You or your designated recipient will also receive a thank-you gift with the name you supply and the character you are sponsoring.

A bronze sponsorship makes a great gift and is a terrific way to show your support for one or more of the thousands of lonely characters out there. There is no limit to the number of sponsors for a specific character at this level. Bronze Sponsors are listed on the Sponsors of Adopted Characters page with their characters. They do not have the option of including a URL or a hyperlink on their name.

You or your designated recipient will also receive a custom digital badge, showing the character you are sponsoring.|||

