April 20 and 21 witnessed the two day extravaganza — ShopifyUnite held at San Francisco. This was the second edition of the event. And like other e-commerce events, Shopify Unite became the rendezvous of the Shopify Experts, their partners and their top clients.

At the event Shopify Revealed a mind boggling number — It has 1 million active users i.e. there are 1 million e-commerce websites currently doing business over internet using their SaaS based platform.

During the Conference The COO of Shopify, Harley Finkelstein, revealed some numbers truly magnificent — by their size and what it translates to.

In the year 2017, Shopify Users earned $15.4 billion dollars in GMV.

With these developments, the partner and developers’ annual conference also witnessed launch of several products:

Navigation to content and from product sync collection, cart and checkout, customer account notification and everything is taken care of in Mobile Store Builder app

And this is what Shopify has to say about the Mobile app builder, “The Mobile Store Builder allows Shopify Plus merchants to build a native mobile app without any technical expertise or coding. The platform is powered by a sophisticated template system that positions merchants to create apps using customizable themes”

It enables Shopify merchants to build customized store fronts for all their mobile experiences and also enables them to manage them along with other sales channels.

And given the rise of the seamless experience when it comes to transactions, the POS system have been trending, and to ensure all the retail merchants offer their clients a seamless operation, Shopify offered Chip n Swipe — an all-in-one POS system, to which company, announced it was open to Pre-orders.

Another pain point of the online merchants is the Faster Check Out. Online retailers dread the possibility of their visitors abandoning their carts due to their longer form pages. To them Shopify has come up with a great solution, If only customer enters their data at any Shopify Store once, they don’t require to enter data on another Shopify store”.

Also, since Shopify is one of the most developer friendly and merchant friendly, it with new set of sales channels, whom Shopify would partner in 2017, also declared the list of New APIs to be released.

And with partnering with these channels, the no of partner channels crosses one-and-half-a-dozen mark.

Often for online sellers pre-planning for flash sales, product launch and upcoming events are great tasks. They occupy the majority of time and brain space for that time period and despite of putting all the efforts, they fail to execute the planned strategy. To them Shopify has come up with Launch Pad, a smart tool that automates all of the activities necessary to execute a flash sale, product launch, or sales campaign.

Read Article: Introducing Launchpad: Time Saving Automation for Major Events, Campaigns, & Sales for more details.

“The Wholesale Channels is created to help Shopify users grow their business from their existing store. Instead of relying on spreadsheets, handmade draft orders, or cloned stores the wholesale channel positions merchants to expand their market, sell to high-volume customers, and increase lifetime customer value”, as stated at their blog.

Some of the features of the Wholesale Blog are:

All the products of Shopify — Mobile app builder, Shopify Dashboard and POS system to have uniform design all through out.

Started in 2010, the company recently became the Official Channel Integration Partner of Walmart.com and has been involved in over 1000 ventures of customizing solutions to address all the unique needs. Fueled by its rich experience, the company has developed highly popular Jet Shopify Integration app being used by 500+ sellers across United Stated of America. The company offers all the products that make selling easier on e-commerce.|||

April 20 and 21 witnessed the two day extravaganza — ShopifyUnite held at San Francisco. This was the second edition of the event. And like other e-commerce events, Shopify Unite became the…