I think the ability to take risk essentially boils down to how special you think you are. And if taking risk in any way factors into success, so does success.

If you’re a millennial who believes that they are special, and somehow more entitled than others, you will find this relatable. Whether you’re special or not, is an entirely different debate. This piece is about what you believe, and why it’s important. Although many videos hint that feeling entitled is essentially a vice, this might not necessarily be true.

Feeling special has it’s own perks. You tend to have an aura around yourself. You’re more confident. You will think of ways of making it big. This also factors into the decisions you make. You will take the path less trodden. You will focus more on big gains than eating small fish. I somehow also believe that this makes your brain less constrained and more innovative. It enhances your ability to take risks because you believe you have it in you to make them pay off. Feeling special about yourself fosters innovation.

On the flip side, if you don’t believe that you are special, you are more likely to settle. While this may be a good thing for you in terms of practical absolute gains you make, averaged over your life, it will always leave you with a feeling of ‘what if’. This is absolutely fine if you are comfortable with the idea to the extent that ‘what if’ doesn’t happen often to you. In that case, in fact, you are at a distinct advantage and more likely to enjoy life more than your peers who believe that they are special. Different people, different views, different ways of enjoying life.

Having said that, all innovation depends on exploring the unknown, and I strongly believe that everyone should serve a higher purpose than themselves. For the lucky ones that enjoy the hustle, they have the best of both worlds.|||

I think the ability to take risk essentially boils down to how special you think you are. And if taking risk in any way factors into success, so does success. If you’re a millennial who believes that…