Alex Qin - Skillshare

Shaving my head made me a better programmer How do perceptions and stereotypes affect those in the programming community? This talk tells the true story of my physical transformation, and the surprising and drastic ways in which it affected how I was perceived and treated as a programmer. This new perspective allowed me to take a hard look at our community, and how it can at times be less welcoming and inclusive than we all intend it to be. This talk also covers the effects of unconscious bias, micro-aggressions, and stereotype threat within our community, and how to make engineering teams and our entire field more inclusive to all, and thusly more successful.

Diogo Monica - Docker

Secure Substrate: least privilege container deployment The popularity of containers has driven the need for distributed systems that can provide a substrate for container deployments. These systems need the ability to provision and manage resources, place workloads, and adapt in the presence of failures. Some examples include so-called Container Orchestrators such as Docker Swarm, Kubernetes and Marathon, which make it easy for anyone to manage their container workloads using their cloud-based or on-premise infrastructure. Unfortunately, a lot of these systems have not been architected with security in mind. In particular for container orchestrators, compromise of a less-privileged node usually allows an attacker to escalate privileges to either gain control of the whole system, or to access resources it shouldn't have access to. In this talk, we will go over how Docker has been working on building secure blocks to allow you to run a least privilege infrastructure - where any participant of the system only has access to the resources that are strictly necessary for its legitimate purpose. No more, no less.

Anthony Seure - Algolia

Building a magic and reliable pipeline in the cloud When we redesigned our processing pipeline, sleep was our main constraint. As SREs, Sleep Reinforcement Engineers, we do not want to be woken in the middle of the night. So we made sure the whole system was highly reliable. With billions of events per day and terabytes of data generated by hundreds of servers in dozens of datacenters across the world, this was no small task. As we needed to do some magic, we called forth Harry Potter and his friends to the rescue...

Joerek van Gaalen - Computest

Why you should run performance tests in the cloud or on CDN One would expect that hosting your environment on a scalable cloud environment and/or CDN would mean you can support practically an infinite amount of users out of the box. Practice and mass scaled load tests have shown that these environments show unexpected behavior under high load. This presentation shows the need and benefit of running mass scaled load tests on the cloud and CDN.

Michiel Toneman - Adyen 

From Trawling the Lake to Fishing the Stream; how streaming is helping Adyen achieve 100x. Adyen was looking good to break multiple records for a PostgreSQL database used in production. Rather than following through and celebrating this inevitable success, we decided to abort our record attempt and to focus on a less risky way to scale our backend. Using an in house developed streaming framework (codenamed "Consistent Kafka"), Adyen is able to shard its databases and achieve massive scalability gains (although sadly without breaking any exciting PostgreSQL records). Vladimir Smirnov - Booking.com 

Graphite@Scale or how to store millions points per second This is a story about dealing with metrics at scale. A lot of metrics. The challenges we’ve faced at Booking.com and how we made our Graphite system handle millions of metrics per second. Learn about one of the most high load Graphite stacks, the problems it poses and the challenges in maintaining it and scaling it further, pushing Graphite to its limits and beyond.

Christopher Madden - NetApp

Containerize everything: Stateful apps on Kubernetes The app guys want to run *everything* in containers, are you ready? In this session you will learn about deploying stateful apps in containers on Kubernetes. Chris will explain how app owners build their stateful apps using StatefulSets and PersistentVolumeClaims, and how these are underpinned by infrastructure resources like PersistentVolumes and StorageClasses. If your stateful app is a single instance DB these basics might be enough, but with a scale-out db a bit of application specific glue is needed to manage this scaling gracefully. We will discuss a few approaches to providing this glue and demo of one of them by deploying a scale-out db on Kubernetes using Trident, the dynamic storage provisioner from NetApp. Pablo Musa - Elastic

Managing your Black Friday Logs Monitoring an entire application is not a simple task, but with the right tools it is not a hard task either. However, events like Black Friday can push your application to the limit, and even cause crashes. As the system is stressed, it generates a lot more logs, which may crash the monitoring system as well. In this talk I will walk through the best practices when using the Elastic Stack to centralize and monitor your logs. I will also share some tricks to help you with the huge increase of traffic typical in Black Fridays. monitoring architectures

 optimal bulk size

 distributing the load

 index and shard size

 optimizing disk IO

 monitoring queries

 monitoring your monitoring system :P

 Takeaway: best practices when building a monitoring system with the Elastic Stack, advanced tuning to optimize and increase event ingestion performance.

Koen Bollen - Blendle

Kubernetes in production since 0.9. What we learned, gained, lost and look forward to. Since January 2017 Blendle has moved almost entirely from GCE VMs to Kubernetes, VMs which were migrated from AWS and initially hosted on bare metal at LeaseWeb. 403 pods, 216 deployments, 107 services, 41 ingresses on 9 nodes. This talk is a summary of our adventure moving to Kubernetes in production and an insight in how we decided to use it. We'll take a look at issues we've encountered, talk about some pros and cons, and see what our next steps are going to be. Amy Nguyen - Pinterest

UX Design and Education for Effective Monitoring Tools I, like many of us, chose to work in infrastructure because I thought it meant I could avoid talking to other people as much as possible. I was wrong. It turns out that a huge amount of work in monitoring is about empowering the rest of your engineering organization to use the tools you develop correctly, quickly, and effectively. We spend so much time explaining how to interpret timeseries data and why averaging percentiles is a bad idea. After feedback from our engineers, we embarked on a journey to redesign our internal monitoring tools and understand where people were struggling with the existing system. In this talk, I will explain how we approached the problem of making concepts like interpolation, aggregation, and alerting more intuitive and how we identified pain points for new users. I will outline common misconceptions our users have about monitoring and how we cleared up this confusion in our UI without forcing everyone to spend hours on documentation. Rather than copying and pasting existing UX design principles onto our monitoring problems, we will see how we can reinterpret these ideas and apply them to our unique situation to create a better experience for everyone.

Arianna Aondio - Varnish Software

How to build a private or hybrid CDN for scalability and performance It is common for organizations that distribute large volumes of data globally to face scalability and performance issues, high network costs, network limitations and/or high latency. In her practical presentation, Arianna Aondio, Field Engineer at Varnish Software, will show how to build a fully optimized content delivery solution for companies seeking a DIY or hybrid CDN. The solution combines high-performance caching with scalable global traffic management enabling a hybrid content delivery strategy. During this presentation delegates will learn: - Content control and flexibility gains of a private CDN (control costs while maximizing delivery performance – rather than choosing one or the other)

 - Deployment scenarios & use cases (private CDN or private CDN in hybrid mode)

 - Performance & flexibility advantages (reduce buffering time when serving videos, while reducing costs at the same time)

 - How to ensure that you always deliver content from the fastest server, closest to your end user

 - How to get started: use cases

Arnoud Vermeer - LeaseWeb

Living with IPv6 Only It's 2017. All IPv4 addresses are depleted. But not much traffic is flowing over IPv6. If I was to connect to an IPv6 only network, what are all the things that would break. I'm going to challenge myself to live on IPv6 only for a week.|||

