You sell services or products to other business (B2B) You sell services or productos to end customers (B2C) You have a mixed business serving other business and end customers services or products B2B + B2C You are a Nonprofit Startup

1. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state You are sure you can build a great product, but haven't built one before. You have a live, fully-functioning product and it's amazing. You've previously been on a team that built great products. You have a prototype, and it's good. You have a prototype, and it's very mediocre.

2. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state You're successfully selling you product, but it's significantly underpriced and/or sales are taking much longer than expected. You've built and led successful sales teams in the past. You've done sales, but not much or not recently or not of the same flavor that you'll need for your company. No one on your team has any sales experience. You're successfully selling you product at a good price and with reasonable sales cycles. You've done a lot of sales work that's similar to what you'll be doing at your startup.

3. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state You have weak competitive advantages: a few small patents, slightly better unit economics than new entrants, etc. You don't have a real competitive advantage, but at least you're the first mover. You have moderate competitive advantages: good brand perception among your customers, significantly better unit economics, a strong patent portfolio, etc. You're not the first mover and you don't have a real competitive advantage. You have strong competitive advantages, like network effects or a proprietary datasets, that get stronger as you grow

4. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state You're not someone people would want to work with. (E.g. you're a jerk.) Your team already includes several great hires. You have prior recruiting and management experience. You've built very strong teams in the past. You have some interviewing experience. You've never hired anyone before. You're currently able to reliably recruit in-demand candidates through personal charisma, a strong company mission, an amazing company culture, or something similar.

5. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state 



 Your product requires strong execution across many functional areas (eng, sales, UX design, etc.) and... ...your full-time team covers most of those areas. ..your full-time team only covers 1-2 of those areas. ...your full-time team only covers 1-2 of those areas, but investors and advisors fill in most of the gaps. ...your full-time team covers all of those areas.

6. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state You talked to potential customers, and they said they wanted to try the product once it was built. You think people will want to use your product. You have LOIs (letters of intent).

7. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state 



 Churn rate refers to the proportion of customers or subscribers who leave a supplier during a given time period. Engagement is very low, churn is very high. Engagement is very high, churn is very low. Engagement and churn are both moderate.

8. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state Your business will not be self-sustaining for a long time, and you're completely dependent on raising many rounds of venture funding. You have good funds with deep pockets investing in your current round. (That is, funds that could lead your future rounds if they wanted to.) You have good funds investing in your current round, and they will help guide you to your next round. You have multiple well-funded competitors and will need tons of capital to compete with them. With some effort and sacrifices, you would be able to get to break-even without any additional capital. There's no cushion between when you expect to have enough momentum to raise your next round and when your current cash balance will force you to try raising another round. (E.g. you think you'll need 12 months to get to $1m in revenue and 3 months to raise a Series A, and you have exactly 15 months of runway in the bank.) You're not dependent on additional capital because you can easily become break-even or profitable at any time.

9. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state There are very few competitors, but no strong differentiation between you and them. There are many competitors, but they are ineffective legacy players or poorly-funded startups. There are very few competitors, and strong differentiation between you and them. There are many competitors of all sizes (huge incumbents, young startups, well-funded startups, etc). These companies are attacking your target market from many directions. There are no competitors and there's a high barrier to entry (which you have crossed).

10. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state You have some early users, but they're all affiliated with you (friends, family members, etc). You think people will want to use your product. Your user base is growing organically at a moderate rate. Your user base is exploding through referrals and word of mouth. Your user base is growing quickly through affordable paid acquisition. You have some early unaffiliated users, but user acquisition economics aren't great.

11. Select the affirmation that most fits your actual state You have a plausible top-down analysis of market size ("People spend $X per year on this problem, and we think we can capture 15% of that with our solution.") You have a plausible bottom-up analysis, backed by experiments and data. ("There are X million potential users for our product, and we've done some tests that show each user would be willing to pay $Y/month") You have a plausible bottom-up analysis of market size ("We think we can capture 10% of users in group A and 20% of users in group B, and we plan to charge those users $X and $Y, respectively.") Your target market is small and unlikely to grow quickly. Incumbent companies are huge and demonstrate that there's a big market for what you're doing. You have no idea how large your target market might be. You found a Gartner report that gives an estimate of market size.|||

Startups are Risk Bundles, and seed valuation is based on risk! Our app will help you reduce your startup risks and increase its valuation (both actual and investor-perceived)