The putrid smell 

of smoke and burnt rubber 

yanked me back into consciousness.

Still buckled into my seat, 

upside down, 

I was covered with glass, blood and gasoline.

I was too disoriented to realize 

the sharp object 

three inches from my face 

was a shredded guard rail.

Intense pain 

ripped down the left side of my head and torso, 

jolting my memory of what happened.

This horrible scene was not a car accident … it was my startup.

The idea was something I cared about so much 

and it would genuinely make the world better.

If it succeeded, there would have been plenty of money, 

but it wasn’t just a meaningless lunge for wealth or notoriety.

Not that there’s anything wrong 

with being successful or earning money.

I haven’t taken a vow of poverty … 

it’s just turning out that way.

I hired three terrific developers, 

paid for everything out of my savings, 

and devoted almost every waking moment 

to bringing this idea to life.

Eight months 

after that first line of code, 

after realizing just how many complicated moving parts were beneath the surface.

and after addressing a zillion technical and user experience challenges with elegant solutions …

we were ready.

There were plenty of rough edges 

and a ‘to do’ list that was a mile long, 

but we were ready.

I was so excited, and exhausted,

and so proud of what we built.

The first month after launching, there was a tiny trickle of users.

It was amazing to see real people using this thing, 

that a few months ago, was just an idea.

The volume of users was less than I hoped,

but we were underway,

and I believed … I knew in my heart

that the essence of what we were working on was right.

I was so determined to 

to build this into something great

that I would spring out of bed every morning

excited to work like mad, 

in the filthy trenches, all day long.

The short version of the next fourteen months is this:

We kept learning, and improving, and growing slowly,

but it wasn’t catching fire.

And we needed to catch fire and grow exponentially to be viable.

Almost all the progress was from sheer force of will,

pushing, and pushing, and pushing forward

one pathetic inch at a time.

I knew from the beginning

that pushing like that

with extreme effort

every single day

was my job.

Capitulation means surrendering 

or ceasing to resist.

Since death 

is the default state of any startup,

ceasing to resist … means failure.

I was very slow to realize and accept

that even after a year and two months

of intense pushing

there was almost no pull.

There was no organic growth or or user activity.

No hint that anyone 

other than a small group of core users

was interested at all.

Our logo should have been a tumbleweed.

When someone I know writes a book

even if it’s not my kind of book

I’m the first person to buy a full priced copy

and ask them to autograph it.

One thing that really bothered me 

was how few of my friends and acquaintances

took even two minutes to look 

at what I spent a year of my life developing.

Even some of the people I talked with about the idea beforehand, 

who strongly encouraged me to build it, 

couldn’t be bothered.

There was nothing to buy, so it wasn’t about money.

This indifference and rejection 

felt like almost everyone I know in the world saying

I don’t care what you’re doing … and I don’t care about you.

It was a horrible, humiliating failure.

I felt so desperately sad, helpless … and alone.

This failure proved to me 

that all the things I didn’t like about myself

and all my fears and insecurities,

were true.

That at the end of the day, 

if you peel away everything I hide behind,

and get down to my core,

the essence of me, as a person

I was not worth anything.

I have always been afraid

that people I care about

will not care about me

and they’ll leave.

Well, it felt like it anyway.

The truth is, as you probably know

that whether it succeeded or failed

I am not my startup.

After few weeks of personal anguish,

I began to find my footing again,

realizing the world had not ended

I had a lot to be thankful for

and that I’d better get to work on something else.

Around this time,

Aaron Price was launching Propelify

a huge startup, innovation and music festival.

I didn’t feel like doing anything

but I bought one of the very first tickets

because I wanted to support him.

As luck would have it,

while I am feeling absolutely miserable,

wallowing in my failure,

Aaron generously upgrades me to a VIP ticket.

I would never have spent this money on myself,

but here was someone I admired 

making me feel special, and worthwhile.

The weather was beautiful and the entire day was fantastic.

I met so many people who were starting up, or falling down,

or trying to come up with ideas, or get feedback, 

that I realized, I am not alone.

I am one of many people, trying to move in the same direction.

The only advice I can share, which I don’t always follow,

is hold yourself to very high standards,

but also be kind to yourself.

Treat yourself the way you would treat a friend 

in the same circumstances.

Nobody owes me anything.

Nobody owes you anything.

If we want to create startups that succeed, 

we have to serve other people 

and help them make progress

and make their lives better

in ways that matter to them.

But just as important

is to make sure 

that whatever we’re working on

also matters to us.

Because four hundred years from now

when our heads are attached to robots

and we’re nearing the end of our lives

won’t it be great to look back 

on our work

our relationships

and how we spent our short time on this earth

and smile warmly

knowing

it wasn’t wasted.

This is the working script I used for the audio recording, so the line breaks above are to help me remember to pause and slow down.|||

I was too disoriented to realize 
the sharp object 
three inches from my face 
was a shredded guard rail. If it succeeded, there would have been plenty of money, 
but it wasn’t just a meaningless…