On September 14, 2016 we announced Envoy, our L7 proxy and communication bus. In a nutshell, Envoy is a “service mesh” substrate that provides common utilities such as service discovery, load balancing, rate limiting, circuit breaking, stats, logging, tracing, etc. to polyglot (heterogeneous) application architectures.

We knew that we had built a compelling product that was central to Lyft’s ability to scale its service-oriented architecture; however, we were surprised by the industry wide interest in Envoy following its launch. It’s been an exciting (and overwhelming) 7 months! We are thrilled by the positive reception and wide uptake Envoy has since received.

As it turns out, almost every company with a moderately-sized service oriented architecture is having the same problems that Lyft did prior to the development and deployment of Envoy:

In summary: an operational and reliability headache.

Though Envoy contains an abundance of features, the industry appears to view the following design points as the most compelling:

When we made the decision to open source Envoy, we were committed to developing a community and an ecosystem; however, we had no idea if anyone would show up! As it turns out, companies both large and small have arrived in substantial numbers, drawn by all of the reasons laid out above. Ultimately, it’s our hope that Envoy is a powerful tool for meeting the SoA needs of many organizations — not just Lyft.

We are excited to announce that we are working in partnership with both Google and IBM to bring Envoy to Kubernetes. Fun fact: there are now more people working on Envoy at Google than there are at Lyft! We have a lot of other things planned with Google that we will be able to share more about in the coming months.

We are eager to move Envoy forward within the open source community. In only 7 months Envoy has amassed over 40 contributors, with substantial contributions from both Google and IBM. Next week, we will be providing Google with commit access, making Envoy a true multi-organizational project. Over the next 6 months we expect to see many more public announcements about large companies using Envoy, startups beginning to coalesce around offering commercial Envoy integrations, as well as other large companies joining the project as full committers. It’s very rewarding for us to see the momentum around this project and we are excited to discover what the future holds (potentially including donation to the CNCF).

We have an ambitious roadmap planned over the coming months between Lyft, Google, and IBM. Some of the major features include:

Please reach out to us and let us know if there are other items that you would like to see!

Before we open sourced Envoy 7 months ago, never in our wildest dreams would we have imagined that we might have the chance to start a project that has the potential to become a building block of the modern internet. We were simply trying to meet the needs at Lyft as best as we possibly could. The trajectory that Envoy is now on is thrilling and daunting at the same time. There is still a ton of work to do to make service mesh networking transparently available, and it will take the efforts of many talented developers and organizations to bring Envoy’s full potential to fruition.

The next 6–12 months are likely to see a further increase in community interest, commercial availability, and adoption. If we haven’t heard from you yet and you are interested in learning more about Envoy or participating in its development, please reach out via GitHub, email, or Gitter. Onward!|||

On September 14, 2016 we announced Envoy, our L7 proxy and communication bus. In a nutshell, Envoy is a “service mesh” substrate that provides common utilities such as service discovery, load…