Back in the days when we were kids, we loved playing outdoors. But with the onset of technology, studies show that more and more children prefer staying indoors and watching TV or videos on gadgets like tabs or mobiles. The consequences of excess screen time are very detrimental to your child’s development. Although playing outdoors is very essential for your child’s physical development and social skills, indoor games are equally vital especially when the weather plays spoil sport. Indoor play also teaches children the importance of spending time at home. This article shows you some interesting games that you can play with your little ones.

Both outdoor and indoor games are equally important. An excess of either is not good as well. It is the responsibility of parents to initiate and encourage indoor games. When children play more outdoors, they do not get an opportunity to bond with their siblings, grandparents and other members of the family.

The advantages of children playing indoors are plenty. Playing indoors teaches your child to invite other children and bond with peers. Children also learn to bond with older and younger siblings, thereby learning to share and play fair. Giving children an opportunity to play indoors helps children be happy with what they have and they do not get cranky if the weather is bad.

This is quite an old game and is called “I spy something with my little eye.” This game requires a minimum of 2 kids. You can pick a topic – it could be anything from colours to objects around them. For example, your kid could say “I spy something with my little eye, a thing which is blue in colour” and the other kid will need to look around the house to try and guess what hee is talking about. This game enables them to practice colours and also improves their power of observation.



This is a fun game that teaches your child balance. All you need is a masking tape that you can stick on the floor. Ask your child to walk along the straight line created by the masking tape without losing balance. This is a challenging game and two or more kids will enjoy it. You could make it more fun by scoring it. You could bring in variations by blind-folding or even walking backwards. Use safety measures like pillows or cushions to soften the landing if the child happens to lose balance.



Give your child an array of items and ask them to sort it according to type or colour. This will keep them occupied for a long time and there is also learning in the process.

Jigsaw puzzles are all-time favourites. They come in all shapes and sizes. Your kid can play this all by himself or he could gather 2 or 3 of his friends to work on it together. Such puzzles help your child with analytical skills. They help develop creative, cognitive and problem-solving skills in your toddler. What can make this even more interesting? You can create your own jigsaw puzzle. Simply draw a picture on a cardboard and have it cut into multiple pieces. This way, you can create a new puzzle every day.

Give your kid and her friend a theme and use materials available at home. Ask them to make up a script and act it out. This not only develops your child’s confidence and acting skills but also her imagination.

An age-old game that has not lost its charm one bit. Your child and his friend will have a good time hiding and finding each other out. Just make sure you draw clear rules about hiding places, to ensure safety.

Treasure hunt is another game that will get children moving and keep them active. It helps develop problem-solving skills and gives them a sense of adventure. The treasures could be simple like a box of crayons or colouring books. You can make your own clues and hide them at various places around the house.

An obstacle course is not just for people in the armed forces. Your child can get the required amount of physical activity from this game. What you need: Pillows, large cushions, beams with masking tapes, ottomans, stuffed toys. Create a trail of sorts with all these items and let your children jump, roll and make somersaults over them. This is not only fun but also works up a good appetite in your child.

I don’t really have to explain this game. All you need is music and a few chairs to keep your little ones busy.

This is a fun way of improving your child’s vocabulary. It keeps kids occupied. Select any theme you want like animals, colours, etc. Each child has to come up with a word starting with a particular letter of the alphabet. A minimum of 5 kids will make this game a lot of fun.

The author is a professional German translator, interpreter, foreign language instructor for schools and visiting faculty for colleges and corporates.|||

