The best way to understand how to create shopping app in Android and IOS is to find out how it works. Basically, it works the same as in the real word but with a virtual assistant instead of a person. Imagine, you are looking for a new pair of jeans. You type a query into the app and it gives you a few different options conforming with your size, preferable style, colour, brand and available budget. The application analyzes the clients feedback and suggests the best options.

The convenience of such an app is obvious. The user can automatically perform on-line purchases, so he or she now saves time and money. The app helps them to keep all purchases organised, monitor orders, keep an eye on prices and consequently buy cheaper.

Lots and lots of retail companies along with large fashion brands have already built shopping apps, which helped them to empower personalization features and to raise users engagement. This is how enterprises can enforce loyalty to their brand.

Just take a look at such giants as Bloomingdales, Debenham's, Neiman Marcus, Nordstrom, Macy's, or Topshop, these stores offer us high-quality goods, so personal shopper apps could be the perfect way to achieve automatization for businesses of this type.

And this app can be applied to more than the fashion sphere! A personal assistant can offer you a vast range of goods in such areas as music, books, houses, furniture, home appliances, wellness and beauty. The application can be useful for corporate customers and offer them various services, such as specific goods purchases. In general, we can divide these spheres into categories:

We listed only a few branches where a Personal shopping app can be applied to provide a customer with the best User Experience ever!

Its obvious that such personal assistants can easily accelerate your business and become a critical organizational tool for the enterprise. However, it's clear that the system would require a solid investment so we need to examine:

The best ways to Monetize a Personal shopper

As we all know there are lots of methods to make a profit on your app, but we want to offer you the best options specifically for our type of program:

Subscription services - it means that your customers will pay to get access to your app. However, you will have to make your service stand out. It should be so unique, that everyone has to love it. If the app is similar to many others, no one would pay a penny for it.

Paid features - Here you need to pay attention to the free features, because they have to be useful, but at the same time not too full, and a user should feel that the app is fantastic but he wants more of it.

Commission for money transfers - probably the most common way to monetize every e-commerce application. The customer doesn`t even think that he pays for your app, he thinks it`s free, which is good for us.

Membership fees for brands and manufacturers - as well as the previous method, this one assures the customer that the app is free. Moreover, it is free but not for the sellers. In this particular case, you have to persuade store owners that your project will bring them profit. Well, I hope you have a huge talent for negotiation.

The choice is on you, yet you need to decide what method you want to use before you start developing a shopping assistant app, because it will influence on the architecture of your product.

Nowadays we can single out three main technologies to create a very helpful Personal Shopping Assistant:

Apps that use real people for all tasks. Usually these apps are used to connecting a customer with the shop, who communicate via the chat in the app. Users send requests and real people answer them choosing the best options and trying to meet all users requirements.

Its rather easy to develop a Personal Shopping Assistant application like this. The main feature of course, is a live chat and some basic components of any usual e-commerce app, like a personal account, wish list, purchase history, payment gateway, delivery tracking and a history of orders.

Other features can be added according to the concept of your business. For example, Daily Dress Me service offers clients a complete outlook depending on the weather forecast, where you can buy anything and every item you would need via the service.

The drawback of this approach is that you have to find and hire real staff, who will work on the project. In addition, you need to educate and train them and then monitor their efficiency. Moreover, you will deal with customers complaints, which means more and more expenses.

Apps based on Artificial Intelligence algorithms. Here the app works using different machine learning algorithms. Such software answers on requests faster and more efficient than people. More than that, using this technology you can find out more about your customers and their preferences.

The brightest example of such shopping apps is Mona - the app collects info about your preference and notifies you of promo offerings from your favourite brands.

The technology is complex and requires large investments to build a good and high-quality shopping assistant app based on AI is a painstaking job. It should also be noted that you will need lots of data to teach your system. However, in the future, this self-learning software will minimise human resources and consequently cut expenses and fatten your profits.

Apps that combine both approaches. It means that the system uses a Machine learning algorithm along with real consultants. The application automates some specific tasks using an AI mechanism, saving at the same time, the human contact.

This strategy is used in the app Mezi. Its a Personal Assistant, which helps you plan your trips, book a hotel room and buy airline tickets. Mezi applies Natural language processing to deal with most of the important information. Then, the info is given to real assistants, who continue the communication with a customer and completes various tasks.

Yet, this approach is very expensive as you need to build a smart technology system as well as to pay your employees.

Apps with a Chatbot. Is a great option for those who want to advance their existing application. It will take much more time to build online shopping apps with your own chatbot from scratch, thats why it is more sensible to use existing solutions for these purposes.

For example Chatbot in Messenger from the company Spring allows users to buy all sorts of clothing in the Messenger application.

But dont expect too much from it, especially if your bot uses specific commands, and not a machine learning algorithm. It means that all the answers are predefined, and the chatbot just picks the most appropriate reply and ignores queries which werent written in the program. On the other hand, you may apply Machine learning for your chatbot as well. However if your budget allows you to spend more, why dont go further and build a system which can do much more than just a bot.

If the approach has been chosen and you understand how your Personal Shopper application is going to be built, dont forget about the blocks your app has to include, to meet all the customers requirements.

These are not all blocks, which your app needs to perform well on the modern market, however, they are the most crucial, so we need to consider them closer.

Probably the easiest solution is to integrate an already existing credible payment gateway, such as PayPal, Stripe or any others. It will take much less time and be better on your budget of course.|||

Everything you need to know about how to create a shopping app for new businesses or how to build a good and high-quality shopping assistant application for existing startups and enterprises read in our article.