App developers are a busy bunch. They have an earth shattering app to build, finish the details of the UI and UX, ensure scalable backend services, make sure that the core functionality works without issues and so on… In all this chaos, one thing that usually gets ignored is the users of the app.

Based on our experience, here are some must do tasks for your users.

Your users are usually at one of the following three stages

All these three users have different needs and you need address them separately. We highly recommend the online marketing automation tools of Online Marketing Wizard because it automates all these tasks. The free plan will usually be enough for you.

Let us look at each user one by one.

These users usually look at your marketing materials (app store link, landing page of your SaaS etc) and now start to compare your product with similar products.

They need to be convinced that your product actually solves their problem. They might also be interested in knowing how your product is better/faster/cheaper than competition and what risks are there in using it.

Online Marketing Wizard makes it very easy to automate a lot of these things:

New users are the brave souls who have taken the plunge and have started using your product.

They need a lot of hand holding and guidance, a place to get in touch with you and ask you questions related to using your product.

It is very important to manage these kinds of users because they are prone to quitting your product during the first few weeks.

Online Marketing Wizard was designed for a situation like this.

Old users are the ones who have been using your app for quite sometime. They usually have issues and they want to change the product to make it suit their needs.

This is a huge opportunity because it helps you prioritise your development tasks. You know which feature you want to work on and which issue you want to solve.

Using emails or social media for issue reporting and tracking is not a good idea because all the issues and feature requests get scattered all over the place and you have no way to systematically organize them.

Online Marketing Wizard has readymade tools for these kinds of users

Online Marketing Wizard is a must have free tool in the arsenal of all app developers. You can create one account and manage multiple products there. For each product you can run multiple campaigns, create user manuals, faqs, issue tracker, feature request etc. These are somethings that you have to configure just once and then it takes over.

Right now Online Marketing Wizard is in closed beta. If you are an app developer who has limited time to support your users, you must signup for an early invite by clicking here.|||

App developers are a busy bunch. They have an earth shattering app to build, finish the details of the UI and UX, ensure scalable backend services, make sure that the core functionality works without…