Those swigging Soylent are in for another hiccup—but, it seems, no belly aches this time.

The high-profile meal-replacement company issued a voluntary recall Monday after finding that a small amount of milk product may have slipped into some batches of its Soylent 1.8 powder, which is supposed to be free of lactose and milk products. Soylent fans with an allergy or severe sensitivity to milk face serious or even life-threatening allergic reactions if they chug any of the contaminated product.

In an announcement of the voluntary recall on the Food and Drug Administration’s website, the company noted that it has not received any reports of illnesses related to the offending dairy. The company also said it has figured out what went wrong and identified the batches contaminated, and the problem won’t affect future products or interrupt supply.

Soylent says that 890 contaminated boxes were shipped to 610 customers (SKU: 1WK-V108) with Lot #: G7076PA, Expiration / Best Buy date: 02/2018). Customers with powder from this lot should toss their supply and contact the company for a full refund or replacement.

The problem arose when milk-containing product was being processed on a manufacturing line next to the powder’s line. “Subsequent investigation indicated that the potential cross-contact was caused by a temporary breakdown in our third-party manufacturer’s production and packaging processes,” the company explained. Specifically, whey powder—a milk-based product often used to boost protein levels—may have crossed the line.

“We apologize for any inconvenience this may cause,” the company went on. “As you know, transparency is one of our core values and your health and well-being is our number one priority. If you have any questions or comments please do not hesitate to contact us at info@soylent.com.”

Ars reached out to Soylent for more information, but the company declined to comment beyond what it said in the recall announcement.

Soylent’s supplier is angry, withholds ingredients for 2.0 and Coffiest [Updated] The company’s swift handling of the contamination is a turnaround from previous stumbles—to the likely relief of devout Soylent guzzlers. Last year, customers reported getting sick from the then newly released snack bars. Recalls, product supply disruptions, a lengthy investigation, online sleuthing, and speculation ensued. When the company discovered the source of the problem—algal flour—it set off a public spat with its algal flour supplier, Terravia, which was facing a lawsuit from its own investors over health complaints about its products.

In its Monday announcement, Soylent assured customers that the issue was quickly resolved and it has already begun shipping new, dairy-free batches of Soylent 1.8.|||

The meal-replacement powder was supposed to be lactose free, but no illnesses reported.