I've been showing Crowdnote around for the past four days now, both in-person and by finding people online and sending them links to the site.

Here are some facts:

The facts don't lie: the motivation to categorize music on the site just isn't there.

This realization actually came at fantastic timing. Today, Y Combinator's Startup School just released a new video about building your product. The video was hosted by one of the co-founders of a company called Box. They were entering a space where companies expected their technology to be complex and difficult, so when they came along with something super simple and super accessible, the employees would push decision-makers to purchase it. Box didn't have to traditionally sell companies on their solutions; end-users bought into it individually just because it was a fantastic product. Ten years later, the enterprise market belonged to their product.

I think Crowdnote is in a similar space, where people are expecting music discovery to be a pain. And right now on Crowdnote, it is kind of a pain even to log onto the site. I have to send them an email, then they have to open it and register, only to find a site void of music. They shrug and understandably move on.

So that's my goal, to remove the "shrug" from that behavior flow.

I'm excited about a particular thought I had today. If the site was no longer under an invite-only lockdown, then accomplishments on the site could be shared freely and might raise the perceived value of recognition on the site. Users could even link their Crowdnote profile page on other websites or send them to their friends. What songs does this ballroom dancer like? Oh, I'll just look at their Crowdnote page. At the very least, that might get people to vote, which in turn rewards those who categorize songs. That's when the engine takes off on its own.

This plan isn't guaranteed to succeed, and it also involves a lot more code development work. However, I'll happily pour my next week of time into it, because I'm convinced that my current efforts networking with local studios has peaked with my current product. Plus, I've learned a ton from my users already, including one fun fact today about how competitive dancers actually hold their newest musical finds close to their chests, at least until they've performed their showcase with the novel song. I'm picturing ways for dancers to attach their own performances to songs on Crowdnote, but it's too soon for that. Right now, it's all about making the site more accessible.

So that's essentially the plan. I've gotta get Crowdnote into an open beta, where all users can look, but only the invited few can touch. I have to stay focused on music discovery as the center of the site. This means making the user pages functional, but also focusing heavier on the tools that are expected to be used the most often, like the add-song feature. I have to keep making that process easier and easier. I may have to look deeper into how music-sourcing API's can be of use, or perhaps I simply need some updated user interface designs. A search bar at the top of every page may be useful. Anything to make music discovery and categorization seamless.

I wonder how long it would've taken me to reach these conclusions without the gentle nudge of real-life users. In addition, does having them there waiting for me help motivate my progress? It's been about a month since I started hunkering down and working on Crowdnote full-time. I've still got lots of runway, but I feel a greater sense of urgency now. I'm excited by it! I'm pumped to be making progress each day, and I know it's progress now; it's not much at the moment, but it's something. I work for real users now, and it feels great!|||

