Gaming in Linux has evolved a lot in the past few years. Now, you have dozens of distros pre-optimized for gaming and gamers. We tested all of them and hand-picked the best. There are a few other articles and lists of this type out there, but they don’t really go into detail and they are pretty outdated. This is an up-to-date list with any info you’d need.

Before we start listing out the best distros, you’d still need to choose one of them. Here are a few guidelines you can use to help you choose the right one for you:

Now, let’s move on to the main part, the best Linux distros for gaming:





 



There’s a reason why SteamOS is always the first on every Linux gaming distro list. It’s designed with gaming in mind. It comes pre-installed with Steam and it’s based on Debian. SteamOS is built, designed and maintained by Valve. By default, SteamOS only has Steam installed, but you can activate the “desktop mode” and you’ll get a fully-featured desktop OS where you can run other applications besides Steam and games. It has everything set up out of the box, so you don’t need to install or configure anything to play on Steam, which is why this is the most recommended distro for beginners and Linux gamers.

However, if you have an older machine, SteamOS is not recommended, as it has quite a lot of hardware requirements:

Visit their official website for download/installation instructions and FAQ:

Download SteamOS

Let’s move on to the next distro on our list:

It’s not the default Ubuntu, but it’s a distro based on Ubuntu. You can still use the default Ubuntu and install Play on Linux, Wine and Steam or any other game you’d want to, but it would not be as optimized for gaming as Ubuntu GamePack is.

Quite similar to the default Ubuntu, this distro requires:

If you’re already familiar with Ubuntu, go with this distro.

Visit their official website for download/installation instructions and FAQ:

Download Ubuntu GamePack

The second most popular Linux distro used for desktop computers is Fedora. Luckily, Fedora also has a gaming flavor (spin):

Fedora – Games Spin has thousands of games already pre-installed and ready to play. It doesn’t support as much hardware as some other distros, and it doesn’t come with Wine/Steam pre-installed, which is why this is not recommended for anyone. However, if you’re already familiar with Fedora or if you like the XFCE desktop environment, this distro would be perfect for you.

If you’ve used Fedora (or CentOS) before, either for a server or for your desktop computer, try this Fedora spin.

Visit their official website for download/installation instructions and FAQ:

Download Fedora – Games Spin

Moving on to the next one:

SparkyLinux is a Linux distribution created on the “testing” branch of Debian. It uses the LXDE desktop environment and it has everything you’d need already pre-installed.

So just about any old PC/laptop can run it without any issues.

Ready out of the box.

If you’ve used an LXDE Linux distro before and you want everything pre-installed, go with SparkyLinux – GameOver Edition.

Visit their official website for download/installation instructions and FAQ:

Gaming doesn’t have to be all 2017 and bleeding-edge. You may be into retro games, which is where this distro comes to play:

Although it’s based on Linux (kernel), it doesn’t have any desktop environment and you can’t really use it for anything other than turning a computer into a retro gaming console.

You can turn any computer into a console since Lakka doesn’t have a lot of requirements. You can even use a Raspberry Pi to run Lakka. It’s a very lightweight OS that can run on just about anything.

Visit their official website for download/installation instructions and FAQ:

Download Lakka





Want to play Windows games on a Linux distro without too many configurations?

Based on Ubuntu, this distro would be perfect for beginners that previously used Ubuntu. Easy to install and everything works out of the box.

Although not the most lightweight Linux distro for gaming, it doesn’t require much. At least not as much as SteamOS.

If you can run Ubuntu desktop, you can run Game Drift Linux.

You can play A LOT of Windows games on Game Drift Linux. It has all the tools you need pre-installed.

The game store is great – a wide choice of quality games that you can install with a single click.

Visit their official website for download/installation instructions and FAQ:

Need a full-featured Linux distro for gaming, media, browsing and general use?

Recently this year, Solus became a rolling release distro, which means that you’ll get the latest software with all the latest updates. Solus looks great, especially with the Budgie desktop environment. It has all the features you need for an OS for gaming/media playback/browsing/general use. There’s an official Steam integration for Solus which will greatly help you with installing and configuring steam on your Linux system. It’s based on the Linux kernel, but it’s independent of any other distro like Ubuntu or Fedora.

Although not the most lightweight Linux distro for gaming, it doesn’t require much. At least not as much as SteamOS.

Everything built into one modern system.

Solus looks great. One of the best looking Linux distros out there today, especially with its flagship desktop environment Budgie.

Visit their official website for download/installation instructions and FAQ:

Want to use the Manjaro (rolling release) distro?

mGAMe, which is based on Manjaro, which is based on Arch Linux, is a rolling-release gaming distro with everything you need pre-installed. Steam, PlayOnLinux, Lutris, Minecraft, Editing Tools, and a bunch of other emulators are already installed. You can easily enable the “living room mode” in which case you won’t need a mouse – you can do everything with your controller or keyboard.

Although not the most lightweight Linux distro for gaming, it doesn’t require much. At least not as much as SteamOS.

If you don’t have enough hardware requirements to run Solus, but still need a rolling-release distro, go with mGAMe.

Visit their official website for download/installation instructions and FAQ:

Which distro do you use? What kind of a Linux gaming setup do you have? Did we miss something? Leave a comment below!|||

A curated list of the best Linux distros for gaming in 2017. A detailed overview along with minimum requirements, features, and screenshots.