Mattermark today announced it has launched on the Salesforce AppExchange, empowering businesses to connect with their customers, partners and employees in entirely new ways. Mattermark streamlines how modern sales teams connect with leads and win new business. Adding Mattermark allows lead enrichment to happen automatically, including the basics and moving beyond location, industry, and employee count to enrich these and 40+ additional Mattermark fields.

Built on the Salesforce Platform, Mattermark for Salesforce is currently available on the AppExchange.

Mattermark Key Features 

Modern salespeople win more business when focused on the prospects who matter most. Move relationships from transactional to trusted with insightful conversations powered by Mattermark. The integration offers the following features: 



Comments on the News 

“By launching Mattermark on the AppExchange, it allows sales professionals to spend more time doing what they do best, and what computers can’t do,” said Danielle Morrill, CEO of Mattermark. “Whether you’re an SDR, Sales Executive, or VP, your time is best spent on the phone or in person cultivating the relationships that earn you the right to do business.”

“Everyone and everything is getting smarter and more connected than ever before, and companies are looking to transform the way they connect with customers, partners and employees,” said Kori O’Brien, SVP, ISV Sales, Salesforce. “By leveraging the power of the Salesforce Platform, Mattermark provides customers with an exciting new way to enrich current leads and discover new opportunities.”

About Salesforce AppExchange 

Salesforce AppExchange is the world’s leading enterprise apps marketplace that empowers companies to sell, service, market and engage in entirely new ways. With 3,500 partner apps and more than 4 million customer installs, it is the most comprehensive source of cloud, mobile, social, IoT, analytics and artificial intelligence technologies for businesses.

About Mattermark 

Based in San Francisco, Mattermark powers modern sales organizations by enriching leads and elevating prospecting with data from over 4 million companies. Adding, on average, 100,000 new listings a month. Founded in 2013, Mattermark began as a spreadsheet that evolved into a comprehensive sales intelligence platform. Mattermark provides data enrichment and discovery with over 40+ searchable and filterable fields including location, company growth score, and funding details. Data is ingested from accredited partnerships, press releases, news reporting, company websites, and synthesized using proprietary machine learning technologies. To learn more, please visit http://www.mattermark.com/salesforce.

Additional Resources 

Like Salesforce on Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/salesforce 

Follow Salesforce on Twitter: https://twitter.com/salesforce 

Become a fan of Mattermark: http://www.facebook.com/Mattermark 

Follow Mattermark on Twitter: @mattermark

Salesforce, AppExchange and others are among the trademarks of salesforce.com, inc.|||

San Francisco, California (PRWEB) April 25, 2017 --  Mattermark today announced it has launched on the Salesforce AppExchange, empowering businesses to connect