Today's news is plagued by sensationalistic headlines and misinformation, resulting in fake news and unbalanced reporting. DNN provides the blueprint to a more open world for creating and consuming the news, while ensuring accuracy through incentivization .

DNN's content is persisted across community-managed servers, so that each retains copies of everything published to the network.

DNN relies on consensus amongst content reviewers, rather than a central authority, to determine what should be published.

Content published to DNN is stored on the Ethereum blockchain, ensuring immunity from any efforts to suppress writer content.

DNN harnesses the power of the Ethereum blockchain to allow for a fully decentralized network that can never be hacked into, taken down, or censored.

Reviewers can interact with writers by attaching notes to articles, which contain feedback on how to better organize content.

DNN's guidelines and content policies direct reviewers on how to vet articles before they get published to the network.

An extensive review process allows for fact-checkers to validate writer submitted content for overall accuracy and legitimacy.

DNN presents news in a thoroughly accurate way, combining the openness and freedom of blogs with the formal fact-checking of news organizations.

All users on DNN are rewarded for their collective actions, thus establishing a community that thrives on incentives.

Activity on the network is driven by its currency called DNN Tokens, which are distributed in proportion to a contributor's effort.

DNN involves readers , writers , reviewers , and publishers providing key contributions that make up the underlying functions and structure of the network.

DNN will focus exclusively on factual and thorough perspectives of current political affairs, while rewarding all parties involved. Our mission is to create political news content that is both empowering for its readers, as well as representative of the integrity of its writers. We aspire to become the most trusted and democratic political news alternative to mainstream media.

Simply put, writers produce and submit content, which is inspected for accuracy by a randomized set of reviewers on the network. Articles deemed acceptable enough (as per DNN’s guidelines) will be published to the network and made available to readers.

Each participant on DNN is rewarded for their contribution, in the form of DNN tokens. Writers earn a reward each time an article is accepted by the majority of assigned reviewers. Reviewers earn a reward by accepting or rejecting articles based on their degree of accuracy. Lastly, readers earn a reward for readership and other engaging activities, such as commenting.|||

DNN, or Decentralized News Network, is a political news platform, combining news creation with decentralized networks to deliver factual content, curated by the community.