Mobile app videos deliver 5x more results than simple posts or ads. This post covers types of mobile app videos and helps focus them for guaranteed success. By selecting the right type of video, you can greatly improve your marketing success.

Mobile app videos are short and succinct videos illustrating your mobile app. Typically, these are mobile app marketing videos, mobile app promo videos, mobile app user-guide videos and mobile app how to videos. They can range anywhere from 45 seconds to about 15 mins in duration and typically have a call to action (CTA) at the end. While all types of videos are important and serve different purposes, your videos should be published either be based on a publishing calendar or decided based on priority and importance.

App marketing videos serve a general purpose of educating the marketplace. These videos  need to start with a well articulated problem statement, simple to understand solution, clear benefits and pricing. Most app marketing videos are typically anywhere between 45 seconds to 2;30 mins.

App promo videos on the other hand are used to build your brand and to promote your app. This mobile app video should focus on one or two most important and useful features. The main emphasis is your brand, your company, team, services, etc. No need to dwell on pricing. Promo videos typically do not exceed 90 seconds.

App user-guide and how-to videos serve to educate users to initially draw them to you app and subsequently to keep them engaged. The goal is to empower users to master your app by learning tips and tricks. These videos can be anywhere from 5 mins to 15 mins depending on mobile app type.

Finally all videos should have a “Call to action” (CTA) and most importantly “Contact info.” CTAs should be direct, to the point and include any URLs. For example: “Download the App”, “Try our free app”, “No cost trial”, etc. Contact information on the other hand should have sales and customer support numbers.

For more information on building your mobile app contact us at Sunvera Software at +1 949 284-6300|||

