There was a time I used to fantasize about breaking my leg as a way to avoid going into the office that week. I don’t believe I am alone. In sharp contrast, I’m now in a role where I feel excited on Sunday night to go to work on Monday morning. I used to want to slap people that said things like this to me, but I’ve seen Fillory now and I know it’s real. At this point, I’ve devoted two graduate degrees and a decade of my life asking what differentiates environments where employees largely feel dead inside from ones where they feel inspired, energized and alive.

Employee engagement is one of those terms that is batted around as a magical differentiator that can distinguish between a great place to work and a mediocre one. Companies with low engagement are at risk of absenteeism, diminished productivity and poor retention rates.

Engagement is one of those elusive qualities, much like passion or culture, that can be hard to measure. According to Gallup Q12 (one of the best known engagement measurement instruments) approximately only 32% of America’s 2016 workforce was “engaged.” While the accuracy of the Gallop poll is contentious, most people would say they know an engaged workplace when they see it. If we are looking for an objective measure (vs. self-reporting surveys) to track engagement, employee turnover is a pretty decent proxy.

At Keen IO, our 2016 voluntary attrition was less than 6%. This is an impressive figure given that according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average turnover rate for a start-up is approximately 25%. We let people go occasionally as our business model shifts or we determine lack of fit, but at Keen, it is extremely uncommon for someone to leave voluntarily.

Other metrics also point to high engagement at Keen: participation in our Learning & Development programs is over 80%, and our coaching program has over 90% participation. In addition, company-wide surveys typically garner a 75+% response rate. In my consulting days in the Fortune 500, anything over a 30% response rate to surveys was cause for celebration.

What can this be attributed to? As someone who oversees our compensation, I can tell you it’s not the money. It’s not the great perks like snacks and beer; those are table stakes in startups. It’s not our annual employee trip to Hawaii. We don’t have one of those.

So, what is it? In one word: Agency.

To explain why I attribute a high sense of agency at Keen to our strong employee engagement, we’ll first travel back to the 1960’s when Douglas McGregor was doing research out of MIT. McGregor formulated a theory, published in his book The Human Side of Enterprise that leadership styles are generally informed by one of two beliefs about human motivation. To be fair, it’s more of a continuum than either/or, but we’ll talk in extremes for illustration.

Leaders with a Theory X orientation assume that people dislike work; they want to avoid it, do not want to take responsibility, and are individually motivated. This requires management to provide strict supervision, tightly controlled job functions, and external rewards and penalties. Much of the factory efficiency improvements have been driven by process engineering catalyzed by this belief system.

On the other hand, leaders with a Theory Y worldview believe that people are self-motivated, thrive on responsibility, and are internally motivated to better their performance — without promise of threat or reward. This perspective leads to very different management styles than Theory X leadership. Under Theory Y, productivity actually *suffers* when people are tightly managed — particularly with roles that require creativity, problem-solving, or innovation…which describes most jobs in tech or other industries trying to gain or maintain competitive advantage through innovation.

As you have likely guessed at this point, Keen ascribes to Theory Y. Personal heros of mine, Carl Rogers, Carl Jung, and Abraham Maslow would also fall into Theory Y as humanistic psychologists. As Maslow’s hierarchy of needs articulates, humans have a strong innate desire to perpetually grow. And if the need to grow is inherent to being human, the experience of growing is its own reward. So, in theory, if self-development is a primary need and you are fulfilling it, you are creating an engaged employee. The question for employers is: how do we create the types of environments where employees can perpetually grow?

Given people need to be continually self-developing to feel alive, aka engaged, how do we create opportunities for them to do so? Some companies do this by having explicit career paths and developmental curriculum. This is a good start. However, we’ve found that when it comes to growth, it’s not one size, or one plan, fits all. Rather than try to design a growth plan, at Keen, we’d much rather let each person figure this out for themselves. Our challenge is how to create an organization that remains productive while giving people the freedom to find their niche, versus fill a job description, that inspires and challenges them.

We start with values because these drive culture and culture drives behavior. At Keen, we emphasize five key values:

I’ve written previously on the topic of values and how we work to make sure they translate to behaviors, not just words on a wall. In relation to employee engagement, I believe the agency value is the most influential. We place explicit expectations on employees for good communication and effective exertion of influence. It is not acceptable to see a problem or feel dissatisfied and wait for someone else to fix it.

Another thing we’ve done to encourage personal agency is eliminate the manager role. Rather than a single person being able to exert a tremendous amount of influence over your career, that authority is widely distributed. In lieu of managers defining job roles, teams collaboratively create their Responsibility Matrix. This provides each employee greater freedom to create their role and customize it to their strengths and interests. This also helps each employee see the whole pie of work, not just their scope, which also leads to increased accountability and agency.

In terms of learning and development, we want our employees to focus on becoming better versions of themselves; better humans — NOT simply better at their job. Which means we step out of the way on setting their learning and development goals. Each employee is given a learning budget that they can spend on whatever they wish. We’ve seen employees use this budget for Stanford courses on willpower, french lessons, anxiety conference registration, a wide variety of book purchases, and many others that we would have never thought to prescribe for an L&D plan. The only courses we require our employees complete are on Effective Communication and Emotional Regulation because we’ve found that these two skillsets dramatically lead to a more productive and pleasant workplace.

Promoting greater agency and freedom isn’t without its challenges. Some of the challenges to engagement we’ve encountered include a unique anxiety that our new hires undergo when first joining the company. It can take time for an employee to adapt to self-management and not having a boss. There can also be confusion around decision-making. Sometimes a culture of high-agency speeds up decisions (a lot of bureaucratic red-tape is avoided) and sometimes decisions are slowed down by many people at the company wanting to help shape a strategic decision and express their opinion.

And finally, agency can sometimes be exhausting. There is a lot of positive press for increased “empowerment,” but the shadow side is rarely mentioned. Increased agency comes with increased accountability, pressure, and the associated anxieties produced by that type of vulnerability. If I am honest, it can be nice to have days where someone else tells you what to do and you can blame that person if it doesn’t go well or was the wrong direction, or decision. Increased agency requires a willingness to make mistakes and own failures. Some people are more comfortable with this pressure than others.

Increased agency can provide a tremendous level of employee engagement but it also disperses the fear of failure to employees. This is a big departure from the traditional model of the glorified leader carrying the albatross of risk. Distributed authority and its emotional burdens are potentially the most complex element of increasing agency within an organization. But it certainly beats a broken leg.

Interested in reading more about how organization design shapes culture and behavior? Or the evolution of scientific management? Productive Workplaces is an Organization Development classic. For a recent read on alternative organization structures, check out Reinventing Organizations. Questions or comments? Reach Lisa @redesignod

This piece adapted from a talk at CMX Community Summit. Here’s a link to the video.|||

Employee engagement isn’t a result of carrots or sticks; its about fulfilling what Maslow argues as a primary need: opportunities for self-development and self-directed learning.