Meetzoo, an app that aims to make business meetings more productive, was launched on Wednesday on the Apple App store. The iOS debut comes just a few months after the company secured funds through its equity crowdfunding campaign on Crowdcube.

Meetzoo was launched in early 2016 by entrepreneur Paul Lewis-Borman, co-founder of the software firm, Symbox. The company stated it is looking charge a subscription fee through its website for premium features, which includes enhanced storage, branding, and connectivity. All of these features will allow users to push meeting data directly into their existing CRM systems. Meetzoo’s target market is anybody that uses an electronic calendar and has a profile on LinkedIn. Lewis-Borman reportedly stated:

“Like most business professionals, I spend a large amount of my work life participating in meetings. Meetings should be the most productive and creative interactions of our business lives. They are the lifeblood of business, yet they are rarely as productive as they should be. I took a hard look at what is wrong with meetings – such as not knowing enough about each of the attendees beforehand, attendees not being properly briefed, agendas rarely being used or followed, poor time management and little in the way of continuity or accountability between meetings. I went looking for an app that could solve these problems and couldn’t find one, so I created Meetzoo.”

The Meetzoo team revealed that the app is free to download. However premium features such as CRM and cloud storage integrations, personalized/branded emails and sharing photo and attachments will be introduced later this year as part of a monthly subscription. As a special bonus for early adopters, those who download the app during the next six months will receive one year’s free access to Meetzoo’s premium features. The core functions of the app, such as calendar and LinkedIn integration, note taking, etc. will always be free. Lewis-Borman also commented:

“We’re constantly improving our product and introducing new features and integrations to help people make their meetings better. You’re going to see a lot of exciting and innovative stuff from Meetzoo this year that nobody else is doing. A Fortune 50 company is estimated to waste $75 million a year due to poor meetings, while the average employee attends around 62 meetings a month. That’s a lot of wasted time.”

“Meetzoo was borne out of my own frustration. Like most business professionals, l spend a large amount of my time in meetings. The problem is that most meetings are far less productive than they should be, so I looked at what makes a bad meeting – such as not knowing enough about each of the participants, not having a clear objective, agendas rarely being used or followed, poor time management and little in the way of continuity or accountability between meetings. I went looking for an app that could solve these problems and couldn’t find one, so I created Meetzoo. No more jumping between your calendar, emails, LinkedIn and note-taking apps just to catch up on what you were talking about. With Meetzoo you can quickly pick up where you left off.”

Meetzoo is currently available for the iPhone, however, iPad, Android and web app versions are in the works.|||

Meetzoo, an app that aims to make business meetings more productive, was launched on Wednesday on the Apple App store. The iOS debut comes just a few month