Commonly, when we say copying Blu-ray, we want to stream Blu-ray conveniently without heavy Blu-ray Player. For example, we can stream Blu-ray to Apple TV via iTunes or watch Blu-ray movies on iPad anytime and anywhere only if we would like. The usage of Blu-ray rips drags in the output format choice when you ripping Blu-ray. Take Apple devices as instance, when you want to playback Blu-ray on Apple TV, iPad, iPhone, you need to convert Blu-ray to MOV on Mac/PC.

Not all the the iOS devices, some Apple software are also involved like iTunes, iMovie, Final Cut Pro, etc. When you ripped Blu-ray to MOV, you can freely play Blu-ray MOV rips on iOS devices/software or edit MOV clips ripped from Blu-ray with iMovie, FCP and other NLE software supporting MOV video files. That's the point that attracts us to rip Blu-ray.

So how to rip Blu-ray to MOV on Mac/PC? Generally, Blu-rays have copyright protection like BD+, AACS, region codes, Cinavia, UOP, Digital Rights Management, High-bandwidth Digital Content Protection and BD-ROM Mark to prevent unauthorized access to Blu-ray disc and the playback of Blu-ray media using unauthorized devices. We need a Blu-ray Copy software to help us remove Blu-ray copy protection and then shift Blu-ray M2TS files to MOV format. A web search for "Blu-ray Ripping Copying Tool" on Google, you will be shown many Blu-ray ripping applications. Here, we would like to recommend you the best Blu-ray to MOV converter for Mac and PC.

After a deep research, we found Pavtube ByteCopy for Mac and its equivalent Pavtube ByteCopy for Windows are topping Blu-ray decrypting and converting software that can easily circumvent Blu-ray decryption scheme and extract Blu-ray main title to convert to different digital formats like MOV. Pavtube ByteCopy can convert any Blu-ray disc including 4K Blu-ray disc to H.264 MOV, MPEG-4 MOV, QuickTime MOV, Multi-track MOV, ProRes MOV, DNxHD MOV, 3D SBS MOV, 3D TB MOV and 3D Anaglyph MOV for various video player, multimedia device, video editing software and 3D devices like VR Headsets. When it comes to A/V parameters, you can tweak video resolution, codec, bitrate, frame rate and audio codec, channel, bitrate, sample rate to output 720p MOV, 1080p MOV with high and low frame rate and bitrate to more compatible with your devices.

Apart from ripping Blu-ray to MOV format video, ByteCopy also allows you to edit the video when outputing. You can trim video length by the beginning and ending and crop video black bar. You also can add external subtitle to your original Blu-ray video and choose desired subtitle track when ripping Blu-ray to MOV.

Pavtube ByteCopy for Mac is fully compatible with macOS Sierra, Mac OS X 10.11 El Capitan, Mac OS X 10.10 Yosemite, 10.9 Mavericks, 10.8 Mountain Lion, 10.7 Lion, 10.6 Snow Leopard.

Pavtube ByteCopy for Windows can work on Windows 10, Windows 8.1, Windows 8, Windows 7, etc.

Note: The steps of converting Blu-ray to MOV on Mac and PC using ByteCopy are the same. The only difference is the version software you using. Below screenshots are from Mac Blu-ray to MOV converter.

Insert Blu-ray to Blu-ray drive and launch the Blu-ray to MOV converter on your Mac. Click "Load from Disc" to load your Blu-ray discs. As for Blu-ray folder and Blu-ray ISO images, you can directly drag and drop them into the software. Once the Blu-ray videos are loaded, the main title will be checked automatically. You can choose desired subtitle and audio track in "Subtitle" and "Audio" box at the bottom of the chapter list.

There are various MOV format you can choose here. Click "Format" to pop up profile window. You can simply search MOV format in the search box at the bottom right corner. You also can choose SD MOV in "Common Video", HD MOV in "HD Video", 3D MOV in "3D Video", Multi-track MOV in "Multi-track Video", ProRes MOV in "Final Cut Pro" categories for QuickTime, iMovie, iPad, iTunes, etc.

Switch to "Settings". You can adjust MOV video size, bit rate, frame rate and audio codec, bitrate, etc to determine to output 1080p MOV or 720p MOV. Click the Edit icon on the tool bar of main interface to open the Editor Window, you can play and preview the original Blu-ray movies and output effects. Also you can flip Blu-ray, trim, crop, add effect, reset, and adjust volume.

All all the setting is completed, hit right-bottom convert button to begin the Blu-ray to MOV conversion. This software supports batch conversion, so you can check multiple chapters and start the conversion.

When the conversion is completed, click "Open Output Folder" on the main interface to pop out the folder with MOV files ripped from Blu-ray videos. Then you can transfer the Blu-ray rips to iTunes for Apple TV 4, iPad Pro, iPhone 7 streaming. Or you can load the Blu-ray rips to NAS or plex to playback on Samsung TV, LG TV, Sony TV. You also can import the Blu-ray MOV rips to iMovie, Final Cut Pro X for editing.|||

When you ripped Blu-ray to MOV, you can freely play Blu-ray MOV rips on iOS devices/software or edit MOV clips ripped from Blu-ray with iMovie, FCP.