Java programming language was developed by the Sun Microsystems, which has initiated by the James Gosling.  He initiated as Java programming language project since 1991 for using one of his several set-top box projects. This language was initially called as Oak. After that Oaktree understood an outside Gosling office and went by namely Green. Later, Oak was renamed by the Java from the random words list. Java was released since 1995 as a core component of Sun Microsystems in a Java platform. It promises to write once and run anywhere (WORA) that provides no cost on rest time in this popular platform. On the November 13, 2006, the Sun Microsystems has been released Java, which is an open source and free software under the name of GNU GPL. On May 8, 2007, Sun had finished this process by making all Java core open source and code free apart from the small code portion to which the sun didn’t hold any copyright.

Java standard edition has recently released on the Java SE 8 platform. In the Java advancement is widespread popularity and multiple configurations, which were built to the suitable different platform types. For example: J2EE for an enterprise application and J2ME for a mobile application. A new J2 version has renamed as a Java EE, Java ME and Java SE respectively. This language is guaranteed to the write once and run anywhere. Java is an object-oriented, platform dependent, simple, secure, portable, architecture-neutral, robust, multithreaded, interpreted, high performance, distributed and dynamic.

Some tools you will need that are Pentium 200 MHZ computer with a minimum size of 64 MB RAM up to 128 MB RAM. You will need some following software like Java JDK 8, Linux 7.1, Windows XP / 7/ 8, Microsoft notepad or another text editor. It will provide desired skill to create GUI and web application by using Java. To build your career in Java, you must need sound knowledge in a Java core. Java is a foundation of learning framework such as spring, Java server faces, struts, JPA, servlets and hibernate. These frameworks are widely used in the development of web application. There are many online tutorials and post freelance projects available to learn Java language, but the Java book provides an in-depth and comprehensive explanation. Some of the best Java books can read to be enhancing your Java programming knowledge.

There are many other Java books, but you have to really above mention all books and that’s why freelance tips recommended them.  Some of them give Java books for beginners, which is tried to include all the best books and helpful you to all Java beginners students. These top 5 books are regarding multithreading, Java generics, collections, design patterns and many other important topics that are most important for all Java developers.|||

Java programming language was developed by the Sun Microsystems, which has initiated by the James Gosling. He initiated as Java programming language project