At Loyalty Bay, we are very interested in how “nudges” can be applied to change people’s behaviour online, but one of the most exciting areas is how this can be applied to making positive policy outcomes in government and local authorities.

So what is a “nudge” in the context of this blog post?

The idea of using nudges in government policy is not new and has been applied all over the world. In the UK we have The Behavioural Insights Team that is doing really interesting work in this area, as can be seen from one of their experiments below:

In one trial, a letter sent to non-payers of vehicle taxes was changed to use plainer English, along the line of “pay your tax or lose your car”. In some cases the letter was further personalised by including a photo of the car in question. The rewritten letter alone doubled the number of people paying the tax; the rewrite with the photo tripled it. Source

We want to see how experiments like the above can be taken further, implemented more quickly and tested in wider policy areas using software and rigorous data analysis.

Some areas that are of particular interest:

This list is by no means exhaustive and there is a lot happening in these areas already, but we believe more can be done, particularly in the online sphere.

Here is one idea of what could be done using our software:

Government target: The Department of Health have stated that one of their priorities is:

Local authority problem: local authorities spend millions chasing late rent payments and want to get people to pay online and via direct debit, as it saves both a huge amount of time and money.

Idea: why not incentivise people to pay their rent by direct debit on local authority web portals (in this case Lambeth council) by offering them a Fitbit, which fits in line with the Department of Health’s priorities.

In this case, the Fitbit costs £19.99 but could pale into insignificance when weighed up by the cost and time savings of getting someone onto direct debit.

I should clarify that you don’t necessarily need to offer a Fitbit or something of that specific value. I merely use this as an example. Our software would allow you to test any type of incentive (including free content) and value to see what works and what doesn’t. We can provide multivariate testing and all of the required data to back it up in our analytics dashboards.

You could even trigger the light box (or integrate our API) based on specific criteria i.e. only show to someone who looks like they are about to abandon or only show to people who are not already on direct debit and have visited this page once already but failed to sign up.

We would love to partner with academics, NGOs and government to see how ideas like this could be progressed. Please get in touch.

Useful resources to check out:

Nudge: Improving Decisions About Wealth, Health and Happiness by Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein

Could Solving This One Problem Solve All the Others?

Public.io – can you transform the public sector

Zinc VC – We create the innovation system to build commercially successful businesses which solve chronic social problems for hundreds of millions of people in the developed world.|||

