I had the pleasure to meet Leslie about two years ago during a summer course in Italy. She was one of the instructors, and her lecture about DNA synthesis in massive amounts and with different techniques made me realize I was doing something wrong with my cloning. She is also a very cheerful person, with a very positive attitude. So when I saw the recent synthetic chromosome articles, I contacted her and she was very kind to answer my questions.

Kostas Vavitsas: Recently the Sc2.0 consortium published a series of Science papers reporting the synthesis of five more yeast chromosomes, and you were co-authoring all of them. Can you tell anything from the backstage? How do you find working in a huge consortium and coordinating with labs around the world?

Leslie Mitchell: The Sc2.0 consortium is certainly a unique collaboration. Each team agrees to work on an Sc2.0 chromosome of specific sequence, but has nearly total autonomy in devising a scheme for assembly. While the final product—the yeast cell encoding the designed chromosome—is open source to the research community, new ideas associated with DNA synthesis and chromosome assembly are completely owned by the partner group.

We have worked closely with all the teams around the world, largely driven by a funding mechanism from the National Science Foundation called 'Science Across Virtual Institutes' (SAVI), which has finded yearly, in-person meetings for both PIs and trainees. We have met in locations like Beijing China, London England, Taormina Italy, New York City USA, Edinburgh Scotland, which underscores the international aspect of our project. This coming summer we'll meet in Singapore, coupled to the SB7 Conference.

A great aspect of the project is that we have students from Sc2.0 labs around the world visit the Boeke lab in NYC, and spend 6 months to a year working on various projects, including putting the finishing touches on their synthetic chromosomes. For instance, we have hosted the lead authors of synV (Zexiong Xie, Tianjin University), synX (Yi Wu, Tianjin University), and synXII (Weimin Zhang, Tsinghua University). The visits allow for development of a much more meaningful collaboration and knowledge transfer, as we work side-by-side for many months. Also, it's a lot of fun to get to know collaborators in person, rather than just by email or only at the yearly meetings.|||

