Feel free to use the following button on your site to promote the use of Metric Time.

Although not a necessary part of Metric Time proper, a Metric Week should also be considered for completeness. As a week is an artificial time unit, unlike days or years, it is open to change and we should decimalize everything we can.

This means we should have a 10 day week.

The days of the Metric Week should be named differently from the AB system for the following reasons:

So, what should the days be named then? The most obvious alternative is to number them, i.e. Zeroday, Oneday, Twoday, ... Nineday. This is my proposal. This will make translation into different languages a breeze and will be easy for people to remember and use. For the sake of consistency, the first day of the Metric week should be Zeroday and the last, or tenth, Nineday. Although this might require some adjustment to for people not used to starting at zero (but then we are asking them to do that with the Metric Time's 0 hour so why not a little more of the same?) it will be more consistent with the numeral representation of Metric Time. So, in summary, my proposal for the days of the Metric Week are:

Next we must consider where to start the week cycle. I think the best solution to this is to use a method suggested to me by Daniel "Ford" Sohl:

This is very straight forward and neat. The only issue is that if anyone decides to use a different year numbering system they might have to alter the even/Zeroday-odd/Fiveday rule. Also, this week system introduces the unfamiliar concept of a day that doesn't exist in the week. But I could live with that; think what a great holiday it would make!

"But, aren't you stealing my weekends?" If we were to only have two-day weekends in the ten-day week, then you would have less weekend days per year. But who's to say we can only have two-day weekends? I propose we have three-day weekends that will fall on Sevenday-Nineday. This will not only lengthen your weekend but also give you about five more weekend days a year. Enjoy!

Another proposal others have put forth is that people work five days then take five days off. This has two advantages: The obvious one is that you get a five day weekend (and lots more off time in total); the other one is that this would allow for there to be two shifts of workers, which would mean more employment.

I changed the symbol for the weekday names listed above from the format "#d" to "D#" in order to avoid possible conflicts and to make them easier to use. Now you can write the time of weekly events as a single decimal number preceded by a "D". (This is not a standard SI-style symbol because of this usage.) For example, say you have a chronology class at noon every Fiveday. You can write this as:

Or, you might see something like this in a future metric TV Guide:|||

The ten day week.