The sci-fi genre is replete with some sort of flying contraption. However, science and fiction blend together in the Larry Page flying jetski set to sweep you away.

Defying gravity is not just a common trope of many genres, but also a rebellion against reality as we know it.

For years, popular culture has depicted the urge to cruise at altitudes in a personal vehicle.

From the classic musical romp of Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, to The Jetson’s cartoon representation of futuristic yearnings, flying cars are the apex of innovation.

However, dreams are becoming reality in disruptive technology’s continually pervasive influence.

Start-up company Kitty Hawk recently unveiled its flying car prototype, which they’ve aptly named the Kitty Hawk Flyer. They have scheduled to release the finalised model by the end of this year.

Resembling an airborne jetski powered by eight rotas, the electrically-powered machine vertically executes take-off and landing.

While remaining coy about the full details of the final product, Kitty Hawk’s website stipulated that their craft will only fly over fresh water.

However, they’ve also hinted that the commercial electric vehicle will look nothing like the current prototype.

Thus, there could be a chance that the marketable Kitty Hawk Flyer might be tricked out with land cruising capabilities.

The company also strives for inclusiveness in releasing their slice of the future.

“Our mission is to make the dream of personal flight a reality. We believe when everyone has access to personal flight, a new, limitless world of opportunity will open up to them. At Kitty Hawk, we engineer, design and build safe, fun, easy-to-fly aircraft.”

Staying true to their goal of making anyone airborne, users of the Kitty Hawk Flyer will not require a pilot’s licence.

Furthermore, the creators claim that “you’ll learn to fly it in minutes.”

While the realisation of flying cars certainly revs the imagination, these fantasies of the future also have practical applications.

Logistically, they could reduce urban traffic congestion, and thus ultimately cut down on pollution in populated areas.

Electrically-powered, they could also contribute to a sustainable lifestyle with little to no harmful effects on the environment.|||

The sci-fi genre is replete with some sort of flying contraption. However, science and fiction blend together in the new Larry Page flying jetski.