My short answer to you is that you don't need to think about changing your career and go for the 9th interview! Think about how many tech companies are there in bay area, in US and in the world, and you just failed 8 coding interviews. In other words, there are countless number of companies you have never tried yet, let alone you can also start your own business.But before you go for the 9th interview, I have some tips for you in terms of interview preparation.It's extremely important to understand why you failed the past 8 interviews. Without realizing the real cause, it's very likely that you're gonna fail the next one.As you said, your algorithm and data structure skills are weak, which is quite possible the reason. But I think it's still too general because coding interviews for new grads are usually focused on data structure and algorithm, so your summary is like I failed the interview because I didn't prepare well.So let me help you nail down the cause. Majority of people failed coding interviews due to 2 reasons. First they are conceptually not familiar/clear about data structure and algorithm. Second they don't have enough practice with interview questions. If most of the time you couldn't figure out which data structure to use, or have problem when analyzing time/space complexity, or you don't fully understand pros and cons for each data structure (like comparing linked list with tree and when to use each of them), I would say you fall into the first category and you should really pick up your textbook to have better understanding of these basic knowledges.However, if you are quite clear about each data structure and algorithm, but you were slow when solving those questions, or couldn't get to the optimal solution, it's likely that you just need more practice. I'll cover this in following sections.You should always spend enough time on coding questions. There are lots of online resources likeand. Here are several thing to keep in mind:Technical interview doesn't only evaluate your coding ability, but a variety of skills and abilities like communication skills, analysis ability etc.. Also many people will feel nervous solving a problem when someone is looking over his shoulder. That's why people may fail with problems that can be solved easily at home. The key point is to practice with a real person instead of yourself.A lot of people also want to get good quality feedbacks from experienced interviewers. With that in mind, we worked on building, which allows candidate havefrom top companies like Google, Amazon etc. and will get real feedback to help them improve. I think in your case, some real feedback about your performance is very important.Failing 8 interviews in a row is not a big deal since you can have more interviews later. The point is really to understand why you failed those interviews and how to best prepare your next one.|||

