RMVB is a file extension for a variable bit rate container file used by RealNetworks RealPlayer media player software for video files or links to these files for live streaming video. Don’t be surprised if you’ve never heard of RMVB, because many people haven’t. They’re simply a type of Real Media file, RealMedia Variable Bitrate. They’re especially popular for Asian movies and series, and it’s probably distribution of these through P2P networks that has seen the format spreading all over the world. Even though RMVB files aren’t very well known, don’t make the mistake of thinking that you need a fancy player or converter to watch them on Samsung TV.

If you've already tried and failed to play RMVB on Samsung TV, no matter the files are downloaded from the Internet or shared by your friends, you are highly recommended to convert RMVB to Samsung TV supported formats like H.264 MP4 on your Windows (Windows 10 also included). Two of the most important things to remember when converting RMVB to Samsung TV are video quality and conversion speed. Preserving the original quality of the video is specially important when you have some RMVB videos and want to play RMVB on Samsung TV. A fast RMVB to Samsung TV converter will save you lots of time so you can watch RMVB on Samsung TV as soon as possible.

One tool that meets this challenge is , which lets you convert RMVB to Samsung TV  video with zero quality loss. This powerful app is specially designed for Samsung TV users to deal with the RMVB incompatible problems so it provides optimized preset for iPad, which means you are only required to click your mouse once or twice to make any RMVB compartible with your Samsung TV.

Besides RMVB, this Samsung TV video converter also allows you to convert any videos like , , AVI, H.265, MXF, MTS, FLV, MOV, MPEG etc to Samsung TV supported video. It also provides you including Panasonic TV, Sony TV, LG TV and more. ( )

Other Download:

 - Pavtube old official address: http://www.pavtube.com/video_converter/

 - Cnet Download: http://download.cnet.com/Pavtube-Video-Converter/3000-2194_4-75734821.html

 - Softonic Download: http://pavtube-video-converter.en.softonic.com/

Mac version - Using , you can convert RMVB to Samsung TV supported video on Mac. It also supports converting any videos to Apple devices like iPhone, iPad, Apple TV, QuickTime, FCP, iMovie, Avid Media Composer etc.

You can directly drag and drop the videos on your Windows to the app. This Samsung TV Video Converter supports batch conversion, so you can add several files at one time. It saves your time and energy.

In the format column, choose TVS preset based on your model, e.g. Samsung TV. This app has optimized the video settings for Samsung TV, so you needn't to set the format, video resolution and more by yourself.

After setting the output format, you can click the "Convert" button to convert your RMVB videos to Samsung TV supported format now. If necessary, you can edit your videos before converting them.|||

If you want to play RMVB on Samsung TV, this is the right guide for you. Keep on to learn more details.