Why would I want to be a Microsoft MVP and how do I become one? Part 1.

I am a Windows Development MVP. I’ve been a Microsoft MVP (Most Valuable Professional) for 2 cycles now, but I was approached by our local Microsoft technical evangelist at the time about a possibility to become an MVP back in 2010-2011. At the time I knew that this program existed and I would appreciate the award, but it was unclear to me why would I do anything extra to deserve it. You can find quite a few articles about what it takes to be an MVP and quite a few of them would mention the benefits, but the focus is always on activities to get there and stay there. For me, at the time, a more interesting question was what’s in it for me? I was working for myself, I wasn’t doing any contract work and titles as such didn’t really appeal to me. The few material benefits were already available to me through the BizSpark program. And, after all, it’s not an award that you suddenly find in your mailbox for the awesome things you did. At the very least you have to put in the work to report your activities to get it.

So, why would I care? You may have the same question…

Even if you go to the official program page you will see that the benefits aren’t emphasized or even mentioned on the front page.

The program Overview page has 4 sections, but none of them is called “What’s in it for you” or something like that. To be fair, it talks about some of the benefits in the “What is the MVP Award?” section, but you have read through it all to notice. The public-facing site itself doesn’t even have a separate section about the benefits.

I know, it’s noble to be selfless, helping others for no personal gain, yada yada, but I’m a middle-aged cynic. This doesn’t cut it for me.

Now that I am a second-year MVP, I am really glad that I am one and I have a few more answers to my question that I wanted to share here with you.

I’ve divided this text into 3 posts so it’s not an insanely long article no one reads:

The “hero” image on the official site says

and the Overview page is a little bit more elaborate:

If I had to put it in my own words, I’d say — MVPs have knowledge in some corner(s) of Microsoft and related technologies and are sharing that knowledge with a wider community in some shape or form.

The program has seen a lot of changes in the last couple of years and will probably see some more going forward. Just a few years ago it included a lot of consumer-focused categories (like Windows Client, etc.) but recently they decided to refocus on Developers and IT Pros and consolidated tens of contribution areas under 10 award categories:

We will look into details of some of them in the final part, but for now this should give you a bird’s eye overview of what areas are covered.

For years MVPs were awarded and re-awarded quarterly and the award was valid for a year. For example, I was an October MVP. This meant that I got awarded on October 1st and my worthiness was re-evaluated every October 1st.

So, there was an approximately equal number of January, April (getting awarded on April’s Fools day must have been a special treat), July and October MVPs.

However, in February 2017 the process was changed and now new MVPs are awarded monthly and all existing MVPs are renewed (or not) on July 1st. The reason for this change was primarily the fact that previously it could take up to 5 months from the moment you were nominated to the moment you were awarded. For example, if you were nominated in August it was often too late to be awarded in the October cycle and the earliest you could get recognized was next January, which is insanely long time in the current fast paced environment.

Now that we know what it is and that you can get it much faster, let’s see the reasons to seek it…

Hope you like this post. Thank you for sharing and “recommending” it! Follow me (Alan Mendelevich) on Medium so you don’t miss my future posts.|||

I am a Windows Development MVP. I’ve been a Microsoft MVP (Most Valuable Professional) for 2 cycles now, but I was approached by our local Microsoft technical evangelist at the time about a…