Have you ever seen a webpage and been blown away by the design? Or, better yet, have you ever seen a page that needs a little work? Maybe it’s not user-friendly or responsive. Maybe it’s got way too much going on and needs to be simplified. Maybe it needs a special touch. Maybe it needs you!

You might be just what that sub-par website needs. If you’ve been looking to get into web design, now’s your chance. There are so many great web design courses you can take -- both online and offline -- that’ll make you a web design expert in no time.

Over the past year and a half, we’ve amassed hundreds of Web Design bootcamp reviews and gathered thousands of data points to bring you our list of recommendations and rankings.

Interested in a school not on this list or just want to see your options? Browse our complete web design classes directory, or ask us a about it on our tech forum!

Here we present a list of the top programs with the best reviews, both online and offline, as well as a short-list of other Web Design bootcamps with a strong reputation. Expect this list to be continuially updated.

This list of courses is by no means exhaustive, but we wanted to narrow it down to provide students with a starting point of well-reviewed, vetted Web Design courses. As more data comes in for different schools, we will update our list.

We really wanted to include the following schools in our top list but “top 5” sounds better than “top 6” or “top 7” or “top 8,” don’t you think? But we’ve still got a lot of love for these schools, and based on reviews, so do their students.

It’s safe to say if you want to attend The Iron Yard, you can. It’s like a rock’s throw away from … well … everywhere! The school offers a 12-week full time User Interface Design program, which covers discovery and ideation, foundational design principles, cohesive design languages, Photoshop, Illustrator and interface development using HTML, CSS and some JavaScript. Upon course completion, students will have a hefty portfolio of projects that will showcase their web design skills and help them get to the next step of their career.

Students aren’t expected to have extensive experience before taking BrainStation’s User Experience Design course, but by the end, they should expect to know all there is to know about the principles of effective UX design. The program is three hours a week for 10 weeks, with self-guided learning outside of the classroom. Industry leaders teach the course and incorporate lots of hands-on projects.

Students can learn a user's behavior, emotions, and attitudes, and how to optimize their experience through good design in New York Code and Design Academy’s UX/UI Design 101 course. It’s a part-time, 8-week program that meets two nights a week. Students will leave the class knowing all about interface design, interaction design, information architecture, wireframes, user scenarios, personas, prototyping, usability testing and Adobe Illustrator.

Tradecraft’s UX course is a full time, 12-week program. During the course, students can expect to learn the ins and outs of customer development, user research, interaction design, user interface design, prototyping, and content and copy. One of the most unique aspects of Tradecraft is that the projects done during the program are for real-world companies -- this means students will be required to not just work on, but lead, a number of projects for Silicon Valley companies throughout the semester.

Planning to build your tech career in 2017? You may want to consider a few high-demand fields that are positioned to take off this year. We’re profiling careers to watch, along with everything you need to get started. 

 

 

 Have you ever seen a webpage or app and been blown away by the design? Or, better yet, have you ever seen a page that needs a little work? Maybe it’s not user-friendly or responsive. Maybe it’s got way too much going on and needs to be simplified. Maybe it needs a special touch. Maybe it needs you! For those who dream about a tech role that channels their creativity, web design and UI/UX design are in-demand and rapidly growing fields to explore. Over the last several years, some of the top tech companies have used a design-centered approach to set themselves apart from the competition. The tech sector as a whole is following their lead, which means there’s no time like the present to learn web design, UI, or UX. 

 

 

 How To Become A UX Designer, UI Designer, or Visual Designer: In the tech world, "design" usually refers to three different fields- UI Design, UX Design, and visual design. All three are great fields for career-changers because employers will typically prioritize the strength of your portfolio over whether or not you have a design degree. With demand high, many career-changers are learning the basics through online web design courses and bootcamps As you do your research, you’ll want to first know the differences between some of the most in-demand design roles. While the terms ‘UI Designer’ and ‘UX Designer’ or often merged together into a UI/UX Designer job title, the two actually mean slightly different things: UI Design: This refers to the aesthetics of a website, and is closely related to graphic design. The UI Designer works on a combination of research and branding to create the look and feel that’s best for a particular audience. UI Designer salary: $96,524 on average (Glassdoor) How to become a UI Designer: As a UI Designer, you’ll want to master a few skills: UX Design: The field of UX Design is more about how a website or app works. It is the process of enhancing customer satisfaction by designing products that are intuitive, easy to use, and delightful. The UX Designer takes on projects like customer analysis, wireframes, and prototypes. UX Designer salary: $87,883 on average (Glassdoor) How to Become a UX Designer: As a UX Designer, you’ll want to master the following: Make sure you compare job descriptions and responsibilities for a few different positions before you decide on your direction. This will help you identify if you’re more interested in a role as a UI Designer, UX Designer, or a little of both. 2. Learn the Basics. Before you dive into a bootcamp, make sure you’ve mastered the basics. Check out one of these free online courses to get started: Intro to UI Design: Coursera + University of Minnesota 

Edx.org: Introduction to User Experience 

Springboard: User Experience Design 3. Research Bootcamps. A UI, UX, or web design bootcamp can give you all the skills to either transition into these fields from a field like graphic design, or land an entry-level web design job. Take a look at the full list here and check out the following: 

 

 

 Get started on your career switch by comparing web design bootcamps. Compare bootcamps here: Want to be the first to receive the next chapter of our FREE Web Design bootcamp guide?|||

The complete web design career guide with rankings of the best web design courses and bootcamps.