Things are pretty rosy and clear when you start building your product. You have a hypothesis/core idea that you have worked on for months, you know who you are building for, and what to build to test your hypothesis.

Things generally start getting messy when you start marketing. It’s at this point that metrics are introduced to measure the effectiveness of your efforts. It also serves as a proxy for marketers to wax eloquently in resume’s and founders to boast to investors. At this point we would have a tendency to pick easily measurable metrics such as new user sign ups or number of new visitors on the website. These seem like metrics that can be directly co-related with marketing. While metrics seem like the only way to keep teams focussed on goals, anchoring too much on them can have bad consequences:

Empirical and anecdotal evidence of start-up graveyard will show a lot of promising enterprises that has gone down the above path. These were run by smart people, and experts. They anchored on a metric that was easy to measure and forgot the core focus of their enterprise.

As legendary CEO of SouthWest Airlines, Herb Kelleher has said:

All of SouthWest Airlines’ core decisions went through this filter. So when an employee came up with the idea of serving snacks on economy flights, Herb Kellehers first response was “Does doing that help make SouthWest airlines the cheapest airlines in the air?”.

Have deeper metrics to chase: Metrics that are in general harder to measure and more aligned with the core goal of the product would serve as better indicators (although still not the best). So instead of number of new sign-ups or number of new users on the website, it can be number of users who completed a core activity on the website/app. For example, in the case of YouTube, the metric that was tracked in the initial days of its growth was number of users who uploaded a video. Not the number of sign ups, not the number of views per video. In the case of AirBnB it was number of users who completed a listing.

Recognise that more information is not always good: It has happened many a time that the perfectly planned A/B test would have more than one variable being tested and the team ends up making the wrong inferences and then losing thousands of dollars by making wrong decisions based on those inferences. Marketers like to talk about more than one metric and tons of information in a single breath to seem like they are doing work. Contrary to popular opinion, I don’t think more information is exactly good.

As Nassim Nicholas Taleb writes in the Black Swan:

Always use the core value of the enterprise as a filter: What is your company’s equivalent of Herb Kelleher’s question “Does doing X make us the cheapest airline?”…? Figure it out and make it a habit of asking that question for every activity . Does doing X help achieve my company’s core value proposition Y?

Mail me on my 21.co profile for writing gigs. The $1 per mail goes to Coincenter|||

Things are pretty rosy and clear when you start building your product. You have a hypothesis/core idea that you have worked on for months, you know who you are building for, and what to build to test…