Guess what people in the United States (and around the World) are searching for the most?

We’ve just uploaded fresh data from March into our monstrous keyword database and, naturally, we wanted to know which Google searches are the most popular as of today.

We have pulled two lists for the United States:

And then we also pulled these "best new keywords in March" across all countries in our database, which turned out quite interesting as well.

So here you go:

Unsurprisingly, this list is almost entirely dominated by branded searches. But we have decided to leave the list as is, so that you could see the full picture.

Before we move on to the next list of trending keywords, it's important to understand the keyword metrics that we display.

Search volume shows how many times a given keyword is being entered into Google per month. And, because the search demand on many keywords tends to fluctuate from month to month, the number that we give you is an annual average.

Return Rate shows how often a person will search for that keyword again. It is a relative metric, so RR 3.55 doesn't mean that people perform the same search 3-4 times a month on average.

But Return Rate is very useful when comparing two keywords.

For example, the keyword "iTunes" has RR 1.21, which means that people rarely search for that keyword again. (Probably because they were just looking to download this app or learn what it is.)

On the other hand, "ebay" has RR 2.88, which means that people search for it quite frequently. (Probably because people often need to buy something and Amazon is a good place for that.)

This list is much more interesting, because it shows things that people in the US have started to care about in March all of a sudden.

What's interesting, is that some of these new keywords had a big spike in search demand and then faded to nothing quite fast. While others seem to have a continuous search demand, that shows no signs of fading.

"Sushi leaks" vs "tad cummins" are two great examples:

And in case you're wondering what's that "komodo dragon" hype is all about, it's because of Google doodle.

It's fascinating how Google can create search demand in practically anything, right?

I didn't include Return Rate this time, because the vast majority of these Google searches were very close to 1.

But I included Keyword Difficulty metric, which is super low for almost all keywords in this list (since they're brand new).

Keyword Difficulty score shows how hard it would be to rank in top10 search results for a given keyword. It is based on the size and quality of the pages that already rank there.

Given that KD scores for most of these keywords are so low, I wonder if this very article will rank for some of them?

And that's it for the US.

Let's look at what bothered people around the World in March.

I know Ahrefs has a ton of customers from all around the world, and hopefully everyone will find a fun keyword from their country in this list.

Unfortunately, Ukraine (where most of Ahrefs team is coming from) didn't make it to this list. But I can't miss my chance to entertain you with the song that all the "Russian-speaking web" is going nuts about.

It is hidden behind the keyword #56: между нами тает лед.

We only shared data for the US and I expect that many of you guys & girls will be asking us to do the same for your country.

That's why we're already in the process building a free mini-tool, that would look kind of like this:

But, unfortunately, the priority of this mini-tool on our roadmap is rather low. So if you'd like to have it faster - please leave a comment and let us know about it. This will push us to ship it sooner.|||

We’ve just uploaded fresh data from March into our monstrous keyword database and, naturally, we wanted to know which Google searches are the most popular