Quick About Me: I am a JVZoo top affiliate who always gets approved for instant commissions because I have so many affiliate sales under my belt over the years. I also promote many other high quality independent affiliate products as well as being an Amazon affiliate.

I have also created my own digital product that teaches people how to earn money online through affiliate marketing that consists of 35 how to training videos I highly recommend you sign up for it I am currently giving it away for free you can do so by clicking here or signing up on the form at the top of this blog.

My Youtube channel has 13,000 subscribers where I show people how to make money online as an affiliate marketer you can check it out and subscribe by clicking here.

I also run a handful  of blogs my newest one being http://bleekee.com  a fun photo, video, audio, sharing blog that also offers free advertising:) it’s a fun little site feel free to stop in sometime.

This is my main site where you are reading this blog post http://jaysonlinereviews.com where I teach people how to make money online, do product reviews, and whatever else my little heart desires:) This site is well established at 9 years old and quite a bit of traffic.

I have been an affiliate marketer for ten years now, so I am speaking from tons of experience, and a ton of affiliate sales that I have earned throughout the years.

So listen closely if you want to learn how to make money online as an affiliate I have the know how and background to help you make it happen.

So let’s dive in, and let me show you how to make some money online and get started ok?

Affiliate marketing in the simplest terms possible is promoting a product or service online in exchange for a commission.

Making money online through affiliate marketing is a multi-billion dollar yearly legitimate business model where product creators need affiliates like you to promote there products or services, because they would not make anywhere near the amount of sales that they do without there affiliate army promoting there goods and services.

Amazon built its multi-billion dollar business using an affiliate army and they still do so today.

How is Amazon doing today? Hmmmm they are a multi-billion dollar company so you tell me:)  Amazon is a household name, and they are the masters of the upsell, so as an Amazon affiliate if you sell one product through your Amazon affiliate link, and that particular customers buys 5 more products, then you get credited for all of the sales.

If you decide that you want to be an Amazon associate and make money online through Amazon here is the link to sign up for there affiliate program click here.

Learn the basics of affiliate marketing before you decide to go out there on your own and waste a bunch of time when you do not know the first thing about how to make money online.

Learn from someone who has a ton of experience and has been there and done that so that your learning curve will rise sharply.

That is why I highly recommend that you sign up for my free training course on how to make money online it is awesome and taught by me an experienced profitable ten year affiliate marketer.

They say a video is worth a million words so sit back and let me explain how to make money online as an affiliate for beginners below.

Affiliate marketing is a very legitimate business model like I stated above, but another benefit is the low cost of starting up an affiliate business to get started you can basically do it for free you will just be trading your spare time for money essentially. Try doing that with a brick n mortar business how much money do you think it was to get your local Mcdonalds or Kohls started as an example? A whole heck of a lot of money and with any business you are not guaranteed success! Just think of all the local mom n pop shops that went out of business when Walmart moved into town. Starting an Internet business as an affiliate marketer is a great way to make money online that has low risk, and potentially a very high reward. Heck, who does not like to make money while they are sleeping:) With a home based business that is a reality for a lot of folks who put the work in to make good stuff happen for themselves.

That is a good question:) I will stop talking in third person:) there are plenty of affiliate programs out there that you can sign up for free, and find potentially lucrative affiliate programs to promote. I am going to go through my favorite affiliate programs that you can earn money through in 2017 that I myself have been doing for years:) These will be complete with how to videos at the end of the content so enjoy your free training comrades:)

With traditional affiliate marketing which I run my internet business mainly through you are paid for referring a sale, not a click or a completed email signup form.

C.P.A. or cost per action affiliate marketing you are paid per referral depending on what you choose to promote it could be a visitor downloads something, or fills out an email form.

When that particular action is performed then you are paid it is as simple as that.

C.P.A. Commissions range from a few dollars all the way up to hundreds of dollars depending on the offer, and how lucrative the niche is. .

* I have personally seen really high paying c.p.a. offers you just have to dig a little. *

C.P.A. marketing is a great way to make money online in 2017 mixed with traditional affiliate marketing offers.

Here are the 2 most popular C.P.A. networks that you can sign up for free below.

I personally would recommend that you do start a website because it is an asset that you control and you can earn money online with your Internet business for years to come. Yes, it takes work like anything in life, but like anything in life that is worthwhile, it takes work to create success, and build up your home based business. The benefits of starting your own website are numerous, the first being you can promote anything that you want as an affiliate to make money online as long as it is legal of course. If you are thinking about starting an Internet business on a free blogging platform like Blogger.com or WordPress.com think again you are essentially building your business on quicksand, they can shut down your online business for whatever reason that they deem fit for breaking there t.o.s. which are constantly changing. Not to mention on the free WordPress.com platform you are not allowed to promote affiliate links!

Do not do it, trust me. I have been there, and done that years ago, and they shut me down. Luckily, I had just transferred my blogger.com blog over to my self hosted WordPress blog right before tragedy struck.

Do not make the same mistake I did you beginners out there who are new to making money online. I am hear to save you some time, energy, lost productivity, and hassle.

If you are smart, and see the potential in starting your own website. I would definitely go the WordPress.org route this is a self hosted blogging platform that I use on all my blogs, and so do thousands and thousands of other internet marketers and entrepreneurs from around the World.

WordPress.org is the gold standard for blogging.

If you do decide to start a website use the link below, these guys are great, they can help you download WordPress.org on your new website by phone and show you how to install WordPress step by step that is what customer support is for:) it really is not that difficult at all, so do not be scared to learn new things, these are skills that will last a lifetime.

Click Here For My Recommended Webhost If You Want To Start A Website Go With These Guys.

I actually put together a huge list of free and paid traffic sources where you promote your affiliate offers you can check it out by clicking here. Just check your email after you sign up, and make sure you use an email that you check often, so you get my future blog updates, product reviews, and the newest ideas to make money online with your Internet business in 2017 and well into the future.

MLM or Network Marketing – There are more than one way to make money online but my definite favorite Internet business model is affiliate marketing as you can see:) You can get involved with a multi-level marketing company and recruit people into your upline – and downline  this is a potentially very lucrative business model as well if you do not mind pestering friends, and family and you are a natural born salesman, or woman. There are a lot of people who are great at direct marketing or mlm opportunities and make a ton of money but I myself am not one of them.  If you do decide to go the mlm route make sure that it is a startup company with great potential to build a thriving Internet business, because the ground level is where you want to be if the company explodes then you will have the potential to earn a lot of money with your online business. If the company has been around for twenty years it is a good sign that it is and was a great business model but most of the people at the top are earning all the money. Ground level equals a lot more potential in my opinion:)

Fiverr – What would you do for five dollars? Lol I myself use this site all the time and outsource a lot of the work with my Internet business that I do not want to do myself. But did you know that you can start an Internet business selling your services on Fiverr? Do you have a service that people would be willing to pay you to perform? If yes, then people will pay you for every gig that you complete, and as the sales roll in and you start moving up in the Fiverr World you can start charging for higher end services that you will perform for your customers like $20, $50, and even $100 gigs and more.

Just brainstorm some ideas for earning money with Fiverr and get some gigs posted and see if you get any sales. You can always do this in combination with affiliate marketing so you can build up your capital to reinvest back into your Internet business:) Just an idea:)

But as you can see I am totally biased towards affiliate marketing and it is by far the best way to make money online in 2017 and well into the future.|||

How To Make Money Online 2017 Edition. This Is Going To Be The Definitive Guide To Making Money Online In 2017 As An Affiliate Marketer And The Steps You Need...