A standard move in the activist investor playbook is to buy stock in a struggling company, suggest changes to the company's management and board of directors, and then call up a friendly journalist to try to get her to write articles about how your ideas are good and the company is resisting them for bad reasons of managerial entrenchment and featherbedding. This can be more or less efficient for the activist, and for the rest of the shareholders, but it is never all that efficient for the journalist. If she succeeds in convincing people that the activist is right, the activist gets rich, and if the activist is right, the other shareholders get rich, but there is no likely scenario in which the journalist gets rich.

So I was pleased to see Frank Partnoy and Steven Davidoff Solomon, two law professors who often write about activism, try to make the process more efficient: They mounted an activist campaign at Tejon Ranch Company, and then just wrote their own article about it in The Atlantic, explaining that their ideas for the company were good and that the company resisted them for bad reasons of managerial entrenchment and featherbedding. Sadly, they waited until after they had given up their campaign and sold their shares to publish the article, which is sensible as a matter of journalistic ethics, but sort of misses the point as a matter of activism. You want to persuade people, then sell.

Anyway the article is great fun and makes me want to be an activist. Also it makes me want to be a public-company director; here's Tejon Ranch's board:

My favorite part may be this counterintuitive account of one of their conversations with Gregory Bielli, Tejon Ranch's chief executive officer:

Your model could be something like:

This suggests that if you actually have a good long-term plan you should probably be private, ceteris paribus, while if your plan is to entrench yourself and hope no one notices, that probably works best in public markets.

If you are a big financial-services firm with a formal program to hire a big class of junior employees every year by doing on-campus recruiting at a group of target colleges, those new junior employees are mostly going to be 22. There is a lot to be said for that -- they will be young, hungry, and probably childless; they will work with each other late into the night because it reminds them of college; they will defer without question to their slightly older and more experienced bosses; and you can bring in consultants to help you understand them as an undifferentiated mass of "millennials" -- but you can't say any of it too loudly, because it might sound like you're endorsing age discrimination. You are not going to find a lot of 50-year-olds at on-campus recruiting! Though that would make a decent Will Ferrell movie?

Anyway here are two guys who are suing PricewaterhouseCoopers for recruiting at colleges:

As someone who has been a junior associate at a law firm, and who has supervised junior analysts at an investment bank, my first reaction was of course: Why would those guys want that job? And my second reaction was: Boy, it would be rough to be the 26-year-old senior associate supervising the 53-year-old associate with "years of accounting and bookkeeping experience" and, you know, a lawsuit under his belt. But perhaps that is just a product of my indoctrination into those cultures. Lots of companies hire people because they will do a good job, let all employees have a decent work/life balance, and promote based on ability and contribution rather than seniority. If that's your plan, you don't have to limit your junior hires to college kids.

Anyway, "the idea that company recruitment efforts aimed at students and recent graduates can be unlawful is a controversial premise that no federal appeals court has ever endorsed," but I do kind of want to see what would happen to the financial industry, and the college industry for that matter, if on-campus recruiting became illegal. I suspect it's about as likely as index funds becoming illegal.

Sure, and my lunch would also be more delicious if it were free. The California Public Employees' Retirement System got a gross annual return of 8.24 percent from its public equity investments over the past 20 years and paid basically zero of it -- 0.04 percentage points -- to the managers in fees. It got a gross annual return of 19.3 percent from its private equity investments and paid 7.0 percentage points to the managers, leaving it a full 4.1 percentage points better off -- that is, with 50 percent higher annual returns -- with the private equity than the public equity. Of course the private equity managers were 175 times better off than the public equity managers, but they earned it! There is a meta-efficient-markets argument that investment managers should charge fees at least equal to the amount of alpha they provide; on that math, Calpers's private equity managers were too generous.

The usual reaction among public pension funds to statistics like this seems to be to get rid of private equity: Better to make less money for retirees, but virtuously, than to make more money for retirees, and also pay higher fees to Wall Street. Calpers isn't going quite that far:

We talk sometimes around here about "the hollowing out of the investing middle class": As money is increasingly concentrated in massive institutions, it can make sense for those institutions to just track indexes, and it can make sense for them to develop in-house specialized expertise to make direct private investments, but it makes less and less sense for those institutions to just give allocations to dozens of outside managers and pay them big fees.

Elsewhere, here is a story about subscription line financing:

Private equity firms, generally, make a lot of use of leverage: Instead of using their limited partners' capital to pay for a whole company, they borrow money to increase the return on the equity capital. Subscription line financing is sort of the same thing, but it applies the leverage over time: Instead of using the LP's capital to pay for the whole equity portion of the deal, the firms use a bank loan to pay for it for the first few months (or "as many as two years"), and then call capital, making the annualized return on that capital higher. Should I be bothered by this? Meh. It does not strike me as obviously worse than other forms of leverage. But as I said when we talked about subscription line financing last October:

It feels like only a month ago that Uber Technologies Inc. was in the news for its "culture of sexism and sexual harassment," its chief executive officer's self-confessed need to "fundamentally change as a leader and grow up," its string of executive departures, its alleged theft of self-driving car technology from Alphabet Inc., the program it built to help drivers evade law enforcement, and probably a bunch of other terrible stuff that I'm forgetting. Not a great month for Uber, public-relations-wise. But in modern capitalism, all those sins are forgiven if you are making money. Uber isn't, but it is losing a lot of money, which is basically just as good:

"This is a cash-burning machine," says Aswath Damodaran, the New York University finance professor and valuation expert, and I feel like that's going to be the cover blurb on Uber's initial public offering prospectus.

What do law firms do?

Here is a blog post (and related article) by Elisabeth de Fontenay about what big corporate law firms do, which is basically remember the last deal and recreate it in the next deal. This is a valuable contribution because the last deal was probably fine, and if you just started the next deal over from scratch you'd probably forget something important:

You remember the Second Law of Insider Trading, right? The Securities and Exchange Commission sure does:

I like to mention cases like that here, because:

Last Thursday I expressed some sympathy for Arturo Di Modica, the sculptor of downtown Manhattan's "Charging Bull" statue, who is going around complaining that State Street Corp.'s "Fearless Girl" statue distorts the message of his art. "The problem," I said, "is not what 'Fearless Girl' means; it's that she has changed what the 'Charging Bull' means." My Bloomberg Gadfly colleague Tara Lachapelle disagreed over email, arguing that "Fearless Girl" didn't change what "Charging Bull" means, "she just made more people think about what the bull means": a representation of a Wall Street "culture that is not welcoming and has an air of superiority and machismo." This is ... not wrong? The main use of the bull these days really may be for people to take pictures of each other giving thumbs up to his testicles. I sympathize with Di Modica's disappointment that "Fearless Girl" interprets his bull differently than he does, but of course his interpretation is not binding: Art means what it means, not what its creator wants it to mean. "The progress of an artist," says Eliot, "is a continual self-sacrifice, a continual extinction of personality."

A Willy Staley profile of Mike Judge is doubly self-recommending, but there's also a Silicon Valley/"Silicon Valley" hook, and for that matter a Wall Street one:

Elsewhere in tech companies! Here's Tanium Inc.:

Here's a story about how index-tracking exchange-traded funds don't work as well for emerging-market debt as they do for equities, partly because of liquidity:

Would you like to read an employment lawyer describing hugs? I think you might:

Elsewhere: You should work six hours a day.

Wells Fargo Board Faces High-Stakes Vote. Fed Puts Together Plan to Unwind Securities Portfolio. U.S. Treasury Has Switzerland in Its Sights. IMF warnings of US protectionism ‘rubbish’, says Ross. Emmanuel Roman fixes his sights on Pimco’s rivals. Fired KPMG Audit Head: How Did Scott Marcello Fall From Grace? Down-on-Its-Luck Caesars Pays Online Chief Garber $210 Million. Airbus sued by dismissed middlemen following fraud inquiry. WhatsApp’s Jan Koum sold or gifted more than $5 billion worth of Facebook stock last year. A new bargaining perspective on sovereign debt restructuring. The Case for Hedge Fund Marxism. "We haven’t actually seen anybody who’s laying down their glass of wine to pick up a bong." Cumins of New York. Arizona police chief swears-in drug-sniffing bearded dragon.

If you'd like to get Money Stuff in handy email form, right in your inbox, please subscribe at this link. Thanks!

This column does not necessarily reflect the opinion of the editorial board or Bloomberg LP and its owners.

To contact the author of this story:

 Matt Levine at mlevine51@bloomberg.net

To contact the editor responsible for this story:

 James Greiff at jgreiff@bloomberg.net|||

Also: private equity fees, Uber, law firms, Charging Bull and unicorns.