We’re thrilled to introduce Helvetica, Sudden Coffee’s very first blend!

Our last coffee, Biftu Gudina, was about taking you on an adventure. Helvetica is about finding comfort. We wanted to serve you something that feels familiar, makes you feel at home. It’s perfect for easing into the morning, or fortifying midday. Just like our favorite font — it kind of goes with everything.

In building Helvetica, we developed a totally new approach to blends — it’s never been done like this before, and we’re excited to share our process! We’re also excited to talk about blends in a brand new way — sharing openly where the coffees are from, and who grew them!

We’re serving Helvetica for a limited time (about a month), until we run out. To try it, you can head here and join the club. Already a member? You’ll receive Helvetica in your next mailing!

Until now, we’ve served single origin coffees. Single origins are comprised of coffee from only one farmer, or one group of farmers in the same area. Our last single origin was from Ethiopia, a country known for acidic and fruity coffees. We chose it to showcase how unique & special coffee can taste!

Our members loved the unexpected quality of these coffees, and asked that we keep sharing unique flavors in our next offering. Additionally, they wanted to try darker coffees with lower acidity. After tasting tons of options, we couldn’t find a singular coffee that fit both bills. So we decided to build our very first blend — using one coffee from Honduras and another from Colombia.

We think it’s awesome to talk about where our coffees come from, and who produced them. Normally, companies only share this info about single origins — and never about blends. We hope to set a trend by treating blends like single origins — that is, sharing everything we know about where the coffees are from!

Our Honduran component was grown on two farms in the Santa Barbara region of Honduras. The first farm, Piedras Amarillas, owned by Elio Diaz, has produced specialty grade coffee for four years now. This particular harvest is incredibly clean and sweet. The other farm, La Colmena, is owned by Angel Arturo Paz, an agronomist and exporter. La Colmena translates to “The Beehive”, and pays homage to Angel’s mission:

Helvetica’s Colombian component was produced by a handful of smallholder farmers in the Yacuanquer Region — nestled in the shadow of Galeras Volcano. Our roaster, 49th Parallel, worked with their exporter to sort the beans by size, using screens of varying coarseness. The largest beans in a lot are the best-tasting, having benefitted from extra nutrients and development on the branch. Yacuanquer’s largest beans, retained on the 18/64 inch screen, were separated into the lot we used for Helvetica.

Helvetica has been a wild ride, because no one’s ever made a blend like this. The most revolutionary aspect: we blend the coffees after brewing and drying. So why is this such a big deal?

Typically, when you brew a blend, you’re really brewing two coffees at once (often more!). So you can’t pull the best from either coffee. It’s like trying to cook potatoes and sear a steak in the same pan. Every coffee needs to be brewed a little differently — so blends are often a middle-of-the-road compromise.

Helvetica is radically different. We brewed and dried two coffees, separately — each coffee prepared to individual specifications. Then we blended them together afterward. This allowed us incredible control. Imagine those proverbial potatoes crispy and tender, while the steak is precisely seared, medium rare. They have to be prepared separately, so you can enjoy them together — perfectly.

It was exhilarating to do something that has never been done before. We’re beyond thrilled to explore this new world!

Our members made this possible. You guys took the time to chat with us, give feedback on trials, share notes, and cheer us on. We designed the flavor profile of Helvetica based on your wants & desires. Helvetica is a collaborative effort above all, from the base of a Colombian volcano to a schoolteacher’s kitchen in Maine.

We’d love for you to try it and we can’t wait to hear what you think! To try it out — join the club! We truly appreciate your support.|||

Our last coffee, Biftu Gudina, was about taking you on an adventure. Helvetica is about finding comfort. We wanted to serve you something that feels familiar, makes you feel at home. It’s perfect for…