In my last post I told you that my startup has just shut down. If you don’t know it, its name was Immotionar: our purpose was to offer full body virtual reality to every kind of headsets, mixing VR HMD with body tracking sensors like Microsoft Kinects. An innovative product, that has failed nonetheless.

With today’s post I want to highlight some errors we made, so that you can avoid them in your startup journey (if you plan in becoming an entrepreneur).

So, this is a list of the main keypoints I want to higlight.

Investors say that the team is the most important thing that they evaluate when deciding if investing in a company. Team is the core feature. You don’t get it until the moment you get in trouble.

I’m not saying that we had no one of these points… but surely we lacked some. Looking behind, I realize that maybe we should have looked for additional founders since the beginning.

Find someone that can guide you: a mentor, a tutor, and investor, whoever. Someone that can guide you during all the startup process, from idea to the exit. This is fundamental.

When we started our journey, we were really unexperienced and so we needed someone to guide us in creating a successful startup from our idea. We thought we found that in the support of our local incubator, but it proved to not be that useful. They did not get the potential of our idea and they had to follow so many companies that in the end we got support only once in a while. We decided most of the strategies by ourselves, listening to some advices from our tutors and reading startup posts on Medium or such, but we made a complete mess most of the time. It has not been our fault: we were unexperienced and we really made the best we could, but the best we could was not enough.

In the end, at EIA, we found Andrea Basso, that proved to be a valuable mentor. But it was too late for us to recover.

But… how can you recognize a valid sherpa? Well, he/she:

Trust me: without a sherpa, you’re just doomed. Being an entrepreneur is like entering a war… and without a sherpa you’re just a lonely soldier without a general and only a toothpick as a weapon.

We made lots of errors in our first times because no one told us that we were doing things completely in the wrong way. A sherpa in the beginning would have surely saved our startup… I’m sure about this.

You can find these kind of people in startup incubators, accelerators or events. But be careful that from experience a lot of people just want to make money FROM startups and not WITH startups. There are lots of super-expensive events that promise you big things just to get your money and nothing else. Be careful.

Build fast, fail fast. Get feedback fast. We failed them all.

We started trying to build a product, but we wanted to deliver a finished product. That’s insane. Just build an MVP and make it available to everyone, so people can give you feedback, can start giving you your first money and so on.

Why what we did was wrong? Well…

Furthermore, the project was a bit too ambitious for a little italian team: we wanted to revolutionize virtual reality and this is really hard to obtain if you’re little. In the end it has been Vive that has put the accent to full body VR thanks to its Trackers: UploadVR continues to praise them, continues to say that Vive has taken full body into VR… but we started far before them. But we were too little to trigger a VR revolution… Valve and HTC are just a little bigger…

Furthermore, we had no clear idea who to sell our idea to. We solved this technical issue, we made a fantastic software solution, without first thinking about its potential market. Again, we were two technical guys, we didn’t know anything about business stuff. We thought that “good products sell by themselves”. No.

So, if you want to make a startup:

I know, there are 10000 other websites saying exactly the same things and the reason is because this is true. We discovered it the hard way.

DON’T develop something just because you want to solve a technical issue.

DON’T develop a product without getting feedbacks from potential customers.

This should be included in the previous point: do marketing, do marketing, do marketing at every time.

You can make the best product ever, but if no one knows it, you can’t sell it. So, just spread the word the most that you can: talk about it to friends, to your social followers, to all possible blogs/magazines.

We started doing a little marketing only at the beginning of 2016, so more than year after we developed our first prototype. And started the real marketing only after we developed the product, so in the second half of 2016. That’s really bad. Starting in 2014 we would have had lots of visibility and maybe the interest of some investors, but we completely ignored this. When in the end we started performing them, our marketing efforts proved to be useful: we got a good amount of downloads for our ImmotionRoom solution. You can’t sell without marketing.

How to do a good marketing? Well, I’ve not a secret recipe… but for a technical product by Immotionar, you have to:

Someone says that marketing should be 50% of the total time of a startup (50% development, 50% marketing) and that it should start in the moment you write the first line of code of your product. I can’t agree more.

A startup needs money and has to create money. A startup is all about money.

Sometimes Gianni and me laughed about the fact that while lots of american VR companies got bazillions of dollars of investments, we should receive a prize for being able to run a startup with almost zero money. For instance, trailer video for our game Hit Motion has been made with just 30$ to rent the green-screen room:

That’s good, because that meant that we were behaving like cockroaches, but a startup can’t work this way.

First of all, a startup should be focused on making money: if you don’t make money, you can’t succeed. If your product isn’t going that well, start doing consultancies to get the money to make your company to survive. In some way, you have to gain money each month.

That’s because a startup needs money: you can’t survive sparing on everything. You have to buy hardware (especially in VR, where things evolve super-fast). You have to go to events and that are very expensive. You have to buy advertisement. You have to buy consultancies. Even if you don’t have to pay salaries, you need to spend money for your startup. In the last times we were on a 0-money-spree and I can assure you that you can’t have a startup if you have no money to spend. For example, an investor asked me if we would have met at Slush (a startup event in Finland) and I answered no, just because we had not the money to be at that event.

So, if you have no money in your pockets, you can’t run a startup.

About investors, we started looking for them too late (only when we had a product), believing that we would easily find one (we couldn’t be more wrong than that). Start looking for investors whenever you have a MVP: create a pitch deck and go hunting investors. We believed that finding investors was really easy, but again:

We are all flooded by posts praising Google free thinking time and reminding us that a lot of great applications has born as side projects. Well, you’re not Google. We spent lots of time in side projects, but no one made success. If your main project has still not established itself, making side projects is just a mess. Please don’t do it. Start doing side projects only when your main project is in a mature stage… otherwise, you’re just wasting your time.

Before starting anything, you’ve to answer yourself: how this can help in selling my product? If the answer is “it doesn’t help”, well, then it’s just a waste of time. And in my first 2 startup years, I’ve spent lots of time doing useless things, like game prototypes, useless features for our ImmotionRoom system, useless calls and meetings.

Your priority is selling and making money. Everything that is not in this sense is useless. I know, there are lots of things that you want to do, but you’ve not the time, money and energy to pursue them all. So, keep on focusing only on your main product and the features that makes it appealing for buyers. Whatever else you’re making, you’re wasting your time.

If you want to succeed in life, you have to set priorities.

Being in Italy sucks.Taxes are super-high, the startup ecosystem is unripe, investments are little and hard to get, technology is a lot behind the U.S. . When we started our VR adventure, when we met other people from other IT companies and talked to them about VR, they didn’t even know what virtual reality was (and we were talking with IT companies!!).

When I started being on reddit, I was contacted by Joe of UploadVR that told me that our project was interesting. He asked for a demo in San Francisco and when I told him that this would be hard because we were in Italy, he stopped answering me. So sad.

Location matters: I love my country, but creating a startup in the United States is far far easier.

I wrote this as the last reason because I think that everyone has to take its responsibilities… blaming bad luck is always too easy. But every successful person has had luck helping him/her. In some sliding-doors moments, we just got bad luck.

For example, we based our technology on Kinects: Microsoft had just released Kinect v2, that was super-powerful and able to track the body of the user with good accuracy, without the user wearing nothing. Super-great. But after some months of great expectations on this technology, Microsoft surprisingly stopped updating Kinect. Kinect slowly died. People continued making us notice that our tracking was not precise and we didn’t know how to fix this issue (since Kinect tracking technology is closed-source). In the end, people just told us “you use a dead technology” and the word “Kinect” made people to run away. Unluckily there’s still not a valid substitute to Kinect, so we had no way in solving the issue. We were f*cked up.

In 2016, a guy that organized events told us that he was super-interested in making a tour of skiing-and-technology in northern Italy. He wanted to install ImmotionRoom in all major skiing facilities as a marketing installation. That year there was no snow, so few people went skiing, so this project blew away.

Some months ago, when Tal Blevins arrived as director of UploadVR, I managed to get in touch with him. He was interested in talking about us, but then the senior editor Ian Hamilton kindly told me that at the moment he “couldn’t see a story” worth to be featured on their website. Reason is: few days before, a solution using Vive trackers for offering full body VR had been released, so they had no interest in talking about a more-expensive and less-precise solution… furthermore using a dead technology like Kinect. Bad timing, bad luck.

And that’s all… there are other dozens reasons why we failed, but these are the main ones. We made enormous errors that led our company to a certain death. It hurted me talking about those ones, but I hope that they will help even a single startupper in not making them again. Please, if you want to create a startup, read all the post-mortem of the cemetery of startups and learn from their errors.

Hope you liked this post and that it has been helpful to you.|||

In my last post I told you that my startup has just shut down. If you don't know it, its name was Immotionar: our purpose was to offer full body virtual reality to every kind of headsets, mixing VR HMD with body tracking sensors like Microsoft Kinects. An innovative product, that has failed nonetheless. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YfUr8iXaunA…