Having done with setting up items in Seller Center,  you have an insight as to what the prices and content looks. Further, you can also publish selected items in order to perform ‘Order Testing’ on Walmart.com, a mandatory step, before all of the items, is made officially live (or get published).

To do this, you have to:

Once the above steps are completed, the items are visible in the grid. Thereafter, to verify the content and pricing of items, you can click Preview Item for any item in the ‘Stage status’.

The following shows what exactly comes at Walmart.com on item’s Page.

If anything needs to be changed you can resubmit the item with the updated content and/or pricing information.

This Preview Page will show the price of the listing, even if it is not the “Buy Box Winner”, while on the other hand the ‘live Item Page’, shows the price of “Buy Box Winner”.

 This happens as the items are not live yet, and Walmart customers can’t see this listing.

You can also view the prices of its competitors’ listings on the Preview Page and make pricing updates from Seller Center before going ‘live’ to ensure that you land up with the most competitive pricing for your potential customers.

So, as the item is not live, you won’t be able to click the ‘Add to Cart’ button on Walmart.com.

 Further, if the same item is being offered by multiple Sellers, the content on the Item Page may not match the information provided and may vary as per record.

Once the details are verified, related to the content and pricing of your items, you become eligible for Order Testing.

To perform ‘Order Testing’, there is a necessity to identify at least 1 item (however, Walmart recommends testing 2-3 items) the item that can be used to test ‘order fulfilment flow’. Once the particular item(s) has been opted, following steps need to be carried out:

‘Pricing’ or ‘Inventory’ can be done using one of the following methods:

Price Update:  Updating Your Pricing Through the API

 Inventory Update: Updating Your Inventory Through the API

Price Update:  Updating Your Pricing in Seller Center

 Inventory Update: Updating Your Inventory in Seller Center

 ** Note: If one chooses to integrate through a Channel Aggregator rather than integrating directly with Walmart, follow their guide/instructions on how to update price and inventory.**

Publish at least 1 (while 2 or 3 recommended by Walmart) item’s by clicking the Publish item link on the right side of the grid under the Actions column.

Once it gets published, the item becomes available to Walmart customers for purchase.

 In order to process, it may take a few minutes for the item to appear on Walmart.com.

** Note: In a rare case scenario, another Seller may update an item at the same time while one attempts to publish it. (If this happens, the item will revert back to Staged status. Thus, in order to Publish the item again to continue or re-try.**

Once the item is published, click the ‘Purchase item’ link on the right side of the grid. This will redirect you to the ‘live Item Page’ where you can purchase your item on Walmart.com. Now in order to purchase

Once the item is published, click the ‘Purchase item’ link on the right side of the grid. This will redirect you to the ‘live Item Page’ where you can purchase your item on Walmart.com. Now in order to purchase item, you need to create a customer account on Walmart.com to get that item in your cart.

 Note: Do not place more than 3 orders with one account within an hour. If it is found, the fraud system will assume these as ‘fraud orders’ and will cancel them.

** Note: Items can only get published if they are in ‘Staged Status’. If an item is still under processing, it has to go to ‘Stage’ and further can be published or made live. So it advisable to wait until the item reaches to ‘Stage Status’.

 Further in some case, it may also state ‘Error’, in that case, try re-uploading the product

Test the following order scenarios: needs to be carried out

On, successfully testing the three scenarios listed above, one can reset the prices and inventory levels for the test items.

Testing: Order Shipment

 ** Note: A valid tracking number needs to be provided although its fake shipment.

** Note: It is advised that ‘Email notification’ must remain enabled as Walmart handles customer communication on your behalf. One can read the order cancellation and refund emails by checking the mailbox associated with the customer account used to place these test orders. **

Please note that the status of an order that is ‘refunded’ will continue to show as ‘Shipped’ and will not update to ‘Refunded’. However, once the refund is successful, the amount will be adjusted.

Thanks for Your Interest|||

Some steps are mandatory to perform before the final showdown at Walmart whether you are manual or use walmart marketplace api. Read to find out the steps.