As highlighted in a few of our previous blogs, push notifications have been a disrupter for the mobile environment of late. These are extremely helpful not only to engage your users in real-time but also with a high degree of personalization. A powerful push notification campaign helps increase direct traffic and repeat visits.

With their intrinsic ability to reach out to those users that aren’t actively engaged with your brand, they are capable of conveying urgent updates and reminders and also of incentivizing your users to keep them coming back to do business with your brand.

However, the flip side is that they also have the notorious reputation of driving users to the edge, if they’re too frequent, intrusive or irrelevant. This in turn, can be bad news for your brand. This article explains a few ‘don’ts’ in the push notifications industry:

Do not send too many notifications

25% of users say they opt out if messages are too recurrent. While sending out frequent messages may look rewarding in the short-term since you will notice an overall increase in the numbers; in the long-term, sending push notifications too frequently will prompt an increasing number of subscribers to opt out.While you may limit the number of messages per campaign but if the number of campaigns going out to the customer are more, it could just as well be that much more annoying. One of the best solutions in this scenario would be to set up a frequency cap that will restrict the number of notifications a user receives during a particular time period.

Also, remember not to stuff too much inside a single notification. Ideally, the best performing push messages are under 25 characters.

Do not time your notifications incorrectly

Would you like to receive notifications for “today’s lunch offer” at 5pm? It is important to consider user time zones and schedule a timely push, rather than a random push across different time zones. This kind of messaging can dilute your marketing efforts.

Ill-timed push notifications is not a good experience for your subscribers, leading to fewer clicks and higher opt-out rates.

Do not be random, be extremely personalized

Personally, I would be amused (if not annoyed) if I received a notification about a discount on pet food and accessories, but only because I have no pets. Every individual is unique and they needs to be reached out to, relevantly.

1:1 personalization is the key to superlative customer experience and subsequently, a higher conversion rate.

Given the character constraints a push notification has, it is never a good idea to educate your users about product features within the notification. The purpose of these notifications are entirely to encourage users to open and engage, period. Instead, you can deep link to an area of your app where more is explained.

Do you have an upcoming sale? Does your event’s rock concert have only a few tickets left? It is almost always a sensible idea to build up the excitement with push notifications. Let them know what’s headed their way but give out just as much information that will nudge them to use your app to know more.

Tapping into positive emotions like excitement and curiosity of users can help you engage them better and even get higher in-app conversions from your campaigns. Like I would be really excited if I knew products I put in my wish list went up on sale!

Remember that intelligent push-notifications are extreme value additions to a brand and are also regarded by many as the future of marketing. And what is more, once coupled with machine learning, they will open up a whole new world of possibilities for customer engagement and collaboration. To know more, contact us today!|||

As highlighted in a few of our previous blogs, push notifications have been a disrupter for the mobile environment of late. These are extremely helpful not only to engage your users in real-time but…