A lot of DFINITY posts are quite technical but basic nature of the network is easy to understand. By popular demand this “DFINITY in a nutshell” post provides a quick historical context and less technical big picture overview of its purpose.

As with many things in blockchain, the origins of the DFINITY project can be traced back to Bitcoin and its history. Bitcoin itself emerged from the cypherpunks’ long pursuit of decentralized currency projects, which I happened upon accidentally in 1998 when I found Wei Dai’s b-money proposal while using his Crypto++ library for an unrelated project.

Practically speaking, the 2008 Bitcoin protocol introduced a means for independently operated computers to communicate peer-to-peer over the Internet in a remarkable manner that conjures up an indestructible shared virtual ledger. This involves balances of coins at different addresses that anyone can send to new addresses by unlocking their access control scripts, and economic features that enable independent participants to earn rewards by supporting network function and security.

More fundamentally, you can view this incredible innovation as introducing a new class of “stateful” decentralized network protocol that allows independent participants to agree upon and update a shared “state” — here the virtual ledger — at Internet scale without anyone being in charge.

The creation of Bitcoin by Satoshi Nakamoto lit a fuse, but some began to chaff against the limitations of its virtual ledger and in 2014 Ethereum introduced a second generation network design. Rather than a shared ledger this network conjured up a shared virtual “blockchain computer” that was indestructible and tamperproof. On this virtual computer you can install and run special interoperable software units that we call “smart contracts” because anyone interacting with them can be sure exactly how they will process and store data.

But the job was not yet done for everyone. The Ethereum blockchain computer had limited performance and capacity like Bitcoin before it. This made the blockchain computer unsuitable for many potential applications in business. Like Bitcoin, Ethereum also embraced “The Code is Law” paradigm — which means there is no governance of platform use nor a formal governance process controlling the underlying network itself — while many businesses seek highly governed environments. There are many reasons for “The Code is Law” paradigm, and one is that if you integrate governance intermediaries into virtual blockchain computers in cyberspace you reduce security and tie in regulations from the local jurisdiction where the intermediary resides.

Imagine now a Third Generation network. One where original new cryptography and protocols as potentially significant as those that launched the industry directly address speed and capacity limitations for business, providing means to boost computation and storage infinitely. Further, imagine the “The Code is Law” is replaced by a new “The AI is Law” paradigm where everything is subject to an intermediary-free algorithmic governance system (read more in posts 1, 2…) that combines crowd wisdom and traditional AI technologies to freeze miscreant smart contracts that harm the interests of those using the platform, mitigate hacks, optimize the network’s economic parameters and transparently upgrade the network’s underlying protocols and software without disrupting users. You are now imagining the DFINITY network (aka “the intelligent decentralized cloud”).

The vision for DFINITY in the field has two poles. On one many traditional monopolistic technology intermediaries such Uber, eBay, social networks, messaging and even Web search might be reengineered as “open source businesses” using autonomous software that use their own decentralized governance systems to update themselves. On the other, we want to see mass reengineering of enterprise IT systems to take advantage of the special properties blockchain computers provide and to dramatically cut costs. This last point is non-obvious because computation on blockchain computers is far more expensive than on traditional clouds such as Amazon Web Services. But dramatic savings are possible because the vast majority of costs involved in running enterprise IT systems derive from supporting human capital, not computation per se, and the DFINITY cloud will make it possible to create systems that involve far less human capital.

DFINITY aims to explore new territory and prove that the blockchain opportunity is far broader and deeper than anyone has hitherto realized, unlocking it with powerful original new crypto.

Although a standalone project, DFINITY is conceived as a sister network for Ethereum that extends its ecosystem with The AI is Law (and for this reason it has been nicknamed “Ethereum’s crazy sister”). This means that DFINITY aims to maintain compatibility with Ethereum so that smart contract and Dapp developers do not need to learn new skills. Furthermore, DFINITY contributes towards shared next generation software components and hopes the unique new crypto and protocols it develops might also prove useful within Ethereum.

DFINITY Stiftung is a not-for-profit foundation in Zug, Switzerland that supports the DFINITY project. It currently holds around $10M in assets (at the time of writing in April 2017) and will run a “Main” fundraising round to collect around 20M CHF in additional donations shortly after the beta test network launches later this year. The project benefits from a discrete team of Computer Science professors, PhDs, self taught crypto experts, technical innovators and professional senior management.

The project is keen to talk to talented developers and potential partners. You can make contact at hello@dfinity.org.|||

A lot of DFINITY posts are quite technical but basic nature of the network is easy to understand. By popular demand this “DFINITY in a nutshell” post provides a quick historical context and less…