Making the best choices for your high-growth business is a lot easier with the expertise of a startup lawyer. Even though founders know it’s important, when it comes to finding lawyers who specialize in startups and deciding which one to hire, many founders are at a loss.

Because a good lawyer can help a startup find its direction, navigate the market, and make game-time decisions, in addition to preparing documents and keeping records, picking the right one to work with can be make-or-break for your business.

Most founders know they need to find a lawyer, but actually finding one can be very daunting. Like any other precious resource, startup law expertise tends to be concentrated in certain places, but you’ll need to know where to look.

Like hiring, connecting with investors, or finding a decent barber, the first and best option for finding a startup lawyer is a network referral. Asking other founders, investors, advisors, and startup aficionados who they’ve worked with in the past can give you an important signal about reputation, as well as a few introductions. Often, other startup-ecosystem service providers, like consultants and accountants, will be able to point you in the right direction as well.

The second place to turn is online search and social media. Attorneys who focus on startups are more likely than average to build an online presence, for example by sharing their expertise on Q&A sites like Quora and law-specific forums. Founders can sometimes find reviews of startup lawyers through search as well. Looking for other similar classifications of services, such as “emerging growth” and “emerging businesses,” in addition to “startups” can help you cast a wider net.

Next, seek out the local startup law community in person by going to events and meetups. Law firms frequently host startup-centric events, often advertised on platforms like Eventbrite and Meetup. These are usually free or inexpensive (under $10) events that let you get a feel for the lawyers that work in that practice group, and the discussions and presentations can also be helpful in understanding which areas of law your startup will want to be aware of. Even startup events that aren’t law-specific will usually attract some startup law talent, since startup lawyers are just as much a part of the ecosystem as founders.

Another good signal that an attorney or law firm caters specifically to startups is that they sponsor a local angel group or other startup-oriented civic organization, like the New York Tech Alliance. Usually, this means the law firm represents startups, and sometimes the relationship to the angel group can work out in a startup’s favor (although you should be on the lookout for conflicts of interest). You can easily find angel investor groups in your area through Gust.

Before engaging an attorney for your startup, asking the following will help you and your lawyer set appropriate expectations and avoid future misunderstandings.

In addition, you’ll want to ask yourself a question to make sure you’re ready to engage an attorney:

Above all, your attorney should be a value-adding resource for your growing company. This list of questions is certainly not exhaustive, and you may have other special circumstances that lead you to additional questions. However, having answers to these questions before you engage your attorney will make you more comfortable with the relationship and help prevent some unwanted surprises later.|||

Making the best choices for your high-growth business is a lot easier with the expertise of a startup lawyer. Even though founders know it’s important, when ...