Windows 10 has quickly become one of the most popular operating systems for people looking to work effectively on the move around the world. Microsoft’s latest software offers the ability to work across multiple devices via its cloud working feature, meaning you can start working on your home device, then continue on a mobile when travelling, and then finally your work laptop. The company is expected to reveal a new generation of its Surface Pro device soon, with the previous Surface Pro 4 launched back in October 2015, meaning it is ripe for an upgrade. Now, a new challenger has appeared for anyone looking for a Windows 10 device with maximum portability - but it might not be from who you think.

A new release from Chinese company Chuwi provides an alternative to the pricey premium Windows 10 devices, such as the Microsoft Surface Pro 4. The cheekily-named SurBook looks to offer a cut-price alternative to Microsoft’s device, sporting a similar all-metal build with a fold-out rear kickstand. There’s also a detachable magnetic keyboard which doubles as a screen cover, and an impressive 3:2 12.3-inch display with the same 2,736 x 1,834 resolution as the Surface Pro 4.  The SurBook also packs front and rear cameras, charging via USB-C and a stylus similar to the Microsoft Surface Pen.

However inside, the device is a bit lacking compared to Microsoft’s top-end Surface Pro. The Chuwi SurBook runs an Intel Apollo Lake N3450 chip, much less powerful than the Intel Core hardware powering Microsoft’s devices, meaning it won’t be able to put up with as much hard work when on the go. To put that in perspective, Microsoft’s next device is set to to come powered by Intel’s flagship 7th generation Kaby Lake chip, meaning more power and longer battery life than ever. The challenger also comes with 6GB of RAM, but only 128GB of storage, equivalent to only the basic version of the Surface Pro 4.

There’s no news yet on pricing or availability, with Chuwi looking to fund the Surbook’s development and launch via a crowdfunding campaign on Indiegogo. However as the Surface Pro 4 is currently on sale from £749 for its most basic version, rising to £2,359 for the most premium option, Chuwi says it is aiming for an “affordable” release. Anyone interested in the device can register their interest on the Chuwi Indiegogo page now, where two lucky fans will be rewarded with a free device upon launch.|||

LOOKING for a new Windows 10 PC? The answer could be here - but not from Microsoft.