Now accepting contributors. If you are interested, please join the Slack group.

The project is currently under development, with continuous changes and some bits and bobs not working. Feel free to test it if you like but don't expect it to be production-ready until mid 2017.

Demo: https://hypatia-8d923.firebaseapp.com (You need to sign up with a valid email address to access some pages)

Warning! This documentation is not super stable. Post an issue if you find any trouble or something is not clear

Install Firebase tools (if you haven't done it yet)

By contributing your code to Hypatia you grant to Joan Siddharta Mira Martos (Theon.io) a non-exclusive, irrevocable, worldwide, royalty-free, sublicenseable, transferable license under all of Your relevant intellectual property rights (including copyright, patent, and any other rights), to use, copy, prepare derivative works of, distribute and publicly perform and display the Contributions on any licensing terms, including without limitation: (a) open source licenses like the MIT license; and (b) binary, proprietary, or commercial licenses. Except for the licenses granted herein, You reserve all right, title, and interest in and to the Contribution.

You confirm that you are able to grant us these rights. You represent that You are legally entitled to grant the above license. If Your employer has rights to intellectual property that You create, You represent that You have received permission to make the Contributions on behalf of that employer, or that Your employer has waived such rights for the Contributions.

You represent that the Contributions are Your original works of authorship, and to Your knowledge, no other person claims, or has the right to claim, any right in any invention or patent related to the Contributions. You also represent that You are not legally obligated, whether by entering into an agreement or otherwise, in any way that conflicts with the terms of this license.

Joan Siddharta Mira Martos (Theon.io) acknowledges that, except as explicitly described in this Agreement, any Contribution which you provide is on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF TITLE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY, OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Icons from Flaticon.com (Freepik and Madebyoliver), triangles background by rvika from Fotolia and photos from Google Creative Commons search results

Copyright (c) 2016-2017 Joan Siddharta Mira Martos (Theon.io) - Released under the GPLv2 license.|||

hypatia - Open Realtime Education. An open source LMS and MOOCs platform based on Facebook's React, Google's Firebase and Slack