Plugins for React and Vue.js, TestCafe Docker image, support for Internet access proxies and lots of bug fixes.

We have changed the way the withText method behaves when it is called in a chain.

In previous versions, this selector searched for a with text because the second call to overrode the first one.

Now this code returns an element whose text contains both and as the second call compounds with the first one.

In this release cycle, we have created a plugin for testing React applications. This plugin allows you to select React components by their names.

And it enables you to get React component's and .

To learn more, see the testcafe-react-selectors repository.

In addition to the React plugin, we have released a plugin that facilitates testing Vue.js applications.

In the same manner, it allows you to select Vue.js components with selectors.

These selectors allow you to get Vue component's , and properties.

To learn more, see the testcafe-vue-selectors repository.

We have created a Docker image with TestCafe, Chromium and Firefox preinstalled.

You no longer need to manually install browsers or the testing framework on your server. Pull the Docker image from the repository and run TestCafe immediately.

To learn more, see Using TestCafe Docker Image

If your local network uses a proxy server to access the Internet, TestCafe can use it reach the external webpages.

To specify the proxy server, use a command line option

or a method in the API.

Note that you can pass the credentials with the proxy server host.

As an alternative to calling the t.debug method in test code, you can now specify the command line option to pause the test before the first action or assertion. When the test is paused, you can debug in the browser developer tools as well as continue test execution step by step.

If you use TestCafe API, provide the option to the method.

You can now use the method to select elements that have a particular attribute set to a specific value. You can omit the attribute value to select elements that simply have the specified attribute.

For you convenience, the DOM node state object now provides the method that allows you to determine if an element has a particular attribute.

User roles now provide a option that allows you to save the webpage URL to which the browser was redirected after logging in. If you enable this option when creating a role, the browser will be redirected to the saved URL every time you switch to this role.|||

TestCafe v0.15.0 ReleasedPlugins for React and Vue.js, TestCafe Docker image, support for Internet access proxies and lots of bug fixes.