There are many studies and researches go into the persuasive communication method to proof whether or not it’s effective to persuade people. The persuasive method is a widely used method to persuade people. In which, by using this method in a communication, people would follow the communicator’s wish unconsciously. Conversely, the target person of a persuasive communication is commonly sure that the impetus for the change towards his or her attitudes, opinions, or behavior has long been within him or her. There are marketing experts use the persuasive method to change the behavior of the target customers. They have been proven that the persuasive method is the most powerful way to drive change and sustain the change in a long term.

Human and communication are one unity. The communication is inherent in human being so that we cannot live without communicating. The existence of the communication is so inherently in a human being, so, most individuals are often not realizing it. As a human being, most of us tend to assume that we have the ability how to communicate. Consequently, such believe would often raise problems in the communication, and most of us often resolve the problems ourselves.

In the study of persuasive communication, understanding the philosophical aspects of persuasive communication is really necessary. Because of the persuasive communication, as well as other sciences, has three philosophical aspects of science, they are ontology aspect, epistemology aspect, and axiology aspect.

By understanding those three science philosophy aspects, we can distinguish a variety of knowledge in the realm of human life. Therefore, we will identify the characteristics of Persuasive Communication Study and can utilize the knowledge in the practices maximally for the welfare of mankind.

Ontology aspect is regarding the question about what is being studied in a science. Epistemology aspect is related to the question about the ways to acquire the knowledge. Axiology aspect regards to the question about the use of the knowledge.

In doing persuasive communication, we must understand the persuasion responsibility criteria, as suggested by Larson; “the existence of an equal opportunity to influence each other, telling the audience about the purpose of persuasion, and considering the presence of the audience”.

Communication exists in all activities of our lives. The form of the communication can be a textual message, subliminal message, oral, image, gesture, printed, visual symbols, audio-visual, palpation, noise, chemicals, intrapersonal, interpersonal, group, organization, dialogue, etc.

The term of Communication comes from the Latin “communicare“, which means to participate, inform, or co-own.

In the definition of communication that put forward by some experts, although each the disclosures are varying, but there are similarities in the study of the communication phenomenon. The similarities in the content are emerging herein such as the communicator, communicant, messages, media or channel, feedback, effects, impact and their objectives, and the establishment of mutual understanding.

To understand communication, you can view from two perspectives. They are general perspective and paradigmatic perspective. The general perspective can be viewed from two aspects, namely etymologically understanding, and terminological understanding.

The term of Persuasion comes from the Latin, “persuasio“, which means to persuade, entice or seduce.

You can practice a persuasive communication rationally and emotionally. By way of a rational, a cognitive component in a person can be influenced. The influenced aspects can be in the form of an idea or concept. An emotional persuasion can be touching an affection aspect, such as a matter that relates to the emotional life of an individual. Through an emotional way, the sympathy and empathy aspects on an individual can be exciting.

From the definitions of communication that put forward by some experts, persuasion refers to a communication process that aims to influence the attitude, opinion, and behavior of people, both verbally and nonverbally.

The components of persuasion include the form of the communication process that can lead to a change, made either consciously or unconsciously, and either in a verbal and nonverbal way.

The factors of persuasive communication include the clarity of the objective, careful thinking about the people encountered, as well as choosing the right communication strategy.

The scopes of persuasive communication science studies include source, message, channel/media, recipient, effects, feedback, and situational context.

The approach used in persuasive communication is a psychological approach. The three main function of persuasive communication is the control function, consumer protection, and knowledge.

The following are the nine tricks of persuasive communication you can apply to be able to persuade and influence people:

Reflecting the gesture means mimicking the movements of the target person such as hands movement, bending the body forward or back, or other head and arm movements. Sometimes we do it unconsciously, but if you know it, learn more how to reflect the movement of the target person. However, keep in mind that you should do it smoothly, and make about 2-4 seconds of a time difference between the body movements of the target person and your movements.

This trick is the most used by an ad maker because the chance of having something scarce looks very attractive. This thing will be useful for people who are in need, but more importantly, you have to watch this trick. Stop and consider how often you are being influenced by the information about a scarce product. If the product is really scarce, there would be a lot of demand for the product.

Whenever a person does something good to you, you would feel have to do something for the person. So, if you want someone to do something good for you, you can give something good to the person foregoing. In the home environment, for example, you could offer to lend cooking appliances, household items, or anything else, to a neighbor who looks in need. It does not matter when or where you do it, the key is to appreciate the relationship.

Most people tend to agree with you when they feel exhausted mentally. Before you ask someone for something to do, he or she may not be agreed directly. So, try to wait until there is an opportunity where the target person really needs it urgency. Meet the person when going home from work, and tell him or her about what you want. The answer would be “I’ll do it tomorrow”.

This technique is often used by the salesperson to persuade a target customer. A salesperson will shake your hand when you’re negotiating with. In the mind of most people, shaking hands means an agreement. So, shaking hands before a negotiation reaches the meeting point, the salesperson solely gets a deal he wants. The proper way is to practice it in daily activities to make the target people act before they decide. For example, you invite a friend to hang out to watch a movie. Meanwhile, your friend does not want to. You can immediately take your friend to the movie while your friend is making a decision will be watching or not.

While we are talking, we often use phrases like “Um …” or “I mean …” and other words that cause a pause in the conversation. Such thing actually shows our lack of confidence. In which, the lack of confidence makes us less persuasive. If you believe in what you say, you can persuade people easily.

Every one of us is born to be a follower. We often pay attention to what others have done before we take action because we need an acceptance from others. In a simple, effective way to use this habit is to be a leader, and make other people follow you. For example, you are attending a seminar, and decide to sit in the middle of the room. When the seminar begins, the MC asks the audience to sit on the empty benches in the front. Then, try to be the first to lead others to occupy the benches in the front.

Show other people the benefit for them if they take action of what you suggest them. But take care of what you say. You must say in a way of optimistic, encouraging, and pleasing. A pessimism and criticism will not help you to persuade people. Try to remember how Obama won the election. The key words are “Yes, we can!” Saying bad things towards other people, as what has ever been done by John McCain, will not make people sympathize towards you.

We tend to follow someone who is in a higher position in a team or organization. This is a good example that we have to be aware of a persuasion attack towards you. On the other hand, such circumstance ought to be a good way for you to persuade others. You would be surprised of how easily to make people like you and gain power among your group or team.|||

The persuasive communication method is a widely used method. By using it rightly, people would follow the communicator’s wish unconsciously.