Where, oh where, will I find, 

 for a product which I have grown, 

 some trusting users, prime to ride 

 the rickety, duct-taped, risky slide 

 into a beta-phase unknown?

I search the town and the 'net, 

 users flocking to my plea 

 curious, impressed, a few who fret 

 checking out this experiment 

 as something worth using, maybe.

Within the crowd, there is a beast 

 who trudges through with strength divine, 

 breaking core systems, my code deceased; 

 despite design, this user policed 

 the value of Crowdnote from afar, online.

Amongst the debris, beyond the mess, 

 treasure abound littered the site 

 proved a theory I race to address, 

 this user partook and caused to fluoresce 

 a community engine I toil to ignite.

I need a way to thank this man, 

 emailing me instantly features undone, 

 believing as I that this product can 

 become a glistening caravan 

 to a problem solved for everyone.

So yeah, Crowdnote has a user who keeps coming back to the site and freely emails me when there's something that's obstructing his ability to use the site. He's both validating the premise that Crowdnote is built on and improving it at the same time. He is my favorite user.

I'm used to thinking that businesses work really hard to make their product into something that doesn't require direct feedback from end-users, but as a budding startup, I've only now realized how valuable these interactions are, especially when the product is incomplete. If I could have even one or two more users like this, I'd be totally psyched. I'm about to release an "open beta" of the site in the next day or two, so hopefully that will attract more users and feedback.

While I was addressing my favorite user's issues today, I experienced first-hand how useful it is to have an ugly site at this stage. It's been so much easier to move quickly to deploy code on an hourly basis. For instance, I was tasked with cleaning up the site for mobile users today, so I did the minimum possible to make the site perfectly clear; I used Bootstrap dropdowns for the top navigation menus, and I used the default styles for <h1> tags on the home page to organize category content.

The plain html tags are labeled, and the dropdown is open in the upper-right corner.

All in all, today was a good day. I'm currently up-to-speed with my favorite user's requests, so I'll be racing to open up beta tomorrow.|||

