We’re on a mission to help get everyone a job they love. Find the job you love here at Hired!

At Hired we believe we are entering a new era of work, where people are not looking for jobs — they are seeking opportunities. Focusing on in-demand technology roles, we intelligently match outstanding people to full-time and freelance opportunities at the world's most innovative companies. By taking the pain out of the job search, we help people build purpose-driven careers and businesses find the talent to fulfill their missions. Ultimately, we want to empower everyone to find and do their best work, from one opportunity to the next.

Hired is headquartered in San Francisco, with offices in cities across North America, Europe, Asia and Australia, and plans to expand into new geographies, industries and job categories. For more information, news and tips for candidates and employers, visit Hired’s blog.

The Hired product is built with Ruby on Rails, with various sets of custom and out-of-the-box tooling to support the business side of our operations. Our services are deployed to Heroku and AWS. Our development philosophy celebrates test-driven development, continuous integration and deployment, and agile processes such as sprint planning, iterative development, and retrospectives. This role will be based out of our San Francisco office.

As a Senior Software Engineer, you will work on various projects critical to Hired’s continued growth and success. Our engineers are versatile and self-motivated, can work in a self-directed manner or in a collaborative setting as needed, and display leadership qualities. We value diversity of perspectives and encourage healthy discussion and debate, but unite behind our decisions.

WHAT WE NEED YOUR HELP WITH:

WHAT WE LOOK FOR:

THESE WOULD ALSO BE NICE:

We believe that when we can bring our whole selves to work on a day-to-day basis we become happier, more comfortable, more confident and more excited to do great things for our company, each other, our product and our users. Hired aims to both build an internal team as well as help our clients build their teams with talent from all different backgrounds and lifestyles.

Hired is committed to building a diverse, equitable and inclusive workforce. Hired is an equal opportunity employer; we welcome and consider qualified applicants regardless of gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, race, religion, age, national origin, citizenship, pregnancy status, veteran status, or any other differences. Members of communities historically underrepresented in tech are encouraged to apply.

Hired is committed to creating a space that celebrates and respects diversity, equity and inclusion in its workforce. If you believe you need a reasonable accommodation in order to move forward in the interview process, please let me know or email accessibility@hired.com with the specific accommodation you’d like to request.

For San Francisco applicants: Pursuant to the San Francisco Fair Chance Ordinance, we will consider qualified applicants with arrest and conviction records for employment.|||

