Bitcoin’s creation spawned one of the most compelling technological developments of our time. Apart from establishing the first ever decentralized peer to peer payment network, bitcoin introduced blockchain technology, a mechanism to record bitcoin transactions based on decentralized consensus. For the first time, two parties who know nothing about each other could transact with complete trust that the conditions of their agreement would be met.

Blockchain technology forced innovators to examine the role of intermediaries in our current economic system. By intermediary, I’m referring to middlemen who facilitate the transfer of goods and services between two parties. If I want to send my friend money through Venmo, my bank is required to make sure that I had that money in the first place, then an ACH is required to move money from my account to my friend’s Venmo balance. This all sounds good in theory, but economic processes with intermediaries take longer to clear and are more expensive (someone needs to be paid to the actual verifying). On top of that, granting that level of power to a central entity can lead to corruption.

The utility of the blockchain quickly spread throughout tech circles and entrepreneurs were quick to launch proof of concept applications promising to fundamentally change our economic infrastructure, many have started calling it Web 3.0. Although blockchain technology, in my opinion, will reshape a lot of our society, we are a ways away from that reality. This current hype phase we’re in has distorted the elements of blockchain technology that make it so powerful. This post is intended to strip away the frills associated with sensational posts and explain how the technology actually works.

For reference, corporate hysteria looks something like this:

A blockchain is an append-only ledger of digital transactions that is distributed equally to every actor in a given network. Digital transactions refer to data structures moving throughout states in the network. Transactions are grouped together into blocks and are verified in terms of order and validity. Each block is tied together to the previous block in the network forming a chain. Breaking this chain is made impossible through clever cryptography.

A ledger in this sense is the same as a ledger that collects financial transactions, just in digital form. Ledgers are the backbone of our financial system, they keep track of transactions and update account balances. Banks and financial institutions have fully digitized their ledgers by maintaining large databases of transactions. These systems are more efficient than physical records, but a multitude of resources have to be dedicated to allow these databases to communicate with each other. Similarly, these ledgers can be changed at will, meaning transactions can be reversed or blocked.

Blockchain technology promises to solve a long-standing computer science issue called the Byzantine Generals Problem. This refers to the inability of actors in a distributed network to reach common knowledge on some factual event when there may be an incentive to behave nefariously. All previous attempts to solve this problem required the use of a centralized party, but blockchain technology enables a system to come to consensus in a decentralized manner.

The proposed solution rewards users within the network who accurately maintain the ledger by verifying the order and validity of transactions. Blockchain systems require these users to prove that a lot of work has been invested into the verification process because making it difficult will deter bad actors. This process involves users solving complex mathematical puzzles that are difficult to compute, but easy to verify, more on this below.

Now this is where the magic of blockchain technology comes in. Proposed transaction states are grouped in blocks before users start the verification process. The mathematical puzzle mentioned above requires a user wishing to submit a new order of transactions to take the data of the underlying block, and run it through a hash function. A hash function is a cryptographic mathematical function that produces a fixed output for a given input. When the string “max bronstein” is run through a hash function, it produces the same 256 bit string every time, but if we just capitalized my first name, “Max bronstein,” the output would be dramatically different. This makes it easy to spot errors. Users compute this hash function until they land on a number below a certain range. The specific hash of that block is used to calculate the following block’s hash, which effectively ties them together. Changing even the smallest piece of data would invalidate the hashes and alert the network of the mistake.

A lot of this terminology may sounds confusing at first glance, but a blockchain is merely a new type of data structure that cannot be edited, is shared equally, and self-regulates the integrity of its content. No intermediary is required to maintain the ledger, and corruption is made impossible through the chain’s cryptographic bond.

Blockchain technology has the potential to reinvent how societies distribute power and make decisions because the core tenet of decentralization undermines a lot of the conflicting interests that plague our current economic system. Blockchain technology also promises a vehicle for achieving trust between two anonymous parties. Without a trust mechanism, trade cannot flourish.

Although I slightly downplayed the current blockchain development landscape, there are some extremely captivating applications being built. If you’d like to learn more about them, check out our pieces on Blockchain Assets.|||

Bitcoin’s creation spawned one of the most compelling technological developments of our time. Apart from establishing the first ever decentralized peer to peer payment network, bitcoin introduced…