Hello and welcome again to MoneyLang’s Money Talks everyone! Every week, we provide authors with a chance to promote themselves as well as one of their books. We put quite some effort in this, and usually, the results are quite positive. Sometimes, however, we get different results, and while we usually don’t publish them, for once, we’re making an exception. Happy reading!

Today’s “featured” author is a German economic sociologist. He is a Professor of Sociology at the University of Cologne and also an Emeritus Director of the Max Planck Institute for Social Research. Besides being a professor, Wolgang is also a part time comedian and science fiction writer.

Our author, Wolfgang Streeck, wrote part 2 of his Science Fiction trilogy about How Will Capitalism End?: Essays on a Failing System, our featured book, and Re-Forming Capitalism: Institutional Change in the German Political Economy. He coauthored Buying Time: The Delayed Crisis of Democratic Capitalism, another dystopian novel to strike fear into the hearts of its readers.

No time to wait, let’s see what Wolfgang Streeck has to say!

Hobbies: Still looking for one

1. What inspired you to write your book/s?

The sorry state of theories on how contemporary capitalist societies are changing.

2. If I am an aspiring author, what advice can you give?

Think. Think again. Write. Think. Re-write. Think. Re-write. Stop thinking.

3. If there’s one chapter in your book people should read, which one should it be and why?

Introduction plus Ch.1. The rest is supportive material.

4. If you could give one piece of financial advice to our readers, what would it be?

Renovate your house so it will keep you warm for the rest of your life. Make sure you have a garden where you can grow veggies just in case.

5. As an author, which book made the most impact on you?

6. What would you like to ask the next author being interviewed?

How are you?

There we go Mr.Streeck. German humour at it’s best. We appreciate your time, but next time, we’ll be posting a real interview again. Curious what a good interview looks like? Then have a look for example at our interview with Professor Sanjit Dhami, an inspirational author and great person to talk to.

Thank you very much too to our dear readers for the continuous support! Without every one of you, we wouldn’t be here!|||

Wolfgang Streeck, wrote How Will Capitalism End?: Essays on a Failing System, our featured book and Re-Forming Capitalism: Institutional...