I started drawing by copying the photo realistic colour plates of birds of prey from “A Field Guide to the Birds of East Africa”. I definitely replicated all of the eagles in their entirety, and East Africa has a fair collection of them. Somewhere in Year 3 I remember being “busted” copying by Murray Grant, a student a year above me. He advised that my skills would be better improved by creating my own ideas, rather than copying art. Although I believe it is useful to imitate in the early stages of learning, his advice stuck with me.

Fast forward three decades and now this resonates with me. I find the online creative digital world rife with copying. I recently reached out to Murray and he said:

With the ubiquity of open source software, ideas can be stored without secrecy, plainly visible to be deconstructed in raw text format. Anyone learning programming can use public source code to advance their skills. This is great for learning, to a point.

Converting code from one language to another is a good initial task to get your unfamiliar brain up to speed with the basics. I contend that after these early stages one should move on to creating one’s own ideas.

Solving syntactical problems between languages is one skill, but the practice of converting mental concepts into written code is the key to programming. Getting the idea out of your head and into your medium is the key to art.

It should be noted there are countless invaluable programmers that port code primarily for utility, for example the conversion of a library from one language to another, along with documentation. The creation here is not in the form of artwork per se, it is code.

However, outside of learning or utility there is a hint of masquerading within creative programming:

Porting code from one language to another is not “inspired by”, it is just ported code.

Deconstructing and recreating art made in one language to another is not “inspired by”, it is just a recreation.

If the “new” creation is made public with untrue credits, this can be classified as plagiarism. This false accreditation has become common.

And it is so easy to get around this! If the programmer at hand simply mixes in their own twist, this is now genuinely “inspired by”. This is not only taking the individual’s learning to the next level, but offering new ideas back to the community. One could simply combine two ideas from other artists’, and this is valid art!

Stepping away from code and art for a second, let’s take some unrelated but similar real world examples… beer and wine… burgers and salads. The methods or recipes for these have been around for years, and they have been copied countless times. But it’s the subtle differences, often manifested through error alone, that creates the variety for us all to enjoy. Striving for perfection, whilst dabbling amongst the permutations, is what makes the outcome of this copying beneficial. Imagine a world where all beers were the same, such as Australia prior to the 90s. Quelle horreur! Thanks to “inspired by”.

These consumable examples are only true because we are talking about the infinite detail of the real world. In situations like this that are not in the digital world, where replication always causes a deviation from the source, it is acceptable since it is not a direct copy.

A second example is music. It’s a valid career option to perform copies of other artists’ work; cover bands world wide rejoice. This is due to the fact that it’s nigh on impossible to replicate the original perfectly, we actually celebrate musicians who reproduce music precisely. However, with music we also love it when it’s totally remixed or reworked, I’m thinking attempts like Rodrigo y Gabriella’s cover of Orion by Metallica or a really commercial song performed a capella.

All life has evolved through mutation, on top of that, natural selection rewards the best traits amongst us. So let this game continue, don’t copy something. Remix it. Remixing art has been acceptable for ages, let’s not allow “inspired by” without customisation to become acceptable.

Plagiarism is penalised heavily in academia because it is theft? No, because it stifles learning.|||

It’s not ok to regularly port others’ programmed creations from one language to another or to regularly recreate others’ art in an alternate programming language. I started drawing by copying the…