I recently switched from working in an open plan office to working from home. With my presence at company headquarters diminished, colleagues have been asking what impact the change has made to my productivity. This post is my answer.

Leaving London and setting up home in an affordable part of the country has literally saved me two decades of mortgage repayments. If productivity is getting more for less, and my aim is to live more and work less, then, yes, I’d say I’m more productive. Much more productive. I spend fewer hours at my desk. Once the social expectation to look like I’m working disappeared I discovered just how much good quality work can be done by lying in bed or taking a walk. The big breakthroughs happen when I step away from the problem (a centuries old strategy that’s been put to good use by many great thinkers). Occasionally, lying in bed backfires and I fall asleep. . I figure if I need the sleep I’m no good for programming anyway. Routine is not a ritual in my home. If I need to sort out some life admin before I start work, then work can wait. Once I’m done paying the bills my mind is cleared to focus on more difficult problems. Conversely, not having any routine can be injurious to health (and ultimately productivity) so I try to keep a diary of social engagements, which force me stop work, get outside and enjoy the other good things life has to offer.

The biggest productivity boost though has come from moving most of my communication to written form. This alone has made the move away from the office worthwhile.

Writing forces you to think about what you will say (sometimes just the act of writing can prevent you from asking someone a question you already knew the answer to). Writing is both self organising and self archiving. Posting a message to the right channel will serve people in the future much better than an in-person meeting. Writing is scalable, if you write a question to one person and they direct you to someone else you can just copy and paste what you wrote. Writing is non-intrusive. A sudden thought can be written down immediately but read later (none of that making people take off their headphones to listen to your brain guff).

This might be starting to sound like not being around other humans has been the key to my improved productivity. There are however some exceptions, and I’m just going to go right ahead and offer some tips on this.

Some conversations happen best face to face. If you work remotely make time to go and have them! Trust is the foundation of remote work. If you’re not yet working remotely take the opportunity to build good relationships and prove that you work exceptionally well away from the office. Take a week away from the office as a trial run, then go and produce your best work. Always turn up to video calls on time. Always have good sound and internet. Try to be sat in the same place.

There are clearly some merits to offices, which bring workers together. But why are increasing numbers of us desperate to leave them? I believe it's partly to do with the perception of work that we've inherited from previous generations.

Industrial age thinking permeates workplace culture. Productivity is measured (subconsciously, at least) by the amount of time employees spend operating machines and moving products down a production line. The pressure to look busy in front of a computer distracts us from how we ought to actually use it. The role of the human is maximise the productivity of the machine. So, in the technological world, “working like a machine” is no longer a compliment; machines were invented so we don’t have to work like them. Qualities such a problem solving and ingenuity, which were pretty useless on a production line, are vital in the modern workplace. Yet work that leverages these qualities - work that is completely invisible - is inhibited by expectations to exhibit "hard-working" behaviours.

In reality, your employer is hiring your brain and the better an environment they can create for it, the more value they will get out of it. Just as our working habits are diverse, our brains operate uniquely. The workspaces of the future, then, need to be designed to cater for a broad spectrum of working preferences. For now though, wherever you work, try to make yourself feel at home.|||

I recently switched from working in an open plan o...