We are pleased to announce the release of Aspose.Email for .NET 17.4.0. This month’s release comes with several enhancements related to Outlook messages and Storage files i.e. PST/OST. We have also fixed a number of bugs that further improves the overall functionality and stability of the API in terms of expected output. For a detailed note on what is new and fixed, please visit the release notes section of Aspose.Email for .NET 17.4.0.

Deleting messages from PST permanently: Consider a scenario where you are given a PST file and a set of messages that have been designated as attorney-client privileged. Given a list of entry IDs for those privileged messages, you are supposed to remove those messages and forward the PST to opposing legal counsel. If the deleted messages are recoverable by forensic tools, this defeats the purpose.

To help you about this, we are glad to share that this month’s release enhances the functionality of deleting messages from a PST file permanently. This means these are no more recoverable from the PST file with recovery tools. There is no public API change that you need to incorporate in your code to achieve this. Your existing code sample for deleting messages from PST file will do the job for you with this latest release of the API.

Support for PT_FLOAT MAPI Property: This month’s release also provides support for a new Mapi property i.e. PT_FLOAT. The API already supports other properties as well and the addition of this new one further enhances the list of such propertie. Following code sample shows how to add such type of MAPI property to an Outlook message.

In addition to the enhancements mentioned above, this month’s release also includes several bug fixes for the issues reported by API users. Details about these can be found in release notes section of our documentation.

The following API resources can be of help to you in getting started with Aspose.Email API.|||

Aspose.Email for .NET API lets you process Outlook and other popular message formats. It also supports POP3, SMTP, IMAP and Exchange protocols.