Baahubali 2 the conclusion is all set to make a flabbergasting release on 28th April 2017 directed by the notable filmmaker S.S.Rajamouli.  It is the sequel of Baahubali 1 the beginning, originally both the parts were jointly produced on an estimated budget of Rs. 250 crore which later went on to increase in the second aftermath.

Baahubali 2 the conclusion has made a successful venture of nearly Rs.500 Crores before the launch itself. It is scheduled to hit the box office theatres on a worldwide basis this Friday. It will be the first ever Tollywood cinema to be delivered in a 4K High Definition format and nearly 200 screens are to get upgraded to 4k projectors before 28th April 2017. Baahubali 2 has left no space for the first part and broken a huge record to project the show in 6000 multiplexes all across India.

This grand flick Production under the banner of Arka Media studios has taken a diversified shape to be the massive south Indian regional film ever. It has not only crossed the Rs. 500 crore benchmark in the pre-release but also has given a rough guess to draw the curtains with a whopping Rs. 85 crore come this weekend.

Rana Daggubati a Chennai-born plays the antagonist in the sequel Baahubali 2. His character, King Bhallaladeva or Palvalthevan will surely give goose bumps and spine-chilling shiver to the audience on Friday.  Rana will be adorned with a barbaric, dangerous glare, salt, and pepper hair along with bullish armour clad on to his muscular torso to hold the colossal retractable mace.

Tollywood Actor Prabhas has a double role in the sequel of Baahubali, in the beginning, he is seen as the character of the heroic protagonist Baahubali the king and the father. Prabhas later comes back as Shivudu the son in the 2nd half of the flick.

Actress Anushka Shetty gets a remarkable transformation in the Baahubali franchise, to play the rebel and brave character of Devasena. In the beginning, she is seen as a tortured, bullied women who will be held captive by Bhallaladeva the brutal and cruel king of Mahishmati. While in the second part she comes as a much younger Devasana, who appears to be more skilled and a beautiful warrior.

S.S. Rajamouli a flamboyant Indian film-maker and screenwriter primarily known for his spellbinding works in Telugu Cinema. This exceptional director of Baahubali 2 has gained immense popularity for his fantasy blockbusters like Magadheera 2009, Eega 2012 and Baahubali 1 the beginning 2015 to become the highest rated Indian movies within the country and the second highest globally.|||

Baahubali 2 the conclusion is all set to make a flabbergasting release on 28th April 2017 directed by the notable filmmaker S.S.Rajamouli.