If the universe started from a single, symmetric point in space (and there is strong indication it did), where did all the variation we see come from? One would expect the point to expand in a big uniform sphere, not into something that has planets, galaxies and humans in it. And why is our universe expanding exponentially? Surely, that would violate the law of conservation of energy, right? Why can’t we explain the origin of the current laws of the universe?

String theory is kind of a dead end. The brightest minds on the planet, like Ed Witten, Leonard Susskind, Joe Polchinski and David Gross failed to produce a single way in which The Standard Model can be described within the framework of string theory.

We perceive things as being causal. This is caused by that. That is caused by something else and so forth. Causality exists in relation to time. But if there was no time before the Big Bang, then what caused it?

The biggest puzzle of cosmology today is why the universe is expanding exponentially. The culprit has been dubbed dark energy. While matter gets “diluted” (the density decreases) as space expands, dark energy is constant and seems to be a property of space itself. More space, hence more dark energy which leads to exponential expansion.

The answer is space, time and causality (as we understand it) seem to be emergent, not fundamental. They are human perceptions of something else. But what?

For that, we need to understand some quantum mechanics. QM didn’t set out to explain these concepts, it came about as the need to explain wave particle duality, or how particles can behave like waves and point-like particles at the same time. With it, we can describe things probabilistically and the Schrodinger equation does just that. It describes what happens to a single particle (or a group of particles that don’t interact) as a field made up of complex numbers. This is what a particle propagating through space in one dimension looks like:

You get the probability of the particle being in a certain place by integrating the square of the value of this field over an area of space (basically, the area of the square of the function for that space). This is the equation:

Ψ(r, t) is the value of this field for a position in space, r, and a given time, t. ∂Ψ/∂t simply refers to the variation of Ψ in relation with time, or the speed of the field (this is the first order derivative from calculus). And this speed is dependent on the current state. Basically, if we know how the wave looks like at moment t0, we know what it’s going to do over time.

The little lump IS the particle. What you can see from the animation on top is that the wave is spread out a little bit in space — things in quantum mechanics don’t have precise positions.

On the left hand side, you can see how the wave function gives the probability of where the particle is. On the right hand side, you see the speed at which that probability varies. This is the momentum.

What is even more interesting is that if the position is localized, its derivative (the momentum) will be spread out and vice-versa. It’s just simple mathematics. Because particles are also waves, you can never know both the position and the speed (momentum) of a particle with exact precision. This is called the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Looking at the Schrodinger wave equation gives us an exact limit for this precision:

There you have it.

The Schrodinger equation can help to understand the shape electrons orbit around the nucleus of atoms. Also, you can see individual dots. This is what it means for the field to be quantized. At any position in space, you either find the electron or you don’t. You cannot half find it.

What if you have multiple interacting particles? For example, we know that electrons are being kept around the nucleus by the electromagnetic force, and this electromagnetic force is being mediated by a vector boson called a photon.

Yes, light is what is keeping electrons bound to protons, what’s keeping molecules together and so forth.

Charged electric particles like electrons and protons create ripples in the photon field, just like flicking your finger on the surface of the water in your bathtub sends ripples on the surface of the water. Just like the water in your bathtub is quantized because it’s made out of water molecules, so is the photon field. The way charged particles create ripples is by absorbing and emitting photons and this happens billions of trillions of times per second.

For a free particle moving through space, the rate at which photons are absorbed is equal to the rate at which photons are emitted, so there is no net gain. This is why it is said that free electrons do not absorb photons. They do, but they also emit them very fast with the same probability. These photons are called virtual because they are absorbed and emitted so fast that we cannot see them. If the electron is orbiting a nucleus, it might be that a photon of the exact energy and frequency comes along to bump the electron to a higher stable orbit. In that case, we can actually observe the transition. This is called a quantum leap.

Schrodinger’s equation doesn’t describe things like absorbing or emitting particles by other particles, so a new way to describe things had to be invented.

In this diagram, an electron is going through space and absorbs a photon. The momentum of the photon gives the electron a bump, so it changes direction. In the second diagram, an electron spontaneously emits a photon, so it recoils and also changes direction.

Of course, quantum theory is indeterministic.

We cannot determine what a particle does exactly, we can determine only probabilities. So we need to consider all possibilities to figure out probabilities, and this is what exactly what the Feynman path integral formulation does. A particle going from point A to point B in space takes all possible routes. Mathematically, this is equivalent to the Schrodinger equation, because it’s just like a wave that is spreading out. However, the advantage of this formulation is that at any point in the path we can consider that the path splits — it can absorb or emit other particles. I know this sounds a bit strange and our day to day experience tells us that particles like light travels in straight lines, not in crazy ways like this. The explanation is simple: in empty space, the vast majority of the probability contribution comes from the straight line, because the other paths cancel themselves out quite exactly. The little arrows are the equivalent of the phase (angle) of the complex quantum number that describes the probability in a point in space in the Schrodinger equation.

So how do we know that particles don’t travel in straight lines? Well, we can put an obstacle in its path. Because the particle is a wave, it will spread out radially and go around obstacles. In fact, it attempts to take all paths, and the contributions to the probability of a specific outcome are added in a similar way to the Schrodinger equation.

A single electron will go through both slits and interact with itself, as crazy as this sounds. The arrow is the phase I mentioned. Different orientations in the phase can cause different outcomes to amplify or cancel out, like in waves. The arrows are called phasors.

This is so mind blowing that one explanation that was put on the table is that all these histories exist in parallel sheets of reality. Yes, parallel universes.

According to this interpretation, the reason why we cannot predict an outcome of an event is that because all possible outcomes happen, and we just observe one of them (the one from our own sheet of reality). This interpretation has been proposed by Hugh Everett.

In his fabulous book, The Strange Theory of Light and Matter, Richard Feynman explains why mirrors and lenses work the way they do. It’s not that the particle goes straight and bounces like a tennis ball. It’s because it takes all paths and the phases of the trajectories are exactly aligned that they cancel themselves out. For photons, the phases (the little arrows) spin at the frequency of the photon itself. So blue photons spin faster than red photons, for example. Now of course, this doesn’t make any difference on a perfectly smooth mirror. What happens if you scratch out some parts of the mirror? Well, that’s going to impact some of the paths the photon is taking. Also because white light is a mixture of lights of different frequencies, and because different frequencies have different phases, the contribution of light of different wavelengths will be different. Light splits.

This is exactly what’s happening when you look at a DVD. It’s called diffraction grating.

The same “rotating arrow” explanation can be used for why water or glass bends light, and why we can make lenses that converge light in a single focal point. So why does water bend (refract) light? Well, we noticed that the particles tend to take the shortest route (in terms of time needed) when that route is available. But light doesn’t take that route when it goes from air to water.

The analogy used by Feynman is pure genius.

Mitchell Buchannon runs a lot faster than he can swim. So if somebody is drowning, he’s not going to take the straight line. What he will do is choose the optimal path, even though the distance is longer. But in order to figure out the optimal path, he has to try out all. In our illustration, neither A or B are optimal. The optimal path is C, somewhere in between. The optimal path actually depends on how fast Mitch can swim compared to how fast he can run. The faster he can swim, the closest the optimal trajectory is to A. The speed of light in empty space is 300,000 m/s whereas the speed of light in water is roughly 200,000 m/s. The ratio is 1.5, this is the refraction index of water, which explain how much light is bent. And now you know why!

But the main advantage of the path integral formulation is that you can consider not only spatial paths, but also interactions. An electron going through space can spontaneously emit a photon with a certain probability (this probability is given by the coupling of the electron field with the photon field — this is called the fine structure constant). This photon can also randomly and spontaneously split into particle-antiparticle pairs, like an electron-positron pair. The pairs can immediately annihilate, or each can emit and absorb photons and so forth. It’s crazy!

To figure out exactly what particles are doing, all these possibilities need to be added up. But there are so many possibilities, it’s insane!

All these influences are called perturbations. And there is a mathematical approach to approximating them. It turns out that the crazier the possibility, the less unlikely it is. So the equations can be expressed in terms of a polynomial Taylor expansion, and the higher order elements can be ignored because they are small. This is how perturbation theory works. A theory that takes this effect into account is said to be perturbative. One that ignores it is said to be non-perturbative.

Another very interesting consequence of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle is that quantum fields can never be zero both in position space and momentum space, because that way we would know where the particle is. This means that quantum fields always have some amount of jitter, or noise. Space is not really empty, and this is what scientists mean by quantum foam (and I will explain why it’s called that in a bit). So how do you express this noise in Quantum Field Theory? The field is quantized so you cannot have half of a particle at any point in space and time.

You use a trick! And the trick is the virtual particles I talked about.

Quantum noise appears at Planck scale distances, which is 10–20 the size of a proton. This perturbation can be approximated, because by zooming out, the image just looks gray.

Imagine a computer screen that can display only two colors: black and white. But this monitor has a very high refresh rate, much higher than the refresh rate of the human eye. You can simulate shades of gray by switching very fast between black and white. The more time a pixel spends as white, the brighter the pixel appears to the human eye.

In this little universe of ours, we would have empty space which is gray, particles which are white, and anti-particles which are black. This is how things that seem discrete can also create seemingly continuous patterns such as waves. Of course, the universe is a bit more complicated than this screen, but the approach is similar. The virtual particles are the pixels that are not stable. The “real” particles are the ones that stay either black or

white for long enough for us to see them.

For a theory to make sense, it’s important that adding up all these fluctuations produces a finite result. Approximation schemes like the one on the right can be used to simplify things and get finite results. This is called renormalization. Renormalization can be applied to the electromagnetic force and to nuclear interactions, but cannot be applied to gravity, so a quantum theory of gravity has proved elusive thus far. The plan was to quantize the it via a spin 2 vector gauge boson (because gravity is only attractive), like electromagnetism is explained via a spin 1 gauge boson.

In fluid dynamics, it’s easy to predict the effects of a slow moving turbine blade. But if the blade starts spinning faster, bubbles start to appear and we get an effect called cavitation, which can potentially be disastrous.

What makes gravity different from electrodynamics is that gravity interacts with itself. From general relativity, we know that heavy masses bend space. A gravity field would have to carry energy, but according to E=mc2 mass and energy are equivalent so a graviton (by carrying energy) would have to bend space by emitting other gravitons. For low gravity fields, this isn’t a big problem because this interaction is negligible, and gravity is just like a smooth wave in a still pond. The problem appears at Planck scale, where quantum gravity effects become significant. What is this Planck scale? Well, it’s the scale at which a photon would turn into a black hole. The energy of a photon is proportional to its frequency, which is inversely proportional to its wavelength. But E=mc2 means that the photon also has a mass equivalent and a mass concentrated in such a small space, means a high mass density. That in turn means extreme space time curvature, so the photon would collapse into a black hole.

Even before photons turn into black holes, things start to get really chaotic and spacetime enters cavitation. It gets bubbly and chaotic and he have no idea what’s going on because the math just blows up.

This is where the term quantum foam comes from.

We of course know what happens at large scales because of Einstein’s theory of gravity. So why do we care about quantum gravity? Because at the moment of creation things were both small and dense. It is impossible to exactly explain the coming into existence of our universe without a theory of quantum gravity.

The Big Bang theory says our universe started from a singularity or single point. Out of that point, time and space, the symmetries that make the laws of physics and all the matter and energy somehow grew.

The simplest thing to explain is matter distribution. Quantum fluctuations imparted small asymmetries in the distribution of energy in the early universe. As the universe expanded and cooled, those small fluctuations became the seeds of the large scale structures that we see now: planets, stars, galaxies, galaxy clusters and superclusters. You just saw how things appear out of something very simple and very symmetric. Spontaneous quantum fluctuations broke the initial symmetry that existed at the time of the Big Bang (nothing is more symmetric than a single point) via well… spontaneous symmetry breaking.

There is also some indication that in its early history, the universe had just one spatial dimension and only one force. As time went by, more forces crystallized (again, via spontaneous symmetry breaking) and as things got more complicated, more degrees of freedom started to appear thus increasing the number of dimensions to three (and possibly 10 or 11 if string theory is true).

Can our universe be a spontaneous fluctuation itself?|||

If the universe started from a single, symmetric point in space (and there is strong indication it did), where did all the variation we see come from? One would expect the point to expand in a big…