On This Page:  • About The Color Tool   • Color Tool: Panels and Controls 

  • How to use Hue Design Panel   • How to use Luminance Design Panel   • System Requirements 

   Designers of information graphics need to choose color combinations that are legible and that help direct the users' attention to the most important information. To accomplish this they need to be able to understand the perceptual relationships among the available colors. Previous design software has required the designer to supply most of the color expertise. The Color Tool is designed to provide the designer with views of the perceptual relationships among the possible color choices. It improves on previous tools by more clearly representing the constraints imposed by the physical display and the structure of human color vision. This should help the designer manage the luminance contrasts of symbol and background colors by showing the tradeoffs in hue and saturation. 

 





 ** Please ensure that your system is updated with the latest Java security patches and updates before you use the Color Tool. You will need to enable Java in your browser in order to use the tool, so please be aware of the risk in doing so. 

 

 For general information regarding Java, go to- If you have any doubts/concerns, you should contact an IT professional to assist you. **For general information regarding Java, go to- http://www.java.com/en/download/help/index.xml 

 



The Color Tool makes use of an international standard color space that attempts to represent colors with uniform spacing in dimensions h, C*, and L*, approximating perceptual hue, saturation, and lightness, respectively. It 

 1) Presents possible color choices as patches that are approximately equally spaced perceptually 

 2) Shows the color gamut of the display graphically in two different slices - the lightnesses and saturations available at a chosen hue and - the hues and saturations available at a chosen lightness 

 3) Shows the user's selected symbol colors on the selected background colors 

 4) Displays coordinates of the user's selected colors in several color spaces. Detailed examples of several things you can do with the Color Tool are:

 Color Space Visualization

 Color Search

 Display Prototyping

"Clear Samples". This control resets the Test Area to its initial state and default view options.

 "Symbols". This control sets the text lines and background tabs of the Test Area to display RGB values in decimal or hexadecimal format, L*hC* values, or graphic symbols.

 "Font Size". This control sets the size of the font in the text lines of the Test Area. Five sizes are available, in one-point increments, centered on the system font size.

 "Color/Grayscale". This control sets the Test Area to display in the selected colors or in grays of the selected lightnesses. The grayscale choice allows quick visual scanning for unusable luminance contrasts.

 "Background L*". This control sets the lightness of the background for the Hue and Lightness Design Panels. Setting this lightness to approximate that of the backgrounds in the design allows the appearance of the design panel color patches to better match how they will look in the Test Area. The accuracy of the L*hC* values and equal spacing are reduced at the highest and lowest background L* settings.



 The Color Tool window is 887x740 pixels. We recommend screen resolution 1024x768 pixels.

 

 Your browser needs Java capabilities to run The Color Tool, as follows. Windows: 

 

 On computers running Windows The Color Tool needs the Sun Java Virtual Machine. We recommend using the Sun Java Plug-in (currently version 1.4.2) Download Sun Java Plug-in from Sun.

 

 Microsoft Internet Explorer 6: Version 6 does not include a JVM ( it is suggested that you download the Sun Java Plug-in, above).

 Current versions of Internet Explorer (now IE 6, Service Pack 1 ) are available here.

 

 Netscape 7: This version of Netscape requires a Java plug-in, which is offered as an option when you download Netscape, or download it from Sun, above. 

 Current versions of Netscape (now 7.1) are available here.

 

 Mozilla: Mozilla requires the Sun Java Plug-in, above.

 Current versions of Mozilla (now 1.4) are available here.

 

 Macintosh:

 

 Internet Explorer or Netscape: The Color Tool needs Apple's "Mac Runtime for Java" (MRJ, version 2.1 or later, requires a PowerPC with 32 MB of RAM and Mac OS 7.6.1 or later). 

Download MRJ from Apple.

 

 Safari: Mac OS X with Plug-in 4.1 installed.|||

Using Color in Information Display Graphics and ATC/ATM Interface Design. Design methods, color science, and color guidelines.