An insider view of how we developed Giroptic IO, a 360 camera

Today, Facebook announced the public launch of Facebook Live 360. At Giroptic we are really excited about this launch not only because we make the iO — a 360 camera designed to live stream 360 on Facebook — but also because we believe in the potential for the medium to connect people in new and thrilling ways! 360 offers new possibilities to share experiences that would otherwise be missed with conventional cameras.

How does it do this? There is no frame! In 360 you don’t miss a shot. You capture everything, up, down and all around so you and your friends don’t miss a thing. Plus, as the photographer, you can enjoy the moment without worrying about framing the perfect shot.

Take a birthday for instance. We’ve all seen some of the billions of photos and videos that have captured people blowing out their candles. But we’ve all missed the reactions of the guests gathered around the room, the silly faces, the cheering, the clapping, the balloons, the whole experience. Wouldn’t it be nice to capture these celebrations and share them with close friends and family live?

Imagine the countless moments (like concerts and celebrations), adventures (like ziplining and kayaking), news stories, and places people are going to share with others in a more immersive way thanks to live streaming in 360.

The Giroptic team has been working passionately for the last 8 years to prepare for today. The Giroptic iO camera in partnership with Facebook delivers the best in class 360 Live streaming user experience. To get to this point, this meant getting three key things right:

2. The right imaging technology and software

First, we needed to develop a camera that you could easily take with you. Great live streaming moments can happen anytime so we sought to design a compact, powerful, and pocket-sized camera you would like to have as a companion in these special moments.

Second, we relied on our eight years of experience in 360 imaging to deliver a high-quality 360 image. We knew that to be successful in 360, we would have to reinvent the imaging pipe. Unlike conventional cameras, 360 cameras capture everything like light sources. So, when it’s sunny outside, the sun is going to be in your 360 shot and your white balance needs adjust appropriately. We iterated over and over until we got details like this just right.

Third, the user interface had to be ultra simple. The adoption of 360 imaging has been hindered by products too complex to use. We focused on delivering an experience that would let you go Live in seconds not minutes., A process that used to take many steps is now as simple as taking a photo or video on your phone. We also set out to make it easy to share 360 content on the Facebook platform for a seamless experience for the streamer and the viewer.

Finally, our goal was to make 360 live streaming easy and affordable. Giroptic iO is available for a price well within reach ($249 / 259€ RSP).

We are excited about how people are going to capture and share key moments of their life in 360. It will help build stronger relationships by allowing friends to feel like they are there with you.

For broadcasters it will allow their viewers to see everything — no filter! Everyone in their audience will get transported to the heart of the action like they are there. The freedom of field of view offered by 360 coupled with live streaming technology gives people access to events in an unprecedented way.

What stories and moments will you share? We hope you will join us in using Live 360 to share key moments with friends and stay closer to them.|||

Today, Facebook announced the public launch of Facebook Live 360. At Giroptic we are really excited about this launch not only because we make the iO — a 360 camera designed to live stream 360 on…