If there’s one aspect of the SaaS landscape that I saw changing tremendously the past 10 years, it’s definitely the rise of bootstrapped SaaS companies.

Financing a SaaS business with VCs or by bootstrapping is a topic which is more and more discussed. Not only an increasing number of founders shares their experience growing their SaaS business without outside funding but an increasing number of them shares their disillusion going the VC way as well.

Since it’s a topic that I discuss quite often with early stage founders, and which impacts VCs too, I want to address it properly and share my point of view in this post.

For the purpose of this article I’ll distinguish four types of SaaS companies:

What’s important here are not so much the different ARR ranges, which can be discussed and adjusted, but the trends for the different categories:

In the category #1 for the past couple of years the trend is toward an increasing number of SaaS companies being funded but it’s linked to the capital available and the will of VCs to invest or not. For category #2 I also think we’re seeing more of these companies but they are still very rare and we cannot say that there’s an explosion of them.

If there’s an explosion which is changing the SaaS landscape it’s definitely happening in the categories #3 and #4. When I entered the SaaS world 10 years ago (building a product on top of flash…) I knew very few founders running bootstrapped SaaS companies. Raising money was the main way to go. But this has changed and I now encounter, almost on a weekly basis, awesome bootstrapped software companies and micro SaaS.

The available market is getting bigger: more and more businesses buy SaaS products and don’t need to be educated anymore. From SMBs to enterprise customers.

Building and distributing a SaaS product is easier, faster and less expensive: thanks to developer tools, APIs and the emergence of software platforms (e.g: SalesForce, Zapier, Segment…).

Advice from people “who have done it” is widely available online: as Jason Lemkin wrote in a tweet: “It’s possible there is now sufficient startup advice on the internet”

All these factors make bootstrapping a SaaS company beyond several million dollars of ARR, without raising VC money, a more and more viable and proven path.

An important characteristic of this growing trend of companies is that a big chunk of them are not “VC compatible”. For various reasons:

The majority of these companies have their sweet spot in the tens to hundreds thousands dollars of MRR. Once reached they’ll continue to grow but more slowly and they won’t scale to millions dollars of MRR. A minority will enter category #2 and become the new Mailchimp or Atlassian.

I by NO MEAN suggest / imply that non “VC compatible” companies are inferior or less prestigious to VC compatible ones:

Edit: For those interested in the alternative financing aspect here are some data points from Tom Tunguz “A Spike Of Venture Debt In Startups”

As an early stage founder if you have no idea on which side you’re leaning toward here are some questions that you can ask yourself :

The very first thing to clear out is whether the VC model fits your personal inspirations as an entrepreneur or not:

The characteristics of your business / product / market positioning also play a role:

Again, the line between VC compatible and not compatible businesses can be very thin and change over time — especially at early stage. There are plenty examples of awesome startups which started as a “feature” to later evolve to big businesses. However it’s a tiny, tiny minority and in the majority of the cases they could show huge traction without raising at first.

As a conclusion I want to emphasis, again, the fact that the VC path is not better or more prestigious than the bootstrap one. Working on the VC side myself my first aim is to be aligned with the founders we work with.

If their aim is to build fast growing companies with the help of VCs then it makes sense to work together. But if they prefer to do so by financing their business purely thanks to the revenue they manage to generate from their customers it’s fantastic too.

There’s no “evil” or “angel” here, these are just two different approaches to building a business and everyone (founders as well as VCs) should chose its path wisely.|||

Hi there, we’re Point Nine Capital a VC firm focused on SaaS and marketplaces. If you want to be kept informed of our new posts you can subscribe to our content newsletter or follow our Medium…