If you watch the stock market, or even your 401k or IRA, you might see the flow… buy a stock, watch it go up a little – you’re feeling pretty smart… then BAM! It plummets, and so quickly you don’t have time to cash out, and recoup your investment. Ugh. So you let it be, and ignore it for a while…

Unfortunately, when things didn’t take off for my project, I gave in to disappointment. Frustration. Self-doubt, with a touch of self-loathing. I gave into them. Heck, let’s call a spade a spade – I gave them a bear hug, and we moved in together for a while.

So, where did I last leave you on this whole journey?

Let’s see. I was going to work to build a $5k/month business, right? Okay. Yeah, that didn’t happen.

I built some things, and really thought I was on to something, and just… crickets. I mean, I didn’t expect an overnight sensation… really… ? Okay. Yes. Yes, I did. And since my self-image was directly tied to my Google Analytics account, when no one came, I had a bit of a pity-party.

I gave up. I went on to other things. And, now I just realized, I’m actually back working on one of the things that I said earlier I wasn’t going to. Hrm. I guess you can’t keep a good idea down… haha.

So last summer/fall I heard about a startup competition in my adoptive town of Kearney, NE (yes, I used to live in Frisco, TX – I moved here to be closer to family in December of 2015). I had just come up with a nice, very (!!!) niche idea, and had some solid interest in it the week prior, so I decided to enter.

In the end, I made it to the final five (out of 100-ish entrants), you can read more here. As you can imagine, this put a bit of a spring in my step.

Fast forward to April 2017, and I’m building this app out, but also have been doing mobile app development as a side business for nearly a year and a half, and I am bringing in around $1500-2000/month in revenue. I’ve even hired a part-time contractor to help me out.

In addition, a good friend of mine and I decided about a month ago, to take on building a SaaS to fill a niche that is served – but poorly – for the customer set we’re interested in – alert management. We’re building, essentially, PagerDuty for the Small-to-Medium Business; yes, PagerDuty already exists, but it’s waaaaay overkill, and it’s also VERY expensive for what is useful. After talking to a number of devops people with teams of 3-15 people, we think there’s a real opportunity for a simple, easy to use, easy to afford (NOT cheap – just affordable!) alert management tool.

So, if you’re interested, check out LessAlarming.com (still being built, launching to the first already signed up [!!! a very important step !!!] customers May 2017)

So, here I am, a little over two years after starting this $5k/month challenge, and I’m approaching $2500/month in revenue – 1/2 way to my goal! It’s not been a quick process, and it’s not been even close to fool proof, and it got pretty ugly there with self-doubt, but dang… I’m actually progressing!

It’s kind of like playing the stock market… your stock drops, and you want to cash out… maybe you do. But maybe, like me… you just let it ride… lived with it… spent some time thinking about other things. Working on other things. And a couple of years later, that “worthless” stock has rebounded back, and is actually worth something.

And that – that is a pretty good feeling.|||

