STUFF YOU MAY LIKE

At times, freelancing or self-employment is not as easy and straightforward as people think because it requires a lot of effort.

Yes, entrepreneurship is amazing but as a freelancer, you will probably have to put in more efforts to be able to make considerably enough money.

Entrepreneurship is great and you should aspire to be an entrepreneur. However, entrepreneurship is a journey you don’t start without knowing where you are going.

In short, there is more to self-employment and it’s advisable to, first of all, understand what you are going into before you make that important decision to go into it.

The fact is that most freelancers lack in-house accounting departments to manage accounts, prepare and send invoices. In most cases, they also don’t have a dedicated staff to collect outstanding debts and manage other financial matters.

However, freelancers or anyone in self-employment must keep accurate records just like other big businesses and brands.

Below are some of the best billing tools or software that can help freelancers and small businesses to keep track of their bills and invoices.

FreshBooks.com prides itself as one of the best cloud-based accounting software for freelancers and small businesses. It’s also a time-management tool that small businesses can use to send invoices to clients and get paid for their time and expertise.

FreshBooks is designed to make your accounting tasks easy, fast and secure. You can start sending invoices, tracking time and capturing expenses in minutes.



SageOne.com is another online accounting and payroll software for small businesses and freelancers. With this tool, you can send and track invoices, keep track of billable hours, wrangle tax documents, and generate financial reports.

SageOne is a web-based tool, which means you can easily access it anywhere and on any internet-enabled device. It offers various accountancy and payroll packages for start-ups and small businesses. Take a free trial.



QuickBooks.com is one of the best accounting software freelancers and small businesses can get to manage their account.

It seamlessly integrates with other popular time management as well as marketing apps, and tools.

QuickBooks is one of the best options for small businesses, freelancers self-employed and top professionals. It offers a high level of security and encryption.



Waveapps.com offers some of the best and smartest tools for small businesses and freelancers to chase payments, track expenses, manage employees payroll and taxes. You can send as many invoices as you want and easily track overdue payments

Also, Waveapps seamlessly incorporates other customer data such as phone numbers, email addresses, and previous payments made for easy management.



Xero.com is a powerful online accounting software for small businesses. You can use this business tool to manage invoicing, bank reconciliation, bookkeeping and much more.

Freelancers who require more robust tools to manage their online businesses might want to consider Xero. The tool also seamlessly integrates with Payoneer and other third party apps.

  

  

|||

Here are some of the best billing tools or software for freelancers and small businesses to keep track of their bills and invoices. Powerful invoice tools