To start with, the underlying probability of each user was determined using an exponential distribution with mean 0.03, as in the base-case. Each connection between users was given a ‘strength’ between 0 and 1, based on how many connections the users shared. If two users both had 12 friends, but 8 of those were common to both, their strength was 66%.

From this, a line was drawn in the sand. A users connections who shared more than 50% of friends were deemed ‘strong’ connections, and those less than 50% ‘weak’ connections. This is fairly easy to visualise, just think about a relationship with a close friendship group, where everyone knows everyone, against that with a colleague or relative who you know, but isn’t really friends with your friends.

With this in mind, 3 factors remained to be determined.

All these factors had to be set between two limits. Too low, and the ad would die out quickly, maybe generating a high Click per View ratio, but a low number of total clicks. Bad for advertisers. Too high, the assumptions were unrealistic and wouldn’t be applicable.

The first factor was set at a maximum increase of 10%, scaled linearly by the strength of the friendship. That is, if a user clicked the ad, all of their connections would see their underlying probability of clicking the ad rise by an amount. If the strength of friendship between those two people was 60%, the amount would then be 6%. If the strength between the people was 25%, the amount would be 2.5%. This was recalculated after every iteration, and users could see multiple probability increases if more and more of their friends clicked on the ad.

Next, the virality of the ad was determined by an ‘Ad-Serve’ composition. That is, when a user clicked an ad, how many, and which of their connections would be shown the ad in the next iteration? Ad-Serve compositions ranged from 10 Strong Connections & 0 Weak Connections, to 16 Strong Connections & 24 Weak Connections. 28 compositions were tested all together, with some combination of Strong and Weak friends with 10, 20, 30 or 40 people being shown the ad.

The aim behind varying these numbers was simple. While Strong Connections saw the highest increase in probability after their friend clicked the ad, showing it only to strong connections could get the ad stuck in small communities, or sub-graphs of the network, and limit its propagation. On the other hand, only showing it to Weak Connections risked the ad dying out as there was a lower probability adjustment. We wanted to test how this balancing act influenced results.

The final factor, the ‘seed’ group, or the number of ‘Patient Zeros’ was varied between 10 and 40. As the assumption was that these people were the first to click on the ad, they were selected as those with the overall highest original probability. This assumption was a bit of a stretch, especially for the 40 person seed group, but more on this later.

With all factors set, the simulation was set up to run for each Ad-Serve composition, for each seed group size, on 20 random graphs (as the original distribution of probabilities was stochastic, we replicated the simulation for more generalised results). Each simulation concluded when 4, 000 users had seen the ad, or when no new clicks were generated in an iteration.|||

Social media yearly advertising budgets have seen massive growth in the last few years, and are projected to reach $17.34 billion by 2019 in the US alone. The ability to target huge markets directly…