All his life, Steve Goodwin had been a private man. No matter the circumstances, he'd say he was doing just fine. But as he sat in his Wilsonville home that Monday morning, he wasn't fine.

Over the weekend, he'd argued with his youngest daughter, Melissa. The blowup ended when his daughter, her voice shaking and tears in her eyes, opened the front door to her home and told him to leave.

As is the case in all families, they'd had minor disagreements before.  But Saturday's battle had been raw. Steve knew he needed to set things straight. It was time to reveal his secret.

With paper and pen, he retreated to a quiet place in his home. He struggled to find the right words, to explain why he'd been so different these past months. When finished, he told his wife, Joni, he was ready.

She called Melissa, who lived three blocks away. After she arrived, they gathered in the living room and made small talk. Then, from a shirt pocket, Steve pulled out his handwritten notes.

Mom and I saw a neurologist. I have a spot in my brain. I am being honest. If this progresses into Alzheimer's, I know what it is like. I saw my mom. I experienced the pain of her personality changing, her being unkind to me and saying hurtful things.

If I ever do or say anything hurtful, I want you to know that I am sorry.

No matter what I do and say, you are my little girl and I love you.

Tears and hugs. Questions with no answers. Fear and doubt bubbling below the surface as each grappled with dark thoughts, knowing the family would be forever changed.

For Melissa, the bitter news explained so much.

The argument, so out of character for her father, started after her parents came over to help take down her Christmas tree because Melissa's husband wasn't home.

While Melissa removed ornaments and lights, her parents kept an eye on the boys, 2 and 4, who ran through the house, loud and wound up.

Melissa noticed her father, always so easygoing, was clearly irritated with the boys. She figured he hadn't yet had his morning coffee. She climbed off the ladder and made him a cup. It didn't help. Within the confines of the living room, the tension built.

And then he snapped at the boys.

Melissa, feeling protective, confronted her father. She didn't know what was wrong with him. She yelled, then cried and said it was time for her parents to leave.

What was happening with dad?

But the real change, she realized, began the previous summer. She'd been at her parents' house, and she'd asked her father to play his piano, something he'd done all her life. Steve was a software engineer by profession, but music was his true passion. Growing up, Melissa and her sister fell asleep each night to his music. Decades later, the music allowed Melissa, now in her late 30s, to forever be the little girl who so loved her father.

"My father expressed himself through his music," Melissa said. "That's how I knew what was in his heart."

On that summer day, she watched in confusion as her father, always so smooth and proficient, fumbled and stopped. He said he hadn't been practicing. Now she knew the truth.

After writing the one-page letter, Steve and his family refused to accept the diagnosis that the spot on his brain was causing forgetfulness. He was healthy. He ran marathons, hiked and rode a bike. He worked in the garden. He ate salmon and kale. More extensive tests in 2015 revealed Steve, then 65, had early-onset Alzheimer's, a disease passed genetically from his mother. Even with hard proof, the Goodwin family denied the inevitable.

"I'm into alternative health," Melissa said. "I convinced my father to leave no stone unturned: yoga, oils, meditation."

Melissa's husband, and her sister's husband, were doctors who certainly could reach out to researchers, experts and specialists. The rest of the family may have waited for a miracle, but Steve knew.

By the time his mother died, at age 74, she spent her days, in silence, staring out a window. She didn't recognize her son. Once an accomplished musician, she didn't know what to do with a piano.

Now, it was his turn.

The piano, once Steve's friend, now mocked him. He'd sit at the keyboard, waiting until he was alone so others wouldn't witness the loss. He'd start a song, get a bar into it and then. ...

I had a business with lots of clients. I had to retire. I couldn't serve them.

Worse was what happened with my music. It became torture for me to play the piano.

My mother played the piano and sang. I had three siblings. None were interested. My mother made me play. I was stuck going to lessons for years. My friends would be playing outside, and I'd be inside practicing to make my mother happy.

But I ended up liking it. The music became a part of me. When I was 8, I met a girl my same age in Sunday school. For the first few years, we teased each other. Then we realized we liked each other. When I was 15, I wrote my first song to her. When we were 20, we got married. Been together 46 years.

My music is my soul.

At first, I could play fluently.

Then I struggled to play the song.

Then I struggled to remember that I used to play the song.

Then I struggled to remember I was the person who wrote the song.

The disease, Melissa knew, would block out all her father had ever been.

"This wasn't cancer where radiation and chemotherapy could offer a glimmer of hope," she said. "A murderous fog in his brain would take my father away from us."

When he forgot, what would she remember?

Her father's essence was his music, the soundtrack to her life.

She'd taken it for granted.

And now the music was dying.

"My father would disappear," Melissa said. "I had to save his music."

She knew it was next to impossible.

All those years, I never wrote my songs down or recorded them. Everything -- every note and phrase and chord progression -- was in my head. All my life, I could remember every song and how to play it.

I felt like my fingers and my heart were doing everything they were supposed to do. But the result wasn't coming out the way it was intended. There was a gap between my head and the piano. I can absolutely hear the music in my head. That's what's so frustrating. I know how it's supposed to sound, but I can't make it happen.

It's all in my head.

The music and the source of Steve's inspiration remained a mystery. He was the only musician in the family. No one else spoke, or understood, his language.

Melissa thought about hiring a professional pianist to work with her father. But she figured most would require a musical score. Her father had none. She needed someone who could pull the music from him, and also respect and treat tenderly the composer's vulnerable soul. A proud man, Steve hadn't told anyone outside the family about his diagnosis.

Whenever Melissa approached her mother, Joni changed the subject: Let's not ruin this good day. Please, we need positive thoughts.

"Discussing the music meant accepting the outcome," Joni said.

Instead of looking to the future, she focused on the present, protecting Steve and his dignity. He used to cook dinner, but now he didn't remember if he'd added salt, or whether the recipe called for salt. He tested her patience by asking the same question repeatedly.

She missed hearing him at the piano. His music represented a life together: Courtship, marriage, family, buying a house, grieving over the death of a pet, empty rooms when the girls left for college and, now, the joy of being grandparents.

Steve's life, as is the case with many men, had been defined by what society calls success: money, power and an impressive résumé.

"Steve was a freelance software entrepreneur," Joni said. "He made a comfortable living, but we weren't rich. But he always believed he had it in him to create something special with his software. He talked about his ship coming in."

But before his projects launched, she said, a big player in the competitive industry would beat him to the punch.

Joni had always told her husband his true gift, even if no one outside the family heard it, was his music.

"He'd say 'Sweetie, thank you very much,' " Joni said. "Then he'd get back to his software to pay the bills."

And now it was just too damn late.

"I lived in fear of losing the music," Joni said. "When it was gone, a bit of me would be gone, too."

Just like her father, Melissa had told no one what was going on. Not even her closest friend, Naomi LaViolette, who knew only that Melissa's father was dealing with a medical issue. Nothing more was offered, and Naomi, respecting Melissa's privacy, didn't pry.

They became friends three years earlier in one of those strange and fortuitous moments where two unrelated lives become so intertwined. Their kids attended the same preschool and they'd see each other in the parking lot.

One day, Naomi, a deeply private woman, surprised herself when she began crying after Melissa asked how her day was going. Instead of saying fine and getting in her car, she said she was going through a divorce and was afraid.

"It's hard to do things on your own," Naomi recalled. "You can, but it's so much better when we help each other. I realized I needed help."

They went on walks, talking about life and struggles. When Naomi had to move, Melissa found her an apartment near her own home. Over the years, the two women had family dinners and outings. Melissa watched Naomi's kids when Naomi needed time alone or had to work on her career.

Naomi started piano lessons at 4. Blessed with perfect pitch, a genetic trait some researchers say is found in only 1 in 10,000, Naomi could identify a musical note by hearing it played once -- without using another note as a point of reference. At 7, she discovered she could learn a piece of music by listening to it. As an adult, she earned a master's degree in classical music and could play anything from jazz to pop to gospel. She performed in clubs and festivals, released her own music and was featured on CDs with other musicians. In addition to being in demand as a session player and accompanist, she was also the pianist for the Oregon Repertory Singers.

In the summer of 2015, the two women met for coffee. Naomi casually asked Melissa how she was doing. This time, it was Melissa who cried. She told Naomi about the diagnosis and the music, how her father no longer played the piano, and how the music would be lost. Naomi, who had no idea that Steve was a pianist, wanted to help.

"I told her that I could learn his music, even by listening to parts of it," she said. "If he could provide anything, we could work together."

The difficulty would be the Alzheimer's. She'd never been around anyone with the disease.

"If I did this," Naomi said, "I'd be dealing not just with music, but the emotional component.  When I was going through my divorce, I needed Melissa and her incredible skills of empathy. And now she needed me to help her family."

Music, she believed, was a spiritual language, conveying deep emotions, different from other art forms. She would find the music deep inside Steve Goodwin's failing brain.

And then she would save it.

While grateful, Melissa declined Naomi's offer. She told Naomi her father had never played for anyone outside of family and friends. With his skills now fading, she doubted he would subject himself to such embarrassment. As the disease had progressed, Steve grew more defiant. He didn't want special attention, certainly not anyone feeling sorry for him.

Music was no longer talked about. Joni banned Melissa from raising the subject.

But during a phone call, Naomi brought up the music once more. She asked Melissa to reconsider. Melissa wasn't sure. She knew time was running out and told Naomi she'd think about it.

A month later, Melissa learned her father was scheduled to take a test to see if he was sharp enough to receive an experimental drug that might slow the pace of the disease. Steve had taken the test twice. Both times, he had failed. This was his last chance.

To help her father relax, she took him on a hike the day before they had to be at the doctor's office. As she drove him back home, she thought about Naomi's offer.

If she told her father, he could get anxious and fail the test. Her mother might be furious. She pulled into the driveway, turned off the engine, still not sure what to do.

"Screw it," she said. "I went with my gut."

Melissa told her father she wanted nothing more than to save the music.

"I told him that I saw him struggling with the piano," she said. "He didn't say anything. We just sat there in the car. I said I had a friend who was a talented pianist. She'd offered to work with him to preserve his music."

For a long while, Steve was silent.

"Then he asked me why she'd want to work with him," Melissa said. "He said it would be a waste of her time."

Why do this?

Because, his daughter said, she cares.

And then he began to cry.

After dropping her children at school, Naomi drove to the Goodwin home, where Steve, Joni and Melissa waited. They talked honestly about the future. Although Steve had passed the test and received the experimental drug, his brain was not responding.

Naomi told Steve she'd love to hear him play. Steve moved to the piano and sat at the bench, hands trembling as he gently placed his fingers on the keys.

"I understood," Naomi said. "I told him to play anything he could remember."

Naomi discreetly slipped a small recorder near the piano. She knew nothing about his skills. She had no idea what she would hear. Starts and stops and mistakes. Long pauses, frustration surfacing. But Steve pressed on, for the first time in his life playing for a stranger.

That night, Naomi pulled out the recorder. She listened just as she had as a child and later as a student to transcribe the jazz solos of Horace Silver, Bill Evans and Thelonious Monk. She understood Steve's music. She found hints of themes, counter themes, harmonies and rhythms.

"It was beautiful," Naomi said. "The music was worth saving."

Her responsibility, her privilege, would be to rescue it. The music was still in Steve Goodwin. It was hidden in rooms with doors about to be locked.

The task would be unlike anything she'd ever attempted. Steve would have to play what he could remember. She'd fill in the blanks, interviewing him, playing for him, trying to understand the music he heard but could no longer bring to life.

In many ways, she decided, the project was a spiritual calling. She believes every human has the ability to create and bring beauty into the world. Within each of us is something worth preserving.

"I found myself, at the age of 41, wondering how I'd fare in the face of a degenerative disease," Naomi said. "Would I face it with such grace? As much as I don't want to think about death and dying, we all are taken from this life someday, somehow. I am gradually finding peace about it."

And so began the partnership.

Naomi would be the fingers.

Steve would be the heart.

Every other week, Naomi and Steve met in his home to spend hours together. He'd fumble at the piano, then she'd take his place. He'd tell her what he remembered and tried to answer her questions. He struggled to explain what he heard in his head. He stood by the piano, eyes closed, listening to his own work, for the first time being played by someone else.

"It amazed me how positive he stayed," Naomi said. "He always, always focused on what he was thankful for. He did not let the disease determine how he saw his life."

Steve and Naomi spoke in code: walking bass lines, playing just off the beat, intervals, moving from the root to end a song in a new key.

All of it.

He just couldn't play it.

Once, when Naomi played one of his songs, she noticed Steve and Joni were both crying.

"When she sat down and played," Joni said, "I can't describe the moment. She literally played like he played. In that moment, she became Steve."

The disease, though, took a toll on Steve. One afternoon, he could remember how he began and then ended one of his compositions. But the middle, no matter how hard he concentrated, was lost. Without it, the entire song would be lost.

At the next session, Naomi asked Steve if they could work together on the middle section to save the song. He agreed. With Steve's input, she created the passage. Steve loved it, said it was what he would have played if he could. He insisted that she be credited as a collaborator on the piece. On another piece, because Steve could no longer improvise, she added a blues solo. She suggested lyrics, which he loved. Again, he insisted she be listed as a collaborator.

And, then, another miracle.

Working with Naomi had stirred within Steve the belief he could compose one last song.

One day, Naomi received an email. Attached was a recording of this final song, a testament to loss and love, to the fight. Steve called it "Melancholy Flower."

She heard multiple stops and starts, Steve struggling, searching while his wife called him "honey" and encouraged him. The task was overwhelming, and

Steve, frustrated and angry, said he was quitting. Joni praised him, telling her husband this could be his signature piece.

Keep going, she said, keep going.

It would be the last song Steve Goodwin would ever compose.

Through 2016 and into 2017, Naomi LaViolette figured out how to play 16 of Steve Goodwin's favorite, and most personal, songs. She memorized them, and scored the music for future musicians.

With Naomi's help, the Goodwin family found a Portland sound engineer to record Naomi playing Steve's songs.

Joni knew the day would come when Steve did not recognize her, but the music, the beautiful music, would remain.

She could play the CD for her husband. Deep within his brain, he'd find comfort and peace in hearing what he had created.

Joni thought that would be the end.

In the months leading up to the 2016 Oregon Repertory Singers Christmas concert, the director asked Naomi, the group's pianist, for song choices. She said she had a special one in mind: "Melancholy Flower."

She told the director about her project with Steve, the song's composer. The director agreed to add it to the repertoire. But to make it work, Naomi would have to take Steve's piece and add lyrics and a choral arrangement for the singers. She asked Steve's permission. He considered it an honor. For the first time in his life, a professional musician had recognized the beauty of his work. He was no longer a software engineer, but a fellow musician.

After the concert, Naomi told the family Steve's music was beautiful and professional. It needed to be shared in public.

The family agreed. They rented The Old Church on the Southwest edge of downtown Portland and scheduled a concert for April 7. They told friends. Word got out. By the day of the show, more than 300 people had said they would attend.

By then, Steve said he was having a hard time remembering the names of some of his friends. He knew the path his life was now taking. His daughter and her friend had saved his music.

He told his family he was at peace.

Steve arrived at the church and sat in the front row, surrounded by his family.

This has been an absolute miracle.

Naomi crawled up into my brain and found the parts and pieces, all of them broken, and brought them back to me.

I don't dwell on the negative. I try to be grateful for everything that is positive. My heart is happy. I know what is happening. I know what my mother went through.

I know what is ahead.

But research is beginning to figure out what all this is about in the brain. I believe that neither of my daughters, and none of my grandchildren, will experience this.

My wife sits at her desk and listens to the CD of my music. I hear it every day.

It's strange the music will be shared at the concert. I'm a bit embarrassed by the attention.

I was just a man who learned to play the piano as a little boy.|||

