A new chatbot, Give or Take, addresses the issue of bot intelligence in its own, unique way. The problem that many bots face right now is that they are unable to truly convince a user that they can process and respond information the same way a real human would. Instead of answering users using complex algorithms, AI, or Machine Learning strategies, Give or Take responds to users with real, human responses. Within 5 days of approval, Give or Take has already appeared on the front page of Botlist and has been featured on Product Hunt. Users from around the world have asked the bot over 1000 questions, and have helped provide over 2000 answers.

(Give or Take is available now on Facebook Messenger).

A typical conversation with Give or Take is as follows:

Suppose User A wants to know what makes people happy, and decides to ask Give or Take. The user goes through the welcoming messages, and selects ask when prompted.

Of course, nothing makes the bot happy. Instead, it waits for a different user to answer the question that User A asked. Shortly afterwards, User B starts using Give or Take. He chooses to answer a question, and is prompted with User A’s question. User B responds with what makes him happy and User A is immediately notified.

The problem with most bots is that people prefer to talk with humans, as the answer a human can give to a question is much more authentic and natural than a response a bot would give. In the example above, User A wants to know what makes people happy, and is immediately provided with a real, human response, delivered by the bot. User B is also able to explore the interesting questions users ask, and provide a response that seems natural and human to the asker.

Human-to-bot communication is great, because humans can think and say anything they want to the bot. However, it’s when the bot tries to communicate back to the human that the difficulty ensues. It is very hard for the bot to interpret the human’s input and respond accordingly, since there is an infinite amount of things that a human can say.

As illustrated, Give or Take bot effectively answers the difficulty of bot intelligence through human cooperation. Could this be the future of bot intelligence? Try it for yourself, and see what you think.

Give or Take is available now on Facebook Messenger|||

A new chatbot, Give or Take, addresses the issue of bot intelligence in its own, unique way. The problem that many bots face right now is that they are unable to truly convince a user that they can…