Staying positive in a world filled with stress, fear and anxiety isn’t easy.  And it won’t always be possible.  But if you don’t strive for a healthy mindset, you won’t be able to thrive and make the change you’ve always wanted to make or leave the mark you’ve always wanted to leave.

Just to be clear, I know that there’s a great deal of sadness and grief in way too many people’s lives, and many get dumped on more than others, and it’s not fair.  But life won’t always treat you the way you deserve to be treated.  Why? I don’t know, there isn’t always an answer, but when Adam and Eve sinned in the Garden of Eden it infested the whole world.  And I’m not saying it’s all their fault because we as people also made poor decisions, and are now still paying for the consequences of those decisions.  Sometimes it’s hard to understand why God still lets bad things happen even after we have repented, but sometimes it’s ok not understand every little detail. And if you can’t realize and accept this, you’ll never get the life you want and crave to have. 

 There’s this popular thing going around where we blame others for the way our life has turned out and if it weren’t for this and this person, we’d be living a much happier life.  You want to know something?  That’s a bunch of bull!  You are the only one in control of how life’s events will affect your happiness and peace of mind. You can’t blame someone else for your bitterness.  It was you that let that bitterness build up, not them!  You might think, “Well, it wasn’t fair, they shouldn’t get away with it.” Maybe, but doesn’t everyone deserve a second chance?  I’m pretty sure you haven’t always treated people right either or always done the right thing.  Don’t you want forgiveness?  Don’t you want another chance to make it right next time?

If the only way you can find happiness in life is by how people treat you or by how many friends you have or by how much money you earn or by how much luck you get in life, if the only way you can have a good life is by the circumstances and events that occur daily, you’ll NEVER have a good life.  Why? Because life’s a bitch. You won’t always get what you want.  You won’t always know why it didn’t work.  You won’t always know why loved ones had to die.  You won’t always get an answer.  And that’s ok!  Make peace with the fact that you can’t and don’t even need to know the reason for everything.  One day we’ll get our answers, one day we can ask God about every little detail if we want, but you know what?  I don’t think we’ll even care about it by then anymore.  So if whatever is happening in your life right now won’t matter in 50 years, why wallow in it now?  Why waste all that time?!

So, if you want a good life, a great life, you just need to change your mindset.  Easier said than done, sure, but in the long run it’ll be worth it.  If something fails, get up and try a different approach.  If someone hurts you, get over it because when someone hurts you it says more about them than it does about you.  If someone you love leaves this world before you think it’s time, try to think about how they’re now in a better place now, and try not to drive yourself crazy trying to figure out an answer why it had to happen so soon because you may not get one.

Make peace with yourself.  Make peace with the fact that life isn’t perfect and bad things still happen.  Make peace with it by thinking about the fact that one day we will all be in a better place where there will be no more pain, no more suffering, no more lies, no more questions, no more wants, no more needs.  Just happy people who love each other!

Now I just want to leave you with one more thought.  Having a positive mindset will be hard.  Leading a negative life though, will also be hard.  Which hard do you want to live with while you’re still here?|||

Staying positive in a world filled with stress, fear and anxiety isn't easy.  And it won't always be possible.  But if you don't strive for a healthy mindset, you won't be able to thrive and make the change you've always wanted to make or leave the mark you've always wanted to leave. Just to be…