The hipster love of long, shaggy beards and growing competition from online shave clubs dinged Procter & Gamble Co.’s sales in the first quarter.

The consumer goods giant on Wednesday reported earnings that showed organic sales up at every division except grooming. The company defines organic sales as those excluding the impact of acquisitions, divestitures and foreign exchange. Organic sales fell 6% at the grooming business on lower volume and reduced pricing in shave care.

“The way I would view grooming broadly is pretty solid outside the U.S., very strong progress on the female side of the business with the Venus,” Chief Financial Officer Jon Moeller told analysts on the earnings call, according to a FactSet transcript. “We have a U.S. dynamic that’s driven both by silent trends and by increased competition which we’re addressing very explicitly.”

Procter & Gamble’s PG, +0.02%  Gillette has been the leading player in the razor blade market for more than a century. P&G said last year it had a 65% market share globally in shave care as of June 30.

The company’s razors, including the Fusion, Mach3 and ProShield, are used by about 750 million men in more than 200 countries, according to a February study by Euromonitor, that calculated that the market is worth about $13 billion in annual sales.

But Gillette has come under pressure from the growing popularity of shave clubs, a craze started by Dollar Shave Club, which offers a razor and supply of blades by mail every month for as little as $3.

Since it was launched in 2012, Dollar Shave Club has inspired a wave of low-cost competitors to emerge. Anxious to retain market share, P&G addressed the competition earlier this month by cutting prices on some of its shaving products.

Euromonitor said Gillette has lost market share for the last six years. The data firm estimates the company’s share at just 54% in 2016, down from 59% in 2015 and as much as 70% in 2010.

Moeller acknowledged the erosion of share, telling analysts the company’s shave care volume is down 3.6 points in the last 12 months, down 0.8 of a point in the last three months and up 0.7 of a point in the past month.

See: 5 ways to save on shaving

“There’s underlying progress that we’re starting to see in terms of the share from a volume basis, and again that’s before the price reductions and the other interventions in the marketplace,” he said.

Wells Fargo analyst Bonnie Herzog said Wednesday she was expecting P&G’s grooming business to deliver organic sales growth of 2% in the first quarter.

“Organic sales were weak, but likely somewhat expected given recent HPC (home and personal care) reports,” she wrote in a note after the earnings. “We expect share reaction will depend on commentary surrounding the category/competitive environment. Given top-line pressures, we remain cautious on shares and maintain our Market Perform rating.”

P&G shares closed down 2.5% but are up 4% in 2017, while the S&P 500 SPX, -0.15%   has gained about 7% and the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA, -0.11%   is up about 6.5%.|||

P&G’s grooming business was the only one to show a decline in organic sales in the latest quarter.