If your email campaigns still aren’t running without a hitch and you’re not getting the response you want from your email sends, it may be time to change email providers. Switching to a new ESP may be just what it takes to improve deliverability and smooth out any problems as you send email newsletters, welcome emails, and promotional messages to your loyal subscribers.

Here are four surefire signs it’s time to change email providers:

If your subscriber list has grown significantly in the past year or you are sending larger volumes of emails that your current ESP can’t seem to handle, it may be time to make the switch. Trying to run your business just by getting by and making use of outdated tools and services may be working against you. If it’s time for an upgrade and a more streamlined email solution, consider making some changes to accommodate for a new ESP.

If you find out that low open rates are the result of emails landing in the junk folder, it may be time to change email providers. Your emails may have ended up on a blacklist and instantly labeled as spam without your knowledge. One way to prevent this from happening in the future is to use an inbox monitoring service that ensures your emails are going to the correct inbox. With email clients like Gmail that label some emails as ‘Promotions’ and others as ‘Updates,’ you want to make sure the recipient receives a timely email and that it lands in the correct inbox.

Email deliverability is a significant element of your email campaigns so you need to make sure you are monitoring your data and ensuring that deliverability is consistent. If you’ve made your best effort to improve email deliverability rates, such as setting up easy unsubscribe versions, removing hard bounces, and cleaning your lists regularly but still aren’t seeing significant improvements, your ESP could be the problem. You need to work with an ESP that has a strong track record of success with email deliverability and can correct any major issues quickly.

If your emails are not going out on schedule or only a partial list of emails from your subscriber base are going out, you need to be able to call customer support for help. If you can’t get through to customer service easily or find someone who can troubleshoot the problems you are having in a timely manner, the holdups could affect your bottom line — and your reputation. It may be time to change ESPs and find one that offers 24/7 customer support and fast response times to address any challenges you end up dealing when setting up or sending email campaigns.

Switching to a new ESP could be just what it takes to improve deliverability and ensure your email campaigns are sent on time. Make sure to watch out for these red flags that indicate it’s time to change email providers.|||

If your email campaigns are running smoothly but you still are not getting good engagement, it's time to change email providers.