When your team is spread across different cities, countries and continents, tasks that are simple in a traditional office environment become much more difficult. Luckily, there are numerous tools available that simplify managing and communicating with your remote team.

From project management apps to cloud storage, we’ve put together the ultimate list of tools for remote teams. If your team is distributed around the world, try using these free and paid tools to save time, avoid communications issues and get more from your remote staff.

Project management apps helps you break out of your email inbox and track progress in a clear, meaningful way. We’ve recommended three different project management tools, all of which are designed for simple collaboration and progress tracking for remote teams.

An old favorite, Basecamp has been around since 2004. With its clean UI, simple collaboration features and great pricing, it’s a dependable choice for project management that’s used by over 100,000 businesses.

Pricing: Free to try. Paid version starts from $29 per month for internal teams.

Designed to make organizing anything easy, Trello is a pinboard-style project management tool that’s ideal for small remote teams. Integration with Google Drive, Dropbox, Onedrive and other cloud storage tools make it easy to stay in sync with new files and project revisions.

Pricing: Free to try. Business Class from $8.33 per user per month.

Another mobile and web-based project management tool, Asana makes tracking progress easy with clean and simple progress charts. Features like task tracking, projects, conversations and integration with Google Drive and Dropbox make this a powerful project management tool.

Pricing: Free to try for teams of up to 15 people. Premium from $8.33 per user per month.

While the project management tools we listed above all have built-in to-do lists, sometimes it’s best to track smaller tasks individually. These three to-do list tools make managing day-to-day tasks, appointments and milestones a breeze for all of your team members.

Todoist is a helpful task management app that tracks your daily progress across all your PC and mobile devices. Simple collaboration and visualized productivity tracking make it easy to bring in coworkers to join you on specific tasks and keep track of your progress.

Pricing: Free to try. Premium from $28.99 per year.

Things is a Mac-only task manager that makes it easy to build and complete to-do lists. Built for individuals rather than teams, Things is a nice alternative to Todoist for team members that work better independently than in a collaborative environment.

Another user-focused task manager, Wunderlist is designed with simplicity in mind. Making task lists and setting up automatic reminders is quick and easy, as is collaborating with coworkers in the pro version.

Pricing: Free to try. Wunderlist Pro and Business from $4.99 per user per month.

Communicating with more than a couple of remote employees from your email inbox quickly becomes a confusing mess. These three communication tools make keeping up to date with your team a breeze, no matter where each team member is located.

Slack centralizes all of your messaging, making it easy for your team to communicate from one place. Conversations can be organized into channels, with drag and drop file sharing and native apps for iOS and Android to make communicating simple even when you’re out and about.

Pricing: Free for small teams. Standard from $6.67 per user per month.

Flowdock offers simple chat and collaboration for teams. Activity it split into group chat and team inbox, which groups all work-related emails in one location. Like Slack, Flowdock is available as a web-based app or for  iOS, Android, OS X and Windows.

Pricing: Free to try for 30 days. From $3 per user per month.

Another chat and collaboration tool, HipChat offers useful features like built-in video calling and screen sharing. Integrations with Asana, Zendesk, Google Hangouts and other tools make it an excellent base for your team’s day-to-day communications.

Pricing: Free to try. HipChat Plus from $2 per user per month.

GoToMeeting makes it easy to host online video conferences in full HD. Ideal for conferencing with your remote team, GoToMeeting is also a hugely useful team for holding conferences with clients, customers and prospects.

Pricing: Starter from $24 per organizer per month. Pro from $39 per organizer per month.

Is it the most reliable video conferencing tool available? Not really, but it is the one tool that most of your team will already have installed. Skype makes one-on-one video calls with members of a remote team easy, making it a must-have tool for anyone managing employees remotely.

Pricing: Free. Calls to mobiles and landlines priced per minute, with country-specific rates.

Join.me is an online video conferencing tool with a focus on simplicity. Meetings are easy to set up and join from PC, tablet or mobile. Join.me’s presenter swap feature makes handing over the presenter role to other team member’s quick and simple.

Pricing: Free for instant video conferencing. Pro from $20 per user per month.

Does your remote team still transfer files as email attachments? Cloud storage makes it easy to transfer and organize your collaborative and team files without having to sort through your inbox for the latest version.

With 15 GB of free file storage, Google Drive is a powerful cloud storage tool that integrates with your existing Google account. Online word processing and spreadsheet tools make Drive one of the best all-in-one online document and file storage tools available for remote teams.

Pricing: Free for up to 15 GB of storage. Extra storage from $1.99 per month.

Dropbox stores your files online and automatically syncs with your PC and mobile device. Easy link sharing makes sending files to other team members a breeze, while shared folders make it simple to collaborate on important work in real time.

Pricing: Free for up to 2 GB of space. Dropbox Business from $15 per user per month.

Need to share passwords and accounts with your team? LastPass Enterprise lets you generate secure passwords for every tool you use and share them with team members without having to send login credentials.

Pricing: Free to try for 14 days. From $24 per user per year, with bulk discounts for companies with more than 101 users.

HelloSign makes it easy for your team members to sign legally agreements from their computer or mobile device. Manage non-disclosure agreements, service level agreements and other vital documents without any need to print and mail documents manually.

Pricing: Free for up to three documents per month. Pro from $13 per month.

Which tools did we miss? Let us know via Twitter &#x1f642;|||

The ultimate list of tools for remote teams to avoid communications issues and get more from your remote staff.