Got data? When you have a list of prospects to contact, it’s tempting to rush in head first with no or little preparation. Doing so produces fast, immediate results, but often at the cost of prospects you could have converted into paying customers with a little more research.

From creating a cold email formula that scales for your entire campaign to researching specific prospects using Twitter and LinkedIn before you start writing, adding a few pre-contact steps to your cold email process can have a significant effect on your response and conversion rates.

Below, we’ve listed five simple steps for you to take before you send your first cold email to any prospective client, customer, investor or partner.

The “bigger” a lead is, whether in terms of sheer spending power or long-term value, the more valuable it becomes to put more wood behind fewer arrows.

This means investing more time and effort into each email you send, instead of optimizing your cold email process for efficiency. Instead of sending a typical 3-5 line pitch, for example, you can create a detailed, personalized proposal for high-value prospects.

Bryan Harris of VideoFruit used this strategy to get in touch with companies like KISSMetrics, HubSpot and Unbounce. Instead of writing a short email, he created a custom video proposal for every company, showing off his video editing and promotional skills.

This approach — providing value before you ask for anything in return — completely changes the dynamic of your cold email. Instead of opening your message to find a request, your recipient is given something of value first, without any hard obligation to commit to anything.

While the more wood behind fewer arrows approach is far more time consuming and much less scalable than automated cold email, it has several benefits:

This approach works best in B2B, especially for companies that sell a costly product or service to a small audience of potential customers. It’s not for everyone, but when it’s a good fit for your business, it’s by far the best cold email sales approach to take.

The more you know about the recipient of your email, the better you can personalize your sales message to cause a response.

GrowthList makes prospect research simple, since it includes the Twitter handle of the founder of each company. It also includes each founder’s LinkedIn profile when available, speeding up the process of pre-email research.

Before you send any cold email, spend a few minutes studying each recipient’s Twitter account and LinkedIn profile. Look for:

All of the above can be used to start a unique, personalized conversation in your email. It takes surprisingly little to stand out from the crowd of other email salespeople, and a mention of a new product or shared connection can often start a successful new business relationship.

You lose nothing by studying your prospects before you click “send,” expect a couple of minutes of your time. Even for the smallest of prospects, a quick Twitter and LinkedIn study can provide valuable insight that makes receiving a response to your cold email much easier.

The above tactics are fantastic for smaller cold email campaigns targeted towards hundreds of people in your industry. But when your campaigns start to reach into the thousands of people, the inefficiencies become obvious and significant.

As your campaign grows in scale, you can save time and increase your return on investment by creating a cold email formula.

This doesn’t need to mean a template, by-the-book email that you send to everyone. A formula could mean an approach to writing an email, or it could simply be an email format that’s tweaked and updated for every prospect you contact.

Criminally Prolific’s list of cold email templates is a great resource for developing your own cold email formula. Combined with tools like Reply, a cold email formula can make emailing at scale look and feel as personal as a hand-typed email, all without the time consumption.

There are several ways to learn how to play the piano. You can spend hour after hour teaching yourself, hammering away at the keys until you create a melody. Or you can hire a tutor, read a songbook and learn better technique at a much faster pace.

Sales isn’t all different, whether it’s conducted online or via email. You aren’t the first person to send a cold email, and you can learn a lot by tapping into resources created by other marketers and sales professionals

From Yesware to Close.io, sales-focused blogs are packed with tips and techniques for sending better, more effective cold emails. Spend an hour or two every week catching up on new tactics and case studies and you’ll become a smarter, significantly more effective salesperson.

One of the most common cold email mistakes is sending a message without a clear, defined, low-friction offer. Just about every B2B company executive has received a purposeless sales email, and most respond the same way — deletion.

Instead of simply sending a message, structure your cold email as an offer. In the example we provided earlier, Bryan Harris offered a free video demo for SaaS companies. Other cold email experts have tried asking for advice, tips and favors with mixed results.

In both cases, there’s an offer — in one, an offer to provide something for free; in the other, an offer to pass on advice and information. They’re both also simple and low friction — watching a demo video only takes two minutes, while sending email advice is short and simple.

Before you send your first cold email, check that your offer — the value you’re offering to each prospect and the task you expect them to complete — is simple and as low-friction as possible.

With the right combination of research, message and offer, you’ll hugely improve your chances of getting a positive response.

GrowthList is a hand researched and curated list of 10,000 of the world’s fastest growing tech companies, all sorted and organized to make launching your cold email campaign as easy as possible. How many can you convert into customers?

Any advice you can contribute? Let us know via Twitter 🙂|||

We’ve listed five simple steps for you to take before you send your first cold email to any prospective client, customer, investor or partner.