We are pleased to announce the availability of new version 17.3.0 of Aspose.Cells for Cloud API. Aspose.Cells for Cloud is a platform independent REST API that allows developers to process their Excel files on Cloud. The new version of the API allows developers to implement their various new scenarios to manipulate the Excel files. They may import an Excel file, autofit rows and columns of any worksheet, and then save to any supported file format. All the supported file formats and features of the API are listed here: Aspose.Cells for Cloud Features.



Developers can also retrieve, add or remove the vertical and horizontal page breaks inside the worksheets. They may also use any available language-specific SDK to convert, edit, or manipulate Microsoft Excel Workbooks. Aspose.Cells for Cloud API also works with both desktops and mobile devices, no matter what operating system clients are using.

On printing Excel files, sometimes developers might be required to have more control over where the page breaks should occur. For example, they might need a repeating table to start printing on a new page once it has reached a certain number of rows or they might wish to provide a way for users who are filling out forms to be able to insert and remove page breaks in certain locations of the Worksheet. Developers can accomplish this using a page break feature. 



These help topics narrate how to retrieve, create or remove the horizontal and vertical page breaks inside the Worksheet:

Microsoft Office Excel lets users auto size the width and height of cells according to its content. Aspose.Cells for Cloud API has now added the support to autofit columns and rows in an Excel worksheet, so that column and row takes just enough space to make content of all its cells visible. Developers can apply autofit settings to a single or multiple rows and columns. 



These help topics show how to autofit rows and columns in an Excel file:

Following are the links to some useful resources you may need to accomplish your tasks.

Start a free trial today – all you need is to sign up with the Aspose for Cloud service. Once you have signed up, you are ready to try the powerful file processing features offered by Aspose for Cloud.|||

We are pleased to announce the availability of new version 17.3.0 of Aspose.Cells for Cloud API. Aspose.Cells for Cloud is a platform independent REST API that