Mark Wahlberg reprises his role as Cade Yeager after a hint was made at the Super Bowl. Watch Transformers: The Last Knight online on moviesputlocker.me which is to be distributed by paramount pictures and the film might be the last Transformers films as revealed by director Michael Bay.

It builds itself after Optimus Prime finds his home planet, Cybertron, now a dead planet, in which he comes to find he was responsible for killing. He finds a way to bring the planet back to life, but in order to do so, he needs to find an artifact, which is on earth.

This is going to be the most expensive Transformer film with a budget of 260 million US dollars. It also stars Tyrese Gibson, who has had numerous appearances in the former Transformer movies. The upcoming American Science fiction movie was shot in Cuba just like The Fate of Furious (2017). Speaking of the Transformer movies, Michael Bay revealed that it will take some time for him to return to Transformer movies, though he is waiting for the right time and story to do any good movie.

Transformers: The Last Knight also stars Anthony Hopkins, Josh Duhamel, Gemma Chan, Laura Haddock, Isabela Moner, Stanley Tucci, John Goodman, Sophia Miles, Santiago Cabrera, John Turturro, Peter Cullen, Frank Welker, Ken Watanabe, and rumored Jean Dujardin. The screenplay is by Art Marcum and Matt Holloway, and it is to be released after ten years of the last Transformer movie in 2007.

After the release of this Transformer installment, there will be a Bumblebee spin-off to be released on June 8, 2018 and a sequel on June 28, 2019.

 There is a time when someone has to stand up and fight for something and that is the theme of the film. The cause to fight seems much bigger than the fighters, but they might eventually become heroes.

Paramount Pictures own the distribution rights and it is to be a production of Hasbro Studios, di Bonaventura pictures, Amblin entertainment and Platinum Dunes. It is edited by Mark Sanger, Adam Gerstel, John Refouaand, and Roger Berton. Transformers: The Last Knight is produced by Don Murphy, Ian Bryce, Tom DeSanto, Lorenzo di Bonaventura and it is to be released on June 23, 2017.|||

