When building a subscription business, it’s easy to get carried away with all the metrics surrounding it: MRR, Churn Rate, ARPA… they’re all useful for certain scenarios, and we should all be measuring them.

But SaaS metrics don’t cover the cash flow aspect of your business, which is a vital component of, well… keeping the business afloat. It’s that important. MRR is not the same as cash in your bank account, so in order to understand your financial standing you need to do some additional planning.

Ideally, you’d hire someone to take care of the cash flow side of your business — a CFO or Finance Director with prior experience. But, especially in the early days of a business, that’s not practical or realistic.

With the help of Martin (ChartMogul’s resident finance expert), we’ve put this quick guide together. First of all, I wanted to get Martin’s take on the importance of financial planning:

Finance is full of acronyms; there’s no avoiding them. Here are two we use in this article:

Get the above definitions and more in The Ultimate SaaS Finance Cheat Sheet (a free PDF download):

There are some key differences between cash flow (or liquidity) planning and accounting. In fact, your accounting numbers are likely to vary greatly from any cashflow planning you do; this doesn’t mean that both are not useful, however.

When it comes to financial accounting:

For a startup, accounting is essentially the practice of complying with various aspects of the law when it comes to reporting and recording a business’s financial transactions.

In summary, cash flow planning has a more immediate practical benefit — the efficient operation of your business.

VC-funded startups, by definition, are running on limited resources, with a looming deadline when they’ll run out of cash. Whether you like being reminded of this intimidating deadline or not, it’s important to know what your runway looks like so you can plan expenses accordingly.

The good, the bad, AND the ugly. It’s a good idea to simulate each one of these scenarios in order to plan for the future. The goal of this exercise is to reduce uncertainty and have a plan for handling a range of different situations. As humans we’re optimists, pre-disposed to assume the best-case outcome. Scenario planning helps you visualize those other cases too.

When you lay all your expenses out in a spreadsheet, you’re likely to pick up on obvious things that don’t make sense. Like the fact that you’re paying for individual licenses when you could upgrade to a business plan for a tool. These things are almost invisible otherwise.

More accurate forecasting allows all-round greater confidence in making decisions, reporting business performance to investors and planning expenses for the coming months. Doubt slows down decisions, and decisions are one thing startups can’t afford to take slowly.

When does your money actually come in and when does it go out?

 For some businesses, monthly planning might not be granular enough. For us, most of the money we collect in one month is deposited into our account at the beginning of the following month (so money from February comes in early March). If you pay anything annually (like a SaaS invoice or insurance), this needs to be considered in the OPEX plan.

As I mentioned above, humans are optimists. We always want to see (and believe in) the best outcome from any scenario. Overly-optimistic planning is very common, especially when it comes to OPEX — there is basically always a surprise expense that you need to cover. Adding in an additional buffer for these unexpected expenses is usually a good idea. Scenario planning helps you predict the outcomes of a range of events, while still shooting for the best one.

Planned increase in headcount is an obvious component of any financial plan. But there are other costs associated to such growth that are often forgotten — some minor, others more serious:

It’s tempting to avoid the hassle of planning everything in fine detail, and lumping such smaller details into a line called something like “Misc. SaaS: 4000 USD / month”. While this may feel okay, all of the real benefits of proper planning silently disappear. To make matters worse, the output still feels like proper planning — you’re not likely to consider the accuracy when making decisions based on predicted scenarios. Dangerous!

Candis.io (focused on the German market – alternatives include tools like Quickbooks, Kashflow, Xero)

Candis saves a lot of time with expense tracking, simplifying a lot of the process of tracking expenses by:

Microsoft Excel

 Because what else? Google Sheets and other tools have come a long way in terms of more advanced functionality for finance professionals, but Excel still remains the CFO’s tool of choice for its better macro and pivot table support.

The following process happens at the end of each calendar month:

This Excel template is a slightly simplified version of what we use at ChartMogul to make business decisions with greater confidence.

You can download it for free here in .xlxs format (no email required):

First, fill in the global parameters at the top of the sheet:

For the first scenario, fill in the scenario parameters:

Once this is complete, repeat for up to two additional scenarios you’d like to plan — this could be your “middle case” and “worst case”, or something else more specific to your business strategy.

Got each scenario planned out? Great! Now you should take a look at the projected Cash in account chart below, which will look something like this:

First things first: Take a look at the numbers. Do they seem sensible to you? If they clearly don’t line up or feel right, you’ll need to look back into the expenses and try to understand where things went wrong.

Secondly: Now we’re getting to the fun part (no, really). Typically what we do from here is take a look at the manual adjustments. It’s this row where we can play with different mini scenarios, and quickly get an output estimate of the impact of different events on our future cash flow. Use the manual adjustments for:

Are you doing your cash flow planning differently? Did you find a great way to simulate scenarios without getting too deep into macros and pivot tables? Let us know in the comments below! We’d love to hear your ideas or feedback.|||

A practical guide for Founders, CEOs and business leaders, to help you understand the basics. Also Includes a FREE Excel template for scenario planning!