Just a little over a week after buying a huge chunk of land at an industrial park east of Reno, Google is filing paperwork in Nevada once again, this time to see if it can procure power outside of utility company NV Energy, which has a monopoly in the state.

Google filed a declaratory order with the Public Utilities Commission of Nevada on Tuesday to see if it can look for more competitive power options outside of NV Energy for a potential project. Google bought 1,210 acres for $29.1 million earlier this month at the Tahoe Reno Industrial Center site about 20 miles east of Reno-Sparks.

Google has yet to officially announce what project it plans to build at the site. The most likely candidate — at least in the short term — is a data center, which becomes even more plausible with Google's PUC filing given a data center’s energy demands.

“We're in a position where until Google does something publicly, then we're subject to confidentiality,” Steve Hill, executive director of the Governor’s Office of Economic Development, told the Reno Gazette-Journal last week. "We look forward to working with them through the rest of the process if they determine what to do with the land."

The declaratory order submitted to the PUC does not mean that the company has made a decision to not use NV Energy, according to a source familiar with the filing. The company, however, wants clarification from the PUC about its energy options under Nevada law. This includes the ability to more competitively acquire power from various sources, with a big focus on clean energy.

Google is not the first company to seek independence from the Nevada utility, which counts Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway as its parent company. Several Las Vegas heavyweights MGM resorts International and Wynn Resorts paid about $100 million in exit fees combined to leave NV Energy. In Reno, Peppermill Casinos filed notice last year with the PUC to leave the utility as well.

Nevadans also voted last year in favor of the Energy Choice Initiative, which aims to break up NV Energy’s legal monopoly in the state. The measure still needs to pass a second vote in 2018 for it to become a constitutional amendment.

NV Energy declined to comment about the filing when reached by the Reno Gazette-Journal on Tuesday afternoon.

Google’s purchase of land in Northern Nevada was welcomed as another economic development win for the state. Google’s arrival follows a list of high-profile companies that include Apple, which continues to expand its data center as Reno Technology Park, as well as Tesla and Panasonic, which are working together on the Gigafactory at the Tahoe Reno Industrial Center.

“Google is an internationally recognized and respected brand and one of the premier technology companies on the planet,” Gov. Brian Sandoval said to the Gazette-Journal last week. “As with all businesses, the state stands ready as a willing and friendly partner in the development of this site.”

Just like the “Tesla effect” proved to be a boon for driving up interest in the area, Google’s arrival should prove to be a powerful recruiting tool for the area, according to economic development proponents in the state.

Although a data center project does not come with the same number of jobs as other sectors, just being able to brandish Google’s name is a big deal for company recruitment, said Mike Kazmierski, president and CEO of the Economic Development Authority of Western Nevada.

“When you can start rattling off names like a Google or a Tesla or a Panasonic, people start looking at Reno differently,” Kazmierski said. “I do think we’ll see a ‘Google effect.’”

Lance Gilman, a principal for the Tahoe Reno Industrial Center, says Google is already having an effect for their industrial park, especially with those in the technology sector.

“Our phone started ringing off the hook the minute the Google deal hit the media,” Gilman said. “We had a call within 24 hours from one of the biggest software companies in the world wanting to take a look at us.”|||

Move by Google is latest in growing trend of companies seeking independence from NV Energy, a Nevada utility monopoly owned by Berkshire Hathaway.