The electric multi-rotor market is booming. After the Flyboard Air of Frenchman Franky Zapata and the eHang, 184 aircraft able to accommodate one person, the start-up Kitty Hawk supported by Larry Page had a personal electric vehicle, the Kitty Hawk Flyer, stolen.

Decidedly, playing flying men is in the air of time. Between “flying car” and personal gear (AAV), the choice is exhaustive.

So after the Flyboard Air of the Frenchman Franky Zapata and the eHang 184 electric multi- turn taxi aircraft, it is the turn of the young start-up Kitty Hawk to perform a demonstration of its Kitty Hawk Flyer.

The first visual impression is that of a mix between a motorcycle and a Speeder bike of the Star Wars saga with a sort of protective net, with two floats added to the set.

Because this is the particularity of this Kitty Hawk Flyer: it can only evolve over a body of water, in zones devoid of human activities.

As the company says, no need to have a flight license (at least in the US) to ride this aircraft equipped with 8 electric rotors. On the other hand, it will be necessary to spend a few hours in a simulator before being released.

In view of the images, this “octocopter” operates like a helicopter (take-off and landing) via two joysticks placed on each side of a control screen.

The Kitty Hawk Flyer rises to 4.60 m and flies at less than 50 km / h. This aircraft will be marketed at the end of the year at a price that has not yet been disclosed. We know that by becoming a member of the Kitty Hawk club ($ 100 for 3 years), subscribers will receive a $ 2,000 discount on the final price of the device.

The baptized Kitty Hawk, the start-up, paid tribute to the brothers Wright who in 1903 made the first motorized flight in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina.

The company has the same financial contributor as Zee.Aro: Larry Page. The man is a true flying car enthusiast like his friend Elon Musk, with whom he spent long evenings imagining new means of transport.

Where the CEO of Tesla and Space X is looking for a new high-end transport, Larry Page prefers to opt for a more affordable alternative.|||

Because this is the particularity of this Kitty Hawk Flyer: it can only evolve over a body of water, in zones devoid of human activities.