I'm not here to talk about my marriage. Though not wanting to talk about my marriage is part of the reason we were in couples therapy in the first place. Let's just say I had drifted, in my early forties, from a midlife malaise—the graying temples, the softening gut, the wandering eye—into a full-blown marital crisis. There are two sides to every story, and my side is that it was all my fault.

In early 2009, my wife—whom I desperately wanted not to lose—and I started spending Friday afternoons sitting on a sectional sofa in a Manhattan apartment belonging to a woman I'll call Jocelyn. In her company, we cataloged the symptoms and tried to excavate the causes. "You know," Jocelyn said to me during one session, "maybe you need some new friends." Appropriate friends. Men. My own age.

What is she talking about? I thought. I have plenty of friends! Colleagues I sometimes had lunch with. College buddies I saw when they were in town. The network of simpatico couples with children the same ages as ours who constituted our main social circle. If it was true that I lacked a pack—a collective entity I could call "the guys"—wasn't that a sign of my enlightened rejection of the savage rituals of male bonding? I'd done my time—in grade school, riding bikes to the 7-Eleven to peek at Playboys; in college, debating French movies over bad red wine and Camel straights in filthy dorm rooms—and evolved beyond it.

Even if Jocelyn was right, it was hard to see how to put her advice into practice. At the time—and still, as far as I know—there was no such thing as platonic, homosocial Tinder. There was also the daily, difficult work of marital repair, which demanded my full attention. Things began to get better. Though the acute crisis eventually passed, I settled into my old malaise, a state of remission well short of a cure.

"Hey, do you play poker?" Jeff asked me one bright Sunday morning in the dugout of a Brooklyn softball field, about two years after the therapy session. I'd known him for a while; our daughters were on the same team, and over a half-dozen springs we had become friendly acquaintances, which was as close as I got to friendship in those days.

Against my habits and instincts, I said yes. Which wasn't a lie, exactly—I had played a couple times in college without great distinction or enthusiasm. But I was bluffing. Self-bluffing, really: I would have to back up the gamble of accepting Jeff's invitation to join the monthly game he played in by proving myself worthy of it, by being the kind of guy who could sit at a poker table, drinking and shooting the shit. To me, that represented an all-in existential bet.|||

A. O. Scott joined a poker night to make friends. It also saved his marriage.