Mobile apps are used on a daily basis and their influence is going to continue to grow according to the App Market Forecast by App Annie. They project mobile app store revenue to exceed $139 billion in 2021, and downloads to top 352 billion. Surprisingly, they predict not only the major markets to drive growth, but according to the report — newer, emerging markets will help lead the way. By 2021, a number of markets which do not generate a significant number of downloads in today’s age will rise to be in the top five drivers. App Annie projects India, Brazil, and Indonesia to join China and the United States as the top market leaders. Combined, these five countries will contribute 54% of all worldwide downloads.

In the App store, downloads are somewhat evenly distributed across countries as compared to revenue. In 2016, the top five countries represented 54% of worldwide downloads. These metrics are expected to remain roughly the same through 2021 as growth in China and India balances out growth outside the top five. Meanwhile, the top five countries represented a hefty 75% of the global revenue pie in 2016. This is expected to increase to 85% in 2021, due to increased spending on games and subscriptions from existing smartphone users in mature markets, primarily urban China, but also the United States, Japan and South Korea.

Global mobile app store downloads forecasts claim an increases at an annualized growth rate of 19% to hit 352 billion in 2021, while global spend grows at 18% to reach $139.1 billion in 2021. App store growth is impressive, yet store revenue is one piece of the app economy, with in-app advertising and mobile commerce revenue continuing their surge in parallel (not included in this report).

Google Play and third-party Android stores are forecast to see downloads grow at an annualized rate of 23% to 299.9 billion by 2021, thanks to growing smartphone and app adoption in emerging markets, particularly India, Mexico, Brazil and Indonesia. iOS will remain the most lucrative app store through 2021, generating $60.3 billion, thanks to growing revenue per device from Apple’s comparatively affluent customer base. However, the combination of Google Play and third-party Android is forecast to exceed iOS in 2017 as the sharp growth in installed base of Android devices makes up for lower user purchasing power.

In 2016, games represented 11% of time spent in Android apps and 39% of all app downloads, yet generated 81% of consumer spend via stores. Many non-game apps monetize through advertising or commerce. Revenue through these channels is even greater, but this revenue is outside of app stores in this report. However, in-app subscription revenue from apps related to media streaming, news and dating is routed through the app store revenue channel that we forecast to grow at an annualized rate of 25% — outpacing in-app purchase revenue from games — and reaching $33.8 billion by 2021.

In China, app store downloads are expected to grow at an annualized rate of 19% while consumer spend grows at 24% from 2016–2021. Though smartphone adoption is reaching saturation in Tier 1 Chinese cities, much of China is still under-penetrated. Growing smartphone adoption in these regions will drive growth in app downloads over the forecast period. On the revenue side, China has a couple of unique advantages. Purchasing power in China, while not as high as in mature markets, is still notably higher than other emerging markets. In addition, China bears a cultural resemblance with other mature East Asian markets when it comes to discretionary entertainment spend, notably on games. This combination of factors is forecast to lead to significant growth in per device app store spend, driving overall revenue growth.

India is poised for spectacular growth in smartphone ownership over the next five years. As a result, we expect app store downloads to grow at an annualized rate of 28% to nearly 23 billion by 2021. Given the recency of smartphone adoption, India is not yet driving material app store revenue. We expect app store spend to grow at a rate of 75% annually to $2.1 billion in 2021, but its share of global spend is expected to remain under 2%. Purchasing power in India is significantly lower than mature markets and this is compounded by the fact that cultural norms favor saving over discretionary spend on gaming and entertainment. The iOS App Store is projected to remain the single most lucrative app store through the forecast period, generating more than $60 billion in gross consumer spend in 2021. However, the combined consumer spend on Google Play and third-party Android stores is expected to overtake it in 2017 thanks to their dominant smart device market share and strong installed base growth. China will continue to be the largest market for global mobile app store spend, exceeding $56 billion in 2021. Meanwhile, rapid smartphone adoption throughout Southeast Asia is fueling downloads, with India’s downloads approaching 23 billion in 2021. Gross consumer spend on games via all mobile app stores should exceed $105 billion in 2021. Spend on apps (excluding games) in categories like news, media and dating apps is forecast to grow significantly faster and hit $34 billion in 2021.|||

Mobile apps are used on a daily basis and their influence is going to continue to grow according to the App Market Forecast by App Annie. They project mobile app store revenue to exceed $139 billion…