There is a growing controversy in France between those who accept to vote for Emmanuel Macron against Marine Le Pen, even if they don’t approve his policies, and those who refuse. Getting more and more heated, the debate is transforming into a fight about the Republic. Supporters of Jean-Luc Mélenchon and others insist that this institution is weak, corrupted, inefficient and unjust. With 19% of the first-round vote, they have not taken a firm position or decided which way to vote.

It’s not a first in France.

In 1951, in his essay “The Rebel, an essay on Man on Revolt”, Albert Camus wrote about these “nihilist revolutionaries”:

As Hadley Freeman has it in the Guardian:

Pollsters think that it’s very unlikely that Marine Le Pen can beat Emmanuel Macron in the second round of the presidential election. But they have been wrong quite a lot recently, and this run-off is unprecedented due to the lack of establishment candidates.

In contrast to the supporters of Macron, polls show that those who say they will vote for Le Pen are most certain of their vote. This means that high levels of uncertainty and apathy could benefit her.

Facing her, Macron will only rely on those that voted for Fillon, Mélenchon and Hamon in the first round — but 37 per cent of Mélenchon voters, for example, have said that they’ll abstain in the second round.

To be clear, since they won the first round on Sunday, Emmanuel Macron and his En Marche supporters have given the impression that they consider the election as already decided. They look like they’re not campaigning anymore. Some of them have announced that they were beginning their own legislative campaign. Others are already fighting for positions within the administration. And Emmanuel Macron has not manifested his intention to gather French people around him in order to fight.

On the other side, Marine Le Pen is not losing any time. She’s been omnipresent in the media and tried to hijack a visit that Macron had organized today in a Whirlpool factory in Amiens, forcing him to come back in the afternoon.

It looks like they’re waiting for to the losing candidates from the Right and the Left to lead the campaign against Le Pen.

As an example, various civil rights organizations organized a protest in Paris on Monday, but neither Macron nor his supporters showed up. François Fillon, Manuel Valls and Benoit Hamon expressed the importance to vote for Emmanuel Macron, but nobody from En Marche seemed to be thankful to them.

They must not keep their victory for granted.

It’s time Emmanuel Macron and his supporters begin taking the second round of the elections seriously. Given the level of controversy, it’s not up to their former opponents to campaign in their place.

They must speak up.|||

There is a growing controversy in France between those who accept to vote for Emmanuel Macron against Marine Le Pen, even if they don’t approve his policies, and those who refuse. Getting more and…