I’ll say what everyone else won’t: It’s not young people. It’s old people.

They’re absolutely terrible at investing in the right opportunities. Less than a decade ago, they were responsible for massively wrecking the U.S. economy.

This stupidity is known as the housing bubble. It’s when old people incorrectly believed they had to own house, and they bet massive amounts of money they didn’t actually have to get their very own home.

You can read more about the Housing Bubble here.

Not even 10 years later, the same helicopter, my-way-or-the-highway nags who blew up our economy because they wanted to own a house are convincing young people to commit the same stupidity they did.

This time it isn’t about houses. It’s about education.

We’re in the middle of an Education Bubble that’s about to pop and no one is even talking about it.

No one is talking about it because the people in power are reaping massive benefits from this bubble, and everyone is too scared to go against this dogma.

I take that back. There is one person trying to bring awareness to the bubble — Thiel:

Three entities have joined forces, creating a mutually beneficial, bulletproof alliance. The relationship between young people and this alliance is like relationship between Superman and Kryptonite:

I want to repeat the numbers I shared with you at the very beginning of this post because they’re important.

The numbers don’t lie. The most votes win. There’s safety in numbers.

We (Millennials) significantly outnumber our suppressors, which means we have a choice.

Option 1: We can accept that this is just the way shit works in the United States and become a bunch of educated derelicts, who work at Starbucks and live with their parents forever and never feel the elixir of financial independence.

Option 2: We band together and confiscate control from the leaders who’ve sweetly ripped us of our independence by: lending us a shit ton of money at exorbitant interest rates; providing us with an endless supply of unpaid work opportunities that cost us hundreds and thousands of dollars each; and then tossing our resumes in the trash when we finally apply for a paid full-time job.

Maybe I’m an anomaly, but I think option 1 is really freakin’ shitty.

I’m one of the lucky ones. I’m fully self-sufficient and do work that I love for the companies decide to work with.

Since dropping out years ago, only two people have asked me why I don’t have education listed on my resume — two — that’s it. Because all that matters is your proven, real-world, relatable experience.

I’m not telling you this to brag. I’m telling you this because I’m tired of being the only one who speaks up.|||

If you’re neutral in situations of injustice you have chosen the side of the oppressor. — Desmond Tutu And there comes a time when one must take a position that is neither safe, nor politically…