Here is a full list of the best performance testing and load testing tools on the market. The tools are presented in the list in a random order. If we missed any of the tools please add a comment and we’re going to update the list. Choose the right performance testing tool for your need:

LoadFocus is an All-In-One cloud testing platform for Load Testing and performance testing, Website Speed Testing, Automated Website Testing for Websites, Mobile Applications and APIs and Mobile Emulation on Mobile Devices.

LoadFocus is an easy and cost-effective way to test your Websites, Mobile/Web Applications, Web Services and APIs.

The Grinder is a Java load testing framework that makes it easy to run a distributed test using many load injector machines. It is freely available under a BSD-style open-source license.

Gatling is an open-source load testing framework based on Scala, Akka and Netty. Project’s aims include: High performance, Ready-to-present HTML reports, Scenario recorder and developer-friendly DSL



is an open-source multi-protocol distributed load testing tool. The purpose of

is to simulate users in order to test the scalability and performance of IP based client/server applications.

Apache JMeter™ is a graphical server performance testing tool, for both static and dynamic resources (files or CGI, Servlets, Perl scripts). Apache JMeter™ is open source, a 100% pure Java application designed to load test functional behaviour and measure performance.

OpenWebLoad is a tool for load testing web applications. It aims to be easy to use and providing near real-time performance measurements of the application under test.

JCrawler is an open source (under the CPL) Stress-Testing Tool for web-applications. You can give JCrawler a set of starting URLs and it will begin crawling from that point onwards, going through any URLs it can find on its way and generating load on the web application.

WebLOAD is easy to use, supports most of our requests. It is easy to create/record scripts for web applications especially dotnet applications. Easy correlation and helps even a starter to handle dynamic values. Easy integration with Dynatrace. Good analysis report. Great reporting.

LoadComplete is a desktop tool for load, stress, scalability testing of websites and web applications. LoadComplete allows you to generate load from virtual machines, on-premise computers, or even the cloud.

LoadRunner – Load testing software that gives you an accurate picture of end-to-end system performance to identify and resolve issues before applications go-live.

IBM® Rational® Performance Tester is a performance testing solution that validates the scalability of web and server applications. Rational Performance Tester identifies the presence and cause of system performance bottlenecks and reduces load testing complexity.

NeoLoad – Fast. Realistic. Powerful. NeoLoad load and performance testing solution realistically simulates user activity and monitors infrastructure behaviour so you can eliminate bottlenecks in all your web and mobile applications.

LoadUI is an API load testing solution. With a visual, drag-and-drop interface, it allows you to create, configure and redistribute your Load Tests interactively and in real-time.

WAPT is a load and stress testing tool that lets you easily analyze the performance of your web site. It can be a mobile application, a web service or a customized ERP system.

Loadster is a full-featured load testing solution for websites, web apps, and web services. It’s built for real web apps and effortlessly handles cookies, user sessions, custom headers, dynamic form data and more. Loadster simulates individual user state and gathers stats for each virtual user separately.

LoadImpact – Load test your website, app or API instantly with up to 1.2 million concurrent users. Get unlimited tests with a free trial.

Testing Anywhere lets you easily monitor your app or website performance. Built on a visual platform, the software provides load testing tools such as enhanced graphs and quick views, so you can quickly implement changes, reduce bottlenecks, and deliver top-quality products.

Appvance UTP is the first unified test automation platform that completely transforms the software QA process.

OpenSTA is a distributed software testing architecture designed around CORBA. The current toolset has the capability of performing scripted HTTP and HTTPS heavy load tests with performance measurements from Win32 platforms.

LoadStorm is a cloud load testing solution to find the scalability of web or mobile applications. Make a browser recording (HAR file), upload it, parameterize it, and begin testing in minutes.

httperf is a tool for measuring web server performance. It provides a flexible facility for generating various HTTP workloads and for measuring server performance.

BlazeMeter platform for load and performance testing enables dev and QA teams to run scalable and continuous testing for website, mobile, api and software.

Soasta CloudTest gives you complete load testing flexibility – from development to production. Test quickly and continuously, at any scale, with unprecedented real-time insights into end-to-end performance.

Loader.io is a FREE load testing service that allows you to stress test your web-apps & apis with thousands of concurrent connections.|||

Here is a full list of the best performance testing and load testing tools on the market. The tools are presented in the list in a random order. If we missed