This research highlights leading firms with proven success in cloud projects.

WASHINGTON, April 25, 2017 -- Clutch has released research on the leading cloud consultant partn ers of Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud. The research conducted is based on Clutch's methodology which examines the firms' proven success delivering reliable, high quality results to their clients.

The following firms are listed as the 2017 Amazon Web Services Partner leaders:

The following firms are listed as the 2017 Microsoft Azure Partner leaders:

Impiger Technologies, Oxagile, Mindsight (formerly Tympani), SADA Systems, Soluciones Orion, CRA | Computer Resources of America, Switchfast Technologies, ComputerSupport, Binary Republik, Welcome Networks

The following firms are listed as the 2017 Google Cloud Partner leaders:

These featured companies have been evaluated based on industry experience, market presence, and ability to deliver results to clients. Clutch analysts consider many quantitative and qualitative factors in addition to conducting interviews with current and past clients. This comprehensive approach is designed to give buyers a realistic understanding of what the service providers' strengths and weakness are.

"Cloud adoption is rapidly growing, and with it, a new set of skill requirements," said Alex Miller, Senior Analyst at Clutch. "Having a team experienced in leading cloud solutions is imperative to ensuring an effective and efficient cloud strategy."

Identifying leading cloud consultants is part of a continuing effort by Clutch, and firms with a demonstrated history of outstanding client service are encouraged to apply for inclusion in future research.

The full research and reviews can be found at:

A B2B research firm in the heart of Washington, DC, Clutch connects you with the agencies and software solutions that can help you enhance your business and meet your goals. Our methodology maps agencies and software solutions based on consumer reviews, the type of services offered, and quality of work./p>|||

This research highlights leading firms with proven success in cloud projects. WASHINGTON, April 25, 2017 -- Clutch has released research on the leading cloud consultant partn ers of Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud. The research conducted is based on Clutch's methodology which examines the firms' proven success delivering reliable, high quality results to their clients. The following firms are listed as the 2017 Amazon Web Services Partner leaders: Intuz, Soluciones Orion, SETA International, ComputerSupport, Fpweb.net, Ideamine, Menlo Technologies, LCloud LTD, SCI-BI, Dedalus The following firms are listed as the 2017 Microsoft Azure Partner leaders: