3D Systems has announced a bioprinting agreement with United Therapeutics which will see the two companies develop solid-organ scaffolds for human transplants with 3D printing.

Combining their respective expertise in 3D printing and regenerative medicine and organ manufacturing, the collaboration will remain for a number of years.

The agreement will pit 3D Systems personnel alongside professionals from a United Therapeutics subsidiary, Lung Biotechnology PBC. Since the collaboration will primarily focus on the development of 3D printing systems for solid-organ lung scaffolds, Lung Biotechnology PBC is seen as best placed to work with 3D Systems.

The printing system will target collagen, and other building block proteins, as scaffold raw materials. Lung Biotechnology PBC will cellularize the scaffolds with patient-specific biological material, including re-differentiated stem cells.

“Our partnership with 3D Systems is a major step forward in creating an unlimited supply of tolerable transplanted organs,” said Martine Rothblatt, Ph.D., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of United Therapeutics. “By cellularizing scaffolds created with 3D Systems printers with a patient’s own cells, there will no longer be a need for immunosuppression and a vastly greater number of patients can extend their enjoyment of life through organ transplantation.”

3D Systems is a company with a wealth of experience in the medical sector. Its precision healthcare capabilities include simulation, virtual surgical planning, and the printing of medical and dental devices. Two of 3D Systems leading executives are not only confident in their company’s own knowledge of the medical 3D printing sector, but also of United Therapeutics’ own expertise. Though conceding the challenge is not straight forward, the pair foresee new solutions being born from the partnership.

“As a global leader in healthcare solutions, we are part of many developments and applications for 3D printing coming together including bioprinting,” said Vyomesh Joshi, Chief Executive Officer, 3D Systems. “We believe bioprinting is a powerful opportunity and we are uniquely positioned with the broadest portfolio of technologies to partner with companies of the calibre of United Therapeutics to provide healthcare solutions of the future.”

Chuck Hull, Executive Vice President, Chief Technology Officer, 3D Systems, added: “Combining the resources of United Therapeutics and 3D Systems transforms our capability to tackle this difficult challenge. This project will be based out of our new bioprinting lab in San Diego, CA, and will rely on expertise across many technical disciplines within 3D Systems as well as the domain knowledge of our technical partners at Lung Biotechnology PBC.”

Meanwhile, the collaboration and joint development will add another technology alternative to United Therapeutics’ pursuit of an unlimited supply of organs for human transplantation.

Dr Rothblatt concludes: “Our Lung Biotechnology public benefit corporation is taking personal regenerative medicine to its highest level yet with this practical, economic solution to a major health care program. Indeed, we expect one personalised organ transplant will avoid years of health care spending on palliative medical therapies.”|||

3D Systems has announced a bioprinting agreement with United Therapeutics which will see the two companies develop solid-organ scaffolds for human transplants with 3D printing.