MP4 is the most popular video format which can be supported by most meida players. However some users feedback that MP4 files play slow on a computer, watch a MP4 video time is so long. The tearing, stuttering, slow or choppy MP4 playback on a computer really makes user go crazy. Nobody wants to watch a 2 hours video with 5 hours. There are many reasons cause this issue, from the constant test and verify, this article will analyze this terrible condition in detail and provides the effective solutions for you to play MP4 on computer without waiting.

MP4 is not only the simple video format which contains video and audio data for computer playback. "MP4" is a video container and holds different video and audio parameters, such as: Video codec, video size, video resolution, and so on. All the factors can affect the playback speed that user plays MP4 on a computer. Of course the computer related configuration and running programmes also can cause this issue.

From above iformation, following provides the corresponding solutions for your reference, I can’t make all the ways can work 100%, because different computer configuration and different media players type can get different results, Don’t ignore it and if a patron comes with such kind of problem, try and give it a test. Hope one way can help you to play MP4 on a computer as fast as you want.

Sometimes the power can cause this issue, user can check the power settings, because "USB selective suspend" is probably turned on. If you own a laptop, this might not be the best setting to change but it still might be the solution to your problem.

1. Start menu -> type into search "power" and choose Power Options under Control Panel results

2. Find your power plan and click "Change plan settings", then "change advanced power settings"

3. Scroll down until you find "USB settings", there change "USB selective suspend" to disabled

When users are watching MP4 video and runing other programmes, various programmes will occupy the speed and CPU loading which will affect the MP4 playback speed. User can do the following steps to improve the MP4 playback.

1. Close all windows that are not required.

4. Remove all the startup programs from startup window.

Mention to MP4 playback, computer graphics driver is important. Graphics driver will send the information to video hardware-either a discrete video card or the integrated graphics chip in your processor-how to handle every type of video program you are running. If the graphics driver version is too old, it means that graphics driver can’t send the information to your computer video hardware quickly, then the the driver may get the information slowly, even can have errors that lead to slow playback. So user need to keep the driver updated.

If user replace another MP4 video and play on a computer smoothly, only one particular MP4 plays slowly on a computer, most reason is that the MP4 file is damaged. Video file errors often occur these error phenomenon: video slowdown, video skipping, stuttering or the inability to use the seek bar. User can download the video from the source website again.

Above solutions are just basic. One condition is complicated, the MP4 files codec is not best supported by media player, even though MP4 can be suported by most media players, the different media player support different MP4 codec, if the MP4 codec is not the media player supported, media player must decode the MP4 files which will cause the slow play. Video resolution is fatal, too high MP4 resolution will cause this issue too. So the best way is to optimize the MP4 video with a third video converter.

Here, Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate is a professional video converter which can convert MP4 to any video format which can be supported by Windows Media Player, VLC, QuickTime Player, etc without quality loss. This MP4 video converter provides user 250+ formats, such as: H.264, MKV, AVI, H.265, M3U8, MOV, WMV, Apple ProRes, MPEG-2 etc. You can choose anyone you want.

4K MP4 can bring user the high video quality enjoyment, however, 4K video needs the high resolution, PC configuration, etc. If the PC can’t support 4K video or can’t play 4K video smoothly, user can compress 4K MP4 to HD MP4 or SD MP4 which can be played smoothly. Best of all, user can enjoy 3D MP4 video in this MP4 video converter by converting 2D MP4 to 3D MP4, this software allows user to choose 3D video: 3D SBS MP4, 3D TAB MP4, 3D Anaglyph MP4.

About the video high resolution, user also can adjust the video size, frame rate which can reduce the video. At the same time, user can change the video and audio codec to the best supported format at the setting menu. The excellent MP4 video converter can support video editing, for example: Add the subtitles in MP4 video, user can add SRT, SSA, ASS subtitles, add the watermark or text to MP4, adjust the MP4 video effect, etc. When user want to share MP4 on Camtasia Studio 8, iMovie, FCP, FCE, Premiere Pro, etc. User can cut the video to the standard video length.

Click “Add Vide/Audio” or “Add from folder” button to load your MP4 files video or audio files. You can load any MP4 format, such as: MPEG-4 MP4, H.264 MP4, H.265 MP4, DivX MP4

Click “Format” bar, and select .mp4, .wmv etc from “Common video” or “HD video” to choose your desire format which is the best supported format of the media player on your computer. Then click "Browse" to choose the output file save location.

Click “Settings” on the main interface to open “Profile Settings” window, here, user can flexible adjust the output profile parameters including video codec (H.264 or H.265), resolution (1080P or small), bit rate, frame rate(30fps), audio codec(mp3, aac, etc), sample rate, channels(stereo, Dolby Digital or 5.1 surround), etc.

After all settings are completed, hit the “Convert” button at the right bottom of the main interface to begin the MP4 video conversion. Then user can play MP4 on a compuer happily.

In fact, this MP4 video conveter is so easy to master, user just need 3 clicks, a complicated issue is solved. Good news, this software not only can support other video import, such as: AVI,WMV, MKV, MPEG, etc. also can load DVD and BD disc and folder, so cool. I believe this software will be your best video assistant.|||

Why MP4 play slow on a computer? How to fix the MP4 play slow on a computer? Read this article, you will find the reasons and solutions.