Samsung had a somewhat difficult 2016, but not for the Galaxy S7 and S7 Edge, which were quite welcome, but for Note 7 and the already more than known problems with its battery that made it withdraw from the market.

Not long after it was rumored that it would sell again, but with a smaller battery to prevent it from happening again.

Not long ago this was confirmed, although the most enthusiastic about this idea did not seem too good that it was not to be sold globally.

One of the data that was not known is the price at which the terminal would be sold, which finally seems to have been revealed, and yes, it will be cheaper than when it was put up for sale for the first time.

To begin with, the terminal would be renamed Samsung Galaxy Note 7R and, as a reminder, the battery would go from the original 3,500 mAh to a more contained 3,200 mAh. At the moment the phablet would only be sold in Korea and would have a price of 620 dollars at the exchange, that is, 250 dollars cheaper than the 870 that cost the original output.

Samsung recently confirmed that it would sell again the Note 7, but with a smaller battery. However, it seems that it would only sell for the moment in Korea, and $ 250 cheaper than the original.

Another data is that the operators that would sell it would be SKT, KT and LG Uplus (South Korean operator that belongs to LG Corporation, which owns LG Electronics) from the end of June.

It is not known if the phablet will leave that country, although they have warned that, for now, they do not intend to sell it in the United States or Canada, which makes us a little pessimistic in this regard.

Now that it is certain that the Note 7 refurbished (or Note 7R, as you prefer) will be sold, taking into account that it is not very far in Galaxy S8 hardware, remains to know if it will hinder sales of the current flagship, but That is something that will be seen in the coming months.|||

Samsung Galaxy Note 7R and, as a reminder, the battery would go from the original 3,500 mAh to a more contained 3,200 mAh