Last week, it was suddenly clicked in my mind that my mom’s birthday is about to come after three days. I didn’t plan any gift or party yet. Even due to the tight schedule, it was not possible for me to go out and arrange the things for her. In this situation, I simply picked my smartphone and made the required arrangements such as gift ordering, restaurant booking, and inviting the guests within one hour of time span using few mobile apps.

This case made me realized how much smartphone is important in our day to day life. If we look at this case from the commercial perspective, companies having trendy mobile apps for the businesses can win more opportunities than others.

Both the enterprise mobile apps or consumer-focused mobile apps ultimately automate the business processes, increase users’ engagement, improve business efficiency, and generate maximum ROI. These are the reasons mobile app development market is continuously growing. Generate and seize infinite business opportunities by outsourcing your mobile app project to a reliable mobile app development company.

Are you still in a dilemma to develop mobile apps for the business or not? Read out this article. It gives you the reasons why mobile apps are an integral part of the businesses.

Today, the world has smart users who perform their various personal and professional activities using the smartphone. App Annie conducted a survey regarding how much time individual users are spending on apps. They stated that the average time individual users spend on apps was increased by 25% from Q1 2014 to Q1 2016.

This number clears that we are spending more and more time with the apps in compared to past years.

As per research of App Annie, “Between Q1 2014 and Q1 2016, we saw the worldwide average length of an app session on Android phones increase by approximately 35%.” Users interaction with the mobile apps is usually complex and longer, as they are accessing video and music content as well as gaming and shopping activities.

Additionally, sophisticated features of the app inspire app users to interact with the app more and more. Intuz professional build intuitive mobile apps that help businesses in addressing consumers’ frequently changing needs effectively. Interaction through mobile platform facilitates with more flexibility and comfortability that is capable enough to disrupt traditional platforms.

Smartphone is considered one stop solution of this millennium as it offers infinite information to the people about any topic or search. Users choose the mobile platform for online shopping and search than computers.

A recent study of Ofcom suggested that smartphones become “important device” in the UK by overtaking laptop usage for accessing the internet.

In the US, mobile devices are gradually replacing the Televisions by allowing users to watch their favourite shows and tournaments anytime anywhere.

If we talk about China, mobile is the primary device in the quickly growing markets.

Whereas mobile-first companies are redefining Indian retail industry as long-term infrastructure investment in Wi-Fi and mobile networks, begin to pay off.

Thus, mobile is expanding all over the world and becoming the first screen for consumers’ in developed as well as emerging markets. There is no doubt that we are living in an era of mobile-centric customers with the mobile-driven economy where tradition platforms are losing their charisma.

Mobile is the hottest platform to grab numerous business opportunities and increase customer engagement. Let’s see how mobile app development drive more businesses to the companies.

According to research, mobile ads will generate more revenue than Television ads by 2020. Promote your products/services via mobile ads to gain customer attention and generate leads. Mobile ads boost marketing strategy of the businesses by providing them next level exposure.

Users prefer mobile apps to purchase the products/services. App Annie remarked that there were 90% of user who uses mobile apps to make a buying decision. Only 10% of user uses top browsers to purchase the products/service.

According to Google, in 2016, 50% of users used mobile apps to make a purchase decision, 45% of users preferred mobile apps to search for the product information, and 29% of users made a purchase online and offline based on the research from mobile apps. As per a research, during the Black Friday 2015, online and mobile were the most preferred platforms for shopping across the US region. The Western retailers stated that basket spend was greater in an app in compared to purchase from mobile or desktop browser.

Apart from transactional benefits, retailers also want to develop mobile applications to enhance users experience and boost customers’ loyalty and interest. Mobile apps help businesses to deliver personalize experience to the users by sending them targeted notifications.

So, take a step ahead and make your business mobile-centric to close all business opportunities successfully.

Consumers favor communicating with the business through messaging instead of calling. So, retailers have started to use various chat tools such as click-to-message, chatbots, 3rd party messaging apps, and much more. By sending right message to right target audience at the right time, business can attain more competitive advantages of mobile messaging apps than any traditional channel.

Today, consumers are more tech savvy as they are more comfortable with the smartphone to purchase the products/services. As per a survey, the mobile-first concept is widely accepted by the younger users. So, it will be one of the dominating trends in the very near future. Retailers of emerging or developed market have to embrace the mobile app to accomplish their business milestones and drive assured success.

Looking to develop next generation mobile app for your business? Avail proven expertise of Intuz team that promises you to deliver extreme satisfaction with expected output.|||

Last week, it was suddenly clicked in my mind that my mom’s birthday is about to come after three days. I didn’t plan any gift or party yet. Even due to the tight schedule, it was not possible for me to go out and arrange the things for her. In this situation, I simply picked…