Morning Report: Uber’s valuation is falling on the private market. Its mistakes, controversies, and failings are taking a toll, despite its rapid growth and progress towards profitability.

Uber’s 2017 has been rocked with allegations of a deeply sexist culture, executive departures, and a lawsuit from an Alphabet company claiming extensive IP theft. And that’s the short list: Hell, Greyball, and the company’s CEO himself have also dogged the company this year.

And what happens when a rapidly growing private company is in the midst of a period so difficult that it decides to release financial performance showing an adjusted loss of $2.8 billion for the prior year? Its value drops.

The Information reported this morning that Uber’s share price on private markets has fallen. According to The Information, Uber’s share value among private investors has fallen around 15 percent, a per-share price that values the ride-hailing company at “around $50 billion.”

Getting granular, this is how it breaks down:

At the beginning of this year, buyers were bidding in the low- to mid-40s per share, equivalent to a valuation closer to $60 billion, the broker said. More recently, potential buyers and sellers have been seeking to do deals in the mid- to high-30s per share, or a valuation of around $50 billion. Uber’s last financing round at $48.77 per share valued it at around $68 billion, but secondary market buyers have generally not been willing to pay that price, even before the recent controversy.

That Uber’s value was falling before its recent spate of bad is perhaps not surprising in the wake of its retreat in the Chinese market and continued losses.

The valuation response mechanism will always be faster for public companies than private firms. But even Uber, which has shown a willingness to exercise taught grip on its equity, is not immune from an old fashioned repricing.

Homework: Does Uber see a material price decline in value the next time it raises external money or is the current dip merely a gulley?

All the Q1 VC news in one post|||

