United Airlines faces fresh controversy today after a 'fit and healthy' giant rabbit expected to become the world's biggest died suddenly on one of its planes.

Simon, a ten-month-old 3ft continental giant rabbit expected to weigh more than 2st 5lbs when fully grown, was bought by a mystery US celebrity buyer who paid more than £2,000 to fly him from Heathrow to Chicago.

Had he lived Simon was expected to outgrow the world's biggest rabbit - his 4ft 4in father Darius.

But his devastated owner Annette Edwards from Stoulton in Worcester claims he died in the cargo hold of United Airlines flight from Heathrow Airport to Chicago on April 19.

United told Annette, a breeder of large rabbits and former Playboy model, survived the flight but died when being held in a storage room in O'Hare International Airport.

The row over Simon's mysterious death came weeks after passenger Dr David Dao was filmed being beaten and dragged off a United Express flight sparked widespread outrage.

Dr Dao, a 69-year-old from Kentucky, was seen with a bloodied face after being forcibly taken off the plane by Chicago airport officers who had been summoned by United employees when he would not give up his seat.

Simon's new owner is expected to sue because he paid £2,000 for Simon's flight, £85 vet bill and £300 for Simon himself.

She said: 'Something has gone wrong somewhere and I can't think for a moment what it might be because nothing like this has ever happened before - it's awful.

'I was devastated and for a couple of days I was feeling numb, just awful and feeling really bad and I think everybody concerned was very upset.

'The gentleman receiving Simon got the phone call when he was on his way to the airport to collect him to be told he had died.'

Annette said: 'What I cannot understand is if he was alright when he landed in Chicago what has happened between then and them finding him dead after he'd been checked on a couple of times?

'I need some answers before we send anyone else on a plane again. I was going to keep Simon but because I've got such a good relationship with the buyer I knew he's going to have a good home so I was prepared to let Simon go.

'Simon was a stunning boy with black fur and blue eyes and the gentleman wanted a boy he could show off which was going to be so nice for Simon.

'I took him for a full health check at the vets on the day of his flight on the 19th of April. He went for his health check at around 6:15pm he left me around quarter past nine.

'He looked so happy at the vets, hopping about everywhere. He had his temperature taken, heart checked and a thorough going over which was all fine.

'He went from Heathrow to Canton and when he landed at Chicago he was checked and alright he was absolutely fine apparently he was left in a room for when they've got another flight to go.

'He was checked a couple of times and was alright but when they checked him for the next flight they found him dead.'

Simon is the son of Annette's 4ft 4ins rabbit Darius, who holds the title of world's biggest rabbit.

But he was expected to overtake Darius who weighs in at a whopping 2st 5lbs.

She said: 'It's just for the love of it Darius' babies that I sell them. It gives me great pleasure to share these wonderful with these creatures around the world but it's definitely not a business.'

'If one of Darius' babies is going abroad they have to be at least 14 to 16 weeks old to fly. This gentleman wanted one that wasn't very small but still getting bigger.

'I've sent quite a lot of animals abroad before but I'd never send them anywhere if I thought there was a risk of death so I need to know the results of the investigation.

'They're now looking at CCTV to find out what's gone wrong. At this stage we don't know what to do and I've told the gentleman to let me know how he wants to go forward.

'Out of all the animals that travel every day it's very rare for something like this to happen. Pets are transported all the time and not least in the army which is why I'm so shocked.'

A spokesman for United Airlines said: 'We were saddened to hear this news. The safety and well-being of all the animals that travel with us is of the utmost importance to United Airlines and our PetSafe team.

'We have been in contact with our customer and have offered assistance. We are reviewing this matter.'

Ms Edwards previously hit the headlines after she spent some £10,000 on plastic surgery to transform herself into a real-life Jessica Rabbit.

She spent thousands to look like the Who Killed Roger Rabbit? film character after a life dedicated to the creatures.

The great-grandmother from Worcester - who has ten children of her own - went under the knife in London for a series of operations at a clinic in the capital's famous Harley Street.

Over a period of a week, surgeons carried out a range of expensive procedures, including a £3,600 breast lift and £2,750 brow lift on her eyes. Next were £2,800 worth of chin implants and a further £600 of botox injections in her face.

Ms Edwards, a former model, is a world famous breeder of the animals - a number of which have gone on to become the biggest in the world.

Ms Edwards shot to fame in 2004 when her pet Roberto was crowned the biggest rabbit on the planet by Guinness World Records.

Next came Amy to take the title, but that bunny's daughter, Alice, took the honour in September 2009, coming in at a massive three foot, three inches long and weighing three-and-a-half stone.

Her other pet Darius, who measures over four feet long and weighs in at a whopping three and a half stone, is now officially the world's biggest rabbit.

It costs her £5,000 a year to feed her giant bunnies as they munch their way through 2,000 carrots and 700 apples.

Continental Giants are the largest breed of rabbit and can grow to around 4ft when fully grown but Darius - who is officially four foot four inches long - and his son Jeff come from a bumper crop.

Jeff was born after Ms Edwards introduced Darius to one of her other rabbits Sally - another Continental Giant who measures 3ft 5 inches.

The family all live in her back garden but they are so big that they each require a dog crate that would normally house a pet as large as German shepherd.

The incident could cause another potential PR storm for United Airlines after 69-year-old physician Dr David Dao was dragged off a Chicago-to-Louisville United Express flight on April 9, leaving him with a broken nose and a concussion.

United Airlines said: 'We were saddened to hear this news. The safety and wellbeing of all the animals that travel with us is of the utmost importance to United Airlines and our PetSafe team. We have been in contact with our customer and have offered assistance. We are reviewing this matter.'|||

Simon, a ten-month-old 3ft continental giant rabbit,  pictured, was found dead in the cargo hold of a United Airlines flight form London to Chicago O'Hare International Airport.