That works out to 5.8 hours a week and just over 300 hours a year.

What else do you spend at least 300 hours a year on other than sleep, commuting, and your job? Maybe reading (lol). Maybe watching TV (smh). If you have a dog or a kid, that. Not vacationing. Probably not sex (sorry).

How many times have you thought, “Gosh, if I just had an extra 20 minutes a day!”…Well, you spend more than double that “liking” things. ☹️

So, we agree, 50 minutes every day is a lot. It takes about 32 hours to read War & Peace. Give up Facebook and read 10 more classic novels a year. You’ll perform way better at cocktail parties.

That’s one person. What if we consider all Facebook users?

Let’s just get the math out of the way…

…Starting to see where this is going?

That’s about 1,025,000,000 hours a day or around 117,000 YEARS of human life. Put another way,

Facebook has done an amazing job of *connecting* the world. Seriously, great job guys and gals. You’ve added a ton of value.

But now that the world is connected the next logical question should be: What are you going to do with it? Or, better, What are you going to do FOR it? It can’t be, “more efficiently serve it ads”. The Facebook PR machine is way too high-minded for that crap.

Facebook should be spending less time copying the frat bros in LA and more time figuring out how to get this mass of humanity off its ass and living better, healthier, and MORE PRODUCTIVE lives. If Facebook were to shift even a fraction of that 50 minutes a day from clicking “like” to doing something productive, that would profoundly impact the world.

I’ll tell you! But, first, let’s consider how much the average human’s time is worth in terms of economic output.

World-wide GDP per capita is right around $16,000. There are roughly 2,o00 “work hours” in a year. This gets us to just about $8 of output per hour for the average human or $2.66 for 20 minutes. Sum across 1.23 billion people and you’re at a cool $3,271,800,000 of potential economic output, per day.

Which, by the way, is more (in a day!) than the annual GDP of countries like Belize, Bhutan, Djibouti, and Liberia.

Annualized, that’s more than the GDP of countries like Mexico, The Netherlands, Switzerland, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Austria, Norway, …

Harnessing that much human time would produce the 15th largest economy in the world.

Obviously *that* isn’t going to happen. But the numbers are so monstrous that even changing the behavior of a small, single-digit percentage of users would have huge impact. (20 minutes a day for 1% of Facebook users would be roughly equivalent to the economic potential of Mongolia).

This isn’t a pipe dream. I recently wanted to reclaim some of my own time from Facebook, so I built a Chrome extension that turns my FB Newsfeed into my todo list. I literally cannot use Newsfeed until I complete some tasks.

It’s dead simple and it works. In 3 months an infinitesimal percentage of FB users (about 5,000) have completed around 50,000 todos. I don’t know what those tasks were but, to me, that represents real people actually getting shit done rather than mindlessly scrolling their feed and propping up “engagement” metrics. This is small, but it matters. Users write to me regularly to thank me for helping them waste less time and be more productive.

This is why Facebook should be building productivity tools.

And I’m not talking about Facebook At Work (Slack is winning anyways). I mean for regular, everyday users.

Facebook should be building tools and features that encourage these people to do more, not less. To be better, not worse… We’re living in a crazy time. Lots of people are struggling. The world doesn’t need more likes.

Note: To their credit they did launch a jobs thing last year, which is cool. They should do more things like that.|||

What else do you spend at least 300 hours a year on other than sleep, commuting, and your job? Maybe reading (lol). Maybe watching TV (smh). If you have a dog or a kid, that. Not vacationing…