A one-page website is a site with just one page which the user can scroll through. A lot of one-page websites still have a primary menu. People can click on the menu items, but instead of going to another page, they go to another section on the same page. In this article, I'm going to show you how to create just that with WordPress!

A one-page website can be a good solution if you're looking for something fast. One-pagers heave many advantages, for example, the site doesn't have to reload to get to another section. Users can easily navigate between sections and find what they want fast. With a one-page website, you also have the control in what order people see your content. You may want to show all the benefits of your product or service first and at the end show them the pricing, or maybe the other way around.

The one-pager is ideal for sites that just have to give a little information about each subject. Let's say you have six main items you want to talk about each with one or two paragraphs. If you divide this content over six different pages, it could give the impression that your site is underdone.

Most one-page websites use a lot of relevant images that give. Dividing these pictures over different pages with just one image on each one can again give the impression your site is a little bit underdone. As you can imagine a one-page website with different images relevant to each subject which the user scrolls through gives way better feeling.

One-page websites often have a very good mobile phone experience as the site doesn't have to reload after every page transition. People can find what they need on any device fast, and it's not even a problem if they disconnect whilst on your website. Since the page is already loaded, they will still be able to go to the different sections. This way your site can even feel like a mobile app instead of a normal website. As a matter of fact, there are apps in the App Store that use this method.

If you're serving massive amounts of content, it could make your one-pager very long and hard to scroll through.

If you think a one-page website is for you, then read on. After this, you will be able to create your very own one-page website.

I assume you are familiar with WordPress and I don't have to explain the installation process. I recommend you to use a localhost like XAMPP for building the website, so you won't have to buy hosting in advance. When you're done, you can migrate your site to a live server. If you don't know what a localhost is, don't worry there are many video tutorials on YouTube, and it's really no rocket science. If you install XAMPP and watch their tutorial video on how to install WordPress on your localhost, you'll have WordPress up and running within less than an hour. This is all totally free.

You can use any theme for a one-page website. For this example, I'll be using the free "SiteOrigin North" theme that can be found in the WordPress theme repository. Go to Appearance -> Themes -> Add New in your WordPress dashboard and type in "SiteOrigin North". It should be at the top of the list now.



 It's a simple, but well designed, responsive theme that also works very well with WooCommerce. It's made by the developers of the page builder plugin we're going to use for the site in this example. Again, feel free to use another theme, the transition effects when you click a menu item will work either way. I advise you to use a theme that has a sticky menu, so your site's visitors won't have to scroll to the top of the page again to click on a menu item that brings them to a different section.

Most important for creating one-page websites are the plugins you use. I'm going to install a page builder named SiteOrigin and a widget extension for this plugin. Both are completely free and hosted in the WordPress plugin repository. Go to Plugins -> Add New in your WordPress site's dashboard and type in page builder by siteorigin. The plugin will appear at the top of the list, install and activate it. You can install the widgets bundle plugin on the same screen, type in siteorigin widgets bundle in the plugin finder. Make sure both plugins are activated.

Since version 2.3 of this page builder, they added the one-page website scroll feature. This is what we need to get the website scrolling whenever someone clicks on a menu item with the ID of a row as href attribute. I'll explain how this works later in the tutorial.

Now you have the plugins activated, and we're ready to build our page. First, add a new page or edit a page. Go to the tabs at the top of the page editor and click on the newly added "Page Builder" tab.



 SiteOrigin Page builder has many presets, so we won't need to build an entire design from scratch. You'll see some buttons above the page editor, one of them is the "Layouts" button, click it.



 You'll now see a screen with all kinds of layouts; these are the presets you can use. You can also import and export layouts, but I don't assume you have these yet. For this example I'll pick the "Fitness Gym" design, of course, you can pick any design you want or start from scratch. Click on the chosen design and click the Insert button in the bottom right corner. If you already had content on the page, you can choose to insert it before or after the content or replace it altogether. For me, it doesn't matter since I have an empty page.



 Go ahead, save the page and visit it. If everything went right, we could add our IDs. Switch to the "Live editor" mode by clicking on the link in the WordPress admin bar at the top of the page you just created.



 When you hover over the elements on your site, you can see exactly which widget represents which element. Go to the first row after the SiteOrigin hero at the top, click on the tool icon and edit row. On this screen, go to "Attributes" and add your row ID. I'm going to give mine an ID of "activities".



 Give every row a different ID, when you're done, save the page.

We're not done yet, we now have to create our menu items, so when a user clicks on one of the items, the page navigates to that specific section of your site. Go ahead and create a new menu in Appearance -> Menus in your WordPress dashboard. We're only going to create custom links in this menu. In the image below I'm creating one for the row I just added the "activities" ID to.



 You see that the URL of the custom link is now the same as the ID of the row element. SiteOrigin page builder is programmed to recognize this and will know that it has to scroll to the specified section. It's very important that you don't forget to put in the hash in the URL of the menu item, this is the format of an HTML ID attribute. However, do not add in the hash in the Attributes -> Row ID section in the customizer, SiteOrigin page builder, already knows this is an ID.

Congratulations! We're done already, you can now build your very own personalized one-page website easy and fast with just two plugins and any theme. It will keep your site fast and very user-friendly. Building this site took me less than an hour, it's the easiest and fastest way I found to build a beautiful one-page website. Best the thing is that it's free.

Do you know another way to accomplish this? Let me know in the comments. If this post was useful to you, then share it with your friends on social media so they can benefit from it as well.|||

Creating a one-page website in WordPress doesn't have to be complicated. Follow these simple steps and have a one-pager in just one hour.