This month, Justinmind brings you another fantastic update to your interactive prototyping tool, with an emphasis on the interactive part! Transform your Sketch designs into fully functional prototypes, embed .wav and .mp3 audios in your prototypes, create events for multiple targets in Masters to spread them globally across your wireframes, and tons more. Read on for all of our news!

Justinmind brings you a brand new integration with design tool Sketch. You can now export designs you’ve made in Sketch to Justinmind with a nifty new plug-in. Then, you can work on your designs in Justinmind!

Export the entire artboard to Justinmind as an image and to create interactive prototypes with drag and drop effects and animations, or export the artboard in individual layers to easily edit styles as well as add functionality. Read this tutorial for all the details on configuring this plug-in and get started with our Sketch integration!

Justinmind now lets you embed .wav and .mp3 audio files in your prototypes! This is a great new feature for adding rich, dynamic content to your interactive designs, and will give your prototypes an even more realistic edge. Check it out for yourself here.

Until  now, you could add events to elements in a screen or within a template with a master as the event target. Now, you can add events to elements in a screen or within a template with any of the items in your masters as the event target.

And as we introduced with Templates in our last release, you can now add multi-target events with master items as the event target. This will allow you to easily distribute multi-target events globally in your prototypes!

We’ve improved the functionality of our Scenarios in a few ways:

With the Creators update of Windows 10, you can now simulate your Justinmind prototypes in Microsoft Edge upon exporting to HTML.

Download our update now and check out all of our new stuff for yourself! Can’t wait to see what you make!|||

New Sketch integration, audio file embedding, enhanced event capabilities and improvements to Scenarios in this release!