Amazon has unveiled the Echo Look, a new voice-controlled selfie camera pitched as the ultimate bedroom companion that allows AI assistant Alexa to give you fashion tips and tell you what to wear.

The camera, which is available by invitation only in the US costing $200 (£156), stands on a shelf armed with four LEDs for lighting, a depth-sensing system and a microphone array to receive commands just like Amazon’s other Alexa-powered Echo and Echo Dot.

The camera uses the depth information to produce “computer vision-based” blurred backgrounds so you can apparently look your best in full-length selfies. It will also capture video, so you can give your audience a twirl in your finery.

But Echo Look is more than just a glorified Echo Dot with a camera, says Amazon. The company’s machine-learning system will compare the photos of different outfits you’re wearing and judge which one is more “in” at that very moment.

Amazon said on its product page for Echo Look: “Style Check keeps your look on point using advanced machine-learning algorithms and advice from fashion specialists.

“Submit two photos for a second opinion on which outfit looks best on you based on fit, colour, styling and current trends.”

Amazon promises that Echo Look’s style advice will get better the more people use it and the more fashion advisors pitch in.

Echo Look performs all the duties of other Echo devices as well, allowing users to set alarms, ask questions, get the headlines, play music and the many other different activities Alexa is capable of.

For piece of mind, a button on the side turns off both the camera and the always-listening microphone. Whether buyers will be happy installing what is essentially an internet-connected smart camera in their bedrooms remains to be seen. But a system capable of taking full-length photos or short videos so people can get a 360-degree view of themselves should appeal to the selfie-obsessed hordes already populating social media.|||

Hands-free, voice-powered smart selfie camera takes photos and videos on command while its virtual assistant Alexa gives fashion advice