Many companies are looking for a panic button system for their facility, because of the violence we are experiencing in America today. Global and domestic terrorism is a huge problem, and companies are looking for ways to actively respond. Many companies are buying security products online and out of security magazines. Corporate management teams purchase metal detectors, buzz-in systems, surveillance cameras, and all these great safety products that become a hindrance to daily operations. Therefore, security initiatives are often then taken away. These efforts become a nuisance to day-to-day functions. Finding solutions to a security problem should be cultivated and embraced by your facility.

There is a major problem with the traditional panic buttons. This type of panic button system is a blanket product that usually requires a construction crew to install which interrupts daily office activities. Many traditional buttons are offered through local alarm companies. The alarm company hardwires the panic devices in through your phone system to be able to send out alerts. The problem with that is, you do not know how long it takes to contact responders or if it is even working. CRS tested some old-fashioned panic system a few years ago. We are still waiting for the confirmation to go through that the alert was received. The old school panic button defaulted, and no one knew. Imagine a situation where you think the signal went through to responders and it did not. What do you guess is going to happen?

Software driven alert systems offer security initiatives in a panic button for your company that is technology based. There are systems in today’s market that integrate internal and external notification alerts to multiple people, using multiple channels ALL at the push of a button. You also get the benefit of multiple alert levels instead of just the one alert level offered by traditional panic systems. Some of the new age notification systems also provide E911 integration. Meaning the warning system will notify employees through multiple channels, but it will also call your local 911 dispatch. Furthermore, modern notification systems are easier to manage. You can usually make changes from one centralized point without contacting your local alarm company for assistance.

In conclusion, the panic button systems of today are far more reliable than the old school panic buttons of yesterday.  New age software alerts systems are also far less expensive and easier to install. When choosing a panic buttons for your facility, step into the 21st century. Leave the outdated panic button systems in the past where they belong. Panic button systems should be updated regularly to combat our country’s growing statistics of crime. Don’t be left behind in the technology revolution.|||

Are you looking for a panic button system for your facility? Global and domestic terrorism is a huge problem in America. Read further to find out more.