The most disadvantages faced the solar panels it’s can’t get full solar power so scientists work to make solar panels more effective and give more power , scientists in Switzerland have figured out a way to utilize Graphene in solar panel design, raising its efficiency to an absolutely staggering 60% and the researchers at the Institute of Photonic Sciences in Spain claim graphene can produce multiple electrons for each photon of sunlight it absorbs-generating proportionally more electricity than the 1:1 ratio of photons to electrons silicon cells are limited to, Graphene Solar Panels researchers estimate that the material could yield 60 percent or more up to double that of the most efficient silicon cells.

In cloudy or rainy conditions solar panel doesn’t work but new solar cell prototype depends on graphene able to generate electricity by raindrops!

 This solar cell developed by a team of scientists in Qingdao, China.

 This tech needs a mere one-atom thick graphene layer for an excessive amount of electrons to move as they wish across the surface because of graphene high conductivity, among many other benefits. In situations where water is present, graphene binds its electrons with positively charged ions. Some of you may know this process to be called as the Lewis acid-base interaction.

The little salt contained in rain separates into ions (ammonium, calcium and sodium), made as a catalyst, so that can lead to developing new generate of graphene solar panels work from evaporation or sea drizzle special in coasting areas or became ideal to used in ships and boats, the water actually cling to the graphene, forming a dual layer (AKA pseudocapacitor) with the graphene electrons. The energy difference between these layers is so strong that it generates electricity.

In crowded cities very hard used solar panels because of narrow places that available to puts solar panels but graphene solar panel present new solve to make it easy use solar panel in every house!

 Researchers Develop transparent or semitransparent solar cells with high efficiency and low cost, so can instate of glass in windows can imagining what happen if skyscrapers use it how produce massive power from own windows.

 In 2008, a research team at the USC Viterbi School of Engineering reported the large-scale production of highly transparent graphene films by chemical vapor deposition technique,The researchers created ultra-thin graphene sheets by depositing carbon atoms from methane gas in the form of graphene films on a nickel plate.

And The Department of Applied Physics of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU) has successfully developed efficient and low-cost semitransparent perovskite solar cells with graphene electrodes (“Efficient Semitransparent Perovskite Solar Cells with Graphene Electrodes,”). The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of this novel invention are around 12% when they are illuminated from Fluorine-doped Tin Oxide bottom electrodes (FTO) or the graphene top electrodes.

Researchers presented prototypes depend on graphene lightweight and flexible solar panels could be molded to suit an automobile body or wrapped around any surface or building, in addition to roofs. They have the potential to collect light and generate power when added to any surface.

 This new solar panel not flexible only but very strong also because the graphene the strongest material in the world so it strong and can be resisting the hard conditions, will enable it to be widely used in the future.|||

