Red Hat, Inc. (NYSE: RHT), the world's leading provider of open source solutions, today introduced Red Hat 3scale API Management as a fully containerized, on-premise offering for end-to-end API lifecycle management. The on-premise release builds on the existing cloud-based SaaS offering and expands the deployment options available for the platform, providing organizations with a more powerful and flexible solution for managing application programming interfaces (APIs) at scale within their own datacenter.

As the first major release of the platform following Red Hat's June 2016 acquisition of 3scale, Red Hat 3scale API Management – On Premise builds on Red Hat's vision to accelerate digital transformation and innovation with API-driven hybrid cloud architectures. Described as the “new language of collaboration,” APIs serve as the building blocks underpinning today's hyperconnected economy, driven by mobile, the Internet of Things (IoT), and new application architectures such as containers and microservices.

Deploying Red Hat 3scale API Management on-premise via Red Hat OpenShift Container Platform enables customers to effectively manage the full lifecycle of their APIs without having to expose services externally, providing greater security and control to help meet regulatory requirements—all while taking advantage of powerful configuration, deployment, and administration capabilities for DevOps.

Named a leader in Gartner's 2016 Magic Quadrant for Full Lifecycle API Management, Red Hat 3scale API Management provides the API-based architecture needed to support an agile integration approach for modern application development, alongside containers and distributed integration capabilities.

Availability

 Red Hat 3scale API Management is expected to be available for download this week from the Red Hat Customer Portal.

Supporting Quote

 Steven Willmott, senior director and head of API Infrastructure, Red Hat

 “Following the rise of mobile and IoT, the API economy is emerging as one of the key foundations of enterprise software platforms. With Red Hat 3scale API Management - On Premise, customers gain greater flexibility, choice and control over their API environment, enabling software teams to better focus on creating tangible business value.”|||

Red Hat expands deployment options for Red Hat 3scale API Management Platform, giving customers flexibility, scale and control over the full lifecycle of their APIs, whether on-premise or in public, private, or hybrid cloud environments.