Okay, let's get it out of the way: Amazon's Echo Look is pretty creepy.

Not just the camera and recording functionalities, but the whole idea of an intimate space being used to market and target under the guise of fashion improvement is pretty nerving. At my daily brand hotsheet meeting, I did an informal review of the device with all-but-me female team at work about the device and was met with disturbed glances.

Nods of approval were in full force as my female team agreed, the Echo Look just felt so out of place. Why do we need this?

However, I was brimming at the excitement of the possibilities.

Not long ago, I bought into the idea of Microsoft Kinect, a camera with 3D sensing functionality that would allow me to peer in and interact with my screen with my entire body.

Of course, the Kinect failed in the market, mainly for the cumbersome nature of it. You needed to have a large, spacious area. It's lackluster accuracy was dependent on several rounds of user calibration. It's microphone didn't pick up voices too well (try screaming Cortana at my Xbox 5 times in a row). It needs a game controller to augment functionality. And it's price, at $150, not including the Xbox powering the device, defeated it from the start.

Yet, here is the Amazon Echo Look, masquerading as a baby Kinect. Except this time, the processing isn't happening on the device. It's on the cloud. Machine learning is powering the camera to blur out backgrounds a la Portrait mode on iOS. AI is making a customer's clothing decision easier and quicker. It's a well designed, portrait device, designed to blend into your room with a white, Apple-like coating on the device.

Amazon's Alexa team is clearly using this device as a way to refine its recognition capabilities. But once it breaks out the mold, developers will get a powerful API to play with. What will they build? I have a few postulations:

Amazon took advantage of our cloud connected world (hell, they pioneered AWS) and reduced the costs of camera-enabled computing. At $199, you have an always-on, ready to go, accurate assistant who can use its "eye" to simplify and capture the story of your life.

Why would you get a Kinect? Why would you get a Nest Dropcam when this has more functionality at a similar cost? And if you think Snapchat, Facebook and other tech players aren't watching (no pun intended), you haven't been paying attention.

I love my Echo Dot but I can already see the horizon ahead. Kudos to you Amazon. Your move Apple, Facebook, Snapchat, Microsoft, and Google.

Side note: While the Amazon logo is a ghastly design oversight on the front of the Echo Look, most people won't care. They'll be too busy looking at their own selfies on their phone. Also, how awesome is it that Amazon took advantage of the screen we always carry with us as it's viewport. No need for an expensive LCD when you already have one in your pocket. 

|||

