I trained a “document classifier” to guess facts about encyclopedia articles, using:

Then I ran it over articles from Tolkien Gateway, the biggest Lord of the Rings wiki, and got surprising results. Let’s dive in!

First off, what do I mean by facts from WikiData? WikiData is like Wikipedia, but with the knowledge structured in such a way that computers can use it well. Here’s an example:

Here’s a more controversial one that clearly needed a reference:

A few months ago Google did the dirty work of wrangling the data from Wikipedia and WikiData into one place, and put it in a massive zip file on the internet, and released a paper about trying to use it to guess facts about Wikipedia articles. You can read about my initial exploration of it if you’re in the mood.

Meanwhile, Facebook have a tool called FastText that can learn associations between the phrases in a document and facts about said document.

So in the above example, it can notice that the article about Shigeru Miyamoto uses the word “he” a lot more than it uses the word “it”, and contains the phrase “was born” instead of “was constructed”. So the next time it sees an article with those features, it might guess that the article is talking about a human instead of a bowling alley.

Once I was getting good results guessing facts about unseen Wikipedia articles, I decided to try it out on articles from Tolkien Gateway, my go-to resource for resolving arguments about whether Isildur’s dad is named Elendil or Eärendil.

People seem to really like Gandalf:

What did FastText say were the most likely facts about Gandalf?

On the fact of it, these might seem a little silly. But keep in mind:

While The Ring was obviously a participant in the most important conflict of Middle-Earth, he was on the opposite side to Gandalf and co. But can we really blame my nascent AI for being fooled? Even Boromir son of Denethor got confused in the end about which side it was playing on.

Little is known about The Ring’s career at the summer games, except that it bent all five Olypmic Rings to its will.

I find it fascinating that Sam is one of the only people labelled as American in the whole legendarium (Éowyn being another). Please tell me your theories.

As for the drug trafficker thing:|||

Then I ran it over articles from Tolkien Gateway, the biggest Lord of the Rings wiki, and got surprising results. Let’s dive in! First off, what do I mean by facts from WikiData? WikiData is like…