Getting feedback (from real live customers!) is a crucial part of the product development process.

And ideally, you want it as early as you can get it. Phil Tadros of Doejo, a firm that specializes in building products using agile practices, even goes so far as to say it’s the main error a lot of managers make: “Too many product managers fail to solicit feedback from both their team and customers early enough in the development process.”

Aside from getting feedback early on in the process, you’ll also want to collect feedback at all of the major milestones in the product (and when new versions are released). Getting that customer insight on how they’re liking the new additions to the product and what they’d like to see in the future can help guide your product roadmap and create a stronger product in the end.

Uservoice did a survey on the influence of customer feedback on the product development process, with the results showing that most companies find traditional customer interviews to be the most valuable source of feedback.

The problem is that they’re also the most time-consuming/costly way to get feedback. When budgets are tight (or as the amount of feedback to be collected grows) people tend to turn to in-app feedback as a way to get more feedback without having to more conduct 1:1 interviews.

For more on getting feedback from mobile users, check out this post at KISSmetrics. (Uservoice also has an extensive guide on in-app feedback here.)

When you’re collecting feedback, you shouldn’t just be saying, “Is there anything we could do better?” You need to follow up with more details and find out why it is that the customer wishes the product would do XYZ.

Our very own Camille Acey, VP of Customer Success here at Clubhouse, has some tips on the right kinds of questions to ask and why they matter, starting off with Cindy Alvarez’s suggestion from Lean Customer Development:

Camille goes on to add:

For more of Camille’s thoughts on user feedback, head here.

All of the product feedback you’re collecting — whether it’s coming from one-on-one interviews, in-app feedback, or customer support — should be tracked in a way that makes it difficult for you or your team to impose your own assumptions onto the feedback.

If you aren’t tracking the number of customers wanting a specific feature, then it’s easy to accidentally prioritize the feature requests that you care about or want to implement, even if that’s not what people are asking for.

As Justin Seymour, head of customer support at Help Scout, puts it:

What’s your feedback process like? We’d love to hear about it — and if you’re looking for a tool to help manage your product development process, be sure to check out Clubhouse!|||

Here’s how to obtain feedback to help develop your product and how to set an action plan to make it happen.