In the present era are high availability and scalable systems. First, you can learn about how to make an application redundant and puts two instances with a load balancer in front of it. Incidentally, a load balancer is becoming one point of failure. A load balancer is a point of entrance to their data center. They are many critical paths to be accessed everything and anything. It gives some interesting characteristics. The first one is the most important thing that is a monitor in infrastructure. The second one is that there is a distinctive position to give an insight not only regarding them but also regarding each and every service is backing. There are 2 popular open source software load balancers that are HAProxy and Nginx. Both load balancers are hire freelancers online that is given more explanation in a detailed manner.

HAProxy is reliable and fast open source solution for proxying and load balancing of HTTP and TCP-based application traffic. It is canonical modern software of load balancer. Also, it is supported as a basic feature of HTTP reverse proxy. It can provide some following advantages over the HAProxy as a load balancer:

Nginx is canonical modern software of web server. It is supported to serve a static content, HTTP / 2, HTTP L7 reverse proxy of load balance and other features. Nginx has so far on overall features rather than edge reverse proxy. However, modern service-oriented architecture does not make use of them. Even the freelance jobs provide some following important advantages over the Nginx as an edge proxy:

This comparison is by no mean complete feature list for each project. Look at the respective sites for getting more information. A full web server is present in Nginx while the haproxy is not present. Both Nginx and haproxy are asynchronies by the concurrency. Also, both are presented in load balancer and SSL offloading. Plug-in is statically compiled in Nginx and not present in haproxy. Admin console exists in haproxy while other does not exist. SPDY is supported both haproxy and Nginx through a plug-in. Nginx is running on the windows while another haproxy is not running on windows. TCP proxy exists in haproxy as same as not exist in Nginx.

All large customers have many web servers in a front end of the systems and all those have a few types of load balancing. Some use LVS or DNS and most Nginx use as a better load balancer. However, you can think about HAProxy is more powerful and better load balancer rather than Nginx. HAProxy is used for most of the systems that need to scale and good control or complex. Most of the people have been heard HAProxy and know it has the same architecture as a Nginx. Then it has to be the single threaded event driven system that may scale from 100 to 200000 simultaneous connections and 100000 requests as per second on the big systems. Most important that the HAProxy is flexible and more powerful with a different variety of front end, back end, flexible rewrite rule and checking, standby pool and much more.

HAProxy is flexible logging and powerful including how each request or connection was begun and end at what phase of HTTP and by who that really helps to troubleshoot. Additionally, a real-time API is allowed engineers to dynamically adding/removing server from the standby pool, which needs for testing. Maintenance and so on (though you have to build their special tool to make it very easy). The most useful part of HAProxy is sophisticated monitoring include nice GUI that is accessed in a web browser. Let’s see that the statistics and status of all standby pools and servers including request rates, connection, check info, errors and much more. You can hire freelancers online directly use for real-time monitoring and pulls data through API to feed your monitoring system.

Further, Nginx has none of those features and very simplistic specifically control and monitor. There is no another way to know that what server is okay. There is no status on the connection rate or other information that make very useful to your system for control, monitoring or troubleshooting. Nginx is very simple to work, but cannot be suited for complex or large systems. One thing HAProxy cannot do in SSL that is directly not supported. The easiest way of using Nginx has handled SSL connection on the port 443 and forward to a unencrypted connection of port 80. This is more complex, but not bad too and works well. Though some works are needed to get their client IP address and then passed in all way via the system to a real application server.

Generally, HAProxy load balancing is one of the best choices for the large scale load balancing of a real system specifically when you are changing many pools, good monitoring with control and complex needs.  Nginx is more convenient and nice solution specifically when one would leverage of its function together, but the HAProxy offers more when you can look at the freelance jobs for giving an advanced load balancing. Nginx is not a bad choice, but the HAProxy load balancer is much better.|||

In the present era are high availability and scalable systems. First, you can learn about how to make an application redundant and puts two instances with a