Just like humans, Newton servers also have bad days and get sulky. It’s annoying, but it happens. And when it happens, we have this error message flashing on the apps…

It’s just a generic error message that almost every software application shows when there is some internal error and users know it, right?

Let’s look at the top 5 reasons why you see this message.

…and there are 100 more reasons. But for none of these problems the user is supposed to do anything. They mostly recover on their own. So, if he tries again, it may actually work. So the message says that ‘something went wrong’ in the server and the user can ‘try again later’ and it may work. Mostly if the problem persists the user would report it to us and the error code helps us to troubleshoot. The error code represents one of the reasons mentioned above.

Surprisingly, we’ve got consistent feedback from some sets of users that this message made them think, that it was they who did something wrong, which made the app stop working. Not a big deal, but just that it made them a bit more upset.

I was anyway relooking at some of the error/alert/toast messages in the app, so I approached this one with this feedback at the back of my mind.

We wanted the first part of the message to make it clear that it’s not the user’s fault. Also, we felt that the second part is a bit cold (about when the user can try again). So we wrote it again.

We have never used ‘We’ and ‘Our’ anywhere in the app. So that was not working. Then how do we make it clear that it’s us and not them? Maybe don’t imply that something “happened” at all.

Somewhat there, can we do better?

Saying sorry suggests that it’s us. Can we make it a bit shorter to add the error code?

And we finalized on this one. This message is going live in the next update. We’ll update how it fares here.|||

Just like humans, Newton servers also have bad days and get sulky. It’s annoying, but it happens. And when it happens, we have this error message flashing on the apps… It’s just a generic error…