NEW YORK – Verizon today launched Fios Gigabit Connection – the nation’s largest deployment of gigabit Internet connection service. Fios Gigabit Connection provides downloads as fast as 940 Mbps and uploads as fast as 880 Mbps.

Priced at $69.99 a month standalone and starting at $79.99 a month for a triple play bundle when ordered online, Fios Gigabit Connection provides revolutionary speeds at a revolutionary price.

“Everyone deserves the fastest Internet available,” said Ken Dixon, president of Verizon’s consumer wireline business. “No cable provider comes close to offering the speeds and power of Fios Gigabit connection on this kind of scale. And we’ve priced it so that millions can enjoy it.”

Following the launch of Fios Instant Internet service in January, Verizon’s network performance exceeded expectations as Instant Internet customers regularly saw actual speeds well over the advertised 750 Mbps/750 Mbps. Verizon has since fine-tuned the service with new firmware and diagnostic tools to increase performance even more. The result is Fios Gigabit Connection service.

Fios Gigabit Connection is available to over 8 million homes in parts of the New York, New Jersey, Philadelphia, Richmond, Va., Hampton Roads, Va., Boston, Providence and Washington, D.C. areas – that’s a more than one million home increase from the Instant Internet footprint with the Washington, D.C. and Providence markets getting access to Verizon’s top Internet speeds for the first time.

Fios Gigabit Connection service bundled with Fios Custom TV and Digital Voice service is available online for $79.99 in year one and $84.99 in year two, with a two-year agreement.

In areas where Fios Gigabit Connection service is available, Verizon now offers two tiers of standalone Internet service – 50 Mbps for $39.99 a month and Gigabit Connection for $69.99 a month when ordered online. Existing customers who wish to upgrade to Fios Gigabit Connection will be able to do so online starting April 30. Customers with Instant Internet service today will soon automatically receive Fios Gigabit Connection and will see their bills lowered.

When Verizon began building its 100 percent fiber-to-the-home Fios network, it was a radical move based on the idea that in the future, customers would need more speed and capacity than we could imagine. That future is now here, but many don’t have the home Internet speeds to fully enjoy it.

Fios Gigabit Connection’s capacity is so powerful that it enables Internet speeds that are 20 times faster than what most people have today allowing customers to connect 100 devices at once.|||

Verizon today launched Fios Gigabit Connection – the nation’s largest deployment of gigabit Internet connection service.