Recently, at the end of a tutorial, a student asked Ann Rogerson a question she’d never heard before: Was it okay to use paraphrasing tools to write up assignments? Rogerson, a senior lecturer in the faculty of business at the University of Wollongong in Australia, was stumped — she’d never heard of these tools before.

It turns out, the student had learned of the tool from another student. For an assignment, the student had taken wording from a journal article and run it through a free online tool that automatically paraphrases text, so it evades plagiarism detection software.

Immediately, Rogerson remembered wording from a previous student submission that had always bugged her — in an assignment about employee performance reviews, the student had written awkward phrases such as “constructive employee execution” and “worker execution audits.” A lightbulb went off for Rogerson.

She immediately went to her computer, looked up the tools on Google, and easily found one. She typed in “employee performance reviews,” and the tool spit out “representative execution surveys.”

It was a troubling realization, she said:

In a recent paper in the International Journal of Educational Integrity, Rogerson and her co-author Grace McCarthy, also at Wollongong, describe what they’ve learned about these online paraphrasing tools, and the dangers they pose. (For tips on how to recognize when someone has used the tools, see the sidebar below.)

Although the paper focuses on the use of the tools by students, we asked Rogerson if the tools have entered into academic publishing; “anything is possible,” she told us:

…however I have no experience or evidence whether professional academics are using the tools for their scholarly publishing.  I have not observed any in the journal articles, book chapters and conference papers I have reviewed to date.  As the tools are freely available, there is nothing to stop anyone using them.  Some of their use may be masked by post-editing of the output to remove or address the errors that they generate.  Post-edited paraphrase tool work would be more difficult to identify, particularly for those outside of a discipline/research area and unfamiliar with specific terminology, formulae or indicators.

As we’ve seen more retractions stemming from third-party manuscript companies which share material between different groups of authors, we asked if it’s possible these services are employing online paraphrasing tools:

It is certainly in the realms of possibility for some less reputable manuscript editing companies to be using the tools or the algorithms behind them particularly where they offer very quick turnaround times and multiple disclaimers…It comes down to motivation at the end of the day – if editing companies are more concerned about making money through manuscript editing they will look for more ‘cost efficient’ ways to produce their content.  They are less concerned about academic rigour and more concerned about making money quickly.  Genuine editing services offered by qualified editors takes time.

Miguel Roig at St. John’s University, who has written extensively about the problem of plagiarism, told us he is concerned about paraphrasing tools — which he suspects at least one of his students may have used in the past:

Roig — who is also a member of the board of our parent non-profit organization — added that he wouldn’t be surprised if some third-party editing companies had used paraphrasing tools to some extent.

Debora Weber-Wulff, another plagiarism expert based at the University of Applied Sciences HTW Berlin in Germany, noted this newer crop of tools shows how difficult it is to quickly determine if a paper has been plagiarized. (Indeed, after Rogerson and McCarthy ran a section of their own work through two paraphrasing tools, the plagiarism detection software Turnitin recognized only a 50% and 30% match to the original). According to Weber-Wulff:

Weber-Wulff added that she is confident paraphrasing tools have already worked their way into the academic literature:

Rogerson is now trying to raise awareness of the problem for the next generation of professional authors:

I openly discuss their existence in class demonstrating how poor the tools actually are along with my encouraging student questions about originality, citations and acknowledgements when preparing for assignments.  Confronting the issue is important therefore I work with students on how to learn and develop paraphrasing skills without using an online tool.  Just because some online tools can easily and correctly convert temperature, distance and currency does not mean that Internet based text tools can be relied upon the same way.  The only way of bringing it to light is to talk and write about it.

SIDEBAR: How to identify text modified by a paraphrasing tool

Over time, Rogerson has developed some clues that tip her off when text has been tweaked by paraphrasing tools. For instance, her suspicions rise when she sees “inappropriate terminology related to the subject context:”

And if Rogerson sees a citation near the inappropriate terminology, she’ll go to the original text and do a short test-run:

Some other clues: A paper includes unusual strings of works — “word salads” — where the phrases don’t make sense; or a reliance on only older references, without anything related to more current thinking.

To illustrate, we put the above quote into one of the many paraphrasing tools we found online. Here’s how it would read:

Like Retraction Watch? Consider making a tax-deductible contribution to support our growth. You can also follow us on Twitter, like us on Facebook, add us to your RSS reader, sign up on our homepage for an email every time there’s a new post, or subscribe to our daily digest. Click here to review our Comments Policy. For a sneak peek at what we’re working on, click here.|||

