Editor’s note: This is the inaugural post of our new Salesforce Incubator Series. Check back in regularly to see triumphs and lessons learned from these 13 startups over their five months in the Salesforce Incubator.

The Salesforce Incubator is pleased to welcome Batch #2!

On May 1st, a new group of 13 startups will join our five-month program to build the next generation of apps on the Salesforce Platform, leveraging both the power of Einstein and the Salesforce AppExchange to make their apps more intelligent and grow their businesses.

Startups will gain access to a broad network of mentors and advisors as well as exposure to technology and industry events, and be able to work from a beautiful workspace within the Salesforce San Francisco campus.

Before they join us, we wanted to share a little more about the problems they solve for their customers and the current challenges they need to tackle.

iWaboo’s on a mission to connect IOT product builders and retailers through a curated platform. They aim to turn a time-consuming seller/buyer relationship into a simple, de-risked online experience.

As the company continues to grow its presence, the team needs to build a more efficient sales process. With help from the Salesforce Incubator, they hope to shorten the cycle, increase lead gen, deal-to-leads ratio and improve funnel management.

Glassbreakers will focus on scale as they get ready to jump from servicing tens of thousands of employees to hundreds of thousands of employees.

By analyzing sales calls, VoiceOps helps customers improve on weaknesses such as missed upsell opportunities, poor closing timing and insufficient qualifying questions.

In the next six months, the company, which just announced a seed round and rebranding (previously Clover Intelligence), will maintain its focus on building a world-class engineering team and growing its customer base.

Joonko offers AI-powered personal diversity and inclusion coaching, tackling unconscious bias in real-time. They believe that removing unconscious bias in real-time is the only way companies can provide all employees with a fair shot at success and truly achieve a diverse and inclusive workplace.

NeuraFlash’s participation in our five-month program will allow them to accelerate the pace of innovation when building solutions for Salesforce customers.

Prophit Insight helps healthcare providers drive top-line growth by providing the analytics they need to make better decisions.

During the program, Prophit Insight looks forward to tightening their Salesforce integration, including migrating their data visualization to Wave Analytics and expanding their AI capabilities by embedding Salesforce Einstein.

Diffeo is an AI-powered advanced search and discovery tool supporting business analysts in finance and consulting.

As part of the Salesforce Incubator, Diffeo plans to add new integrations to Sales Cloud and Quip to help customers uncover connections between people and companies across their CRM records, disparate data in private cloud tools, and the Web.

The team shared their plans for the next few months:

Usernap is a bot-ready in-app messenger for external, visual communication with your customers.

The team shared that through the program, they will be focused on:|||

Editor’s note: This is the inaugural post of our new Salesforce Incubator Series. Check back in regularly to see triumphs and lessons learned from these 13 startups over their five months in the…