I never really had a bias-to-action while growing up. I mostly overthought things and did very little of the things that I really wanted to do — Like make movies, write screenplays. I could find many narratives to explain this away, such as circumstances, up-bringing or education, but I’m pretty sure most of them will be narrative fallacies — seeing cause and effect where there is probably none. I ended up developing a lack of appetite and appreciation for uncertainty in life. My decision making when I was 21 can be summed up in the addendum that my father used to often repeat “Work hard, Minimize risks at all costs”.

After my graduation, I joined a start-up as one of the first employees. Thinking back on it, neither me or the first-time founders had any real appreciation of the uncertainty of starting up. Whatever we knew of the uncertainty of starting-up came from anecdotal evidence of Silicon Valley CEO’s and leaders we looked up to. But that lacks the authenticity and conviction of first hand experience. Its not that none of us faced any uncertainties in our life up to that point, its just that most of the uncertainties we faced were known and easy to understand. Everything is easy to predict in classroom education and a 9–5 job. We would learn how grossly unprepared we were about a year and half later, when the company would split into two and the founders would flounder in debt. That was learning the hard way.

One of the important aspects of starting up anything — a blog, making a movie, starting a company is the ability to make decisions based on imperfect and incomplete information. I usually get stuck for two reasons

Too much information is rarely good. The more information we have, the higher the probability that we will make our final decision based on an irrelevant, obscure piece of information. The smartest people in the world know this, take Warren Buffet’s Berskshire Hathway’s acquisition process for instance. Traditional buyers/investment firms will go through a 6–8 month due diligence process before acquiring a company. Warren Buffet acquired Precision Capstarts for $37 billion after talking for 25 minutes with the CEO and going through publicly available financial information about the company. To paraphrase Fortune magazine’s article on Warren Buffet:

Warren Buffet has of-course developed a simplicity in his thinking, that level of simplicity is of-course not simple to attain, as Steve Jobs said :

The easiest way to get your thinking clean is probably not thinking, its doing. I write because my thoughts become more clear and I become aware of my own inadequacies and holes in my thinking process. In a start-up, you follow the Silicon Valley addendum of “Fail fast, Be foolish” to get your thinking clear. In general, doing is the counter-intuitive (it seemed counter-intuitive to me all this while, no longer does) method to getting your thinking right.

Lack of courage or conviction is what has made me stuck and depressed many a time and still does. One way I convince myself to make a decision is by imagining myself as the protagonist of a movie. If my life was a movie, and I was the pivotal character, would I sit around and be in-decisive about the choice I am about to make?

Lajos Egri writes in the art of dramatic writing:

So, imagining yourself to be the pivotal character in your movie is a good way to trick your mind to be courageous. It’s something that’s worked for me when I was an adolescent and I kind of re-discovered recently.

Mail me on my 21.co profile for writing gigs. The $1 per mail goes to Coincenter|||

I never really had a bias-to-action while growing up. I mostly overthought things and did very little of the things that I really wanted to do — Like make movies, write screenplays. I could find many…