SHAREit is file transferring app design and developed by Lenovo which is alternative to the Xender app. The app offers easy and quick file transferring service. You can share any file from any device. There is a number of a user searching how to download SHAREit for PC or SHAREit for Windows PC but they fail to find such a good way. Currently, this app is available on Android & iPhone and many devices have already installed.

When thinking to transfer a file from one device to another device, we generally use Bluetooth or any other app but some app not able to transfer a file or it so much time to transfer files. But now we have SHAREit for Windows (7/8/8.1/10) and Mac to share files / docs / Audio / Video / Image/backups and all these features come for free. Yes, you heard right.

With the SHAREit app, you can share files / docs / Audio / Video / Image / from Windows PC or Mac to Android, iOS, Blackberry and also you can receive from that device too but you need to download SHAREit for PC OR SHAREit for Mac.

So without wasting your valuable time let’s jump to the tutorial how to download SHAREit for Windows PC OR Mac.

SHAREit is quick and easy file transferring app and it has some other awesome features which fulfill user requirements.

SHAREit is not like other file transferring application. It transfers all your important files and other documents easy and faster than any other app.

Privacy is always first concern for all and SHAREit provide high privacy and keep your all documents and data secure.

SHAREit user-friendly app. You can easily share files and documents with 3 simple step – Connect with other devices – find user – share the files.

No USB: Don’t need any external cables or USB for SHAREit app.

No Data: SHAREit works offline so internet connection not require for file sharing.

No Network: If your device has no network still you can send files and download.

Group Sharing: This is best that you can share files and other documents to multiple users.

To share your important documents/files/video/audio/image from Windows PC you have to download SHAREit on Windows PC. Below are the simple steps to get it done.

Step #1: Download SHAREit APK for PC from here

Step #2: When you click on download button, it will start downloading.

Step #3: When the downloading process gets done, you will get the .exe file.

Step #4: Click on that .exe file to download SHAREit for PC.

Step #5: When you click on SHAREit .exe file you will see the below screen. Just click on Run button.

Step #6: Now you will see the below screen where you have to Accept all the terms and condition about this app. Just click on Accept button.

Step #7: You will jump to the new page where you have to click on check box if you want shortcut of this app on your desktop screen. Now click on Next button.

Step #8: When the all setup process gets done, just click on Finish button.

That’s it. Now you are enabled to share your important files / docs / Audio / Video / Image / from Windows PC to any other device.

We have shared apps and APK in our previous article like Periscope for PC, Vidmate for PC,  Hotstar for PC and many others which you can also download with our tutorial.

SHAREit app is not officially launched for Mac OS but you can use it with this tutorial. There are some iOS emulators which we shared in our previous article, helps you to get the SHAREit app on your Mac OS. Let’s jump to the tutorial how to get SHAREit for Mac.

Step #1: Download iPadian iOS emulator from the official website. If you are not familiar with iPadian than you can find more here.

Step #3: Once the installation process gets done, just open it.

Step #4: Now search SHAREit app from the search option and start downloading it and install it on your Mac.

Now you can send important file and documents etc. easily and faster to any devices like Windows, Android, iPhone.

Hope you enjoy the tutorial on how to download SHAREit for PC and Mac. Just follow the steps which we mention and if you face any difficulty while downloading SHAREit, let us know in comment box.|||

Tutorial for Download SHAREit for PC. Download SHAREit for Windows 7/8/10 and Mac and start sharing files and documents to any device.