Web push notifications are those notifications (short messages) that are sent from a particular website. You may receive these messages on your desktop or handheld device even when the sender’s web page is not open in your browser. They are a disruptive marketing channel in its nascence and is meant to re-engage your visitors without requiring to have their email or any other contact detail in advance. In context, it may be interesting to note that according to a study conducted by Smart Insights, desktop usage still accounts for 42% of total internet time. Therefore, web push notifications are that mode of messaging that delivers the power of real-time push notifications to this 42% of internet users. Additionally, website push notifications are cost-sensitive and critical since it gives businesses the ability to send push notifications without needing to invest in an app.

Step 1 — Opt-In: Web Push Notifications are among the most non-intrusive forms of messaging available nowadays. The first step is to get the visitor’s permission to send them the notifications by getting an ‘opt-in’ from them. As soon as a visitor/user lands on a website, an ‘opt-in’ box is triggered, asking them if they wish to allow these notifications. Only if the visitor clicks on “Allow”, will s/he be added to your list of subscribers. What’s even more customer preference centric is the fact that these notifications may also be disabled or opted-out from, anytime.

Step 2 — Receive: Once subscribed to your notifications, the visitor may be sent push notifications from your website. However, in keeping with brevity and precision, both the title message and the text message are customizable within a certain character limit while a URL needs to be specified. These notifications will arrive in real-time even if the browser is not open at that point of time. Clicking on the notification will take the subscriber to the landing page specified by the URL.

Now that we know that many businesses are gradually embracing this particular marketing channel, let us have a look at how these are disrupting E-commerce today.

Using Web Push Notifications for Ecommerce: In current times, there may be multiple ways to use and benefit from web push notifications. With these notifications, it is far easier to achieve your marketing goals across the purchase cycle. From Healthcare to Travel, push notifications are making inroads into an organization’s key marketing activities and creating unprecedented impact in many ways. Here are several ways ecommerce websites can send web push notifications to engage users:

Be it the latest Apple device or a new range of accessories, there are millions amongst us who love to be among the first to possess it. With web push notifications, remember to alert this user segment to generate a boost in sales and maintain a healthy engagement rate.

Who doesn’t love a good discount on unpurchased wishlist items? A well-structured web push notification can ensure a lot of repeat traffic for your website. These notifications are also highly useful while communicating deals that are bound by a timeline. They help to bring about an urgency to check out a limited offer before the stock or the duration of the deal runs out.

If your notifications are adept at promptly informing users about the status of their order(s) in real-time, it will help your business build a positive and holistic relationship with your users.

A staggering average of 69.23% users abandon their carts at the sign off stage, they simply migrate to another page or discontinue their session. The best way to prompt such users to return to your website’s order page and complete the purchase is by sending them an offer or a discount on a particular cart item through a web push notification. It works wonders!

While there may be multiple scenarios across all industry verticals where web push notifications are increasingly playing an important role, the limitations are only defined by the imagination. To know more about how web push notifications can help your business, contact us today!|||

Web push notifications are those notifications (short messages) that are sent from a particular website. You may receive these messages on your desktop or handheld device even when the sender’s web…