Jason Pontin is no ordinary journalist. Since joining MIT’s little-known Technology Review magazine in 2004, he has taken the reins not only on editorial direction, but on media platforms and business strategy. He put MIT’s name in the title (think Harvard Business Review), made it a mobile-first publication early on, and created the Solve conference where experts in energy, urban infrastructure, education, and healthcare come from around the world not only to lecture one another, but to leave with agendas for real change.

Besides all that, he’s hilarious on Facebook — equal parts Oxford-educated classicist and bitchy Internet commenter. Artificial intelligence, conversational interfaces, and big-scale Internet economics are serious stuff for him, but we prodded him via Facebook: What do you really think, Jason?

The big advances are still mostly occurring in the genre of machine learning called “deep learning” or “convolutional neural networks.” But smart researchers are beginning to augment or multiply deep learning, which is not very efficient, with other techniques such as “reinforcement learning” or “evolution strategies” that make it faster, smarter, or more self-directed.

Well, they are. But I think that conversational interfaces are actually a hard problem, and that we’re not really there yet. Chatbots can give a more-or-less convincing simulacrum of conversation, but really fluent conversation will require common sense. Not easy!

I think we’re at that point already. Machine intelligence is everywhere, and we couldn’t live without it now.

Chess is easy. No one was surprised that A.I. could master chess, except for chess players. There are a limited number of chess moves, and the optimal move — or, set of moves, depending on strategy — can be calculated by brute force in machine learning by recognizing patterns in massive training sets. But to get me to be a more devoted Maroon 5 fan would be magic, because I detest Maroon 5. The AI would have to know me better than myself and be able to manipulate me in a way that I didn’t resent.

There are bots that briefly amaze me by not failing the Turing Test before they in fact do so. But, more seriously, I think we’re at that stage where chat bots can convincingly interact with humans in specialized settings for brief periods — which is extraordinary in itself. If you’d asked most A.I. researchers before 2012 how far away we were from that happening, with the possible exception of Geoff Hinton, Yann LeCun, and Andrew Ng, they’d have shrugged and said, “Search me!”

Well, the problem with Tay wasn’t that the engineers were dumb. The fault was in not having an anthropologist or psychologist on the team. Maybe they needed more women. I’m serious: in general, technologists are nice, educated, well-meaning men to whom very little that is bad has ever happened. They consistently underestimate the awfulness of human beings. They’re optimists about human nature.

A. They’ll need self-directed learning, a theory of mind, and a theory of the world, as well as access to everything that humanity knows. That’s getting pretty close to a general intelligence.|||

Jason Pontin is no ordinary journalist. Since joining MIT’s little-known Technology Review magazine in 2004, he has taken the reins not only on editorial direction, but on media platforms and…