This week I’m working from Hong Kong. It’s not my first time working from Hong Kong, or working outside of my regular office, so I decided to discuss working from away.

We must recognize there are multiple kinds of away:

There are undoubtedly other options, I give no promises that my lists are ever complete. They all come with pros and cons, and everyone seems to have their own opinions.

When it comes to (1), I hate working from home. I believe home is a place you relax, and you should never mix the two (else disrupt the dragon known as work life balance). Maybe one could argue that you could have an office in your home devoted to work, but I live in a studio apartment so that’s probably not an option. If I had an office at home, it would probably be reserved for projects, possibly coding. If I ever have a startup, maybe this will be revisited.

In lieu of a dedicated place to work, or if you’re from New England the ability to get to work (I’m looking at you snow) a coffee shop is often a much celebrated option.  Theirs often free wifi, some kind of desk space, and plentiful power outlets. The issues occur in places that don’t take kindly to workers, these places due exist, and you should honor the establishments wishes.

Both of these places have the same issue: No co-workers to discuss with. Emails are terrible in comparison to in person discussions.

Currently I’m working in Hong Kong, so my position is 3. Now, you’re ability to do this will probably depend on the size of your company, and the experience will depend on the office you visit.

Lets start with my current situation: I’m working in a Google office in Hong Kong, there’s not many other SWE’s (software engineer’s), but the ones who inhabit this office are quite experienced. If I have a question to ask, they have great insights. Since I’m here for a week, it’s enough to know everyone, and since there’s few of us SWE’s it’s a friendly environment. In all, it feels like being at my usual desk.

Last Friday I was working from the NYC office. This office has thousands of people, all working in their respective teams, and I’m only there for a day. This makes it impossible to know anybody… It feels like a coffee shop, only I don’t feel like I’m upsetting the owner.

Well, this is my take. Please write yours in the comments!|||

This week I'm working from Hong Kong. It's not my first time working from Hong Kong, or working outside of my regular office, so I decided to discuss working from away. We must recognize there are multiple kinds of away: One could work from home One could work from coffee shop (maybe a version of…