Making it in the ever-changing world of programming means keeping up with all the latest trends and constantly refreshing your knowledge. These six blogs are brilliant resources for anyone looking to make a career out of programming.

1. Coding Dojo

 This US-based blog is packed with tips and resources for programmers, and they even offer a free quick start guide for aspiring web developers. Their website also has a section dedicated to career advice and a handy overview of coding bootcamps.

2. David Walsh Blog

 David Walsh is a Senior Software Engineer for Mozilla who runs this information-packed blog on the side. With a wide variety of tutorials, demos and topics on offer, it’s a great place to find real world tricks that will up your programming game.

3. A List Apart 

 A List Apart is packed full of in-depth articles on everything from user journeys to keeping your JavaScript pure. You’ll learn about so much more than just coding, with web strategy, industry, content and design all covered as well.

4. Stoyan’s phpied.com

 Stoyan Stefanov is a Facebook engineer and the author of several books on JavaScript. His blog is an incredible resource of advice from an industry pro, with regular reviews of handy tools and clever insights that will make your life as a coder so much easier.

5. Smashing magazine

 As well as being a brilliant resource for jobs, Smashing Magazine is filled with features on the latest trends and best practices. Subscribe to their weekly handcrafted web development newsletter to get all the latest news and advice sent directly to your inbox.

6. Usersnap

 Usersnap is mainly known for its excellent bug-tracking tool but its blog is also a wealth of development knowledge. Recent posts look at whether you need a college degree to make it as a web developer and five skills every web developer needs.|||

Want to keep up with the latest trends in the world of programming ? These blogs are brilliant resources for anyone look-ing to make a career out of