Nowadays, most of the travelers begin planning their trips on the mobile phones. Except such big names among travel apps as Trip Advisor, Google Maps, Skyscanner or Airbnb, there are so many, which come in handy and cover different sides of traveling. From finding a place to stay and the most convenient way to get there to city guides, currency exchanges, and sending postcards – travel apps cover this all and much more.



For that reason, travel apps industry is becoming more and more filled with the new and useful ideas. Furthermore, it is a great area for launching a startup as traveling is what a great deal of people is into. So, whether you are an active traveler or want to explore the market where your next start-up is going to be launched – check out this article with 12 outstanding travel apps, which are certainly worth your attention.

TripIt is the application, which enables keeping track of your trip by storing all the information about your travel plans, such as flights, accommodation, car rentals, bookings of events, reservations from restaurants, etc. in one location. All you have to do is just forward the confirmation emails to this application. The rest is done by TripIt. It takes this information and converts it into one single itinerary, so you have everything at one place.

TripIt is compatible with thousands of airlines, lodgings, car rentals, cruise lines, and other companies related to traveling. It is also possible to share your travel plans with whomever you want. Additionally, it has a calendar sync feature, so your travel plans will be included into your calendar.

Available on iOS, Android, Windows Phone, and BlackBerry

Citymapper is a travel app, which is built for finding the best way of commuting within the city. There are 39 big cities (mostly in Europe and the USA) covered by this application so far. If you need to get from the point A to the point B in the city this application covers, Citymapper will find the best route for you. This app combines all the possible types of transport, such as buses, trains, taxis, subways, car/bike sharing, and, of course, walking routes.

It also includes real-time routing being updated all the time, disruption alerts, line status, estimated time of arrival, etc. Moreover, it integrates with Uber, Lyft, and Hailo. There is even ‘Where to Get On the Train’ feature, which shows you where to get on a train so as to be close to the exit when you get off. To sum up, this application enables its users to find the cheapest and the quickest way to get to the destination and is really useful when you visit an unknown city.

Available on iOS and Android

LiveTrekker is about documenting your trips and sharing them with the others. This is a free travel app that enables creating a travel diary recording the route you go through with the interactive maps, photos, videos, texts, etc.

When using this app, you can track your movements, which are marked by a red line and watch the route you have taken on a satellite map. Adding multimedia, such as pictures, video, and audio, to your map makes it more interactive and alive. You can broadcast what is happening and upload it to the Internet in real-time or whenever you want.

So, basically, if you want to make a digital interactive journal of your journey and even share it with the others, LiveTrekker is here help.

Available on iOS and Android

While traveling abroad, most probably you will need the local currency of the country you visit. And XE Currency is going to help you with that. It is a free currency converter application, which provides converting more than 180 currencies and up-to-the-minute exchange rates. Moreover, it works offline and saves the last updated exchange rates, so you can use it without internet access.

With XE Currency, you get live exchange rates and charts to track the currency rate. You choose your base currency and maximum 5 currencies exchanging at one time, which helps to compare them. It is also possible to watch your chosen currencies rates changes through the immediate notifications. In addition, there are some other features, such as currency graphs for historical rates, precious metal rates, etc.

PackPoint is a smart packing list application. Its core function is to organize what you have to grab with you for your trip depending on how long the trip will take, what will be the weather there, and which activities you will be into.

When you launch the app, you get the list of questions about your gender, the place where you go, the length of the trip, the type of activities, etc. Afterwards, it generates a customized packing list based on the information received. It is also possible to share your list with the other fellow travelers and add some extra items there needed for your trip.

Available on iOS and Android

Triposo intends to be your personal travel guide. This app covers 50 000 destinations worldwide, so there is high chance it will help you with the destination you chose for your journey. Triposo takes information from plenty of web resources, analyzes and categorizes it, and, therefore, deliver its recommendations and makes this data convenient to use and navigate. Among the categories, this app includes the sights, food, nightlife, accommodation, transport, and others. So, you can personalize your trip choosing the best from each category. You can also find there the popular tourist attractions and hidden gems, maps for each category, information concerning culture and history, and even phrasebooks with local language vocabulary.

What is more, this application is for free and it works offline, which is very useful when there is no constant internet connection. You can download the guide, maps, recommendation and use it without access to the Internet.

Available on iOS and Android

It is clear from the name of this application that it is connected to the flights. App in the Air aims to be a personal travel assistant for its users. With this app, it is really easy to track flights since it divides them into the stages (check-in, boarding, take-off, and landing) and provides timeline for each stage so that you can manage your time properly. Besides, you don’t need to have internet connection because it works offline sending text messages with the changes and updates regarding your flight.

There is also extensive information about the airports available with tips from other flyers. What is more, you can record your flight experience. Additionally, App in the Air provides integration with TripIt, enabling importing the flights from there and vice versa.

Time Out is a trip planner app, which is meant to explore the cities and activities there. In more than 30 cities, which this app covers, you can find the places to visit, different attractions, events, restaurants, pubs, festivals, and other activities available there. Besides, you can customize the application for yourself by adding your favorite places, events, activities, and creating a customized city guide. It is also possible to book restaurants and tickets for the concerts or festivals through the app. Moreover, Time Out’s content is available offline, so internet connection is not a must-be.

Available on iOS and Android

Postagram is about sending postcards just using your smartphone. Wherever you are located at the moment, you can make a photo and send the printed version via mail to your friends, family, or just to yourself with the help of this application.

While you are travelling, you can take plenty of wonderful photos, and Postagram enables turning them into real postcards and sending them anywhere you want. You just make a picture, add a message, add recipients and that is it. The rest is up to Postagram. As a result, you (or the person you send it to) receive beautiful printed pictures. With this app, the picture you send is completely customizable – you make it the way you wish, choosing the moment to capture and send it in the form of a postcard for collecting your memories.

Postagram is free to download but, obviously, it requires some costs for sending postcards: starting at $0.99 for anywhere in the US and $1.99 for addresses in the other countries (price includes postage). At the same time, there is a possibility to send some postcards for free.

Available on iOS and Android

While the weather forecast is very significant issue for those who travel, it makes sense to mention a representative from a weather app category here. Dark Sky is a hyperlocal weather application which gives its users very detailed information about the weather and its changes. It is very accurate when it comes to prediction of the weather with its down-to-minute forecasts. Dark Sky is not just about cities and regions, but about the places where you are standing at the moment. Using this application you can find out exactly when the rain or snow stops, when storms will come, how much time hot days will last, etc. In addition, it provides various types of notifications together with the custom alerts so that you get the news you are interested in. However, it is currently available only in the US, UK, and Ireland.

Available on iOS and Android (for Android users it is free, but for the iOS devices the price is $3.99)

Foodspotting is like Instagram, but only about food. This is a food social network, which enables sharing your impressions from dishes you taste and just getting social with your meals.

This app is very simple to use. First, you take a photo or upload it from the gallery. Then, with the help of GPS on your phone, you can find the restaurants nearby and choose where you have tried that particular dish. Afterwards, you just put the name of your dish or select it from the list, make comments to tell what you think about it, and share it on social networks, such as Facebook, Twitter, or Foursquare, if you want. Therefore, if you visit a new city and want to try some local food, you can use Foodspotting in order to see the places with meals near your location and get the recommendations and even some tips on the dishes there from the other users.

Available on iOS and Android

To sum up, there are a lot of apps, which can make planning process of your trips easier, your travel experience better, and your journeys just safer and cheaper. What can be seen clearly is that in order to succeed on the travel app market, there should be an innovative and useful idea, which would draw travelers’ attention and make them start using it. At the same time, there are more and more applications related to traveling coming out and the fraction of their users grows as well. So, thanks to the benefits they bring, the prominence of the travel apps is not going anywhere and is about to increase.

Do you know any other amazing travel applications? Tell us about them in the comments, we will check and upgrade our list.|||

Check out this article with 12 outstanding travel apps, which are certainly worth your attention.