How to use Platforms to Explore new Business Ideas for your Company

In the case of climbing a Value Chain, a company essentially transforms its own services into a component and optimize them for those building higher value services on top of it. A particularly interesting and fresh example could be that of Banca Sella’s Platform .

As companies embark into exploration I always point out the two main possible contexts for it: Value Chain Climbing and what I call… Moon Shooting .

More specifically, companies often fail to know how their own products and services are, in turn, used and remixed to create higher value. As Anshu Sharma explained very well once, companies are victims of the so called “ stack fallacy ”: being more inclined to innovate downwards in the value chain than upwards. This tendency is a result of human nature since “we (over) value what we know” and also based on the fact that “you are yourself a natural customer of the lower layers”.

As extensively explained in section two of our White Paper ( available here ), on the value chain you can go upwards (towards the user) and downwards (towards the suppliers). It’s normally quite a challenging task for companies to innovate upwards (and therefore go in the direction of more value creation) for one simple reason: companies tend to know very well what they demand to their suppliers — below them in the value chain — but often fail to know what are the real expectations of their users or, more widely intended, of their ecosystem of relating entities .

A first step for companies wanting to explore new business cores is to develop a better understanding of their current business context. More specifically companies must learn to understand the value chain(s) they are part of.

A growing understanding in business tells us that companies need to develop what is called an “ambidextrous” approach to innovation. The mission of the company should be — on one hand — to exploit existing capabilities, improve value and create efficiency in what they do; on the other hand a company should look farther and generate the new capabilities that — in the longer term — will develop new business cores to integrate & substitute existing ones.

With this platform move, the Italian bank — famous for having pioneered banking digitization in Italy — is componentizing some of the main features of many trading and financial services (escrow, wallet management, etc…) hoping to make the life of Fintech Companies building user centric services, easier. Despite we don’t have a glance yet of those that will be the marketplace features that this initiative will open up in the future, the Bank already pointed out that it’s on a track to open the platform to other financial services providers essentially transforming those that are now competitors, eventually into suppliers (or, better, partners in the Platform Design Toolkit model).

When it comes to moon shooting, companies look for a business context where they feel it’s possible for them to build something at a high value chain level now underserved: the exploration can happen in contexts that are more or less related to the company current core businesses. As anticipated in my recent essay “Why Business Strategy Innovation is Hard” often companies fail to explore farther because they are too strictly attached to what they consider competitive advantages and assets.

When moon shooting, companies should look not only at their own assets — that may even reveal a psychological and design burden — but also at the assets and capabilities that are available in the target value chain-ecosystem. That’s why we embedded this aspect in the user research tool we recently developed: the Entity Portrait (see below). Furthermore, Pentagrowth, a framework developed from our friends at Ideas For Change, has demonstrated to be a great tool for ideas exploration and our two methodologies have been integrated tightly (reach out if interested in the combination).

Once a company identifies a context that is worth exploring, platform thinking is a precious design tool. Platform Design allows companies prototype new strategies which are less costly (by avoiding intensive investments and instead leveraging on distributed assets and competences) and much faster in terms of market reach: network effects can grow fast and exponentially when a number of conditions are met.

A few days ago, in a post I wrote for Sharetribe’s Marketplace Academy I started to dig into the conditions that need to be met to make a platform move effective: these come from our research in validation and growth hacking that we will soon published in a new set of canvases and tools.

Airbnb and Uber have been setting the bar by reinventing from the ground up the experience of simple tasks such as renting a holiday house (do you remember phone calls and bank wires?) or commuting across the city (anyone missing taxi queue and debates over credit card payments?).

Most of the transactional markets have been reinvented already but there’s still a lot of space for platform moves in more complex markets: carefully look for cumbersome experiences, contexts where current market options involve time losses and headaches; look for contexts where complicated coordination between several providers is needed. As an example, when people move to a new house, they need to coordinate mortgage and insurance providers, utilities activation, searching for new schools, moving services, etc… making the overall experience more stressful than a divorce event.

With growing potential of the so-called “market networks” an increasing number of complex workflows are available for platform reinvention: similarly to what honeybook did for creative event design and organization, I can think of several contexts where the experience is bad enough to deserve platforming. From planning holidays to home improvement, from exercising and getting trained to relocating: there’s a lot of complicated and common experiences that need to be reinvented.

The first aspect a company needs to check when designing a multi sided platform is to ensure that none of the sides (partners, producers & consumers) experiences unnecessary friction in joining and starting to use it. Designers need to carefully avoid imposing non necessary blocks (e.g.: special requirements, background checks, certifications, etc…) and always try to create easy onboarding steps.

Onboarding is indeed the most complex moment for platform users: since most of the times you’re targeting an expanded supply source than traditional services (for example including non-professionals in peer to peer service marketplaces) you’ll need to carefully support adopters achieving their first transactions. You can use Platform Design Toolkit’s Experience Learning Canvas to focus on onboarding.

This is by far the most complicated aspect of platform design but, at the same time, network effects are driven by simple rules. Your platform must — from the start — sport a trigger to drive one of the sides inbound, either supply or demand, with the hope to attract the other side.

The most common strategy to ensure that your platform is attractive for one of the sides from day one, includes things such as single user utility: making the platform useful with a bulk of centrally provided services at the start, often for the demand side.

A similar strategy can be manually curating one of the sides (often supply) when starting, with the hopes of driving interest in the other side to later open doors more widely for both sides to join. A good example of this strategy is what Airbnb did when introducing experiences: despite it’s relevant existing user base, the company first introduced a series of curated experiences called “city hosts” and later — once the customer expectations for such a product was mature enough — opened independent experience hosts to join and design experiences on their own.

The evolution of Airbnb towards experiences is — also — a great example of Value Chain Climbing: moving from a bed or holiday home towards unforgettable and varied entertainment experiences brings the company up in the value chain and also unlocks infinite supply, making it possible to operate even in increasingly regulated contexts where supply of beds might be strongly affected by legitimate city policies protecting housing markets. With this move the company can also make experiences available for travelers that were originally provided by competitors such as booking.com, homestay.com and the likes.

Similarly, in its early days, Uber (and most of the ridesharing services) subsidized heavily the demand side creating attraction for the drivers (supply). Those are jut few inbound trigger tactics worth sharing.

I’ll never explain enough that reputation is a key driver of adoption for platforms: reputation is the oil in the engine, the only way to make the best emerge. Since you can’t and won’t control the quality of the services provided by your ecosystem providers on the platform — except during the initial curation stage — reputation is really crucial to improve quality and experience.

More essentially your platform will need to enable reputation sampling, quantifying and visibility. From Fiverr’s Top Sellers to Airbnb SuperHost to Tripadvisor Certificates (that you now see everywhere) every platform needs to have mechanisms to ensure reputation is created, validated and made visible. Two great companies that achieved a near-perfect management of trust and reputation cycles are BlaBlaCar and Airbnb: get inspired by their reputation harvesting user journeys (use the services and try first hand).

A long time ago, making money selling applications was a business for few. When Apple iPhone and (later) Android joined — somehow created — the smartphone business, they introduced a sensible reduction of the barriers for the professional development of computer applications: a business once domain of large software makers or, at least, mid-sized companies that could afford engineers, hardware sourcing and specialists, suddenly become open to any sufficiently curious developer.

The overall history of smarthphones and apps can be actually described as a three wave process: Apple created a large pool of high spenders demand by creating the iPhone platform first (growing quality of demand, inbound trigger). Later, the platform was opened to independent developers (lowering the barriers to entry to software commercialization). In a slightly later moment Google Android actually enlarged the demand side by lowering again the barriers to access (growing quantity of demand): smartphones of any price flooded the marked creating a real global market where developers can create applications and reach anyone on the planet.

In a similar way, Airbnb lowered the barriers to entry for those wanting to rent their own house — by reducing expenses and efforts related to creating a website, managing inquiries, managing payments, etc… On the other end, Airbnb reduced the cost of travel, opening travel to new and less common and less expensive destinations, allowing people that normally couldn’t afford to travel often, to travel more.

But it’s not just about consumer services: similarly, things such as salesforce App Cloud and AppExchange lowered the cost of IT solution personalization allowing SMBs to access a controlled environment for custom app development, a traditionally very costly and complicated matter to manage for a small business with little or no technical knowledge.

When a platform succeeds to lover barriers to entry, especially by leveraging on new categories of supply (non professional providers, underused assets, unlocked potential) it can really generate exponential traction and growth.

If you’re part of a company or team looking for new ideas of exploration, here’s where you can start: look up in the value chain and transform your competitors into partners. You should be more ambitions though: target a new business context — where your asset can potentially provide you a jump start — with an open mindset: most importantly, look for opportunities to rethink cumbersome or stressful experiences that involve different parties and that can be rethought through platform coordination.

Once you’ve a context in mind create your strategic vision with Platform Design Toolkit (download from here, join our masterclasses or ask for help). Later, at execution time, pay attention to these five essential aspects:

Stay tuned as, throughout the summer, we’ll release new tools to help you in prototyping and hacking growth, paving the way to your next platform success.

Register to our newsletter here: http://bit.ly/PDToolkit-NL

If you liked the post, show your support by recommending it >>> ❤

Want to learn Platform Design Toolkit? Check our our masterclasses, we’re coming to Berlin, Munich (English) and Rome (Italian)!|||

There’s a recurring question I get when I work with large companies or do my public and private Masterclasses: A growing understanding in business tells us that companies need to develop what is…