There are some places where the police advise you to not treat your vehicle as a person. Let’s say you’re in a dangerous situation and you need to jump from the vehicle while on high speed. If you treat it as your "baby", then your instinct is gonna be to stay and save it. However, if you let it go, the chances of surviving can be bigger.

The same attachment can happen to the code.

We say a developer is married with the code when they don't feel comfortable when somebody wants to change something they wrote.

The reason why they do that can vary. However, there are some common patterns:

There are people who can overcome those effects by having a different mindset. They understand that you are not the code you write.

Criticism to your code is not a criticism to you. Just because you wrote a crap code in the past, for whatever reason, that doesn’t mean you’re a crap developer. The code is crap, not you. You never were.

There’s an interesting principle people use when doing retrospectives called “The Retrospective Prime Directive”, which says:

With code is the same.

There’s always something to improve and we should believe everyone did their best at the time given the circumstances.

If you treat the code as your "baby" or as a representation of yourself, then:

The author of the most loved and most hated library in the history of JavaScript said in a blog post a long time ago:

The project scope changes, time passes by, people improve, individuals come and go and the code stays the same. Stop caring about the ship that already sailed and start caring about the new ships you’re gonna build.

Be comfortable that people will look one year from now at the code you will write today and criticize it. Those "people" can be even yourself, for that the goal is not to insult, but to learn with the past in order to understand the present and create a better future.

That doesn't mean you shouldn't be proud of your work. It means you shouldn't be too sentimental and defensive about it.

Accept that you can be wrong.

The only day you’ll be the code you write is when you become a cyborg able to program yourself.

Kill your ego and don’t be afraid to let it go.

Trust me. It's worth it.|||

Some developers tend to defend their code when criticized as if it's their “baby” or a fundamental representation of themselves. However, that’s not true and such behavior can cause bigger problems.