We launched Rights Manager a year ago to help rights owners manage and protect their video content at scale. Since then we’ve listened to feedback from our partners as we’ve continued to improve the tool, and we’ve consistently heard that rights owners would like greater automation and control in Rights Manager. Today we’re announcing new automated rules for Rights Manager that will better support rights owners’ business objectives.

With Rights Manager, rights owners can find matches of their video content on Facebook; these matches are surfaced on a dashboard. Previously, the rights owner would review these matches in the dashboard to take action. To help make management more efficient for rights owners, we’re now enabling them to automate more of the process, and providing more options for what happens to matched content. This means that the rights owner can decide to set an action to happen automatically when a match of their content is found on Facebook, simplifying the process.

Match actions determine what happens when Rights Manager identifies a match of copyrighted content. Rights Manager now has four automatic match actions:

Match conditions are the criteria that rights owners can set to determine whether to take an action on a match of their content. If match conditions are met, then the specified match action (above) that the rights holder has set is taken automatically.

With the addition of Privacy type, Rights Manager features five match conditions:

Using combinations of match actions and conditions, rights owners can use Rights Manager to support their business goals. For example, a rights owner could choose to “Block” all public copies of a matched video in the United States.

These updates will start rolling out today and will be available to Pages using Rights Manager globally in the coming weeks. We hope these updates for Rights Manager will better support our partners’ business objectives. We will continue listening to feedback to improve the product.|||

