Brad Canadian Entrepreneur and Coding Instructor with a passion for Web Development and adding life changing value to aspiring entrepreneurs & freelancers.

Hey, I’m Brad! I’m a 27 year old guy from Sub-Arctic Canada who works from home and makes a living online. I’m that weird guy who loves Mondays because I love what I do. I want to teach you to be the best web designer & coder that you can be. I want to help you cultivate your passion, reach your potential and live the life that is most true to you.

In the transition from Photoshop designs to a working website, it helps to have someone like Brad on your side.With an attention to detail and a keen eye for interactivity and usability, Brad takes the static and turns it into the dynamic.His knowledge and experience with HTML5, web application development and mobile optimization make him an ideal developer for a studio fixated on the future.

At the beginning of 2013 I launched my very first Udemy course that taught people how to code a website in 4-hours. I sold it for $39, and the moment my first sale came in, my eyes had opened — I saw a great potential in creating online courses and generating passive income. Over the past 3+ years, I’ve established myself as an authority in the web design tutorial & freelancing niche, created an online course brand that accounts for the majority of my business revenue, and built a significant following of passionate students.

A highly skilled professional, Brad Hussey is a passionate and experienced web designer, developer, blogger, digital entrepreneur and leading online instructor.

 Hailing from North Of The Wall (Yellowknife, Canada), Brad made the trek to the Wet Coast (Vancouver, Canada) to educate and equip himself with the necessary skills to become a spearhead in his trade of solving problems on the web, crafting design solutions, and speaking in code.

 Brad’s determination and love for what he does has landed him in some pretty interesting places with some neat people. He’s had the privilege of working with and providing solutions for, numerous businesses, big & small, across the Americas. Brad builds custom websites and provides design solutions for a wide array of clientele at his company, Brightside Studios.

 He regularly blogs about passive income, living life to the fullest, and provides premium quality web design, development & coding tutorials, and courses for tens of thousands of amazing people desiring to master their craft and change their lives, remember just on udemy  he reached out more than 203,000+ Students enrolled in his courses

|||

