India is a linguistically diverse country, with more than 11 major languages having at-least 30 million speakers each. With smartphone revolution at peak, millions of Indians are getting introduced to the Internet. As we all know English is the de-facto language of internet. However only 10% of Indians are fluent with English. 90% of 1.34 billion Indian population is clueless about basic usage and content consumption from Internet and their interests are still left uncatered to.

For these new users, internet is equivalent to usage of some popular applications like WhatsApp or Facebook without much understanding of internet navigation patterns. Most of the times they are introduced to apps via friends or while searching for them on Google Playstore. In 2016, India logged highest number of android app downloads in the world. No doubt, this is the primary reason why Google Playstore has a lot of clone apps for Santa-Banta jokes, Kishor Da songs, Government jobs, Poetry etc. Content discovery is a grave situation in India today. Difficulty to type and search in Indian languages makes it an even bigger one.

This is why we decided to build a content discovery platform for Indian languages — Clorik.

In India 800 million people still reside in rural areas where resources are limited. They have smartphones but struggle through difficulties like devices running out of storage space and poor internet connectivity. Even in the times of 4G connectivity and mobiles phones with specifications comparable to laptop, people are still under 2G and phones with barely 1GB available storage space. A plethora of android apps are available on Google Playstore, but only a few understand Indian users and their difficulties.

We at Clorik, took these problems at the heart of app development process.

Video content is taking the internet by storm today. People spend hours navigating through them and choose it as a preferred source of content.|||

Clorik is the all-in-one multilingual platform, categorized into interest based communities allowing selective content consumption.