As the new video compression standard after H.264, H.265, the next generation High Efficiency Video Codec (HEVC), supports to delivery high quality video at even small file size. However, As HEVC is relatively new to the scene, it’s not nearly as compatible with existing playback devices as H.264. Many such devices have dedicated hardware for decoding H.264 streams, while equivalent hardware for decoding HEVC is significantly less common. Although there are many software options out there to playback HEVC-encoded files, however, software decoding is not a good option since it is not terribly efficient. Therefore, for convenient media entertainment, it would be much ideal for you to convert H.265 to H.264, the following article will show you how to encode H.265 MKV to H.264 MKV on Mac.

Although there are many tools on the market that can assist you to convert H.265 MKV to H.264 MKV, however, there are few program that can complete the same conversion on Mac platform. Fortunately, here comes the Best Mac H.265 Converter – Pavtube iMedia Converter for Mac, which is has full support for H.265 MKV file format with the resolution of both 4K and 1080p resolution. The program supports batch conversion mode, so that you can save a lot of time by batch importing multiple H.265 MKV files. You can convert H.265 MKV files to H.264 MKV files with fast conversion speed and also terrific output file quality. Besides encoding H.265 MKV to H.264 MKV, the program also assists you to rip Blu-ray/DVD to convert video to H.265 MP4/MKV with splendid quality.

To get better output video and audio quality, you can flexibly adjust output profile parameters including video codec, resolution, bit rate, frame rate, audio codec, bit rate, sample rate, channels, etc as you like. Make sure to keep a balance between the video quality and the file size. The built-in video editing functions can also assist you to get your desired video that you want. You can trim video to cut off unwanted parts, crop video to remove the black bars, adjust output video aspect ratio, add watermark, apply special rendering effect, add external subtitle, etc.

For your convenience, the program is available on both Windows and Mac platform. You can download Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate to encode H.265 MKV to H.264 MKV with up to 6x speed as long as your computer runs on a Nvidia Graphic card that supports Nvidia CUDA or AMP App technology.

Download the free trial version of the program. Launch it on your computer. Click “File” menu and select “Add Video/Audio” or click the “Add Video” button on the top tool bar to batch import multiple H.265 MKV source files into the program.

Clicking the Format bar, from its drop-down list, choose “Common Video” > “MKV (Matroska) Video (*.mkv)”.

Then click “Settings” on the main interface to open “Profile Settings” window, in video section, click “Codec” drop-down list, choose “H.264” as output file codec to convert H.265 MKV to H.264 MKV. You can also tweak other settings according to your own needs.

By default the Edit icon is grayed out. To activate the Edit menu, you have to select an item first. When a video or movie is selected, click the pencil like Edit icon on the left top tool bar to open the video editor window, here, you can play and preview the original video and output effects. Also you can flip or rotate video, trim, crop, add watermark, apply special effect, edit audio or insert external.

After all setting is completed, hit the “Convert” button at the right bottom of the main interface to begin the conversion process from H.265 MKV to H.264 MKV.

When the conversion is finished, click “Open Output Folder” icon on the main interface to open the folder with generated files. Then feel free to play the converted files on your Mac computer with VLC or transfer and view on iPhone, iPad or stream to Apple TV.|||

Best Mac H.265 Conversion tool to batch encode H.265 MKV to H.264 MKV for conveniently view on Mac computer or iPhone, iPad, Apple TV.