Origin Ventures, an 18-year-old venture capital firm based in Chicago, has closed an $80 million fund, it announced Thursday.

This is the Series A-stage firm's fourth fund and its largest yet, said co-founder and partner Steve Miller ⇒. It is twice the size of Origin's previous fund, which closed in 2013.

Origin has already invested in five companies since the fund's initial close in the first quarter of 2016. Three of those — Tock, Tovala and Avant — are based in Chicago. It was an early investor in Grubhub, a business it exited when the online meal ordering company went public in 2014, he said.

"One of the things that sets us apart from the younger funds in town, we have a track record of (net) realized returns," he said.

Miller declined to share details of Origin's returns, but said its investments in Grubhub and iNest.com — which Lending Tree acquired in 2004 — translated to exits that multiplied its first and second funds.

He said Origin will continue to invest across the United States and in Canada, a territorial expansion it took on with its third fund a few years ago. As Origin's fund sizes grew, it needed a larger pool of companies in the software, online marketplace and digital content sectors to select from, he said.

He declined to name limited partners who invested in the latest fund but said he and other Origin partners put in a minority of the capital, as they have in the past.

Miller said he expects Origin to make 16 to 20 investments with this fund, in the $2 million to $3 million initial investment range. As round sizes grew in recent years, it became necessary for Origin to raise an even larger fund because it likes to lead investments, he said.

"On average, we'll be deploying more capital in our initial investments," he said. "Even though the size of the fund is doubling in dollars, we don't anticipate that we'll invest in twice as many companies."

Other Chicago venture capital firms that recently raised new funds include Corazon Capital and Chicago Ventures.|||

