Whether you are a WordPress developer with experience in coding or just a user who gets things done by installing themes and plugins, you are likely to come across errors that are common to most WordPress websites.

Often such errors are frustrating and push you to the extreme edge of patience. But all these errors are common and happen with other users as well. When you face such errors and just grope over the web for a similar query in forums and ideal solution for the problem, you end up leaving the problem where it started from.

Wouldn’t it be great if instead of trying to find your queries and answers across web resources, you can find all these major issues and their respective solutions just in one place? Just to do this only we are here explaining 5 most common WordPress errors and solutions to fix them:

When you have lost your WordPress admin password you try to retrieve it through email and that’s normal. But what happens when such retrieval process fails to leave you completely clueless? Well, there two definite ways to solve the problem.

To begin with login to your FTP account and then go to and download the entire file. Now open the functions.php and add this below mentioned code just after the first :

Now all you need to do is to replace the old password with a new one. When you completed the editing you need to upload the newly edited file directly to your FTP. As soon as you have ensured a secure login remove the code and upload the same with FTP.

500 Internal Server Error is the most common server error that causes regular pain to many WordPress websites. While it is one of the most annoying error, solving it requires a few cautious steps. First of all check with the hosting service of your company. Here we explain some solutions to this common problem.

Some plugins can interfere with WordPress website performance. Sometimes two plugins working for a similar purpose can interfere with each other and cause server side errors. To solve this deactivate the recent plugins and then make them active one by one. While doing this you can easily know about the culprit plugin responsible for the error.

Internal server errors are also caused by more consumption of memory by some plugins. When you are using shared hosting this may lead to a resource crunch. You can request your hosting provider for increased space. Otherwise, a few simple steps can help you increasing memory space. Here are the steps.

See the How to Increase WordPress Memory Limit article for various ways of increasing memory in WordPress.

Internal server errors are also caused by a crucial file called file. Whether this file has been corrupted you need to check and fix. Login to cPanel and move inside the File Manager and there inside the root folder where all your website files are located and here you will find file.

Right-click on this file and rename it. Now download this renamed file. Now with the help of notepad create a text file in your system and save the file with an extension . Now upload this new file again to the root folder. Now see if the website is reloading perfectly in the previous tab. In most cases, this trick will work.

If the above trick does not work go to the permalink settings of WordPress dashboard. Here you should save the permalink settings here as you have just uploaded a new file. Now check reloading your website once again.

The uncleared cache also contributes to the server errors. You should use a cache cleaner to address this problem.

Facing the blank white screen is a common issue faced by WordPress users worldwide. To find the issue causing this enable the debug mode by bringing some changes in code in the file. Here below we provide the codes to upload.

You can also try to solve the problem by taking the website to the previous condition before the crash. If the problem is happening after a theme or plugin has been activated, deactivate that theme or plugin and see if the problem has been solved.

Errors in code syntax can cause your website to load and show properly. WordPress syntax error is a common problem which happens when one adds code snippets through the .

To prevent such things from happening do not paste code snippets directly into the live website. Instead, taste them in a development environment. Your browser only will tell you the location of the code line with such parsing error. All you need to do is to edit the line of code or delete the added code snippet. When it’s done reload save and reload the web site.

It is a common issue when we see the connection with the database gets broken. Some of the common causes of this problem include the following.

First, check with the hosting provider to know whether there is any issue with the server or database. If all are ok with hosting you need to concentrate on the next possible reason.

Now go to your file using the file manager or FTP. Check whether the name, host, username and password of the database are correct. If you see any change correct it immediately. If you do not have PHP knowledge get it done by someone who knows.

Lastly to check whether it has been hacked or not, use a security plugin or tool to scan the site. Finding any irregularity you should change the login details and restore the website from backup.

Are these all? No, certainly there are several other issues that need equal attention. But the above-mentioned ones are critical and often more baffling than other common problems. Can you enlighten us about some grave WordPress issues? Please share with us.

Keval Padia is a co-founder of Nimblechapps, a prominent iOS app development services provider company based in India. He follows different tech blogs and current updates of the field lure him to express his views and thoughts on certain topics.|||

Tribulant Software, premium WordPress plugins blog with announcements, releases and other information