Welcome to another round-up of the latest news in DevOps, Agile and Continuous Delivery. In this week’s post, DevOps proves it’s here to stay, as 50% of tech leaders are now implementing DevOps – which has been proven to increase speed of software delivery while maintaining quality – saving organizations time and money. Also in this week’s news we revisit some best practices for Continuous Delivery and find out what’s in store for DevOps in the foreseeable future.

Continue reading for more on the latest modern software delivery news and trends, and, as always, stay tuned to all the news coming from @ElectricCloud on DevOps and Continuous Delivery throughout the week.

DevOps is much more than a set of practices for smarter software development. The benefits of Agile-type thinking — such as iterative development and continuous delivery — are being pushed beyond the IT department and out into the wider business. Here’s how adopting small, quick changes will deliver new benefits to businesses and their customers in the future.

Organizations including Adobe, Amazon, Target, and Walmart have adopted the DevOps workflow to improve productivity and communication. In terms of other organizations, DevOps implementation is currently “all over the map,” Jeff Sussna, founder and principal of Ingineering.IT and author of Designing Delivery: Rethinking IT in the Digital Service Economy, told ZDNet.

How can DevOps teams take continuous delivery to the next step? Part of the answer lies in self healing, which could optimize performance management and monitoring and underpin the software delivery pipelines of the future. Self healing means the ability of systems or environments to detect and resolve problems automatically. It eliminates the need for manual human intervention, upon which most systems today still rely to fix issues.

While it’s easy to start up a few, flashy new DevOps teams, releasing to production each week and flaunting the ball-and-chain of enterprise governance, scaling that change to your organisation will always be challenging, if not crushingly impossible. When it comes to scaling the skunk-works, I’m reminded of a conversation with a struggling enterprise architect. I often use the company’s mobile app and it’s updated frequently, integrated well with iOS, and provides an overall very pleasant experience. Such results are normally unexpected from this type of aged, highly regulated, lumbering enterprise.

Delivering exceptional customer experiences and product for your business take speed and flexibility. More than ever before, speed and flexibility are required from every part of your organization, business and IT alike. DevOps provides your business leaders, enterprise architects, developers and I&O leaders a philosophy to achieve, not only the velocity that customers desire but also drive innovation and enforces quality. One example is ING. The company is undergoing a major digital transformation in which DevOps is a primary driver supporting their transformation.

It seems laughable now, but do you remember when Internet Explorer was updated every two years? Times have changed. Development cycles are approaching warp speed as companies deal with the competitive pressure to update their applications and websites as frequently as possible.

After reading plenty of articles, books and listening to conference speakers, I often ask myself if we are always using appropriate or consistent terms in IT industry. We have borrowed some of them from other domains, which is a fairly good approach, but sometimes we distort their meanings or use terms in an inconsistent way, within IT and also in comparison to other disciplines.

DevOps—a cross-disciplinary, collaborative practice that blends software development and information technology operations—aims to build, test, and deliver software both more quickly and reliably. It involves the entire project lifecycle, from the early stages of planning through production support efforts. The “Dev” in DevOps relates to the development of the product—including varied disciplines such as QA and product teams—while the “Ops” in DevOps involves disciplines such as security professionals, system administrators, and operations teams.

Docker containers and microservices are appealing to DevOps teams with tight deadlines, but it’s a very bad idea to use either without automated continuous integration and testing in the house, according to Jim Rose, CEO of CircleCI, a software-as-a-service continuous integration platform provider based in San Francisco.

Managing and controlling the process of continuous integration (CI), especially with modern methodologies such as agile that emphasize fast delivery, is one of the biggest challenges software companies experience. Doing so successfully requires collaboration between many different stakeholders.

Have you seen the latest version of ElectricFlow? You can now deploy to ANY container platform (think: Docker, Microsoft Azure, Google Container Engine, Amazon Container Services and more!) with the click of a button. Learn more about the latest features.|||

