In the current hiring process, why not make use of recruitment tools and software? Companies with newly upgraded systems save around 22% per employee, yet only around half have modern HR software. You can use a variety of different programs to help with recruitment, and here are the top ones for various stages of the process.

An Applicant Tracking System (ATS) can allow you to easily keep note of available candidates, and assist you with posting job openings to various boards and social media.

Level Hire is an efficient way to optimize recruitment, as it combines ATS and CRM functionality into one capable product. It’ll allow you to:

Zoho Recruit offers everything a standard ATS service would usually provide, but stands out from the crowd with its advanced resume parsing features. These features allow Zoho Recruit to act as a piece of resume screening software, and allows recruiters to:

Pricing: Zoho recruitment software offers three pricing packages. For one recruiter monthly, there’s a free service, then Standard ($25), and Enterprise ($50). Each package has a different set of functions, and information on this can be found here.

As with the other ATS’ we’ve just looked at, JazzHR helps recruiters streamline their hiring, and make more informed decisions. JazzHR does have several features which set it apart, however:

Pricing: JazzHR offers two pricing plans. Plus is $229 per month, and comes with many customization features. Pro is $359 per month, and features extended options across the entire recruitment process. More information can be found here.

The interview phase of recruitment is significantly sped up via video interviewing software. Recruiters and candidates alike can save their time by talking regardless of where they are, without the need to organize locations. Responses can often be rewatched and shared, resulting in a more assured hiring decision.

Pricing: there is an app, along with three tiers of pricing:

The unique and nice thing about VidCruiter, is it allows you to alter the level of pressure you oppose onto candidates. Along with general functionality — interview scheduling, question preparation — it:

Montage offers two hiring software solutions to recruiters’ need: Video Interviewing and Voice Interviewing. These are then each split into two directions:

Pricing: information is only available after filling out a contact form, however a demo is available once personal and company information has been provided.

Onboarding is the crucial process of integrating and establishing a new employee within your company. These introduction processes can be mired with things such as paperwork, but there are great employee onboarding software tools available to help.

Kin is a tool that wholly encompasses onboarding; it focuses not just on getting new team members integrated, but also helps existing employees and managers. It does this through:

Pricing: Kin’s pricing policy is simple, as you pay $5 per person, per month. A 7-day demo is also available, upon request.

With the slogan “software that stimulates productivity,” HR Cloud’s Onboarding service revolves around getting new employees ready, as soon as possible. They offer:

Pricing: information is available upon request.

Bamboo HR is all about ensuring your new employee has the best first day possible. It:

Pricing: information is available upon request.

One of the major reasons for losing a talented employee, is that the employee feels a lack of appreciation for their work. These tools provide different approaches for both manager-to-employee and peer-to-peer recognition.

Another product from HR Cloud, Kudos provides:

Teamphoria offers the functionality to facilitate communication, conduct surveys, and provide peer-to-peer recognition. It integrates with Slack, and allows you to control privacy — someone can “vent a frustration” anonymously, for example. It also:



 Pricing: information is available upon request.

A company revolving around motivation, even their website is inspiring. Their Rallyware for Human Resources:

You may watch a video about Rallyware here.

Pricing: specific pricing information is available upon request, and you can schedule a demo.

These pieces of software are aimed at creating the optimal scheduling process; they help recruiters keep on top of their plans, and help ensure worthy candidates are not lost.

Pricing: Sortd has a simple pricing policy, split into three plans. They offer a free package, which has some limited features. You can then pay $4 or $6 per team member, with the more expensive plan obviously containing the most features.

Calendly is a platform which aims to efficiently set up meetings with potential employees. After creating a profile, you can then invite candidates to input on a meeting time. The software:

Pricing: there are three price packages: $0, $8 and $12 per user per month. For each tier, you get an increase in the number of events you can organize, support, salesforce integration, and customizable event notifications.

Reschedge is a tool designed to untangle and streamline your company’s calendars. It:

Pricing: information is not available right now, however you can instantly book a 30-40 minute demo on their website.

Even if you are perfectly utilising every piece of software you can, recruitment can still be very difficult. Tools and programs can help optimize the process, but people are still at the core of every stage — at Daxx, we can bring years of recruitment experience to the table, help you decide on the correct path to take, and allow you to work with the best IT specialists in Ukraine if you can’t find the right developers locally.

Check out our blog, look through our available specialists, or simply fill out the form below to ask any questions you may have.|||

The hiring process can be tricky, so why not use recruitment tools to help? Here’s an overview of video recruiting software, onboarding tools, and more.