This is the last of our three-part series on the Future of Data Integration technologies. In our previous article, we discussed the rise of real-time ETL and Data Warehousing and the active part it has played in revolutionizing Business Intelligence. In this article, we will discuss why ETL is giving way to new Data Integration Technologies.

Though ETL has been extremely useful and efficient in handlining the increasing volumes of data, the continued onslaught poses a problem. While many enterprises have turned to real-time ETL and Data Warehousing, it is not always a feasible solution. Earlier data migration projects relied on ETL to read data from a database, transform it using lookup tables and rules and load it to a centralized warehouse. However, since data has breached the boundaries of enterprise-based data warehouses, spilling over into cloud applications and storages, ETL’s limitations are glaringly visible. Software service providers are hard-pressed to perform speedy, yet cost-effective data integrations in near real time. Therefore, enterprises are looking at superior alternatives to replace ETL. Here are the key reasons for the decline of ETL and the emergence of new data integration technologies.

It is, therefore, evident that the need of the hour is a shift in paradigm, a new way of looking at data and new tools and data integration technology to effectively utilize that data.

Enterprises are therefore exploring new data integration technologies where a self-service, real-time integration platform updates data in near real-time thereby freeing up capital and resources to concentrate on generating valuable insights for strategic decision making.

CyByte’s Data Integration Solutions can help you integrate your cloud and on-premise applications, structured and unstructured data in near-real time with customized connectors to translate raw data into actionable insights.|||

CyByte Blog on Social Data, Data Integration, Big Data, Business Intelligence, Data Visualization and more