During last years we were constantly noticing a bunch of developers and enthusiasts looking for a solution to parse (extract content) and index their documents, such as PDFs. Something they can send or upload their documents into and query them by some phrases from documents' content. Since there was no integrated solution present, they had to improvise. Most of them ended up using Tika or Ingest Attachment plugin along with ElasticSearch, some used Solr or even Lucene with custom parsers. But all these solutions are actually not easy to set up: it usually takes weeks or even months to combine all the modules, fine tune them, fix all bugs and finally get them working together properly (Check out this post: Ingest Attachment Plugin for ElasticSearch: Should You Use It?)

At some point during Ambar development we realized that along with its main goals, it also perfectly solves the issue I described by providing developers with an out-of-the-box solid "parse and search" solution.

Let's discuss a basic scenario of using Ambar for uploading files and search through their contents.

First of all, if you haven't done it yet, install Ambar CE. It's easy, just follow the steps from Ambar Installation: Step-by-step guide.

Let's assume your Ambar API is running on , I'll use this address as a default.

To upload a file into Ambar, use this method:

The is a parameter to group files inside Ambar by their source, for example for files coming from Dropbox the source name can be 'Dropbox', for files that were uploaded from UI you can set 'Default' as a .

is the name of the file being uploaded.

The request body must be a multi-part form data with a single field inside containing the file.

Receiving response means the file has been successfully uploaded into Ambar and enqueued for processing.

Let's search for the file by a rather popular phrase from it: (check Mastering Ambar Search Queries to understand search syntax)

The method for search is

Here is the response

The method for downloading a file is

You can get from field in the search response (see previous chapter).

Also, you can just open this URL in your browser and it'll download the file.

I described how to use Ambar as a ready-to-go parse and search solution for your projects, it's actually much easier than setting up your own Tika + ElasticSearch or any other self-built infrastructure. Also it provides you with much better results quality, both in terms of content extraction and search optimization.

Here is the complete Ambar Web API Documentation, please refer to it if you need to clarify anything on interacting with the API.

Stay tuned and subscribe for our blog!|||

