Nearly half of US adult smartphone owners fall victim to cyberthieves each year – but the notorious founder of the world's largest security technology firm believes he has a solution.

John McAfee has unveiled plans to develop what he calls 'the world's first truly private smartphone', which is said to be 'hack-proof'.

Boasting a $1,100 price tag, the 'John McAfee Privacy Phone' will be equipped with switches that enable users to manually disconnect certain components such as the antennas for Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and geolocation.

John McAfee has unveiled plans to develop what he calls 'the world's first truly private smartphone', which is said to be 'hack-proof'. Boasting a $1,100 price tag, the 'John McAfee Privacy Phone' will be equipped with switches that enable users to manually disconnect certain components. This includes 'the battery, the antennas for WiFi, Bluetooth and geolocation, the camera and the microphone, McAfee said during an interview with Newsweek.the battery, the antennas for WiFi, Bluetooth and geolocation, the camera and the microphone, McAfee said during an interview with Newsweek. It is said to be an OEM model using the Android operating system. But the full specs of phone will not be made public until a week before it is unveiled - which is later this year.

McAfee plans to release the phone later this year through MGT, reported Anthony Cuthbertson with Newsweek, who conducted an exclusive interview with the computer expert and businessman.

'The smartphone contains a bank of switches on the back cover that allow the user to physically disconnect the battery, the antennas for WiFi, Bluetooth and geolocation, the camera and the microphone,' McAfee said during an interview with Newsweek.

'It also will not allow the phone to connect to a Stingray or any other IMSI catcher device. In addition, it contains a web search anonymizer.'

MGT shared a press release last month, revealing it had signed a letter of intent with Nordic IT Sourcing Association to design, test and assemble a state of the art cell phone with privacy features that stay one step ahead of hackers and eavesdroppers.

'We are honored to be working with cybersecurity pioneer John McAfee and his team. MGT's innovative ideas should result in a unique offering in mobile communications, said Alexander Reay, president of Nordic IT.

'We have been heavily involved in the research of security and privacy issues, both in the Nordics and with our partners worldwide.'

'With the new GDPR regulations here in Europe set to take effect in 2018 and recent leaks, there is no end to the privacy issues facing enterprises and society as a whole.

'We strongly believe that such a device will be the center of attention for both privacy concerned consumers, and corporate leaders looking to develop a winning strategic cybersecurity and privacy program on behalf of their company.'

According to the release, the 'phone will be procured as an OEM model using the Android operating system, and then modified using the skills of MGT's cybersecurity team.'

However, Newsweek noted that the full specs of McAfee's phone will not be made public until a week before it is unveiled.

According to John McAfee, AI is a ‘self-conscious entity’ that is inherently self-interested, which could give rise to conflict with the human species. The cybersecurity expert argues that any system created by humans would be flawed by nature – and, ultimately, the AI’s goal would include the ‘necessary destruction of its creator.’ In the novella - which blatantly alludes to the debate on artificial intelligence today, with opposing forces named ‘Demis’ and ‘Elon’ – a particular passage describes an advanced system that can hack itself to ‘improve efficiency and logic,’ McAfee explains. ‘Such a concept is certainly not new and typical hacking techniques in use today can easily be imagined to be self-produced by complex software systems,’ McAfee wrote. ‘It would, in fact, be trivial to create such a system.’ Despite strides in cybersecurity, the expert says any imaginable logical system can be hacked – and, this becomes more certain as these structures become more complex. This is because there is no system that exists that does not have a defect, according to McAfee.

But MGT's first lot production would include 16,000 units at $350 per unit.

'Smartphones have become the Achilles heel of cybersecurity,' said McAfee, who is also the executive chairman and CEO of MGT.

'No matter how secure our applications become, they must still execute in an environment designed from ground up to be a spy device.

'It is like building a race car and having it powered by a rubber band.'|||

It could be the end for smartphone hackers. John McAfee unveiled plans to develop what he calls ‘the world’s first truly private handset’ that is said to be ‘hack-proof’ - but it could cost over $1,000.