Speaking of the changing American society between 1920 and 1930, the illusion of prosperity, the reality of the stock market crash, and the unfair passing of time, Thomas Wolfe wrote You can’t go home again.

But that’s exactly what many rural and post-industrial voters would like to do. Going back to what they feel is their home. To what they identify to. To the past they idealize.

In over 20 countries, from Argentina, to Malaysia, to Japan, the structure of the electoral systems gives rural voters disproportionate power, relative to their numbers, over their more numerous urban-dwelling counterparts.

But the same is true in Europe where electoral systems are more balanced. A survey conducted by Eurostat found that, in most cases, residents of northern and central Europe report a higher “overall life satisfaction”, but that people in the south are more content when in a city. In the end, rural Swiss reported the highest happiness of anyone in the survey, at 8.2 out of 10.

Urban and rural voter decisions are getting polarized.

In Austria’s national elections in December, Alexander Van der Bellen, the Green Party candidate, got a majority in nine of Austria’s 10 largest cities. But Norbert Hofer of the far-right Freedom Party won most rural districts handily. In Britain, those who voted to leave the European Union were concentrated in rural areas. Donald Trump lost cities by historic margins but made up for that with his rural support base.

And the same goes for France where this election shows how the support base of Marine Le Pen is located in rural areas.

Many nations, including France and the US, were founded as agrarian states. Thomas Jefferson famously warned that:

Things are different now. Countries are getting organized around Cities, and Cities are trying to survive as many post-industrial examples show how they can die pretty quickly.

This competition complicate things. We go from a rural divide to a post-industrial divide. There is a redistribution problem at hand. Wealth and growth are concentrated in the surviving urban areas that don’t want to share, or don’t share enough with rural ones.

And now that their values tend to differ so starkly, it’s really becoming a matter of two nations, a new south-north divide, but everywhere in the world and in every country.

One of the problem is that we don’t really understand this dynamic. We don’t know how Cities work, why they’re so attractive, how they can fail so quickly, and how they should share around. Work by Acemoglu and Robinson, for example, makes a strong case for the importance of institutions. But their focus is almost entirely on nation-states, even though many aspects of institutions express their most interesting variations at the level of the city.

As Patrick Thorton described in The Atlantic, the real bubble is the rural, or rather the post-industrial bubble.

The trouble is to get people from the Cities to understand that these people are real. As he has it,

Indeed, some people are interested in it, as Raymond Depardon with series of a film and photographies.

Part of the solution is broadband of course. It can bring so much wealth to poor rural and post-industrial areas that it would be a waste not to install it. And as in Chatanooga, the results are staggering.

But who will pay for it? And who will pay for the schools, the hospitals, all of the infrastructure that’s being moved from the rest of the country to the heart of the Cities?

As I wrote before, “The replacement of Public Services with Digital Services is often used as a pretext for deregulation”, meaning that it’s also a way to get rid of all the rules that create some sort of equality between rural and urban areas.

Public Services are associated with a social consensus that is usually expressed through democratic elections. If they are public it’s because we consider that they should be available to all, regardless of income, physical ability and/or mental acuity. But also regardless of where you live in your country.

Of course, there is nothing new with Public Services being provided by private companies. But then, they are usually subject to some regulation. And once they’re done with “throwing rocks at the google bus”, people will start voting, and they will vote bad.|||

Speaking of the changing American society between 1920 and 1930, the illusion of prosperity, the reality of the stock market crash, and the unfair passing of time, Thomas Wolfe wrote You can’t go…