I believe that the Internet is underrated and most of us are blind from the hundreds of potential jobs it provides. Are you struggling to get started like I did? I want to teach you everything I have learned during the past decade of living in the world of web development. After years of developing I found methods that heavily improved my coding techniques. I became comfortable with focusing on both my life and what I loved doing the most (creating for the web). I want to show you all the little secrets and best tactics I have learned along the way.

As the Internet keeps growing, so are the available building tools, libraries, coding techniques, and the continuous advancements and improvements of web technologies and methodologies. I want to place you immediately in the right direction. No more time wasted searching for the best approach to begin developing. Start coding in no time, and rest assured you are doing it the right way!

Follow my updates and be notified when the book is released

The Internet is still growing at a fast pace, especially now that mobile devices are in everyone's pockets. It is the easiest way to reach millions of people globally and effortlessly.

I want to help you get there. All that's required is will and motivation. If you’re like me, you’ll give that extra push to keep moving forward and turn your ideas into real-working digital products.

Hey, I’m Owen. I am fascinated with technology and how it can help enrich people’s lives. I’ve been on the Internet world for the past decade, eagerly searching for the best strategies in web performance and user experience. I’m the creator and developer of Buttons, a web application that helps you organize and share your browser bookmarks. I'm also a writer for the publication Hacker Noon.

The book will be available in 2017. I will be keeping you up to date with my goals and provide you with sample content along the way. Subscribe with your email address to follow my updates and start your journey today. Expect bonus content and a surprise for early subscribers!|||

A realistic guide on how to get started and quickly dive into the real world of web development.