A new report by United Airlines has concluded that a litany of failures in customer service, training and technology contributed to the forcible removal of a paying passenger earlier this month.

In an 11-page report, United Continental Holdings Inc. UAL -1.23% sought to give a more complete account of the events—including previously unreported details—that led to the April 9 dragging by aviation police of Dr. David Dao from a commuter flight. It said the incident, which sparked international outrage, exposed key gaps in various areas of customer service that the company promises to address this year.

It was “a failure of epic proportions that’s grown to this breach of public trust. We get that,” said United’s chief executive, Oscar Munoz, in an interview. “We let our policies and procedures get in the way of doing the right thing.”

The comments come nearly a week after United said Mr. Munoz will no longer be taking on the chairman role next year so he can focus on the top job. “It’s better for me to focus on the task at hand and continue to be the CEO,” he said, adding that there wasn’t a specific timeline spelled out by the board to measure success.

United said a new rule, to take effect Friday, will increase compensation to up to $10,000 for customers willing to volunteer to take a later flight.

United said that later this year it would install an automated check-in process to gauge a customer’s interest in giving up his or her seat on an overbooked flight in exchange for compensation. The airline also said it would give more discretion to its employees to issue mileage vouchers for future flights and other compensation when bad service occurs—things that some of its rivals already do.

United said it will reduce overbookings on flights that historically haven’t generated a lot of volunteers when oversold, particularly on smaller planes and the last flights of the day to a destination. The airline will start a new program to find “creative solutions” for agents to use to help overbooked passengers, such as turning to other airlines or even ground transportation to get customers to their destinations.

When asked if any individual employees would be held responsible, Mr. Munoz said he was taking the blame himself: “Things happened in so many places, there was no particular breakdown I can’t and shouldn’t take ownership of.”

United already has made some policy changes, including not calling on law enforcement to remove passengers from flights except for safety or security reasons.

The incident involved United Express Flight 3411, a 70-seat aircraft operated by subcontractor Republic Airways Holdings Inc., that was destined  for Louisville, Ky., from Chicago’s O’Hare International Airport. The Sunday afternoon flight had been overbooked not once but twice, according to United’s report released Thursday.

Because the plane initially had one more passenger than seats, United agents asked for a volunteer to no avail, and ended up bumping one customer who hadn’t yet been given a boarding pass before 70 passengers boarded Flight 3411, the report said.

After the flight boarded, United learned that four Republic crew members also needed seats because their earlier flight had been delayed by a mechanical issue. If the two pilots and two flight attendants didn’t get to Kentucky, the Monday flight would have been canceled and possibly more after that, a cascade of events that could have affected hundreds of other fliers.

Gate agents began seeking more volunteers, offering $800 vouchers for future travel plus the cost of meals and hotel accommodations. No one accepted.

One couple who was involuntarily bumped left the flight in return for up to $1,350 each in compensation, as required by the Transportation Department. The report said the agents then approached  Dr. Dao and his wife, who were on their way back from California.

It isn’t clear when his wife left the plane, but the 69-year-old Vietnamese-American physician refused to leave, the report said. Another customer volunteered to give up his seat for $1,000 but the agents needed a total of two volunteers.

A United supervisor notified Dr. Dao that the authorities would be contacted, according to the report. Officers from the Chicago Department of Aviation boarded the plane and tried to gain his cooperation, without success, the report said. The department “has authority to respond to such airline requests and historically has been effective in getting customers to voluntarily comply,” United said in the report.

Dr. Dao physically resisted and was forcibly removed from the plane, dragged down the aisle on his back. A few minutes later, he ran back on board, his face bleeding, and was removed by the officers for a second time, after which he was transported to a local hospital, the United report said.

His attorneys said the doctor suffered a concussion, a broken nose and two busted teeth. One of the three officers from the Chicago Aviation Department involved in the event said the officer who removed Dr. Dao from his seat used “minimal but necessary force,” according to city records made public on Monday. The three officers were placed on leave pending an investigation. Tom Demetrio, an attorney for Dr. Dao, called assertions in the city records “utter nonsense.”

Mr. Munoz said he and the company reached out to Dr. Dao, and he personally left a voice mail. “His attorney said they’re not desirous of any conversation,” Mr. Munoz said. The CEO said he hopes that will change. Dr. Dao hasn’t commented publicly since the incident.

Mr. Munoz, who intends to testify Tuesday at a House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee hearing on airline consumer affairs, was denounced for his initially antagonistic comments about the passenger, only later unreservedly apologizing and blamed the incident on a “system failure.”

“What I saw and how we responded will haunt me forever,” he said. “I should have responded with my humanity and values, I got caught up in the facts when I should have responded to the raw emotions of the event. And that’s on me.”

Appeared in the Apr. 27, 2017, print edition as 'United Cites Litany of Failures.'|||

A new report by United Airlines has concluded that a litany of failures in customer service, training and technology contributed to the forcible removal of a paying passenger. CEO Oscar Munoz, in an interview, called it “a failure of epic proportions. ... We get that.”