In the spring of 1988, four London plane trees were mysteriously cut down in Temple Square, at the corner of Schermerhorn Street and Flatbush Avenue, in Brooklyn. Witnesses reported seeing a crew of about ten men arrive in an orange truck; when they left, they took the illicit timber with them. The local rumor was that a group of neighborhood shop owners had arranged for the trees’ removal, hoping to make their businesses more visible. Not long afterward, Henry J. Stern, the commissioner of the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation, organized a memorial service. He wore a black armband for the occasion and, accompanied by a recording of Verdi’s Requiem, delivered a brief eulogy. “This is arborcide in the first degree,” Stern said. “The loss of a tree is not the loss of a person, but plant life nonetheless deserves our respect. We are highly resolved that these trees shall not have died in vain.”

It is difficult to reconcile Stern’s poignant gesture with the hard-edged image of New York in the nineteen-eighties. But the city has always had a soft spot for the London plane, a horticultural hybrid (part Asian plane, part American sycamore) known for its camouflage-patterned bark, columnar branches, and maple-like leaves. First grown around 1670 in England, it came to dominate the urban planning of London, Paris, and Rome. The tree took over New York thanks in large part to Robert Moses, the first and longest-serving commissioner of the modern Parks Department, whose head of landscape design, inspired by what the historian Thomas J. Campanella has called Europe’s “public-works baroque” aesthetic, planted colonnades of London planes. They would become New York’s most common street trees. Here, like other hardworking immigrants, they performed tireless, invisible labor for the city, sequestering carbon, countering the heat-island effect, and reducing the pollution of storm-water runoff. Fit to thrive in dirty, confined environments for two hundred years at a stretch, London planes are, one arborist told me recently, “tough, tough trees. You can drive a truck into these things, and they’ll just keep on ticking.” Infect one with a fungus that shrivels all its leaves, and its bark will continue to photosynthesize.

But not all of New York’s London planes were resilient enough to withstand Hurricane Sandy, the storm that swept the city in 2012. Two winters ago, Michelle Johnson, a scientist at the N.Y.C. Urban Field Station, took me to see what remained of one of Sandy’s casualties—a curbside stump in the Rockaways, sawed nearly flush with the ground, colored a disturbingly muscular yellow-pink. When Johnson had last seen this tree alive, in 2014, it had lost more than half its leaves. As part of a study she is conducting with her colleagues Richard Hallett and Nancy Falxa Sonti, she had rated it a four in vigor, on a scale of one to five, where five was dead. Within a year, the Parks Department had cut it down, meting the same fate to the moribund London plane right around the corner, six planes located four blocks west, and the double row that used to shade visitors to Rockaway Beach. While half of the stalwart old planes between the beach’s “Welcome” sign and the boardwalk still flourish, the other half, closer to the ocean, died and were replaced with spindly honey-locust saplings. For as long as the trees stand, that abrupt shift will mark the flood line.

The dead London planes in the Rockaways were not among the twenty thousand unhealthy or defective trees immediately culled by the storm. They were the strong ones that had withstood Sandy’s blasts, as they’d withstood decades of bad weather. Only in the months and years after Sandy did they, along with forty-eight thousand other New York trees, reveal the long-term toll of saltwater flooding. They leafed sparsely, or not at all, in the spring and summer; they sickened; they died. After the floods, it was often the families struggling to rebuild who first noticed that the trees they’d played or picnicked under were ailing. Trees belong to neighborhoods; they grow alongside generations of humans, for whom their familiar colors and contours, even the nuisance of leaves, become the characteristics of home, so that the death of any one tree compounds the destruction of a community’s character, history, and beauty. This is how the tough London plane, that New Yorkiest of trees, has come to represent the city’s vulnerability in the twenty-first century.

Similar thoughts of change and loss might have crossed the mind of the composer George Frideric Handel when he wrote his comic opera “Serse.” Between 1735 and 1738, Handel’s London was assailed by walnut-sized hailstones, the most violent winds in thirty years, and the Thames’s highest tide in fifty. The river surged into Westminster Hall. Gales flattened houses, sank ships, and uprooted innumerable urban trees; one storm felled thirty-six trees in St. James’s Park alone. During this period of extreme weather, Handel revisited Herodotus’s story of Xerxes and a “plane-tree of such beauty that he was moved to decorate it with golden ornaments and to appoint a guardian for it in perpetuity.” “Serse” opens with the title character’s recitative: “Tender and beautiful fronds of my beloved plane-tree .  .  . / May thunder, lightning, and storms never bother your dear peace, / Nor may you by blowing winds be profaned.” Comic or not, Handel’s opera reserves space, within human wars and affections, to acknowledge the fragility of the vegetable world.

What could Xerxes’s passion accomplish if it were lavished on a real tree? After visiting the Rockaways, I sought the answer twelve miles to the northwest—beyond the plane-lined neighborhoods of Flatbush, where strains of “Serse” waft magisterially from the Brooklyn College carillon—in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. Here, a pair of arborists have been monitoring a towering but faulty London plane. Circling the trunk, I could see a giant cavity infested with fungus. “It’s tempting to think of it as dead wood, but it’s also a live organism,” one of the arborists, Alec Baxt, told me. To sound the extent of the decay, he whacked it with a trowel, dislodging handfuls of spongy yellow tissue like foam batting. “Dead: this is how we normally talk about it, because we think from a very tree-centric point of view,” he said. But from the perspective of the fungus, along with lichens, insects, mites, nematodes, bacteria, birds, and squirrels, Baxt pointed out, “this tree becomes a much more complex ecosystem when it starts falling apart.” His colleague Travis Wolf wanted to introduce still more life-forms into the tree. “We’re talking about turning it into a pollard, and eventually making it into a neat little treehouse,” he said. “It would kind of look like a castle,” Baxt said. Still, there was more pondering to be done, with this tree and others in the garden. For instance, Baxt was hoping to prune an effusively weeping hemlock in a way that honored what Wolf called its “intention.” They debated what kind of work “lets the tree be a tree”—sometimes like diagnosticians, sometimes like proud, harassed parents.

In a world full of ecological endangerment, and in a city in which so many needs compete with one another, there is a small, dear peace to be found where trees are allowed such a respectful margin for unpredictability. The effort required to save one rotting giant, otherwise destined for the chipper, might seem absurd when compared with the dizzying scale of bereavement already apprehended in global climate change. Yet in New York in 2017, such efforts of love—mapping stumps, replanting shores, crowdsourcing the N.Y.C. Street Tree Map—are just as tender, ridiculous, and essential as they were in Handel’s day, no less necessary for their slightness in the face of catastrophe. Trees, Baxt reminded me, “exist totally at the whim of so many people.” He went on: “You’re getting generations of people who safeguard a particular tree, and then its responsibility just shifts by one person, and it’s done. It takes a day. The wrong person and a day is all it takes to destroy an amazing tree.” Like Xerxes and Stern, Baxt could be singing a love song—or an elegy—for all of New York’s London planes, and for a day two thousand years ago, or four hundred, or thirty, when we expected nature to rebound from thunder, lightning, and storms, when a king or a city spared the time to honor one beloved tree.|||

Alison Kinney examines New York’s history with the London plane tree, a hardworking horticultural hybrid, and the city’s vulnerability to climate change.