What’s THE BEST PROBIOTIC? Are Probiotics for fat loss? For a flatter stomach? Are probiotics for gut health only? What’s gut health exactly? Can probiotics help with allergies and skin conditions?

 For balancing gut bacteria probiotics and good gut health help optimise health. Does taking probiotics with antibiotics restore balance? READ ON to find out…

Feeding good bacteria is optimised by the best probiotics. Probiotics in food or a probiotic supplement is healthy. We’re not certain WHY but basically: Probiotics – everyone’s taking them. So they must promote health somehow!

WHICH probiotic do I recommend and WHY? Read on…

Why’s everyone taking probiotics in modern times?     Tweet This

For a specific concern you need to get the right blend of bacteria cultures. What’s a healthy balance of live gut bacteria anyway? Can we need antacids and benefit from probiotics? Why? Find out today . This balance is becoming harder to find in today’s world. We pull together valuable information and help guide you towards health. We’re seeking health, not disease.

We’re all in search of a flatter stomach. It seems like this “friendly” bacteria or” good bacteria” in probiotics is keeping us regular too. Regularity is a consistent theme in wellness programmes. In our quest to feel well, we associate probiotics with the image above.

Fast fact! Two million of us are consuming a probiotic. We’re drinking a probiotic as a beverage. Or we’re eating  more yogurt or yoghurt. We’re taking powders in sachets and shaking them in water bottles. We’re refrigerating probiotic capsules.

Gut health aids the production of B vitamins. These are vital for efficient running of our nervous system. Our natural probiotic levels are easily damaged. Modern life i.e. poor diet, stress and alcohol are diminishing our levels. Hormonal fluctuations, cigarettes, surgery and drugs are commonplace factors. Our modern lifestyle is making probiotic supplementing a necessity. In modern times we need help to keep our gut healthy.

We know gut health is a measure of far more than our metabolism. Gut health is the meter controlling our body’s ability or inability to convert our nutrition to health.

Got heartburn, acid reflux or hiatus hernia? Choosing the best probiotic supplement may be the fastest, safest treatment     Tweet This Similarly, if you experience bloating, bad breath, body odour, gas or excessing burping during and in between meals.  Colds, constipation, diarrhoea, food cravings, PMS or hot flushes are another list of symptoms. Itchy nose and itchy bottom and allergies, stomach pain and stomach ulcers are unlikely indications for probiotic supplementing. Others are: Irritable bowel syndrome IBS, malodorous stools, thrush, urinary infections, vaginal discharge. What you need is the best probiotic supplement.

Being healthy means giving our body a fighting chance! Our nutrition and our lifestyle should work together for our health.  Our body should break down food we eat properly. Then we can use the nutrients in our food for health. This includes on and off switches involved in hormone secretion. Many other functional pathways rely on healthy metabolism. Otherwise we become sick and tired — literally.

Ongoing biological processes require nutrients to be bioavailable. Prescript Assist aids this process. It makes it easier for your body to eliminate waste. Also so not to confuse the goodness for waste. Prescript Assist ticks the boxes you require when selecting the best probiotic.

Chronic illness makes you more likely to try it all. Fatigue or digestive problems are commonplace in modern times. So many patients I treat for GERD or GORD, acid reflux and IBS feel that this is normal. They feel they should accept this as part of their life. Bloating and constipation aren’t normal. You need a probiotic that works. Trying every probiotic in sight isn’t the solution either.

Probiotics are fast becoming the most popular non prescription medication. Mulling over your purchase in your local health food shop is commonplace. Your organic supermarket aisle is expanding with brand name probiotics. In fact, you are least likely to make your purchase there for this very reason!

Which probiotic bacteria strain is the one or the winning formula? Will it work for you? This question leaves you despondent. However, you are right to be asking.

Not all probiotics on the market are created equal. What makes the best probiotic supplement?       Tweet This       You do not have to do this research alone. This 5 tick box list takes the guess work out of your health journey.

If you feel that probiotics are the way to go, this is the single most concise, informative article on the matter. It summarises major variations in the quality and efficacy of probiotic supplements. The are products you can buy at organic supermarkets or online .

The Problem.

 Here are 5 MAJOR problems with probiotic supplements on the market today:

 1) Strain Homogeneity 2) Perishability 3) Low viability 4) Lack of Prebiotics 5) Weak Scientific Validation

Finding the best probiotic supplement. The Solution. Prescript Assist

 1) Broad-Spectrum Formula. Prescript-Assist contains 29 different strains of beneficial bacteria. This better reflects the great microbial diversity of the intestines.

 2) Unparalleled Shelf Stability. Prescript-Assist features probiotic bacteria protected by a durable seed-like structure. The probiotic bacteria are safeguarded against environmental factors this way. Routine viability testing confirms >95% viability two years after date of manufacture. This is without refrigeration.

 3) High Viability. Contains bacteria that reach the intestines intact. This is because the seed-like structure protects against degradation by stomach acid.

 4) Prebiotic Support that includes leonardite. Leonardite is a prebiotic composition of humic and fulvic acids. These allow the beneficial bacteria to proliferate.

 5) Back By Sound Science. Supported by a peer-reviewed, double-blind, placebo-controlled human clinical trial – including a one-year follow-up study, verifying long term efficacy.

Prescript-Assist– WHO? HOW? HOW OFTEN? HOW LONG FOR?|||

Probiotics - London Functional Osteopathy