Napa Valley is known for its incredible natural beauty. The county in Northern California is also a world-renowned wine region. It boasts more than 450 wineries that produce classic, delicious, and high quality wines like oaked Chardonnays, fruity Merlots, and spicy Shiraz.

From a fabulous weekend wine tasting trip, to a romantic week-long getaway, Napa is the ultimate vacation destination. You can relax among blooming vineyards, whilst sipping the rarest of wine varieties.

If you’re planning a vacation, or weekend getaway, then consider Napa Valley. Even if you aren’t really that into wine, one visit to Napa Valley’s famous wineries will make you fall in love. And if you are already a wine lover, or want to become a great sommelier, or just want to learn more about this luxury beverage, treat yourself with Napa Valley wine tours.

There are hundreds of Napa Valley wineries that you could explore during your vacation. If you are a first-time traveler to Napa Valley, or have visited before, but did not get the chance to enjoy a splendid wine tour in Napa Valley, here are twenty of the most stunning wineries in Napa, that you can’t afford to miss.

One of the oldest wineries in Napa Valley, and the first one to offer public tours, Beringer still stands amongst the top wineries in the valley. Take a tour through the sumptuous rhine house with historic architecture, exploring the art of wine and food pairing, and enjoying exclusive wines from the winery.

A magical wine destination, Peju Winery is focused on offering great hospitality to all their guests, and is known for crafting some of Napa Valley’s most superb estate grown wines.

The next must-see winery on the list is Sterling Vineyards. Not only do they offer exceptional varieties of wine, but also panoramic views of the Napa Valley. On your arrival, you will be hailed in a classic style by offered a glass of wine.

Visit the winery in style by climbing through the aerial gondola, while gazing at the splendid views of South View Terrace. Fall in love with the Mediterranean style architecture, and savor a glass of yummy wine.

Owned by Scott Chafen, the winery was listed as one of the top five wineries in Napa by The Wall Street Journal. It is popular for its handcrafted wines, and specializes in different types of wine, including Syrah, Pinot Noir, Petite Sirah, Zinfandel, and Bordeaux Blend.

Tastings happen in the winery tasting room, and the reserve takes you through the inside workings of the winery.

Started by Moet Hennessy, Domaine Chandon is a leading producer of sparkling wine in America. Along with the winery tour, you will also learn about the winery’s history, the process of wine-making, and the distinctive wines of Domaine Chandon.

Enjoy sipping wine in their stylish tasting lounge, which features a bar, cocktail table, and shaded patio table.

This family-owned winery was founded in 1985 by Shari, Garen, Brandon, and Shannon Staglin. The wines produced here reflect the historic character of the Rutherford Bench estate property. The varietal wines include Cabernet Sauvignon, Sangiovese, Bordeaux style blend, and Chardonnay.

Goosecross is known for creating handcrafted, and quality wines. Enjoy five of their latest releases inside their barrel cellar, where you can sip, socialize, and learn about the history of wine, style of winemaking, and the techniques of tasting.

Another family-owned winery, V. Sattui produces over 60 different kinds of wine. It is a beautiful place, perfect for organizing picnics, events, and weddings. It was declared, “Winemaker of the Year,” in 2015 by the American Fine Wine Competition.

The perfect place to enjoy red wines at exciting price. The location of the winery yields the best quality grapes. Enjoy the elegant, and rich flavored wines of Bennett Lane Winery in their tasting room.

For club members, there are special perks, like a free tasting on every visit, pre-release access to wines, access to private winery events, and discounts on future releases of wine.

Popular for producing some of the world’s finest wines, Beaulieu was named, “One of the Best Napa Valley Wineries to Visit,” by Food & Wine magazine.

This winery specializes in small lot Cabernet Sauvignon, Sauvignon Blanc, and Merlot. Enjoy wine tasting in Provenance’s tasting room, or while gazing at the views from their lounge, or patio. Taste Hewitt Vineyard’s exclusive, elegant Cabernet Sauvignon, which is crafted in a unique way. The resulting wine is a deep black cherry color, with hints of cocoa, black olive, and cedar.

Established in 1861, the Charles Krug Winery was named as one of the, “Top 10 California Tasting Experiences,” by Food & Wine magazine. The winery features rustic, yet modern architecture with high ceilings, large windows, and a large wall of wines. You can taste wine in a sitting arrangement, or opt for a standing tasting option.

Established in 1977, Newton Vineyard specializes in Chardonnay and red Bordeaux varieties. The winery gives you a superb view of natural surroundings, in the form of terraced vineyards.

This family-owned winery, (which was first started in a horse barn, as a small project), has now grown into a full-time passion. Today, it stands as one of the top wineries in the Napa Valley, focusing on terroir-driven specialty wines.

Recognized as one of the top producers of fine wine in the world, Chimney Rock located in the Stags Leap District, specializes in Cabernet Sauvignon, and Bordeaux blends. Lose yourself to the Cape Dutch inspired architecture of its buildings, and winery.

Established in 2000, the winery specializes in producing Cabernet Sauvignon from four different vineyards – Cañon Creek, Clark-Claudon, Haystack Peak, and Tomasson.

Founded in 2006, Crosby Roamann is a boutique winery, producing less than a thousand cases per year. Wines are handmade, and aged in barrels for six months to three years.

Enjoy sparkling wines from Mumm Napa by choosing one of their unique tasting or tour experiences.

A classic Napa Valley winery with award-winning architecture. Clos Pegase is very popular for their estate wines, and luxurious hospitality.

Dedicated to crafting top class estate grown wines, Joseph Phelps Vineyards is a family owned winery founded in 1973. It is home to 390 acres of vines, and is best known for their Insignia, a flagship wine which is a blend of varieties of red Bordeaux. Other specialities include Chardonnay, Pinot Noir, Syrah, and Cabernet Sauvignon.

Wine tasting experiences at Joseph Phelps are unbeatable. You can sit in the tasting room, or on the terrace to savor every sip of your wine while looking at gorgeous view of the vineyards. Wine and cheese pairing sessions offered every Friday, Saturday, and Sunday.

Whether you’re a wine enthusiast, avid traveler, or just looking for a great weekend getaway, don’t let your travel diaries miss the stunning wineries of Napa Valley. And don’t forget, there are 400+ more wineries in the region, in addition to those mentioned above, each of them unique in their own way.

Indulge yourself with a relaxing, romantic, and luxurious Napa Valley wine tasting tour. But be careful! You may never want to come back to the hustle and bustle of daily life. Do you have some other destination, or itinerary in mind? Just get in touch! We would love to assist you with planning your own custom wine tours.|||

