Cops fear vulnerable youngsters are being swayed to take their own lives through sick social media accounts

Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

BLUE Whale is a twisted suicide challenge that appears to goad vulnerable teens into killing themselves.

The dangerous game has been linked to at least 130 teen deaths in Russia and police in the UK have now started warning parents about the challenge.

The Blue Whale suicide game is believed to be an online social media group which is encouraging people to kill themselves.

There are hundreds of thousands of posts relating to the sick trend on Instagram.

It’s thought a group administrator assigns daily tasks to members, which they have to complete over 50 days.

The horrific tasks include self-harming, watching horror movies and waking up at unusual hours, but these gradually get more extreme.

On the 50th day, the controlling manipulators behind the game reportedly instruct the youngsters to commit suicide.

The NSPCC say children should remember not to follow the crowd and not feel pressured into doing anything that makes them feel unsafe.

A spokesperson said: “Children can find it difficult to stand up to peer pressure but they must know it’s perfectly okay to refuse to take part in crazes that make them feel unsafe or scared.

“Parents should talk with their children and emphasise that they can make their own choices and discuss ways of how to say no.

“Reassuring a child that they can still be accepted even if they don’t go along with the crowd will help stop them doing something that could hurt them or make them uncomfortable.”

It can sometimes be hard to stand up to your friends, so Childline offers the following tips on how to say no: 1) Say it with confidence:

 Be assertive. It’s your choice and you don’t have to do something which makes you feel unsafe or uncomfortable. 2) Try not to judge them:

 By respecting their choices, they should respect yours. 3) Spend time with friends who can say ‘no’:

 It takes confidence and courage to say no to your friends. Spend time with other friends who also aren’t taking part. 4) Suggest something else to do:

 If you don’t feel comfortable doing what your friends are doing, suggest something else to do. Any child worried about peer pressure or online worries can contact Childline on 0800 1111.

If you are affected by any of the issues raised in this article, the Samaritans can be contacted on 020 7734 2800

Essex Police informed a school in Basildon about the Blue Whale challenge and the headteacher wrote to parents about it.

The letter, sent by Woodlands School in Basildon was seen by Essex Live and read: “We have discovered a game through the police that we feel you should be aware of.

“It is called The Blue Whale Game and is played via many social media platforms.”

No deaths in Britain have been linked to the game, but police officers have posted online warnings to parents.

Devon and Cornwall Police PCSO Kirsty Down tweeted: “Whoever created this horrible game is sick!

“Parents: Please be aware of this ‘game’ talk to your children about it if concerned.”

FOR PARENTS: How to talk about peer pressure Make sure you both have time to talk, the atmosphere is relaxed, and remember that this is a conversation, not an interrogation. 2) Listen:

 Avoid solely talking at them. Listen to their concerns and their experiences. 3) Acknowledge their worries:

 Dismissing their feelings will only shut down the conversation and make them reluctant to talk about what’s bothering them. 4) Help them practise ways of saying no:

 Rehearsing with them ways to stand up to peer pressure and coming up with alternatives for them will build their confidence. 5) Keep the conversation going:

 Let them know that they can always come to you if they have more worries, and take an interest in how they get on saying “no”. Any adult who wants advice on how to talk to their child about peer pressure can contact the NSPCC Helpline on 0808 800 5000.

Police are said to be probing a number of suicides across Russia which they fear are linked to the online craze.

But as of yet the Blue Whale game has not been proven to be directly responsible for any deaths.

Investigative newspaper Novaya Gazeta reported: “We have counted 130 suicides of children that took place between November 2015 to April 2016.

“Almost all these children were members of the same internet groups and lived in good, happy families.”

Two schoolgirls Yulia Konstantinova, 15, and Veronika Volkova, 16, fell to their deaths from the roof of a 14-storey apartment block.

Another unnamed 15-year-old girl was also critically injured after falling onto snowy ground from a fifth floor flat in the city of Krasnoyarsk, also Siberia.Two days earlier, a 14-year-old girl from Chita was reported to have thrown herself under a commuter train.

A 13-year-old boy was also saved from killing himself after he was spotted perching on the edge of a roof in Lviv, Ukraine.

In all cases, state investigators are probing whether the controversial social media suicide game had influenced the girls to take their own lives.

Yulia left a note saying “End” on her social media page after she posted a picture of a big blue whale.

A family raced to stop a 15-year-old girl from killing herself, with the young girl reportedly now recovering in a hospital in Barcelona.

Cops are said to have launched a probe into the sick craze sweeping Russia – the suicide capital of the world.

It was reported that two teenage boys were detained by police at the scene after allegedly filming the tragic double suicide of Yulia and Veronika.

The Russian Investigative Committee has opened a probe on “incitement to suicide” regarding the pair’s death.

In Krasnoyarsk, law enforcement recently opened three criminal cases of incitement to suicide involving schoolgirls via the groups on social media.

In all three cases, the teenagers were rescued.

One local school director told police he had received an anonymous call saying a student had joined a “group of death” and planned soon to kill herself.

The police identified the girl who explained that she had joined a “game” and had been given “tasks” by the group administrator.

She did not obey the commands, which involved self-harm, but there are fears that others did.

In the Chita case, transport police confirmed the game is a possible “cause of death”.

Last year, an alleged ringleader named as 21-year-old Philipp Budeikin was detained, and he has been charged with organising eight groups between 2013 and 2016 which “promote suicide”.

Some 15 teenagers committed suicide, and another five were rescued at the last moment, according to the case against him.

Instagram has started showing users a warning when they search for pictures relating to Blue Whale.

When you search for the term on the network, a notification appears which reads: “Posts with words or tags you’re searching for often encourage behaviour that can cause harm and even lead to death.

“If you’re going through something difficult, we’d like to help.”

But directly underneath the post it gives the option to “see posts anyway”.

There are several shocking pictures of self-harm and even jokes about the sick game once you click through.

Some include pools of blood on the floor, while others appear to show a whale carved onto an arm.

If you are affected by any of the issues raised in this article, the Samaritans can be contacted on 020 7734 2800|||

The Blue Whale 'suicide game' is goading teens into taking their own lives and now it's reached British shores