We are a technology, product and service company specializing in information retrieval, natural language processing, analytics and compression.

There is a limit to how much data you can store in a relational database before it crumbles under the weight of its data. Easy enough to solve though. Hire the best database engineers in the world and give them a huge hardware budget.

This is out of reach for most.

Every company is a big data company these days. We all face the same problem. How do we keep large historical data in a queryable state? Archiving is easy, cheap, neccessary or your big data database will crumble, but not keeping all data available at all times to analysts or as machine-learning data is such a draw-back. Market-winning companies master this process. It’s usually called Elasticsearch+Hadoop.

Elasticsearch is built on a piece of tech called Lucene. It’s Lucene in a distributed form. Lucene, the go-to tech for basically all serious search problems for many years, is built on the Java runtime.

Our core technology, Resin, started out as a Lucene clone but is now a much faster search engine than that, that is, faster and more efficient at indexing and querying time.

Resin has perhaps a better model. Same mathematical model (vector space model). Much better implementation.

Sir, our other piece of tech, is Resin distributed. It’s the equivalent of Elasicsearch only the core component is much faster.

It is built on the world’s most efficient system for distributable problems. A problem is such if it may be divided into many and solved piece by piece.

Machine-learning and compression have at least one thing in common. They both do better with huge amounts of data.

A unique way of storing vast lexicons, compressed but still very much in a queryable state, distributed, in a form that makes this technology accessible to all, that’s Sir, our flagship product.

It’s very hard to find a person who masters Elasticsarch+Hadoop. They are expensive. Really skilled teams around the world are just now starting to master this. Should your business die just because you didn’t solve this problem?

We intend to beat the competition by using state-of-the-art technology from the leaders in information retrieval. We intend to keep everything we do open-source and cool. We will never be evil.

Need a support plan for Sir? We shall have you covered.

We are in love with all things NLP. We see information retrieval and natural language processing as a stepping stone towards general AI. We believe in and strive for general AI to be born before our children take over this world. We hope to save this world.

Lucene hasn’t improved its indexing performance in years, most likely because they are not innovating in that area.

Do you want to do research and product development in areas the competition doesn’t yet know is being contested? Join us, in any of our open-source projects :).

Match Elasticsearch’s excellent documentation. Offer to the market place both Resin and Sir as obvious choices over Lucene and ELK.

Challenge the ELK+Hadoop architecture by using the strongest compression in the world paired with the world’s most expressive querying language.|||

