Sweet! Seems like @Jack has feelings for you! Go say hello.

@mention the person you have feelings for. I will keep it a secret unless feelings are mutual.

It will be our little secret unless feelings are mutual

The workplace often introduces us to like-minded humans. Having feelings for them is natural and amazing. Dimo and Ana work together and believe that feelings can enhance one's life. There are some rules which we call common sense, but still want to list here.



When someone doesn't like something, it's fine, don't worry about it.

At Feeld we believe that some societal norms can be redefined to enhance our human nature. Working at the same place with someone means you already have a lot in common.

Embrace your feelings. Having a crush, an interest in someone, being accepted, rejected, ignored—all these events cause us to feel in certain ways. Stay open to them, observe how you feel and keep exploring. Respect people's choices and feelings, they matter as much as yours.

Always be mindful that these humans have feelings, fears, curiosities too. Respect those and don't go beyond where you're welcome. Working with someone can often make us feel extra close to that person, but that might not be the way they feel. Respect people's choices.

Discrimination, intimidation, or marginalisation of any kind have no place in the Feeld community. Preserve the open, honest, respectful attitude in your actions and approaches towards others.

Nothing should happen without a talk and agreement about consent. Trusting that someone understands what you are comfortable with, the limits to your comfort, and that they won't violate those limits without your agreement — and vice-versa — is essential to the growth of intimacy, authenticity, mutual respect and above all, safety.

Having fun at work is awesome, exploring your feelings is what we believe will make us better humans. Work is work however, always remember the main reason you're there—to make awesome things with the awesome people in your team.|||

First ever Slack bot for dating.