OBS is a free and open source software, user can do video recording and live streaming. Most game user love OBS and capture the game video and edit OBS video in Windows Movie Maker, after the perfect video editing, upload the great video to Youtube for share. However, some user can't edit the OBS video in Windows Movie Maker happily, why? Most OBD saved video is VLC media file(.flv) which does not work with Windows Movie Maker, when user import the OBS video to Windows Movie Maker, this software doesn't recognize. Best way is to convert OBS video to Windows Movie Maker supported video format, following will provide 2 ways for your choice.

Most user like to change the OBS video from FLV to MP4 which can be supported by Windows Movie Maker, in fact, in OBS, user can do it well, following is the operating steps.

Steps to Change OBS File Format from FLV to MP4

Step 1. Click on "Broadcast Settings" in the menu on the left-hand side. You'll see "File Path" which is the default saving area.

Step 2. Click on the text box to the right of "File Path" and erase "flv" at the end. Do the same for "Replay Buffer File Path", erase "flv" and add "mp4".

Step 3. Click "Apply" then "OK". Now the next time we record something, it will record an MP4 instead of FLV.

NOTE: These settings will not be applied until the next time you begin streaming, so it will not disturb your existing recording.

User can change OBS File Format from FLV to MP4, however, some user having no luck to edit video in Windows Movie Maker, why can't edit video again? MP4 is a video container which can hold different video and audio codec, some is incompatible with Windows Movie Maker. To PC or software beginner, video format and codec are so complicated, who can provide the best and safe way to Edit OBS video in Windows Movie Maker? A video converter is your saviour, best video editing format in Windows Movie Maker is WMV, user can use Pavtube Video Converter for Windows to convert OBS video to WMV for better editing.

Why i recommend this video converter to you? This software can support Windows and Mac operating system, user can import any OBS video into it without any interruption, black screen, format compatibility issue. At the video output format options, 250+ video formats are ready for you, user can choose any video formats that Windows Movie Maker can support, such as: WMV, MPEG-4, AVI, etc.

Bue to the special OBS video format, user want to upload to Youtube will meet some troubles. For prevent the tragedy, user can change the video to Youtube best uploading video format. At the setting menu, user can chenge the video codec and audio codec, adjust the video frame and size. Best of all, user also can enter the video editing menu to cut the video in 60s. Some other editing features cam make the video more special, for example: Add subtitle in OBS video, add watermarker in OBS video, replace audio from OBS video and so on, more features are waiting for you to explore. User can read this article to know more about this video converter.

Install and launch this Video Converter on your computer, click "File" > "Add Video/Audio" to load OBS videos files to the program. If you have recorded many OBS videos, you can click the "Folder" button to batch load multiple OBS videos files into the program for saving much time and energy, this software can do the batch video conversion with high stability and speed.

Best safe way is to convert OBS Videos to Windows Movie Maker best supported format: WMV. Click "Format" bar, from its drop-down list, select: WMV. Also user can choose AVI or MPEG-1 as the output video format.

TIP: Before starting the magic conversion, user can edit the video in this video converter. Click the grey pen icon and enter the video editing window, Trim, Watermarker, Subtitles are waiting for you to create your special video.

The final step is coming, go back to main interface, hit right-bottom "Convert" button to start OBS videos to Windows Movie Maker supported format: WMV. When you are waitingbthe video conversion result, you can watch the video at the preview window.

Some Windows Movie Maker may meet many video editing issues, such as: XAVC, MXF, H.264 and H.265 4K video and so on. This video converter all can solve all Windows Movie Maker supported or unsupported video editing troubles. Give you a chance to try this excellent video converter.|||

Can you import and edit OBS video in Windows Movie Maker? If not, this article will tell you the best way to import and edit OBS video in Windows Movie Maker.