With all the hype in the media recently about the tech industry, young men up and down the country are turning to the once underground profession of programming in order to 'beef up' their image and become more attractive to the opposite sex.

Once a job frequented by bespectacled males who knew too much about ASCII and star trek the profession is fast becoming a breeding ground for the most trendy males on the market.

Check out my 4 tips to help you to become a hipster web developer….

As a web developer you will spend anything up to 18 hours a day sitting in your office chair. As someone who cares deeply about things like free speech, spirituality and the transcendence of the human race it’s of paramount importance that you look really good.

We all know tatts look great, so make sure you get a timeless piece of art like ‘jquery’ or ‘can I haz cheeseburger’ somewhere discreet, but where everyone can see it nonetheless. In order to be comfortable for your marathon programming sessions you will need comfortable trousers and there is nothing more comfortable than skinny jeans, right?

'These boots are made for walking' sang Nancy Sinatra in the 1968 hit western song. Well just like Nancys boots are made for walking, your arms are made for hands, and hands have fingers… so you can type.

It isn't enough to simply be able to apply a normal amount of pressure to keys anymore. You will need to hone some large guns so that everyone can see you are able to DOMINATE every puny key on the keyboard. This is because the modern hipster is also the alpha male. And nothing screams ALPHA MALE (ahem, I mean good programmer) more than large biceps.

PC’s are so boring. And it's really unprofessional to use a machine which wasn’t designed by Steve Jobs.

As a technology elite - you can’t stand PCS, so the only option left is to buy a mac. At over 8 times the price and half the speed you simply won’t care because it is pretty and has a picture of an Apple on it.

When you walk into important business meetings everyone will know you are serious about your profession and will most likely want to keep talking about your amazing fashion accessory. You can also visit MacDonald’s on a regular basis and take it out whilst you eat a happy meal and feel good about yourself.

Let’s face it, static languages are for academics and clerics. No hipster male would be seen dead having to do things like ‘implementing interfaces’ or ‘using dependency injection with an IOC container’. As a hipster you want to distance yourself from anything that could mark you out as a conformist. C#/Java etc they are all languages of the masses. If anyone saw you using something like Visual Studio with its really handy GUI and easy install process you are worried it would tarnish your reputation.

No…dynamic languages are much cooler because errr well… you aren’t quite sure and you haven’t bothered to try a static language, but who cares you’re an intellectual free-thinker right?

Pete Heard is the hipster web developer of Logic Room a web and mobile software consultancy based in Reading (UK) that cares deeply about producing well-engineered cross platform JavaScript that scales! To discuss your next project contact : pete@logicroom.co or call 07889 812 612|||

