Some days it's a challenge to keep up with all the latest Instagram changes, but here's an update that your marketing team may be particularly interested in, especially if you've been thinking about using time-sensitive or "ephemeral" apps like Snapchat to reach the younger buyers, but really don't have the time to adopt a whole new app. Now Instagram Direct is making it easier than ever to try out its own ephemeral posting tools. Here are your top options to take advantage of the changes!

Instagram Direct was originally designed to be just this – a small chat section for a post that could function as a comment option for those who wanted to talk about photos or videos. In the beginning, it was even largely restricted to text. This soon changed as Instagram moved it more to the chat side and encouraged the use of photos and emoticons. However, the core purpose of Direct remained – giving a way for the poster and the viewers to talk, well, directly. This is particularly valuable for brands that want to increase their social media engagement, and brands that have photos that tend to spark conversation and more detailed explanations. In other words, even if the new updates aren't quite for you, it's still a good idea to consider how Direct can be used for your work.

So, what did the update change? Direct now allows you to create ephemeral content in the form of photos or videos – although not the new carousel function. That means you can paste pics right in the chat window in two different formats, either permanent or ephemeral. The ephemeral images, once viewed, will vanish, leaving behind only a notification.

Originally, this type of see-it-once posting was separated from Direct when it launched last year, but Instagram decided it made more sense to combine it with their existing chat service. Think of it as a way to insert more casual images into a conversation the way that you might use Snapchat – images you have no real interest for keeping for marketing purposes, but which help underline a point for the people you are talking to.

We all know those certain clients – those that you've often known for years, those that you have no problem joking around with from time to time. These are just the people that you can use the new ephemeral images in Direct for engagement. In addition to more utilitarian images for quick explanations, the ephemeral option is also suitable for cracking quick jokes when talking with contacts that you know well. There is a place for conversational humor in marketing and PR, and this is a way to take advantage of it.

Direct can also be useful if you are talking to remote peers or employees about a particular event, like a trade show. We're seeing a growing use of Snapchat at business events for its immediacy and how it can be use to share personal viewpoints of event activities for those who can't be there. Direct can do the same thing: Post the best images on Instagram to share with everyone, and then post more casual images on Direct for the people who can't be there, but still want to feel like they are.

While the new options in Direct do allow you to post either photos or video, it's a smart idea to stick to photos for now. People's time is valuable, especially when they are in a product-oriented or professional conversation. Stick to images to speed the chat up and make your point fast.

Remember, the show-it-once setting on Direct will delete the image entirely from Instagram – it's not even going to be on their servers any more. So don't use this to display the images you want to stay on Instagram! Save those images for their own, separate posts.|||

Instagram Direct is making it easier than ever to try out its own ephemeral posting tools. Six top options to take advantage of these Instagram changes.