As part of Airbnb’s ongoing work to combat discrimination, Airbnb and the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing today announced that the two parties have entered into a voluntary agreement that will help fight bias and discrimination and help ensure all consumers have access to listings offered on the home sharing platform. Created after more than ten months of collaborative work between the agency and Airbnb, the voluntary agreement builds on Airbnb’s comprehensive review authored by Laura W. Murphy, a longtime civil rights leader and former ACLU executive, in consultation with former Attorney General Eric Holder and notable civil rights organizations.

“Fighting discrimination is fundamental to our mission and we are committed to creating a community that is open to everyone,” said Airbnb General Counsel Rob Chesnut. “Our work with the State of California builds on our ongoing efforts to fight bias and we look forward to continuing to work with state leaders to ensure the Airbnb community is fair for everyone.”

Under the terms of the voluntary agreement:

Airbnb will continue its ongoing efforts to publicize its nondiscrimination policy, including preserving its pre-existing requirement that all users agree to the which requires users to certify that they will not discriminate against anyone when using the Airbnb platform. Airbnb will continue its pre-existing efforts to train its employees, hosts and guests to identify and combat bias and discrimination. Airbnb will continue to expand its efforts to make it easy for users to file discrimination complaints, and offer additional information for users who seek to file complaints with the Department of Fair Employment and Housing.

Airbnb is committed to creating a world where anyone can belong anywhere. We look forward to continuing to work with community leaders as we continue our work to fight bias and discrimination.|||

As part of Airbnb’s ongoing work to combat discrimination, Airbnb and the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing today announced that the two…