Marketing was once a shouting match. Companies would toe up to one another to see who could make the most noise. As fun as that was, marketing has completely changed with the digital age. No longer are consumers looking to the loudest company. Instead, customers are looking to be wooed and enamored with a company’s branding. This revolution has helped open doors for smaller shops and niche companies, but it has also made the concept of marketing much more detailed and complicated. That’s where email data comes in.

In our new age of marketing, the devil is in the details, and boy are there a lot of details. When you’re starting out, data can seem like an overwhelming mountain, but when you know how to use it, it can be your most powerful weapon. Luckily, one of the best data tools is right at your fingertips. When you engage with people through opt-in email lists, you are gathering information about their interests, where they live and their purchasing habits. That folks, is what we call a great opportunity.

Each time a user visits your site they connect via an IP address. This IP address can help you learn a little more about your user such as their locational information. Understanding your audience’s whereabouts can help you build a stronger marketing campaign. 

 

 It may sound like it could be difficult to obtain this information, but with tools like XVerify it is very easy. Each time you collect a lead on your registration path you can also capture the IP address and pull back in the location data best of all it is free.

Using this information to inform your marketing strategy is a basic way to segment groups out for different marketing campaigns.

A great example of this is a campaign run by Merchanta for Mazda. By the end of their operation, Merchanta had increased Mazda’s return rate by 53%, increased engagement by 20% and increased the value of car sales by 98%. To achieve this type of success, Marchanta implemented a multi-faceted marketing strategy that focused on sending potential sales to dealerships close to the users’ IP address.

You can mimic a similar type of success with your own campaign by utilizing a users’ location to influence the type of emails and marketing material you send them.

Once you have information on where your users are engaging with your site from, you can then segment your audience by city or state. Then you can use this info to push different types of email campaigns. Using a person’s location, you can push sales and discounts for certain stores or simply revolve your campaign around things happening in their area.

This could be a music festival, a local event or even just the weather in their area. Pushing short sales and articles on “How to Survive the Heat” will have significantly more impact on users in Florida than it would on someone from Alaska. When you use geo targeting, you can easily make your emails feel more personal, which is what the user is looking for.

Some of the most common emails you will be sending are called transactional emails. These include receipts, order confirmations and tracking information. For the average, ever day viewer, these automated emails may seem like a necessary evil. Necessary to keep the customer informed, but clogging up your email pipeline with more useless email data. Or is it?

Transactional emails give you an insight into the user’s interests. By looking at what they currently purchase, you can predict other items they might need. A prime example of mastering this type of user engagement is Amazon.

As you scroll through Amazon’s plethora of tech items, knick knacks, home furnishings and more, you’re clicking and interacting with their site. Each time you click on an item, you’re giving them more information about your interests. Based off what you’re viewing, and what other people viewing the same item have looked at, they are able to suggest other items you might be interested in.

With your transactional emails, you garner the same valuable information. Knowing what your customer has already purchased, you can make suggestions for their next purchase, inserting yourself and your company as a resource for their next buying need.

When you’re sending transactional and opt-in emails, you have an opening with the consumer that other companies don’t have. Use it. This new age of marketing is all about knowing what the user wants and playing to their needs. What better way to know what the customer expects than to ask them? What better way to ask them than through a personalized email?

After you have built a trustworthy relationship with the consumer, start asking them their opinion. What do they want to see more of? What do they want to see less of? How satisfied are they with their product? Using the email data you’ve gathered from the user directly, you can make more informed suggestions for potential purchases.

This type of well-informed marketing plan doesn’t only help you segment your users, it also helps you create content that they would be genuinely interested in. When you deliver relevant information to the consumer, you position yourself as a reliable, authoritative source that will fulfill their needs. When your customer feels like they need you, that’s more than beating the competition. That’s eliminating the competition.

Email marketing gives you an open invitation to your users’ inbox. A smart marketer uses every bit of useful information they can get from their consumers. When you verify your email list, you’re ensuring that your list is going to give you reliable email data from real users, not robots. Using that foot in the door to your advantage isn’t just a smart marketing move, it’s a necessary one. The world of marketing is a tricky one, but if you keep your customer’s needs in the forefront of your mind and use every chance to get more information to better fulfill those needs, your marketing future is bright.

Author’s Bio: Alyssa’s passion for learning about people led her to a career in marketing and social media, with an emphasis on content creation. She currently works for VCN Media where she mainly focuses on their email verification software, XVerify. Connect with Alyssa on LinkedIn.|||

Guest Post by Alyssa West from XVerify