Here are some quick tips to help you with creating your phone script template.

 Whether you want to create a phone script that you read direction from or create a sales tool that is more of a guide to keep you on track when making sales calls, a first step that you can take is to create an outline of key sections to fill in. Here are some sections that we recommend you include in your phone script template.

Elevator Pitch

 We recommend that you begin your sales phone call with some sort of elevator pitch. What many salespeople will do at this point is mention their company and describe the product that they sell. We want you to replace this with an explanation of how you help.

You could either share a value statement, some examples of problems that you help to fix, or share a quick client example as your elevator pitch. Here is an example.

Pre-Qualifying Questions

 The next section of your phone script template could be a section that outlines some of your key pre-qualifying questions. These are probing sales questions that help you to learn a little more about the prospect to determine if they fit well with what you offer. Here are some examples:

Common Pain Points

 Try to include in your phone script template some examples of common pain points that you help to fix. These can be good to share with a prospect when you are trying to identify if they need what you offer. Here are some examples.

Key Product and Company Points

 You can probably talk about your company and product all day. But you don’t have all day when you are on the phone with a prospect and to help you to be very efficient and focused, it can help to have some key and powerful points about your company and product in your phone script template.

Closing Options

 There are probably a few different directions that you could close the prospect on at the end of your call. To make sure you keep those options in mind, list out the different directions you can go in your phone script template.|||

Sales tool that provides sales script, cold calling script, calling script, objections responses, email templates, first meeting script, voicemail script, sales presentation and more