Regardless of the size of your business, if you want sustained results you must have a number of promotional strategies in place. The gap between a small and large online business might be considerable when looking at available budgets, but the fundamental strategies used to generate leads and overall interest will largely be the same. A one-person operation can now develop a profitable business, eventually scaling up the enterprise as revenue comes in. So what are the core promotional strategies an online business should be focused on?

Search engine optimization has helped small businesses, large corporations, and local enterprises gain targeted traffic for many years. Frequent algorithm changes have meant much of this traffic can be lost in an instant, so many businesses have grown reluctant to invest the same portion of their budget. SEO can, however, be a cost-effective method of reaching people searching for your brand, niche, or targeted keyword. While many tactics can provide good rankings, choosing safe strategies provides the best chance of long-term stability. These tactics include guest blogging on quality sites, building relationships with authority sites, and social media promotion.

Building a network of social media properties lets you deliver content to your audience at any time. To really get the most benefit from social media you do need to engage with followers and stay consistent. However, the result of this work is that you can generate leads and loyal followers for free. Facebook typically offers the highest engagement levels, but there may be more specific platforms that work for your niche. Pinterest and Instagram are perfect if you operate in a niche reliant on images, Twitter works well for discussion, and Snapchat lets you target a younger demographic.

While many entrepreneurs are attracted to the low-cost nature of online business, paid advertising is still one of the best ways to get targeted traffic. Many older advertising methods, such as newspaper ads and leaflets, make it hard to quickly gauge the ROI. Online ads provide immediate stats, so you can adjust advertising to ensure you get the best returns. Assuming you are tracking results and making a profit, paid advertising will let you scale your business to new levels without taking on too much risk.

Content dominates the internet, with audiences in almost all niches eager to consume interesting articles, videos, and other types of media. Content marketing takes advantage of this interest, delivering content that generates greater interest in the wider brand. As long as a connection can be drawn with the content and the products on sale, it is possible to move leads into a sales funnel. Info products are perfect for this strategy, but even individual items can be promoted with interesting angles that generate views and shares.

Email marketing has remained such a consistently effective strategy because you can develop a strong relationship over an extended period of time. Trying to make a sale with a first encounter is extremely difficult, but a series of crafted emails can overcome doubts and promote the benefits of a purchase. Providing a free gift can be enough to encourage a portion of visitors to join your list. Making an initial offer can often secure a number of sales. But it will likely be over the course of a few weeks where you start to really see the benefits of email communication and relationship building.

Each of these core strategies can be used to a lesser or greater extent. Certain strategies might work well for your business, while others might not help you reach your ideal audience. However, as your business grows, it is worth testing each strategy as you can usually find certain platforms that provide positive results. New innovations will always result in new tips and tricks, but the five core strategies will typically be the areas that sustain your enterprise as it grows to new levels.|||

The official Smoolis Blog: eCommerce News, Trends, Selling Online, Business Tips and Smoolis Updates