We are enormously excited to announce today the unveiling of the future of GDELT.  GDELT 2.0 debuts what we believe is one of the largest and most ambitious platforms ever created for monitoring our global world. From realtime translation of the world’s news in 65 languages, to measurement of more than 2,300 emotions and themes from every article, to a massive inventory of the media of the non-Western world, GDELT 2.0 is poised to redefine how we understand and interact with our global world, transcending language barriers and reaching deeply into the reactions and emotional resonance of world events. In essence, within 15 minutes of GDELT monitoring a news report breaking anywhere the world, it has translated it, processed it to identify all events, counts, quotes, people, organizations, locations, themes, emotions, relevant imagery, video, and embedded social media posts, placed it into global context, and made all of this available via a live open metadata firehose enabling open research on the planet itself.

GDELT 2.0 is an index over global society, an open dataset that attempts to make human society itself “computable,” leveraging the enormous power of Google Cloud to fundamentally reimagine how we study the human world in realtime at a planetary scale.

For more than half a century, the majority of work on understanding global society at scale has focused exclusively on English-language Western media. GDELT 2.0 redefines what it means to listen to the world, leveraging what we believe is one of the highest-resolution inventories today of the media systems of the non-Western world to give voice to the most remote corners of the world in near-realtime. This is coupled with what we believe is the largest realtime streaming translation of the news, translating 98.4% of non-English material monitored by GDELT 2.0 in 65 languages in realtime, allowing it to truly listen to the world irrespective of traditional language barriers. At the same time, sentiment mining has rapidly emerged over the past few years to become a key developing technology for studying global society. Yet, we must keep in mind that human emotion spans far more than just “positive” and “negative” and recognize that emotion reflects an incredibly rich tapestry that is deeply embedded in personal and cultural contexts. Towards this end, GDELT 2.0 is opening an entirely new chapter in the study of global emotion, bringing together 24 emotional measurement packages (see the list of available packages here, here, here, here, and here) that together assess more than 2,300 emotions and themes, including native measures for 15 languages. The single largest deployment in the world of sentiment analysis, we hope that by bringing together so many emotional and thematic dimensions crossing so many languages and disciplines, and applying all of it in realtime to breaking news from across the planet, that this will spur an entirely new era in how we think about emotion and the ways in which it can help us better understand how we contextualize, interpret, respond to, and understand global events.

Below are just a few of the myriad new capabilities debuting today with the official release of GDELT 2.0. We can’t wait to see they make possible.

Rest assured that the GDELT 1.0 data streams will be maintained at a minimum through the end of Spring 2015, so your existing applications will continue to work without modification.  At present the GDELT 2.0 data streams only stretch back to late morning February 19, 2015, so those wishing to perform longitudinal analysis will still need to use GDELT 1.0 for historical analysis and GDELT 2.0 for realtime analysis – in late Spring 2015 we will be releasing the entire historical backfile back to 1979 in the GDELT 2.0 format.

We'll be releasing a new "Getting Started With GDELT" user guide in the next few days to walk you through the incredibly vast array of new capabilities in GDELT 2.0, but in the meantime, you can go ahead and jump right in to exploring GDELT 2.0 (keep in mind that the data files begin late morning February 19, 2015, so there is not currently a historical backfile).|||

