Listen and subscribe to Work in Progress, our new podcast, on iTunes.

EAST LIVERPOOL, Ohio — “Just give me a winner! My toilet, my commode is blocked up from all these losing tickets I’ve been using!”

It’s 12:30 on a late February afternoon and a customer is already making impossible demands of Robin Beabout, a cashier and store manager of the BP mini-mart. Beabout is 56 and has a deep laugh, which resonates in the small booth in which she’s cramped. “Quit trying to flush them,” she says to the middle-aged man standing in front of her. She rips off a Cash Five ticket, hands it to him and gives him some advice: “You better get yourself a bigger plunger.” The man leaves smiling.

I’ve been spending my day with Beabout in this working-class Ohio River city an hour outside of Pittsburgh. Most of my time is normally spent dealing with executives and consultants who are writing about the wave of automation about to come crashing down on the workforce, as certain as the tide. Beabout’s heard about that, she tells me, but laughs at the idea. Some mornings, she arrives and chases drug users off the property, telling them: “You’ve got to go. You’ve got to go. You’ve got to go.” A machine is going to do that? People need help with the credit-card reader. The pumps outside stop working. Customers ask which roll of scratch-off tickets is the newest. They chat about aches and pains. Good luck programming for that.

“Human interaction is the key to succeed; I don’t care what anybody says,” she tells me, her tone sharpening. “You can’t cut people out. You just can’t.”

Robin Beabout at a BP in East Liverpool, Ohio. On automation: “I think it’s wrong.” (Photo: Chip Cutter)

But in Silicon Valley and other tech centers, the intention is to do exactly that — and to cashiers first. Amazon, despite technical glitches and a delayed opening, is still pushing ahead to open a cashier-less convenience store in Seattle. Walmart, Kroger and other retailers are trying out technology whereby shoppers, not cashiers, do the scanning: roaming stores with their phones or handheld devices to tag barcodes as they go. As minimum wages rise nationally, fast-food chains such as Wendy’s and McDonald’s keep rolling out thousands of self-order kiosks. Starbucks said it plans to test a store at its headquarters that accepts only mobile orders and payments. On lists of likely-to-be-automated positions, cashiers regularly rank near the top. In one widely cited 2013 paper, University of Oxford researchers Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael A. Osborne assigned a 97 percent probability that cashier jobs could be automated within the coming decades.

If that’s true — or even partially true — just this automation alone could put unemployment — quickly — at levels we haven’t begun to wrestle with. Cashiers and retail salespeople represent the two most-common jobs in the U.S., according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. More than 8 million people work in those roles. And while it’s not a high-paying job (the median hourly pay for cashiers nationally is $9.70 per hour), it’s an accessible one. People of all ages, skill levels and educational backgrounds can get hired to do the work, often without multiple interviews or even a drug test. And unlike some occupations, cashier positions can be found across the U.S., not clustered in big cities or on the coasts.

In other words, cashiers are everywhere today. But they may soon be nowhere. Are cashiers ready for that? Is the economy?

To answer the question, I interviewed dozens of cashiers, retail workers, economists and entrepreneurs across the country as part of a new, year-long series on the state of work called Work in Progress. The focus on cashiers is the first story in our series because this group of workers is so massive and, if you trust the forecasters, so endangered. Yet the frontline employees I talked to rarely said how they’re readying for the change. It’s not because they don’t know what options they have. The issues is that they largely don’t believe a change is coming. Who is right?

Without much prodding, grocery clerks, big-box associates, new grads, retirees will chat about the challenges in retail, from low pay to finicky customers and ever-shifting schedules. Yet many say their jobs are too demanding or too complex to automate, to say nothing of the human component of their work. “A machine can't tell you, ‘Oh, that looks good on you,’” said Alesia Meredith, a 49-year-old part-time sales associate at Macy's in Colonial Heights, Va.

“There's always going to be a place for humans in retail,” adds Barrett Goldflies, 26, a cashier at the Mariano’s grocery chain in Chicago's Jefferson Park neighborhood.

In the Seattle area, near the cashier-less Amazon Go store, conversations about automation hadn’t ever come up among clerks at a Safeway where Emily Schwichtenberg, a recent chemical engineering graduate, works up to 35 hours a week. "Cashiers will be here forever," the 23-year-old said. "We're pretty confident that we have job security and we'll be OK."

If her managers talked about automation and Amazon Go — something she suspected – then those conversations never reached the store floor. The government also isn’t as certain about automation as businesses are. Last month, Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin told an Axios reporter that AI was "not even on my radar screen" and that it wouldn't affect jobs for 50-100 years.

The cashiers that I talked to often said they didn’t pick this as a career, which might explain why they’re not focused on the future of it. But for the economy, these jobs often play a lifeline-like role, offering some income in times of turmoil. Jennifer Mesko, a 38-year-old who lives in the Orlando area, found herself unemployed after her contract position as a digital content producer at Universal Orlando Resort ended in July. After six months of applications, phone interviews and freelancing in her field, she applied to be a cashier at a large grocery chain near her home. With one interview, she got hired. The $250 she makes a week is “a small fraction” of what she earned in previous positions. But "any money is better than no money at all" as she continues hunting for editing and content-related jobs, she said.

To her surprise, she likes the work, too. She frequently comforts upset kids and makes small talk with their parents. “People really appreciate the face-to-face contact that cashiers provide,” she said. “I don't know that a robot or an auto checkout is going to hand the kids a balloon, give them a sticker, get them a little bit distracted.” She asked that the name of her retailer not be identified because she is not authorized to speak on its behalf.

Colleen E. Ryan, a cashier at a Whole Foods in the suburbs of Chicago, said she’s confident in the future of her position if only because customers need so much guidance and ask so many questions.

“Last week, somebody approached me looking for ‘euthanasia,’” she said, “when they were looking for ‘echinacea.’”

[What’s it really like to be a cashier now? Read why one cashier describes the role as part “impact absorber.”]

Silicon Valley says that kind of human connection won’t be enough. When it comes to friendliness or convenience, the latter always wins out.

While a small subset of cashiers will likely get re-assigned to other customer-service jobs, like greeting people in stores, the core task of scanning an item and collecting payment will vanish, predicts Phil Libin, the former CEO of Evernote who is now a venture capitalist at General Catalyst, where he invests in AI technology.

"Of course technology's going to change all these jobs and probably relatively soon," Libin told LinkedIn. "It's not like the technology is going to do the work of the cashiers. It's that the entire experience of shopping will probably eliminate the need for a checkout." Prominent names like Elon Musk, Meg Whitman and Mark Cuban also all warn that rapidly advancing AI technology will displace workers.

Libin believes the Amazon Go model will become the norm across retail, allowing customers to grab an item and leave, with payment billed automatically.

"I'm happy if the cashier's a very nice person, but I'd much rather just take what I want and go without having to wait behind other people," he said. "Imagine how much time is recovered in the society if no one had to wait in line. We would just eliminate lines, period. Like, that's amazing. Of course, we should work towards that."

Amazon’s cashier-less store may not be an outlier, either. NCR, the company best known for its ubiquitous cash registers and self-serve kiosks, is working on computer-vision and image-recognition technology that, combined with shelf sensors, would allow other retailers to create stores similar in concept, said Eli Rosner, senior vice president and chief technology officer of software solutions for the company.

“All the components exist,” he said. “The time for that technology to be live in production in this type of store is relatively short. We’re not talking years.”

He declined to mention specific retailers NCR may be working with, citing nondisclosure agreements. But a product is set to be released later this year. He said it’s likely that the technology would first be applied at convenience stores and speciality shops, both of which have fewer products on their shelves than grocery chains.

While he, too, said there would likely be fewer cashiers “in the pure sense of the word” in the future, he expected the role to shift to focus on service. Others I talked to agreed: the question isn’t whether the change is going to happen, but how fast and how damaging it’s going to be.

Cashiers might be facing an existential threat, but maybe they don’t have to panic immediately. Just look at banking: The number of tellers steadily rose until 2007, long after many declared them dead, as banks opened more branches across the country even while needing fewer employees per location, said Michael Chui, a partner at the McKinsey Global Institute, the research arm of the consulting firm.

After I got off the phone with Chui, I kept thinking of the cashiers I had met. Was there another explanation for their lack of concern? Some didn't plan on staying in retail for long, so perhaps they felt no need to worry about how their jobs might evolve.

It’s easy to have a blind spot, too. In her book, “The Signals Are Talking,” futurist Amy Webb writes of the tendency to dismiss technology that sits on the fringes now but that could one day become the norm, an idea she calls “paradox of the present.”

When I read perfectly serviceable corporate earnings stories now being produced by AI at The Associated Press, my former employer, do I pause to consider the possible implications for my own journalism job? No.

So maybe there’s a human explanation: We understand automation in theory, we agree it will affect jobs — other people’s jobs — in abstract, but remain convinced it’ll never touch us. Shortly after our conversation, one cashier sent me a follow-up message.

“Honestly,” she wrote, “I think bank tellers are more in danger of losing their jobs to technology.”

This article is part of Work in Progress, a new series and podcast exploring what it means to earn a living today. Have an idea for other topics we should explore? Send me a note, or share your own post using #workinprogress|||

