A few years back Carl Johnson relieved himself from the life which was full of pressures in Los Santos, San Andreas, A place that was infused with corruption, drugs and gang troubles. A place where the big fishes like millionaires and film stars try their best to stay out of these all troubles. It is the early 90s now, and Carl has to head back home because the mother of Carl has been murdered brutally and his family and friends are all in trouble. As soon as he returns to his locality, some corrupt cops frame Carl for homicide. He is forced to be on a journey that is going to take CJ across the state of San Andreas, to take control himself and to save his friends and family from any further disasters.

GTA San Andreas PC Game is open world game, and it will be providing a huge amount of varieties to the new and old players of the GTA series like GTA 3  and GTA Vice City. There a lot of new buildings, cityscapes, vehicles and now the players have more control in the game. Moreover, the character Carl Johnson has been given the real classic look. Like all the previous games of Rockstar GTA series, GTA San Andreas Game is also generous when it comes to experience and originality and it is the greatest and latest version of Grand Theft Auto series. It is now bigger, worse and more ass burning than ever. Say Hi! To the GTA San Andreas game.

The notable thing in this game of GTA series is that San Andreas is not a city but a State. A huge one, though. It is made up of 3 cities and is based in California. Each city is almost the size of whole Vice City. Which means that map of this game is 3 times bigger than that of the previous game of GTA series. There is also a complete desert in between the cities. There are different missions of each town and of course there are rampages and stunts as they were present in previous versions.

There has been an addition of an enormous, massive mountain into the newly produced map. All the missing rocks or hills in GTA Vice City have been rolled up to make this mountain. It will take just about a minute time to reach the top of the mountain if you are using a helicopter. We are sure you will enjoy riding this mountain downwards in GTA San Andreas.

Some may think that the Rockstar has emphasized on land and may have skipped the small details but it is to be kept in mind that small stuff has been properly taken care of. In GTA Vice City there was a new introduction of attractive interiors that were inspiring and jaw dropping. This time the same is promised by Rockstar. San Andreas is more diverse than Vice City or GTA 3 when it comes to the environment. Now in San Andreas, you will not experience any large empty slots of land as it was in GTA 3 and GTA Vice City.

“GTA San Andreas is rich in texture and detail and a lot many things that were lacking on the GTA Vice City and older games of this series. I enjoyed playing this game a lot, and I am sure people are gonna go crazy over this bad ass game.”

“By playing this game for a little time and writing the article about it may seem crazy to you but to be honest with you all, San Andreas is a very remarkable game with a solid storyline which will take you from doing a drive-by shooting to the bouncing in the lowrider you own. Anything within the boundaries of this game can easily be done by you. Thank you for reading this out.”

Other Requirements: Installation of software like SecuROM or Direct X.|||

GTA San Andreas is a most successful release of the GTA series & has been liked by almost every player. Grand theft auto san andreas is an addicting pc game