Lose More, Win Big: The Power of High-Failure Strategies

Early in my career, I was struggling to find my way into a great role at a startup.

How do I figure out which companies to approach? How do I get the right intro? How do I figure out if the timing is right and if a suitable role is available?

I was wrestling with these questions when I got the best piece of advice I ever got about looking for a job:

Up until this point, most of my professional and academic life was punctuated with high-probability strategic decisions. Not that I didn’t take risk, but I would usually weigh the risks, and then make a decision that involved a reasonable chance of success at each step of the way.

This strategy was different. Yes, if I embarked on the path of cold calling 30 companies, I would likely find something interesting. But along the way, it was going to involve a lot of failure and futility.

Every individual call was likely to be a failure, even if the strategy as a whole was likely to succeed.

The strategy worked. I got the job. Fast-forward to today, and I’m still a big believer in the value of a “high-failure strategy”—especially in the context of building startups.

With any problem, there are likely multiple solutions with varying degrees of success. I find it helpful to think of them in terms of a 2×2 matrix. On the vertical axis is that chance that the strategy succeeds at any one time. On the horizontal axis is the chance that the strategy succeeds if repeated over time. This yields four quadrants.

The bottom left strategy is an easy one to rule out. Chances of success are low no matter what. You shouldn’t attempt this strategy because you are bound to fail.

The top left strategy is very dangerous. These are situations where a strategy may work out well if employed once or twice. But if repeated over time, the odds are not in your favor.

Some examples here are pretty obvious. Doing something illegal. Taking drugs. Drinking and driving.

But some are less obvious, like being disingenuous to win a deal, secure a financing, or close a candidate. In a multi-turn game, you have to look beyond the outcome of a single turn. You should rule out this strategy, too.

The top right strategy is where most people tend to gravitate. We tend to like strategies that have a pretty high probability of success at each turn, and also have a pretty high probability of success if repeated consistently.

It’s what we are trained to hone in on. In school, we are trained to show steady and consistent progress towards a goal. Training for a sport or a musical instrument leads to improved skill over time. It’s usually not an exercise in complete futility along the way.

For example, most companies would love to hire the smartest young technical talent out of MIT and Stanford. The problem is, so would Facebook, Google, and Uber. If you play the same game as these companies, you may be in for a world of hurt. You need to find some other sort of angle, or some other profile of talent that most other companies miss.

Put another way, if you are going to take the same strategy as everyone else, you have to be that much better — or luckier — to win.

The bottom right strategy is fascinating because it leads to great outcomes — but it’s much less competitive.

Most people are not trained to find these strategies and are not trained to have the stomach to execute on these strategies for a long enough period of time. But the ones that do reap the rewards — especially over time.

I saw this first-hand with my startup job search. One of my cold emails that led to me getting the job was to the CEO of a company backed by top-tier VCs. That job later led to this CEO being an investor in my fund and a co-investor in multiple companies. My manager at that first startup job later became a founder who we backed at NextView.

While my high-failure strategy failed often in the process of finding that first startup job, it set me up for many great things to come.

I also find that many of the most valuable but least followed pieces of startup advice also fall into this category. For example:

So, if you’re trying to decide what kind of approach to use when you’re hiring or fundraising or building a go-to-market strategy, stop to consider a high-failure strategy. While it likely will be painful, you will be thanking yourself down the road.|||

How do I figure out which companies to approach? How do I get the right intro? How do I figure out if the timing is right and if a suitable role is available? I was wrestling with these questions…