This story was delivered to BI Intelligence IoT Briefing subscribers. To learn more and subscribe, please click here.

Uber plans to test flying cars by 2020 in Dallas and Dubai, and hopes to offer a commercial service in those markets three years later, the BBC reports. The ridesharing giant is working with aircraft makers Embraer and Bell Helicopter to develop the technology.

There's no word yet on what the cars will look like, but the flying transport drones that the UAE government plans to deploy in Dubai this summer, which essentially resemble cars with propellers and carry just one person, could provide a clue.

There won't likely be flying cars outside your windows anytime soon. In the US, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) forbids drones from flying outside the operator's line of sight without special permission — primarily because of the safety hazards drones might pose to other aircraft, like airplanes and helicopters. Flying cars will likely face similar, if not more stringent, regulatory hurdles. And that's to say nothing of the massive technological challenges involved.

But with Uber, anything's possible.

The self-driving car is no longer a futuristic fantasy. Consumers can already buy vehicles that, within a few years time, will get software updates enabling them to hit the road without the need for a driver.

This autonomous revolution will upend the automotive sector and disrupt huge swaths of the economy, while radically improving energy efficiency and changing the way people approach transport around the world.

Automakers and tech companies are racing to develop the technology that will power self-driving cars in the coming years. That tech is advancing, but leaves observers with a bigger question: will consumers trust driverless car tech, and will they want to use autonomous cars?

Peter Newman, research analyst for BI Intelligence, Business Insider's premium research service, has compiled a detailed report on self-driving cars that analyzes the market, and forecasts vehicle shipments and market penetration. It also profiles the players expected to take on a prominent role in the autonomous future, examines the barriers to autonomous car development and adoption, and reviews developments in technology, regulation, and consumer sentiment. Finally, it analyzes the impact the introduction of autonomy will have on various industries and transport trends.

Here are some of the key takeaways from the report:

Interested in getting the full report? Here are two ways to access it:|||

Uber plans to test flying cars by 2020 in Dallas and Dubai, and hopes to offer a commercial service in those markets three years later