Being in the same boat before and also LinkedIn->Uber, I was really really sad to see this story. This reminds me my first year in Uber. I told friends that I slept fewer hours than commuting and worked almost 100 hours a week. I was not kidding.

As almost the sole engineer handling the underlying system paying all partners on Uber platform worldwide, I got woke up 1am, 3am, 5am, and stressed out whole Monday through Tuesday to make sure millions of drivers get their hard earned money correctly. The rest of the week would be spent fixing various things in case next week is the same. I would be extremely anxious on Sunday because Monday is coming. This is when my kid was less than one year old and in case you have never been a parent, it's hard work. It's not a surprise I got depression due to lack of sleep for straight several months. My physical health was also in a terrible shape that I need to see a variety of doctors.

I didn't kill myself but honestly I almost did. I thought about that many times late in the night in 2014. Relatively new to the country, I don't know how to get help. I don't even know the word psychiatric. So, I guess if I killed myself, Uber wouldn't pay anything to my family as well. Denying the benefits claim, really? Uber is under lots of scrutiny lately. There are always two sides to every story, and for most of them, I'm in Uber's side. I think Uber still brings more value to the world than it's damage. However, my problem with Uber is that it doesn't even try be nice to it's employees. That's why I am not surprised all the nasty things were and will continue to be leaked to public. I sometimes told my kids -- if you are not nice to others, they may be rude to you. If there is one thing I think LinkedIn is doing really well, it's the principle of managing compassionately.

I'm lucky that my story has a different ending. I can proudly say I helped scale up Uber's driver payment platform to where it is today and left Uber after 3 years. Many people wonder why I left money on the table. The answer is I almost died and chose to prioritize family which I could barely spend time with. With my wife's support, I took a well deserved break to heal and now I'm finally better physically and mentally. However, I'm burning huge amount of saving every month to get this time off. I know it's my decision and no one should care. However, there are a lot of employees who don't have this privilege and are having financial troubles. Uber wants employee liquidity to be as late as humanly possible. Well, it's not human, Travis.

Be human to your employees and ex-employees, it's how a company gets where it is and the only path to success in my humble opinion.

Just to be clear, I added the following notes:|||

