Stanley Kubrick was a friend of mine, insofar as people like Stanley have friends, and as if there are any people like Stanley now. Famously reclusive, as I’m sure you’ve heard, he was in fact a complete failure as a recluse, unless you believe that a recluse is simply someone who seldom leaves his house. Stanley saw a lot of people. Sometimes he even went out to see people, but not often, very rarely, hardly ever. Still, he was one of the most gregarious men I ever knew, and it didn’t change anything that most of this conviviality went on over the phone. He viewed the telephone the way Mao viewed warfare, as the instrument of a protracted offensive where control of the ground was critical and timing crucial, while time itself was meaningless, except as something to be kept on your side. An hour was nothing, mere overture, or opening move, or gambit, a small taste of his virtuosity. The writer Gustav Hasford claimed that he and Stanley were once on the phone for seven hours, and I went over three with him many times. I’ve been hearing about all the people who say they talked to Stanley on the last day of his life, and however many of them there were, I believe them all. Somebody who knew him 45 years ago, when he was starting out, said, “Stanley always acted like he knew something you didn’t know,” but honestly, he didn’t have to act. Not only that, by the time he was through having what he called, in quite another context, “strenuous intercourse” with you, he knew most of what you knew as well. Hasford called him an earwig; he’d go in one ear and not come out the other until he’d eaten clean through your head. He had the endearing and certainly seductive habit when he talked to you of slipping your name in every few sentences, particularly in the punch line, and there was always a punch line. He had an especially fraternal temperament anyway, but I know quite a few women who found him extremely charming. A few of them were even actresses. Some Americans move to London and in three weeks they’re talking like Denholm Elliott. Stanley picked up the odd English locution, but it didn’t take Henry Higgins to place him as pure, almost stainless Bronx. Stanley’s speech was very fluent, melodious even. In spite of the Bronx nasal-caustic, perhaps the shadow of some adenoidal trauma long ago, it was as close to the condition of music as speech can get and still be speech, like a very well-read jazz musician talking, with a pleasing and graceful Groucho-like rushing and ebbing of inflection for emphasis and suggested quotation marks to convey amused disdain, over-enunciating phrases that struck him as fabulously banal, with lots of innuendo, and lots of latent sarcasm, and some not so latent, lively tempi, brilliant timing, eloquent silences, and, always, masterful, seamless segues—“Lemme change the subject for just a minute,” or “What were we into before we got into this?” I never heard him try to do other voices, or dialects, even when he was telling Jewish jokes. Stanley quoted other people all the time, people in the industry whom he’d spoken to that morning (Steven and Mike, Warren and Jack, Tom and Nicole), or people who died a thousand years ago, but it was always Stanley speaking.

When I met him in 1980, I was not just a subscriber to the Stanley legend, I was frankly susceptible to it. He’d heard that I was living in London from a mutual friend, David Cornwell (b.k.a. John le Carré), and invited us for dinner and a movie. The movie was a screening of The Shining at Shepperton Studios a few weeks before its American release, followed by dinner at Childwick Bury, the 120-acre estate near St. Albans, an hour north of London, that Stanley and his family and their dogs and cats had just moved into. Stanley wanted to meet me because he’d liked Dispatches, my book about Vietnam. It was the first thing he said to me when we met. The second thing he said to me was that he didn’t want to make a movie of it. He meant this as a compliment, sort of, but he also wanted to make sure I wasn’t getting any ideas. He’d read the book several times looking for the story in it, and quoted bits of it, some of them quite long, from memory during dinner. And since I’d loved his movies for something like 25 years by this time, I was touched, flattered, and very happy to meet him, because I was of course fairly aware that it was unusual to meet him. Stanley wasn’t someone you ran into at a party and struck up a relationship with. He was thinking about making a war movie next, but he wasn’t sure which war, and in fact, now that he mentioned it, not even so sure he wanted to make a war movie at all. He called me a couple of nights later to ask me if I’d read any Jung. I had. Was I familiar with the concept of the Shadow, our hidden dark side? I assured him that I was. We did half an hour on the Shadow, and how he really wanted to get it into his war picture. And oh, did I know of any good Vietnam books, “you know, Michael, something with a story?” I didn’t. I told him that after seven years working on a Vietnam book and nearly two more on the film Apocalypse Now, it was about the last thing in the world I was interested in. He thanked me for my honesty, my “almost blunt candor,” and said that, probably, what he most wanted to make was a film about the Holocaust, but good luck putting all of that into a two-hour movie. And then there was this other book he was fascinated by—he was fairly sure I’d never heard of it—Arthur Schnitzler’s novella Traumnovelle, which means “Dream Novel,” meaninglessly called Rhapsody in the only English edition available at that time. He’d read it more than 20 years before, and bought the rights to it in the early 70s (it’s the book that Eyes Wide Shut is based on), and the reason I’d probably never heard of it (he started to laugh) was that he’d bought up every single existing copy of it. Maybe he’d send me one. I could read it and tell him what I thought. “You know, just read it and we’ll talk. I’m interested to know what you think. And Michael, ask around among your friends from the war, maybe they know a good Vietnam story. You know, like at the next American Legion meeting? Oh, and Michael, do me a favor, will you?” “Don’t tell anybody what we’ve been talking about.” The next afternoon a copy of the Schnitzler book arrived, along with the paperback edition of Raul Hilberg’s enormous The Destruction of the European Jews, delivered by Stanley’s driver, Emilio, who whether I realized it or not was about to become my new best friend. I read the Schnitzler right away, and that’s when I had my early inkling of how smart Stanley really was. Traumnovelle, published in Vienna in 1926, is the full, excruciating flowering of a voluptuous and self-consciously decadent time and place, a shocking and dangerous story about sex and sexual obsession and the suffering of sex. In its pitiless view of love, marriage, and desire, made all the more disturbing by the suggestion that either all of it, or maybe some of it, or possibly none of it, is a dream, it intrudes on the concealed roots of Western erotic life like a laser, hinting discreetly, from behind its dream cover, at things that are seldom even privately acknowledged, and never spoken of in daylight. Stanley thought it would be perfect for Steve Martin. He’d loved The Jerk. He’d talked about this book with a lot of people, David Cornwell and the novelist Diane Johnson among them, and since David and Diane and I later talked about it among ourselves (and out of Stanley’s hearing, I think), I know that his idea for it in those days was always as a sex comedy, but with a wild and somber streak running through it. This didn’t make a lot of sense to us; we were just responding to the text as a work of literary art, and not a very funny one. Maybe Traumnovelle is a comedy in the sense that Don Giovanni is: attempted rape and compulsive pathetic list-keeping, implied impotence, and the don dragged down into hell forever, the old sex machine ignorant and defiant to the end. A pretty severe and upsetting comedy, not very giocoso, and not the essence of Traumnovelle, which more than anything else is sinister. The way we writers saw it, it was as frightening as The Shining. Now I think we were all too square to imagine what Stanley saw in Steve Martin, because this was not The Jerk. This could have turned out to be another one of those stories you heard so many times about him, usually from cameramen and other high-echelon crew: Stanley said we should try to do it this way and I said it’s never been done this way, and it can’t be done this way, the wrong stops on the wrong lens on the wrong camera, and he did it anyway, and he was right. We talked about it for years, starting that afternoon, because I don’t think Emilio could have made it back to St. Albans before Stanley called. “Didja read it? What do you think?” After about an hour, he asked if I’d had a chance to look at the Hilberg book yet. I reminded him that I’d only just gotten it. When he sent you a book, he wanted you to read it, and not just read it, but to drop everything and get into it. John Calley, who was probably Stanley’s closest friend, told me that when he was head of production at Warners in the 70s and first working with him, Stanley sent him a set of Frazer’s The Golden Bough, unabridged, and then bugged him every couple of weeks for a year about reading it. Finally Calley said, “Stanley, I’ve got a studio to run. I don’t have time to read mythology.” “It isn’t mythology, John,” Stanley said. “It’s your life.” I picked the Hilberg up many times and put it down again. I finally read it only a few years ago, when I knew there was no possibility that Stanley would ever use it for a film, and I could see why Stanley was so absorbed by it. It was a forbidding volume; densely laid out in a two-column format, it was nearly 800 pages long, small print, heavily footnoted, so minutely detailed that one would have to be more committed than I was at the moment to its inconceivably dreadful subject. I could see that it was exhaustive; it certainly looked like hard work, and it read like a complete log of the Final Solution. And every couple of weeks, Stanley would call and ask me if I’d read it yet. “You should read it, Michael, it’s monumental!” This went on for months. “I don’t know. I guess right now I just don’t want to read a book called The Destruction of the European Jews.” “No, Michael,” he said. “The book you don’t want to read right now is The Destruction of the European Jews, Part Two.”

You know, Michael, it’s not absolutely true in every case that nobody likes a smart-ass,” Stanley was saying. I once described 1980–83 as one phone call lasting three years, with interruptions. This serial call had many of the characteristics of the college bull session—long free-form late-night intellectual inquiries, dis- cursions, conversations, displays, and I’d think, Doesn’t this guy get tired?—like talking to a very smart kid in a dorm room until three in the morning. But then Stanley never went to college; he was only a stunningly accomplished autodidact, one of those people we may hear about but rarely meet, the almost-but-not-quite-legendary Man on Whom Nothing Is Lost. “Hey, Michael, didja ever read Herodotus? The Father of Lies?” or “Frankly, I’ve never understood why Schopenhauer is considered so pessimistic. I never thought he was pessimistic, did you, Michael?”—laughing at the four or five things he found so funny in this, with a winsome touch of self-deprecation, half-apologetic … It’s not my fault I’m so smart. And I’d think, Doesn’t he have anything else to do? But this is what he did. These calls were about information. They were about Stanley’s work. We’d be talking about something, like why “most war movies always look so phony,” or why we thought this movie or that book was such a hit, and we’d be suddenly off across 2,000 years of Western culture, “from Plato to nato.” He was just an old-fashioned social Darwinist (seemingly), with layer upon layer of the old, now vanishing Liberal Humanism, disappointed but undimmed, and without contradiction; if he made no distinctions between Art and Commerce, or Poetry and Technology, or even Personal and Professional, why should he make them between “Politics” and Philosophy? Stanley had views on everything, but I wouldn’t exactly call them political. (“Hey Michael, what’s the definition of a neoconservative? A liberal who’s just been mugged, ha ha ha ha.”) His views on democracy were those of most people I know, neither left nor right, not exactly brimming with belief, a noble failed experiment along our evolutionary way, brought low by base instincts, money and self-interest and stupidity. (If a novelist expresses this view, he’s a visionary, apparently, but if a movie director does, he’s a misanthrope.) He thought the best system might be under a benign despot, although he had little belief that such a man could be found. He wasn’t exactly a cynic, but he could have passed for one. He was certainly a capitalist. He believed himself to be a realist. He was known to be a tough guy. The way I see him, essentially, he was an artist to his fingertips, and he needed a lot of cover, and a lot of control. For the most part we talked about writers, usually dead and white and Euro-American, hardly the current curriculum. Stendhal (half an hour), Balzac (two hours), Conrad, Crane, Hemingway (hours and hours—“Do you think it was true that he was drunk all the time, even when he wrote? Yeah? Well, I’ll have to find out what he was drinking and send a case to all my writers”), Céline (“My favorite anti-Semite”), and Kafka, who he thought was the greatest writer of the century, and the most misread: People who used the word “Kafkaesque” had probably never read Kafka. I’d read The Golden Boughand didn’t have to go through that again, but he urged me to check out Machiavelli, and The Art of War (years before Michael Ovitz slipped him a copy), and Veblen’s The Theory of the Leisure Class. He had a taste and a gift for the creative-subversive, and he dug Swift and Malaparte and William Burroughs, and was interested that Burroughs was a friend of mine. I got him to read Faulkner, Absalom, Absalom!; he thought it was incredibly beautiful, but “there’s no movie in it. I mean, where’s the weenie, Michael?” Then he’d be into something else, the “inevitable” fiscal and social disaster lurking in the burgeoning mutual-fund market, or how he’d like to make a movie about doctors because “everybody hates doctors” (his father was a doctor), or the savage abiding mystery of Mother Russia, or why opera was “quite possibly the greatest art form” except, oh yeah, maybe for the movies. Then he’d dish about the movies. “Always thinking, huh, Stanley?” I said after one of those exhausting (for me) rooftop-to-rooftop riffs of his. I felt that these calls were starting to take up most of my time, yet I knew they didn’t take up most of his, that he was doing other things, “many many of them.” I acquired a sense of awe at the energy that had coincided so forcefully with my own. You really needed your chops for this; you’d feel like some poor traveler caught in a ground blizzard, 3 to 30 times a week and usually after 10 at night, when he usually started wailing. Sometimes I’d duck his calls. We talked this way, with occasional visits to his house, dinners and movies, until he found Gustav Hasford’s The Short-Timers bought the rights, wrote a long treatment of it, and asked me to work on the script with him. Then we really started talking. By then I knew I’d been working for Stanley from the minute I met him.

Stanley could never be accused of breaking any sumptuary laws. He may have been the master of Childwick Bury, but he dressed like a cottager, and it was very becoming, too. He wore the same thing every day, beat chinos, some sort of work shirt, usually in one of the darker shades of blue, a ripstop cotton fatigue jacket with many pockets, a pair of running shoes, so well broken in that you almost might think he was a runner (and not a man who liked to be seated), and an all-weather anorak. He had something like a dozen or so sets of this outfit in his closet, so he changed his clothes every day but never his wardrobe. When his daughter Katharina got married in 1984, he went to the Marks & Spencer in St. Albans and bought a dark-blue suit for £85, and a white shirt and a tie, and from one of the High Street shoe shops a pair of black shoes that he told me were made of cardboard. But he had never been admired for his dress sense. Even back in the late 50s, when he was working in Hollywood, the insouciance of his attire was remarked upon by many producers and actors, who thought that he dressed like a Beatnik. Body-blocked, uncomfortable in physical contact, even Stanley’s handshake was a bit awkward. The last time I saw him—we hadn’t seen each other in four years—he actually put an arm around my shoul- der, but I think he felt he might have gone too far, and quickly withdrew it. I don’t mean to suggest that Stanley was not a warm person, only that he didn’t express it in kissing or hugging or even touching, except with his animals. Apollonian not Dionysian—I couldn’t see him on the dance floor breaking hearts. He hated being photographed, and the few glimpses of Stanley on film, in his daughter Vivian Kubrick’s documentary The Making of “The Shining,” show a man who clearly doesn’t want to be there at all. He never had the impulse to slip around to the other side of the camera like Orson Welles or John Huston or Hitchcock. I think he felt that he impressed quite enough of himself on his films without that. He’d once been a chain-smoker, and would mooch the odd cigarette, but very rarely. He wasn’t especially appetitive, except where information was concerned. He ate temperately, almost never took a drink, and was drug-free. Stanley had a lot of self-control, to put it mildly a hundredfold. Somehow or other we get into this rather heavy rap—about death, and infinity, and the origin of time—you know the sort of thing. —Terry Southern He had small fine hands that he seldom used when he talked, with slender white fingers, expressive even in repose, although they were often in his beard, or up to his glasses for a compulsive adjustment. He had an odd habitual gesture, a stiff sweeping movement of the arm, indicating some low-rent real estate of the mind, “Over there, where we don’t want to be.” He had small feet, rather dainty, and they moved him along very quickly and smoothly. When I saw him on a set after years of only seeing him in his house, I was amazed at how fast he moved, how light he was, darting around the crew and cameras like one of the Sugar Rays, grace and purpose in motion. He was totally contained physically, but everything else about him, all the action going on behind the forehead, was in constant play, and it showed—black beard and black hair horseshoeing back from his high brow to the crown of his head; he looked like he took care of his teeth; and although his mouth wasn’t particularly sensual, he had an interesting repertoire of smiles, expressing a wide range of thought and irony and amusement. As for his famous eyes, described as dark, focused, and piercing, he looked out from a perceptibly deep place, and the look went far inside you, if you were what he happened to be looking at. Only extremely startled people ever get their eyes open that wide. I know that quite a few people, mostly actors, have unraveled when they got caught in Stanley’s beams, even though there was rarely much anger in them. Stanley’s look was just so deliberate, as cool as functioning intelligence itself, demanding satisfaction, or resolution, some kind of answer to some kind of problem before the next problem arose, which it would. Life was problem solving, and to solve a problem you have to see the problem. The eyebrows, especially when arched, were the coup de grâce.

Ican hear my previous agent now all the way from 1983, when he’d just received Stanley’s appalling offer for my writing services on Full Metal Jacket. Rendered almost inarticulate by representational indignation, he taunted, “Little Stanley Kubrick wants his Bar Mitzvah money” (a Jewish man talking to a Jewish man about another Jewish man), adding, “And it isn’t even his money!,” obviously impressed, as we all were, by the nerve of the guy. Stanley was a good friend, and wonderful to work with, but he was a terrible man to do business with, terrible. His cheapness was proverbial, and it’s true that in the matter of deal-making, whether it was his money or Warner Bros.’ money, it flowed down slow and thin, and sometimes not at all, unless you were a necessary star, and even then: it bugged him for years that Jack Nicholson made more money from The Shining than he did. If, I feel I should add, Nicholson really did. Stanley’s money pathology was one of the most amazing behavioral phenomena I’ve ever witnessed. In spite of the care he took, and the tremendous price he paid, to distance himself in all ways from the brutal, greedy men who ran Hollywood, a piece of him was always heart to heart with them, elective affinity, and he would sometimes use their methods. It’s possible that a few of Stanley’s ships sailed under Liberian registration, that his word was not necessarily his bond; and it’s true, if you were only in it for the money, I can see where you would feel undercompensated, some have said ripped off. Stanley was the Big Fisherman. He played everybody like a fish, but all different fish, from the majestic salmon to the great white shark, from the agile trout to the sluggish mudfish, each to be played in its particular way according to the speed of the current and the fighting capacity of his adversary, and obviously his desire and even need for the fish. Sometimes there was just more fight than play, and he’d cut bait, but much more often there were the ones who couldn’t wait to jump right into his boat and knock themselves out, because after all he was Stanley Kubrick. And he knew it, had every reason to know it. It really was Stanley’s feeling that it was a privilege to be working with him, and it wasn’t remotely the way it sounds, it was a reality that existed far beyond any question of arrogance or humility. I agreed with it then, and nothing ever happened to make me feel any different. Still, it made him happy, knowing that I would never make more than the lamest pro forma difficulties over what he loved to call “emoluments.” Probably somewhere he pitied me for being so careless with my “price,” for offering him my soft white throat like that, knowing as I did that he would never find it on his pathological screen not to take advantage of it. “Gee, Michael, you’re such a pure guy,” almost drooling with sarcasm. “Are you calling me a schmuck, Stanley?” And my agent’s words would pop into my head. Stanley hadn’t really been Bar Mitzvahed. He was barely making it in school; he couldn’t do junior-high English, let alone Hebrew, and besides, Dr. and Mrs. Kubrick weren’t very religious, and anyway, Stanley didn’t want to. He was not what anybody would have called well rounded. From the day he entered grade school in 1934, his attendance record had been a mysterious tissue of serial and sustained absences, his discipline nonexistent or at least nonapparent, his grades shocking. He’d received Unsatisfactory on “Works and Plays Well with Others,” “Respects Rights of Others,” and, inevitably, “Personality.” He did all right in physics, but he graduated from high school with a 70 average, and college was out of the question. At 17 he was already working as a freelance photographer for Look magazine, and he joined the staff, and he played a lot of chess, and read a lot of books, and otherwise arranged for his own higher education, as all smart people do. Stanley always seemed supernaturally youthful to his friends. His voice didn’t age over the almost 20 years that I knew him. He had a disarming way of “leavening” serious discourse with low adolescent humor, smutty actually, sophomoric, by which I mean a sophomore in high school. (Think of Lolita, with its cherry-pie, cavity-filling, and limp-noodle jokes, so blatantly smutty, without shame, subversive, which was the idea. He’d set the lyric-erotic Nabokovian tone and captured an essence of the novel in the opening credit sequence, the tender and meticulous painting of Lolita’s toes, and then begun the comedy. What a fabulous shiny moral barometer that movie looked like in 1962, when it was new, and how we loved which way we thought the wind was going to blow.) Everybody brings his adolescence forward through life with him, but Stanley’s adolescence was like a spring, not necessarily rising pure, but always fresh, and refreshing, and touching, because you’d get a glimpse at times of someone like Little Stanley in there, an awesomely intelligent teenager in a lot of pain keeping his courage up. Sometimes I imagined that I could see his actual adolescence in all its devious complexity. In Vincent LoBrutto’s biography Stanley Kubrick, there’s a photograph of this socially challenged, academically reviled phenom, taken when he was 12 or 13, around the time he would have been Bar Mitzvahed, if he’d been Bar Mitzvahed, like a normal person. As a piece of evidence in some kind of Citizen Kane scavenger hunt to establish the character of a legend, it’s convincing in suggesting how this possibly dweeb-like little Jewish kid from the Bronx came to identify so intimately yet so appropriately with Napoleon. It’s as striking and unsettling as photographs he used later in his movies: the late Mr. Haze in Lolita, “the soul of integrity,” whose mean, calculating eyes look down from his widow’s bedroom wall (his ashes are displayed on the bureau) upon the sexual train-wreck-waiting-to-happen, or Jack Torrance in The Shining, who has “always been the caretaker” at the Overlook, smiling like One Possessed in a picture on the hotel wall taken a generation before he was born. Only just pubescent and already temperamentally if not yet tactically beyond the possibility of compromise; secretive but frank, focused, willful, serious and seriously amused, not looking at you so much as past you, at what I’d be reluctant to say. I would call it a picture of a very powerful boy, a handful (as I’m sure someone in the house must have called him at least once), maybe not certain of what he wants but unusually clear about what he doesn’t want, and won’t stand still for; very refined features, delicate but tough, Stanley on the trembling lip of manhood, a pre-teen face enveloping an ancient soul, like he’s already seen them come and seen them go, and so what? He disliked the usual references to his having been a “chess hustler” in his Greenwich Village days, as though this impugned the gravity and beauty of the exercise, the suggestion that his game wasn’t pour le sport or, more correctly, pour l’art. To win the game was important, to win the money was irresistible, but it was nothing compared with his game, with the searching, endless action of working on his game. But of course he was hustling, he was always hustling; as he grew older and moved beyond still photography, chess became movies, and movies became chess by other means. I doubt that he ever thought of chess as just a game, or even as a game at all. I do imagine that a lot of people sitting across the board from him got melted, fried, and fragmented when Stanley let that cool ray come streaming down out of his eyes—talk about penetrating looks and piercing intelligence; here they’d sat down to a nice game of chess, and all of a sudden he was doing the thinking for both of them. A high-school friend, the director Alexander Singer, went with Stanley to see Eisenstein’s Alexander Nevsky around this time. “And we hear Prokofiev’s score for the battle on the ice and Stanley never gets over that. He bought a record of it and … played it over and over and over again,” until his kid sister couldn’t stand it anymore and broke it. “I think the word ‘obsessive’ is not unfair.” It’s fair only as far as it goes; just as he was multidisciplined, he was variously obsessive, and not fastidious about picking up information, and not afraid of whatever the information might be. Nobody who really thinks he’s smarter than everyone else could ask as many questions as he always did. He was beating the patzers in the park, working for Look magazine, sometimes using a series of still photos to tell a story, sometimes taking pictures of people like Dwight Eisenhower and George Grosz, Montgomery Clift, Frank Sinatra and Joe DiMaggio (and, I’m sure, keeping his eyes and ears open), reading 10 or 20 books a week, and trying to see every movie ever made. There was definitely such a thing as a bad movie, but there was no movie not worth seeing. As a kid he’d been part of the neighborhood multitude that poured ritually, communally, in and out of Loew’s Paradise and the RKO Fordham two or three times a week, and now he haunted the Museum of Modern Art and the few foreign-film revival houses, the very underground Cinema 16, and the triple-feature houses along 42nd Street. Reportedly he was already careless, even reckless, in his appearance, mixing his plaids in wild shirt, jacket and necktie combinations never seen on the street before, disreputable trousers, way-out accidental hairdos. He started infiltrating what- ever film facilities were in the city in those days, hanging around cutting rooms, labs, equipment stores, asking questions: How do you do that? and What would happen if you did this instead? and How much do you think it would cost if … ? He was jazz-mad, and went to the clubs, and a Yankees fan, so he went to the ball games too, all of this in New York in the late 40s and early 50s, a smart, spacey, wide-awake kid like that, it’s no wonder he was such a hipster, a 40s-bred, 50s-minted, tough-minded, existential, highly evolved classic hipster. His view and his temperament were much closer to Lenny Bruce’s than to any other director’s, and this was not merely a recurring aspect of his. He had lots of modes and aspects, but Stanley was a hipster all the time.

Just as it made Stanley happy to know that all was well in the Emolumental Universe, so it upset and offended him to hear stories of profligacy among members of the industry. This wasn’t simply a phobic reaction to waste and folly, it was a response to energy and intelligence that weren’t burning like his own, furious and clean. I told him about a dinner I’d had a few nights before with a director, a man whose history had set new industry standards for wretched excess, and there he was again, committing further hubris in a London restaurant, leaving £300 worth of wine that had been ordered and opened sitting untouched on the table when we left. Stanley shook his head sadly. “You see, Michael. These guys don’t know how to live like monks.” I have to apologize for repeating this story, which I’ve told before, because I don’t know how to describe Stanley to you without it. I’d already begun to think of him that way before he said it, half joking and perfectly serious. His distance from people, his “impersonality,” were always attributed to his supposed neuroses, his “misanthropy,” but I think they were more probably signs of his purity. He lived a simple (outer) life, and a largely devotional one, although admittedly secular. Childwick Bury was as much a studio as a home, a double studio actually, one for him and his movies and one for his wife, Christiane, and her painting. It was a space of perpetual creative activity. He was thought by the press, and so by the public, to be sequestered there, lurking, scheming, like Howard Hughes or Dr. Mabuse or the Wizard of Oz, depending on which paper you read. This is because none of them could ever imagine living the kind of life Stanley lived. Anyway, he wasn’t misanthropic, he was irreverent; and come to think of it, he wasn’t irreverent either. They say he had no personal life, but that’s ridiculous. It would be more correct to say that he had no professional life, since everything he did was personally done; every move and every call he made, every impulse he expressed, was utterly personal, devoted to the making of his movies, which were all personal. In terms of worldly activity, since you’d have to look to the spiritual sector to find anything like it, I never knew anyone who cared so much and so completely about his work. When we first met I told him secondhand stories about the filming of Apocalypse Now, and what a tough shoot it had been. “They’re all tough, Michael,” he said, and they were, at least the way he did it. Yet something drew people to it, and kept them at it, even into the part of the process where you felt like you were a slave, to it and to him, like he and his movie were inseparable, insatiable, you were trapped in it, even though the door was always open and you were technically, if not always contractually, free to walk through it at any time. People stayed, holding on to whatever piece of the prevailing obsession was going around at the moment, dragging massive blocks nights and weekends and holidays to build another one of Stanley’s pyramids, and whether cheerful or resentful didn’t matter that much to him, although he preferred cheerful. The more highly paid you were, or the closer to the actual shooting, the more enslaved you were likely to be. If you were right there on the set with film running, the pressure could be amazing, or so I was convincingly told by many of the cast and crew of Full Metal Jacket. I wasn’t the cameraman or the art director or even a grip, or, thank God, an actor. I was only even on the location two or three times, so maybe I wasn’t properly enslaved at all. I may have rewritten a few scenes 20 or 30 times—I would have done that anyway—but I never had to go through the number of takes Stanley would require. It was everything anyone ever said it was and more, and worse, whatever it took to “get it right,” as he always called it. What he meant by that I couldn’t say, nor could hundreds of people who have worked for him, but none of us doubted that he knew what he meant.

After seeing Paths of Glory, I remember walking out on the street and thinking that I’d never seen anybody shot and killed in a movie before. I was 17, I’d seen a few (thousand) movies, and I soon realized that I’d been seeing it all my life: cowboys shooting Indians, Indians shooting cavalry, cops shooting robbers, good guys shooting bad guys, weak guys shooting strong guys, Japanese and Germans and Americans shooting one another—it was a staple of the cinema. This was the first time I’d seen it done in this way, as calculated and pitiless as a firing squad itself, no possibility to dissociate, no way to look someplace else. Stanley had apparently wanted a last-minute reprieve for the condemned soldiers, a happy ending, because it was more commercial, and he wanted to make money. Now, 25 years later, he wanted Joker, the teenage hero of The Short-Timers and of his still-untitled movie, to die. (He also wanted a Joker voice-over.) I didn’t think so. “It’s the Death of the Hero,” he said. “It’ll be so powerful, so moving.” And he was genuinely moved by it. “We’ve seen it in Homer, Michael.” I’d arrived for work in the late afternoon. “Ready for some serious brainstorming, Michael? You want a drink first?” I reflexively checked my watch. “How come all you heavy drinkers always look at your watches when somebody offers you a drink?” Jim Thompson, the toughest pulp novelist of them all, had made him nervous when they were working together on The Killing, a big guy in a dirty old raincoat, a terrific writer but a little too hard-boiled for Stanley’s taste. He’d turn up for work carrying a bottle in a brown paper bag, but saying nothing about it—it was just there on the desk with no apology or comment—not at all interested in putting Stanley at ease except to offer him the bag, which Stanley declined, and making no gestures whatever to any part of the Hollywood process, except maybe toward the money. We were working that afternoon in the War Room, a large space on the ground floor, which would have been airy if it hadn’t been crammed with computers and filing cabinets, long trestle tables littered with sketches, plans, contracts, hundreds of photographs of weapons, streets, pagodas, prostitutes, shrines, signs. (He’d taken three months, an entire summer, to go through his Full Metal Jacket contract with Warners, crawling up underneath the boilerplating to make sure there were no hidden viruses, checking the esoteric meanings of “force majeure,” calling his lawyer, Louis Blau, in L.A. every hour, because Stanley hated surprises.) There were two sets of French doors opening onto the garden, part of which was fenced off to make sure that none of the dogs got to any of the cats. He kept the cats in this section of the house and fed them himself. While we talked he cleaned their litter boxes. The American language of the Vietnam War gave him tremendous pleasure. “Michael, I need this scene finished most ricky-tick” (a variation on “I don’t want it good, I want it Tuesday”), or “Michael, these pages you sent me today are Number Ten. [Laughing.] In fact, I think they may even be Number Twelve.” One scene, where a bunch of Marines sit around in the evening eating C rations and talking (titled “C Rats with Andre” on the scene-by-scene file cards he kept), wasn’t only too long but too talky, boring, and a little sentimental. “Shouldn’t there be some guy playing a harmonica in the back?” he said. One day we took a few of Stanley’s guns over to a local gun club and fired at their range. It surprised him that someone who’d spent so much time in a war could be such a lousy shot. “Gee, Michael, I’m beginning to wonder if you’ve got what it takes to carry a rifle in my beloved Corps.” The walls of his workrooms were one continuous shooting board—lists and schedules, names, dates, equipment, locations; except for one crowded wall, which seemed to be devoted to Stanley’s investments. He liked the way my pages looked: open spacing, agreeable format, good font, big enough for easy reading but never obtrusive. He was very happy with the dialogue. But he wanted the scenes shorter. “Tell me, Michael, did you ever see a movie that had too many good short scenes?”—a funny question from a director who loved long takes and long scenes, who was, in Anthony Lane’s opinion, “alarmingly insolent toward the demands of chronology,” which wasn’t meant as a compliment but should be, and referred perhaps to the leap across three million years in a single jump cut in 2001, or the languorous protractions of 18th-century discourse held in rooms lit by candles in Barry Lyndon, every one of his films making its powerful assertion that pace is story as surely as character is destiny. He’d watched The Godfather again the night before and was reluctantly suggesting for the 10th time that it was possibly the greatest movie ever made, and certainly the best-cast. “Your buddy Francis really hit the nail on the head with that one.… [Because Francis was another director, and a friend of mine, Stanley affected to regard him through a long lens.] It was certainly better than One from the Heart.” “I loved One from the Heart,” I said. “Boy, Michael, you’re so loyal.… Anyway, what were we talking about?” It drove him nuts that I didn’t use one. This was 1983, pre-laptop. There were five computers in this room alone, all running, and he’d move from station to station to feed and manipulate data while we talked. “Michael, listen to me: it’s only a very limited, arbitrary, and simple series of commands that you just don’t know yet. I mean, how hard can it be? The police use them.” “Michael I’m telling you, blah blah blah,” and “Michael I swear to God blah blah blah.… At least for screenplays [a lesser form] you’re crazy not to use them.” He gave a demonstration to soften my Luddite heart and show me that I was only making more work for myself by resisting. He went to the computer that he was using to write the script. He typed, marked, cut, pasted, while I faked interest. When he was finished with the routine, Christiane phoned to say that dinner was ready. As we left, I reminded him that he hadn’t turned the computers off. “They like to be left on,” he said ironically, factually, tenderly.

Stanley didn’t live in England because he disliked America. God knows, it’s all he ever talked about. It was always on his mind, and in his blood. I’m not sure he even really knew he wasn’t living in America all along, although he hadn’t been there since 1968. In the days before satellite TV, he’d had relatives and friends send him tapes of American television—N.F.L. games, the Johnny Carson show, news broadcasts, and commercials, which he thought were, in their way, the most interesting films being made. (He’d tape his favorite commercials and recut them, just for the monkish exercise.) He was crazy about The Simpsons and Seinfeld, and he loved Roseanne, because it was funny and, he believed, the most authentic view of the country you could get without actually living there. “Gee, Stanley, you’re a real man of the people,” I said, but in his way he was. He was fiercely unpretentious. He was exclusive, he had to be, but he wasn’t a snob. It wasn’t America he couldn’t take. It was L.A. He was walking into a Hollywood restaurant one night in 1955 as James Dean came out, stepped into the Porsche Spyder that had just been brought around by the parking valet, and drove off. Stanley remarked at the time how fast he was going. He lived in Hollywood for three or four years and made two movies, The Killing, which got him a lot of attention, and Paths of Glory, which got him a lot of respect. He and his partner, James B. Harris, formed a small company. He went to a thousand meetings with Harris, tummled and hondled, read and wrote scripts, watched the big changes as star power, in the form of independent production companies, started breaking down the old studios, and wished all the time that he was in New York. Harris told me that when they were making Paths of Glory Stanley came to him with a new final scene, something to follow the execution of the three soldiers and make the ending less grim. A young German girl has been captured by the French, and they force her to sing for them in a tavern. They intend to humiliate her, but when she sings, her innocence and the suffering that they’ve all been through move them to tears of shame and humanity. Stanley had just met a young German actress, Susanne Christian, and was going out with her. “She was his girlfriend,” Harris said. “He was really crazy about her, and he came to me with this scene he’d just written, and I said, ‘Stanley, you can’t just do this scene so your girlfriend can be in the movie.’” But Stanley had his way, and gave the film an unforgettable ending. The actress was incredible. Then she and Stanley got married, and the marriage lasted 40 years. Harris laughed. “Boy, was I wrong.” Stanley could hardly fail to notice that very few directors had anything close to autonomy on their pictures. He said the way the studios were run in the 50s made him think of Clemenceau’s remark about the Allies winning World War I because our generals were marginally less stupid than their generals. He was determined to find some way to succeed there, because he didn’t know where else he could make movies. His ambition was spectacular; he had talent and confidence, a steely brain and huge brass balls. He saw clearly that on every picture someone had to be in charge, and figured that it might as well be him. He told me that he owed it all to Kirk Douglas. Douglas once called Stanley “a talented shit,” and this may be one of the nicer things he said about him. He’d starred in Paths of Glory, and even though he’d done himself a lot of good by it, I imagine that he felt Stanley owed him, and would be grateful and pliant when he hired him to replace Anthony Mann after three weeks of shooting on Spartacus. The script had been written by Dalton Trumbo, who was still blacklisted in 1958, and when the producers agonized over whether they dared give him the writing credit or not, Stanley suggested that they solve the problem by giving the credit to him. (Douglas says that Stanley never wrote one word of that script, but I doubt this. Laurence Olivier’s Crassus is the most complex character ever to appear in an epic-genre film, almost Shakespearean, and I’m sure Stanley wrote and otherwise informed a lot of those scenes. I don’t think he wrote lines like “Get up, Spartacus, you Thracian dog.”) Kirk Douglas (and this is rich) was offended by Stanley’s chutzpah. But specifically, conclusively, it was Kirk on horseback and Stanley on foot, just about to shoot a scene and having yet another of their violent disagreements. Kirk rode his white freedom-fighter stallion into Stanley to make his point, which was that he was the star and the producer, turning his horse’s flank against Stanley, pushing him back farther and farther to drive it home again, then riding away, leaving Stanley standing in the dust, furious and humiliated, as one of the wise guys on the crew walks by and says, “Remember, Stanley: The play’s the thing.” The only other two places he knew of to make movies in were New York and London, and New York was too hard, and too expensive. That’s how he became English Stanley, and why he made all his movies there, most of them within an hour’s drive from his house. The English work ethic drove him nuts. The crew would call him “Squire” on the set, and he got so pissed off at their endless tea breaks that he wanted to film them surreptitiously when he was shooting Lolita there in 1961. He said, “England’s a place where it’s much more difficult to buy something than to sell something.” He once asked me if I’d mind moving with my family to Vancouver for a year to check it out for him, and he heard Sydney was a great place, maybe I could try that out for him too, but he liked England, it suited his family and it suited him, living and working and making telephone calls in his great house, his multi-gated manor, his estate, his park. And anyway, if he’d lived in America, it would have been in such a house, used the same way, as a studio, a citadel, a monastery, a controlled Stanley Kubrick environment, so what difference did it make which country it was in? Gentiles don’t know how to worry. —Stanley Kubrick

One of the sweetest things anybody ever said about Stanley, and one of the truest, was something Matthew Modine told Stanley’s biographer Vincent LoBrutto: “He’s probably the most heartfelt person I ever met. It’s hard for him, being from the Bronx with that neighborhood mentality, and he tries to cover it up. Right underneath that veneer is a very loving, conscientious man, who doesn’t like pain, who doesn’t like to see humans suffering or animals suffering. I was really surprised by the man.” This from a guy who really suffered for most of the year that he was in London shooting Full Metal Jacket, as part of an ensemble of young actors, some of them hardly actors at all, who had only the most rudimentary sense of what Stanley actually meant by “knowing your lines”; by which he meant that you had to know them so completely that there were no other possible lines anywhere in your head, and certainly no lines of your own, unless you were Peter Sellers or Lee Ermey. They were a jolly enthusiastic crew, some very talented, some not, all thrilled to be in a Stanley Kubrick movie—I think they all saw blue skies and high times ahead—but there was a plateau of discipline that they couldn’t have known existed before. Stanley showed them, and it hurt. Then there was a break in the shooting of almost five months after Lee Ermey smashed up his car late one night and broke all his ribs on one side. Some of the cast had other jobs lined up and had to juggle while they sat and waited in London, going to the theater five and six times a week, and tried to keep some kind of edge. Vincent D’Onofrio had gained 40 or 50 pounds to play Private Pyle, and he had to keep the weight on through all those idle months. A few of them with their wives and girlfriends would come to our apartment for dinner, and they were all flipping out. They believed that Stanley asked me to the set only on the rare days when there were no foreseeable glitches, because he didn’t want me to hear the way he spoke to them. When I went to the set, they’d come over to me between takes, search my face for a clue, confused and half-mutinous, and then Stanley would walk by and say something like “Don’t talk to my actors, Michael.” I have no idea what really went on for Stanley with actors. I do know that it was his belief, or his prevailing hunch, that actors were really working only when film was running. If he had any preconceptions about what he wanted them to be doing, he kept them to himself. Maybe actors were essentially visuals for Stanley, like Alfred Hitchcock and his blondes. Stanley said he didn’t like Hitchcock much—“all that phony rear projection”—but they had a lot in common. I was always impressed by what Hitchcock did with, or to, James Stewart in Vertigo, ruthlessly (but far more subtly than Carl Dreyer making Falconetti kneel on cobblestones all night to experience the suffering of Joan of Arc) drawing a performance out of him that was so sweaty, tortured, and unwholesome that, if Stewart had known he had any of that in him, he would have done anything in the world to conceal it. I think that Stanley did something like this with just about every actor he ever worked with. Nor could I explain that strange irresistible requirement he had for pushing his actors as far beyond a “naturalistic” style as he could get them to go, and often selecting their most extreme, awkward, emotionally confusing work for his final cut. The peculiarity of it: George C. Scott in Dr. Strangelove, Patrick Magee in A Clockwork Orange, and Jack Nicholson in The Shining, just to pick the most blinding examples; Scott complained publicly that Stanley not only directed him way over the top but also chose the most overwrought takes for the final cut, while Nicholson’s performance turned The Shining into a movie that largely failed as a genre piece but worked unforgettably on levels where it didn’t matter that there was a huge movie star and great actor on the premises or not. (Nicholson did some of his greatest work, and his very worst, in The Shining, and the same could be said of the director.) “That was much more real,” Stanley told him after a take, “but it isn’t interesting.” Even the biggest stars knew what it was like to be a pawn in Stanley’s game: “That was really great. Let’s go again.” They’d come to him for direction, and he’d send them back to work to find out for themselves. On A Clockwork Orange, when Malcolm McDowell asked, he told him, “Malcolm, I’m not rada. I hired you to do the acting.” He was preparing a scene for Spartacus in which Laurence Olivier and Nina Foch are sitting in their seats above the arena waiting for the gladiators to enter and fight to the death, and Nina Foch asked him for motivation. “What am I doing, Stanley?” she asked, and Stanley said, “You’re sitting here with Larry waiting for the gladiators to come out.” The usual M.O. was for him to become incredibly close to actors during shooting, and then to never see them again. A lot of actors were terribly hurt by this. There’s no question that the affection he felt for them and the inspiration he extended to them were genuine, and this made the break even more painful. For Stanley’s part, I never heard him speak of an actor, even ones who had given him a hard time or been “disloyal” once the film came out, with anything but affection, like a family member who’d gone off, dispelled into some new career phase, even if it was oblivion.

As I write this, the release of his last film is two months away. Only a few people have seen it, and already the entertainment media is holding itself ready to be shocked and offended, or pretending to. “What’s new?” Stanley would have said, as if it hardly warranted the question mark. He’d begun planning the publicity campaign before he completed the final cut of the film, but I’m sure that he’d thought about it for years. Some people seem to think that he’s controlling it from the grave. It’s inconceivable to anyone who knew him that an energy like that could stop just because death has occurred, that it isn’t going on in some form, circulating. This very piece is evidence of that, since it was his idea that I write about him, and specifically for this magazine. In the two and a half years between the time I declined to wash and rinse for fun and the moment he finished editing, we talked only a few times. He was shooting for most of it; he said it was going great, no matter what I might have heard. He was crazy about his stars, impressed with their professionalism and their energy; he said they energized the whole crew and made his job a lot easier. The only other actor I ever heard him speak quite that way about was James Mason, and that was on the day after Mason died. In the beginning of January my wife and I received a gift from him, a book of photographs by Jacques-Henri Lartigue. It was a Season’s Greetings present, the first we’d had in three years, since he’d gone into production. “That was nice of him,” my wife said. She’d always liked Stanley. “Yes, it was,” I said, thinking, I wonder what he wants. The calls started up again, every couple of days, longer and longer. He sounded terrific; it was great to be on the blower with him again. For the first time in all the years I’d known him, he actually asked me if there was some time of day that was better for me than others, so we did most of the talking in the mornings, his afternoons: Did I happen to see Norman Mailer’s piece in The New York Review of Books about Tom Wolfe? Brilliant. He must be pretty old now, Michael, but what passion, and I hear your buddy Francis just won a bundle from Warner Bros. in a lawsuit, and Somebody ought to write a book about Bill Clinton and call it “He’s Gotta Have It.” Then, one morning, “Hey Michael [already laughing], I’ve had a great idea! How’d you like to write the exclusive piece on Eyes Wide Shut for Vanity Fair?” I didn’t know. I was working on something, and besides, I hadn’t written a magazine piece in 20 years. “Listen, it’ll be fun.… You come over for a week, I’ll show you the movie, you can talk to Tom and Nicole, interview me. Wouldn’t you like to do that, Michael?” “I wouldn’t know what to ask you.” “That’s all right, I’ll write all the questions.… It’ll be the only piece about the movie, you know, Michael, a really classy piece of P.R.” (yuk yuk yuk), and “You’re the only one who can do it right,” and “It’s perfect for you,” and “It’ll be fun.” I said that since it was him I’d think about it, look into it. I decided to do it, and called him. “Gee, that’s terrific, Michael. That makes me very happy.” “Me too, Stanley. Now you’ll find out what I really think of you.”|||

The screenwriter of Eyes Wide Shut, Michael Herr, pays unsentimental homage to his longtime friend, legendary director Stanley Kubrick.