After 3½ years studying for a Ph.D., morale dwindles, distractions grow, and the end seems further away than ever. So, to satiate my hunger for achievement, I decided to set myself a challenging, but realistic and measurable short term goal: Make 8 YouTube videos in 8 consecutive weeks. On Tuesday I reached that goal, but while I certainly feel like I have achieved something, it is not quite what I expected.

Check out the channel here: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCzvhjBHSW6wLNnyAOEj9u2w

This kind of project isn’t uncharacteristic for me. In 2013 I decided to live in my car and play music in all 32 counties of Ireland in 32 consecutive days. I did it — and in the process I learned a huge amount about myself, my music and Irish culture.

I learned more about myself in those few weeks than I had done in the previous 4 years combined, but I don’t have the same freedom now as I did in 2013, the summer after I finished my undergraduate degree. So a slightly different challenge would be required.

So I decided to start Startup Nerd, a youtube channel for entrepreneurs.

I really enjoyed the challenge so far, even if my housemate had to convince me to make the last video after a particularly tiring work day earlier this week.

This challenge has opened up a lot of ideas that I feel deserve further exploration. At the very least, I feel I need to finish my series on Cialdini’s Influence, the Art of Persuasion. But beyond that, I feel there is a real opportunity to build a community around this channel.

One idea that has been incubating since I began is to form an experimental Board of Patrons. Similar to a company board of directors, the board would be made up of Patreon patrons, who would be able to directly influence the channel.

Money pledged through Patreon would make up a fund, and I would stream monthly board meetings, where Patreon subscribers could vote and directly influence the use of that fund.

The overall goal would be similar to the various Vlog Brothers / DFTBA initiatives lead by Hank and John Green — to “decrease world-suck” / do good / help others / make a social impact, however you want to phase it. The difference being, it is lead directly by Patrons which could lead to interesting results.

The possibilities are endless, and I’m willing to explore them.|||

After 3½ years studying for a Ph.D., morale dwindles, distractions grow, and the end seems further away than ever. So, to satiate my hunger for achievement, I decided to set myself a challenging, but…