Wangle Technologies has launched Australia’s first ACMA compliant, fastest, most secure, cheapest mobile VPN solution.

Wangle VPN is easy to use and not only protects data and identity from theft globally through its enterprise-grade secure and private network, but also minimises data use through unique compression technology.

“Wangle Technologies is offering a product that keeps customers safe from all online intrusions no matter where they are in the world when using their mobile devices,” Wangle Technologies MD and CEO Sean Smith said.

“We’ve had Wangle VPN independently tested and in all the benchmarks regarding speed, data compression and security, have come out as the current market leader for products of this type,” Mr Smith said.

Recent CSIRO studies have shown many VPN offerings in the market are insecure and often include spyware or advertising.

Wangle VPN is Australia’s only ACMA compliant VPN, having undergone a rigorous approval process.

“As Australia’s only ACMA compliant VPN, we’re confident Australian VPN users will compare their existing services and find them falling short in key areas, including pricing,” Mr Smith said.

Wangle VPN also uses a global network of high capacity points of presence in key locations including the US, UK, Central Europe, Singapore, Japan, India and South America to provide users safety no matter where they are in the world.

Wangle VPN has partnered with Rackspace and Amazon Network Services to guarantee performance and reliability across the service.

Wangle VPN is available to trial for free for 30 days on both Android and iOS mobile devices, and then on subscription for $4.99 per month.

“We will continue to work to make the app even better and add more features in the future that will enhance the user experience,” Mr Smith said.

About Wangle Technologies

 Wangle Technologies has developed patented algorithms to optimise data flow between devices. It allows faster data transfer and reduces data overhead, while enhancing security and privacy. Wangle’s technology provides compelling value to consumers and service provider looking for innovative, low cost solutions to manage network capacity in the face of unprecedented growth in data consumption.|||

