This infiltration was most likely spread using social engineering techniques and delivered to potential victims via SMS. Text message contained link to malicious app and bogus text that tried to persuade user to open the link, download and install application.

Most probable scenario of infection is that received text message possibly tried to make user download additional app to view received MMS message.

Once app is downloaded and installed, it mimics app. Right after start it request user to activate device administrator rights and hides its presence by removing itself from home screen, however it is still perfectly working in the background.

The attacker is capable of remotely controlling all infected devices using few simple commands over HTTP protocol.

Based on received command from attacker server, Trojan can send text messages with specific text. I assume it can be used to spread itself further and subscribe for premium SMS services.

Intercept received messages – authentication messages (2FA), account balance, subscription services. Received messages are sent to the attacker server and then are removed from the device.

And the most important functionality is to impersonate legit banking applications to trick the user into inserting his credentials and send them to the attacker server. This Trojan affects 28 banking apps including PayPal.

So, how it is done? Trojan detects running app in the foreground, once this app is running as top activity, banker will create duplicate activity overlaying the legit one. Victim will then insert his credentials into this fake form and the attacker has now access to victim mobile banking account and can intercept authentication messages received from bank to bypass 2FA.

For better illustration I created demo video, due to my previous research of BankBot, to demonstrate this functionality.

And finally, the actual control panel, where all sensitive information were sent and all infected device were controlled from.

Right after I tried to contact him on Twitter, pointing that out, I got his answer: ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

That’s not it! Few minutes after I tried to reach him on Twitter – probably the only handle there is - botnet server was taken down. But this could be a coincidence. The question stays, is there a connection or is someone impersonating him for some reason?

In 2017 we can expect rise of mobile banking malware due to open source code published last year on the underground Russian forum. It has been even proved by discovering few derivatives that slipped through Google Play security systems and has been installed on thousands of devices.

For that reason, before installing app, you should always spare a second to look at app permissions and read some users comment to make a picture about the app.|||

