We may have robotic authors long before Skynet

Humanity has a long opined upon its special place within the universe. The Judeo-Christian God made man in his image. Plato believed the logos, the mind, is immortal. And for the last century everyone’s known that humans are better than computers because calculators are, well, kinda dumb.

We may have already seen the seeds of truly creative AI. This could lead to a bold new world: one where the New York Times bestseller list is populated with machine generated literature and ravers flood into a warehouse to hear the latest live performance of a superstar cloud server. Our economy and place in the world could be radically shifted.

The tools for studying AI are now widely available and computer science has a great culture of openly sharing research. Thanks to this there is a rich and rapid flow of experimental results being shared with the world.

Current AI research results are like the PalmPilot to today’s iPhone: they seem a bit awkward and childish, but the same ideas with more raw power behind them can dramatically alter our lives.

Here is a highlight of recent projects and an explanation of why they suggest AI is close to being creative:

Style transfer quickly became a hot topic in AI research thanks to its visually stunning outputs:

That the three generated pictures are so recognisable is a testament to the role of style in an artist’s work.

This AI straddles the boundary between eerie and pastiche. Its application of brush strokes and colouring complements the subject matter fairly well, but it also tries to hard to shoehorn the source style into parts of the photo where they don’t belong. However, with a slightly deeper understanding of what it’s looking at, those problems could be eliminated.

Another development in this field is AI fluidly moving between different artist’s styles:

Every artist, creative and inventor stands on the shoulders of their predecessors. Imitation is an important part of apprenticeship, creativity and artistry. By taking others’ ideas (here, their visual styles) and mapping them out, it is possible to find new ideas both by recombining them and also by seeing what lies beyond their boundaries.|||

Humanity has a long opined upon its special place within the universe. The Judeo-Christian God made man in his image. Plato believed the logos, the mind, is immortal. And for the last century…