In 2007, the number of Bits of information stored in the digital universe has exceeded the number of stars in the physical universe. The amount of data gathered since just keeps on growing at vertiginous rates. Although the Big Data industry worth is estimated nowadays above $26 billion, its major actors keep themselves from blazing abroad their business and its profitability. This naturally raises controversies among individuals who wonder whether this market questions the safety of their privacy. As it occurs on a border-free territory that is the internet, groups are diverging on how should data collecting be regulated, while some concerns wonder: does it jeopardize fundamental individual rights? And if so, how governments can mitigate this 21st century’s burning issue?

We all experience the consequences of this market on a daily basis, without even noticing. Have you not ever wonder how those hundreds of commercial mails ended up in your mail box from companies you mostly don’t even know? Well, remember that time when you visited a website, entered your contacts for whatever reasons, and forgot to tick the mention: “I don’t want my information to be shared with business partners” or its equivalent. This blind consent is the legal basis of the trade of your information and marketers develop more and more tricky technics to keep you consenting unconsciously.

So, who are the actors of this industry and why do they make business with such sensitive information. One can answer this question in many ways, but the first thing to know is what is data and where it comes from.

Computers are basically the bridge between humans and Informatics. It translates our wills in digital actions by interpreting our message in specific computer languages. When you press “enter” on your keyboard for instance, remember that it is just electric signals emitted to your computer’s hardware that translates it into a code, understands the information and decrypt it as a physical action that is “skip a line”. Here, “skip a line” is the information in the process, translated through different languages to be digitally effective. This information is stored in the computer’s log. Data stands consequently for the whole bunch of these digital pieces of information recorded in the computers’ system. This assimilating example is of course simplified and restrictive but it illustrates rather well the core process.

Now that this is explained, we can have a better understanding on what is data in the general digital world and why it is naturally recorded in your computer. It is unnecessary explain the way humanity evolved since the appearance of computers and its technological infinite opportunities. Its impact on our society affected everybody’s daily way of living by making it better, easier and faster. The place of the internet among societies has widened every day and still has a bright future ahead with human imagination as only limit. A direct consequence of this “migration” of habits is the tremendous increase of Data generated. Hence the emergence of this Digital Information Market. Try to figure out the amount of data created the last couple decades and the golden source of information it represents. From 3.2 zettabytes of digital information today, it is expected to grow up to 40 zettabytes by 2020. (editor’s note 1ZB = 1012GB = 1021 bytes) This gives plenty of material to work with and benefit from on many aspects. By looking at those data for an individual computer, sorting them out and dealing with the most relevant ones, we can identify the needs, the interests, the tastes and the habits of the computer’s owner.

It is now easier for you to understand why some people had the idea to open a business specialized in data collection and treatment. They categorize computer owners by situation, interests, physical properties or habits, and sell their contact according to what segment their customer is targeting. Those actors’ businesses are based on the lack of marketing efficiency of other companies. NGOs are also major actors in the data resell market. However, contrarily to the previously mentioned actors, profits earned are claimed to aim at nothing but completing their researches’ fund-raising campaigns, since donations are often not sufficient to finance the causes they carry on.

We thus can legitimately wonder where the legal limit is, and what are the actions taken by governments to frame those practises.

Here again, opinions are shaded and a priority order is to be settled: is it about favouring the economic growth it generates over privacy, or its contrary? This privacy controversies are a burning topic currently tackled by different governments.

If you ask the latter question in Capitol Hill, don’t be surprise if individual privacy comes after the country’s economic development. On March 23rd ,2017, the US senate indeed voted to repeal Obama-Era Internet privacy rules and let internet service providers (ISPs) sell your browsing historic without your permission. It basically means that anyone living in the US can be seen its browsing habits sold to advertisers and third parties. If this approval to undo sweeping privacy rules adapted by the Obama-era Federal Communication Commission (FCC) becomes a law, it would also prevent the FCC from settling similar rules again. Nevertheless, and fortunately, ISPs are required to tell consumers what information is being collected and how it is being used or shared. Some data requires also consumers explicit consent to sell information such as geolocation or browsing history for advertising.

So, what does Europe says?

Germany in 1971, Sweden in 1973, and France in 1978 were the first three States to vote for a “Computers and Liberty” law. These work with an independent control authority embodied by the NCIL (National Commission of Informatics and Liberty). We nowadays call the G29 the organisation gathering the 29 European NCIL. Yet, the NCIL is the target of various criticisms, alleging its lack of action and tendency to support governmental legislation, forgetting its original aims of protecting data privacy and citizens’ rights. In an era dominated by the development of online technologies, such criticisms can no longer be on the table. The European Parliament therefore voted on April 2016 a new legislation on data protection, to be effective in May 2018. This legislation aims at creating a uniform set of EU-wide rules adapted to the digital age, to improve legal certainty and to strengthen the confidence of citizens and businesses in the digital single market. Clear and positive consent to data processing, right to forgetting and heavy fines for companies breaking the rules are some of the new features.

Many lambast companies are profiting from this lack of online regulation but none will be effective until a sustainable worldwide regulation is established for this border-free digital territory. The ideal solution would be to protect user’s privacy while keep using Big Data and the opportunities it allows for everybody. To do so, nominative data ought to be eliminated from the process, profile should be encrypted to get anonymous, and data collect should only focus on relevant mining (interests, tastes, habits, handicaps etc.) to make better the way we browse and enjoy the web we are!|||

