There are a lot of money making ideas nowadays, and most of the websites and applications that are making money online, are apps that are not available worldwide. Which is sad especially for people like us who live outside the US. Although some of it are downloadable, the offers, ads, and tasks are so few. Making it so hard to earn a dollar so most of us would end up frustrated.

 So, I did my homework and did some research for the best apps which are downloadable worldwide. Here are just 6 unique apps that I tried. There are still more to come I just need to test them first. Enjoy.

I have to start with this app because I used this early this year. If you are a native English speaker or you basically speak English well, this app is for you. If you’re an English major and/or have an experience teaching English (although this is not required). This app is perfect for you. In my opinion, it’s one of the best platforms to teach English with foreign students as well as making some extra money. You get paid by the minute and you can change you rate anytime. But I suggest you start low then work your way up after few weeks. Students will keep calling you once they like you. Making them your loyal regular students.It’s definitely worth a try.

Another similar app to Palfish. This app caters to mostly Chinese students of all ages. You need an android phone with a clear front camera. Yes, it’s a requirement. There are the times that students prefer not to use their cameras while teachers need to leave it on. And some students are kind enough to let you turn off your camera as well. It seems like more students enroll with this company compared to Palfish. I just hope that they will improve their hiring process, nobody wants to be in the waiting game.

Here’s another paying app that would let you review phone calls. Like inventory calls, Home service, Hotel reservations and such. All you need to is to categorize these calls properly. To be able to do that, you need to read the guidelines carefully. This is a paying company. Now, the downside is that they will deduct your pay with your mistakes. The last time I used this app it didn’t go well, it wasn’t very smooth. (glitches and stuff) So, I suggest if you’re having trouble listening switch to your laptop then return to the app after few hours.

My favorite app so far. Although this app won’t make you rich, it still helps you to make money. There are days that I make $5 an hour and sometimes I make $5 in 15 minutes. It depends on the task or offers available on a specific day. It will pay you to do micro tasks like keyword tagging, phone surveys and so much more. There are mornings that I call to different hotels all over the world just to ask a couple of questions. There are times that I just tag pictures with appropriate words.

 Other unique apps:

5. FOAP- If you have tons of pictures on your phone and they’re worth looking, download this app and sell them. Breath-taking photos can be a good source of extra money. Each picture will be sold at $5. Here’s a tip. Don’t go uploading tons and tons of pictures. Don’t just upload selfies, your lunch today, beverages etc. Make sure to upload pictures that have great potential to be sold. The good thing about this is that you don’t lose the copyright of your pictures and once your picture is sold. it can be sold over and over again.

6. AppNana- You can make money downloading and trying new apps. Watching videos and sharing. If you like trying out new game apps. You’ll love this. Points earned can be exchanged for amazon certs, iTunes, PayPal money and so much more. Here’s a tip. If you want to earn more and to be able to get more points, do a little networking. Share this to your friends. When you refer a friend, you will get 2,500 points. Once you shared it on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter you will be surprised with your points. Just download this app from the play store, input my invitation code and you’re good to go. By the way, if you input my invitation code (please contact me) We both get 2,500 points.

In conclusion, these apps won’t make you quit your job but they can make a very good extra money. Thus, making your spare time a worthwhile. Break time will never be the same. Like what I mentioned earlier there are still a lot more apps coming. So stay tuned and please subscribe if you like.|||

