HTML5 is a markup language used for structuring and presenting content on the World Wide Web. It is the fifth and current version of the HTML standard. If we get a HTML5 video player, we can play HTML5 video easily. Today we share the top HTML5 video players with you. Check it out in this article.

Every feature is supported for both both HTML5 and Flash with the same configuration, bringing unparalleled ease of feature integration across platforms. We invite to explore the vast feature set of the Kaltura Player on your Tablets and Mobile Devices, and use the HTML5 / Flash player switch tool present on almost all feature pages.

A free, open source (GPL) HTML5 based video player written in Javascript. It solves cross browser and compatibility issues, adds eye candy and provides extremely powerful non standard features. To explain the mission’s goal simple: Create the best HTML5 centric media player out there - period.

FlareVideo is an open source and free HTML5 video player that automatically fallback to flash when a browser is incompatible or not supported to HTML 5. All the controls can be easily customized using CSS. It comes with full screen.

Videojs HTML5 Player is a user-friendly plugin that supports video playback on desktops and mobile devices. It makes super easy for you to embed both self-hosted video files or video files that are externally hosted using Videojs library.

JW Player is the world's most popular HTML5/Flash embeddable media player for websites. he basic version of the JW Player includes all our core features and video analytics. It is open source and free forever (non-commercial sites only).

If you have some troubles playing videos on HTML5 video players, you can adopt a software to convert videos to HTML5 video (WebM) format on computer. We have to tell you the professional one video converter - Pavtube Video Converter (Read Review). With this program, you can convert any videos like MP4, MKV, MOV, AVI, FLV, MXF, MTS etc to WebM with only 3 steps.The main advantages of using Pavtube Video Converter is high conversion speeds, no quality loss for files and high compatibility rate. Some of the platforms supported by this software are Windows 10, Windows 8.1, Windows 8, Windows 7, Windows XP. It can convert to very many video and audio formats in addition to allowing for video personalization. Mac version is here.

You can directly drag and drop the videos on your Windows to the app. This Video Converter supports batch conversion, so you can add several files at one time. It saves your time and energy.

In the format column, choose "Common Video" and select the WebM format easily.

After setting the output format, you can click the "Convert" button to convert your videos to WebM format now. If necessary, you can edit your videos before converting them.|||

HTML5 is a markup language used for structuring and presenting content on the World Wide Web. It is the fifth and current version of the HTML standard. If we get a HTML5 video player, we can play HTML5 video easily. Today we share the top HTML5 video...