When you've found a gem of a local business in your neighbourhood — be it a funky clothing boutique, a bookstore, or a hand-crafted furniture studio — it can be pretty devastating to see them close down.

Think of that one shop where you'd always find something original and distinctive, and where you felt good knowing your hard-earned cash was supporting someone in your community and contributing to the overall energy, look and feel of your suburb.

But then it closed, replaced with a chain store or perhaps staying vacant for months. Your go-to shop was gone and your suburb seemed poorer for it.

According to Australian Bureau of Statistics figures, nearly half of all retail businesses open in June 2012 had closed by June 2016. So how do you shop local if your local shop shuts down?

For some small business owners, going 100 per cent online is a way to sidestep rising costs and stay alive.

Chris Smalley opened jewellery design shop Etelage on King Street, a popular shopping strip in Sydney's inner-west, in 2005.

"The traditional bricks-and-mortar store worked really well for us because the product that we sell is such a touchy-feely product," Ms Smalley said.

The shop sold beads and hosted workshops where customers learned to make their own accessories. But the killer location came at a cost.

"Our profits were going down quite significantly for a few years, but what I did notice in the year before we decided to close was that our online sales had trebled," she said.

Those sorts of crippling rents and expensive overheads also convinced custom footwear maker Shoes of Prey to launch its business solely online eight years ago.

The website prompts customers to choose the design and material for their shoes, which are then manufactured and delivered within two weeks.

Within two years, the business was earning millions of dollars.

Shoes of Prey opened a concept store within David Jones in Sydney in 2013, then expanded into the upmarket US retailer Nordstrom in 2014.

But late last year, co-founder Jodie Fox decided to close the bricks-and-mortar stores and return Shoes of Prey to its online roots, recognising e-commerce is the company's best opportunity for global growth.

"So that's a big indication for me that there is definitely a level of comfort now around shopping online that wasn't there before."

Ms Fox said the lessons learned were invaluable. All Shoes of Prey staff would do shifts in the bricks-and-mortar Sydney store to learn first-hand from real customers.

"All of a sudden [an] engineer is standing in front of someone who's been clicking around on the site, and they're hearing them explain what they need and helping them to find it. The education that we got from it was extraordinary," she said.

That personal interaction with customers is what Ms Smalley misses most about her Newtown store, but she said she had found other ways to connect with people.

"We've also had workshops in gallery spaces, and people love that because there's something very intimate and special about being with the designer and learning from them, as they're creating their art in a gallery."

Ms Smalley said that in order to survive, many businesses just needed to acknowledge that times and habits were changing.

"I think more and more people are choosing to spend their money online and my observation is now we kind of stay home and shop and we go out and eat, which when I grew up it was the complete opposite," she said.

"Once you've had … a great online experience, I think you're quickly converted to 'well it's easy, I'm time-poor', it just makes sense to the average consumer today."

And for a business owner struggling to stay afloat, Ms Fox had some advice:

"Sometimes you just have to decide which corner you're going to stand in and really put your bet on."

Even if the corner you choose is no longer a corner store.|||

The closure of a favourite local store doesn't have to mean the death of the business or your support. As some Australian retailers have discovered, switching from a bricks-and-mortar setup to an online one can give a dying business new life.