Are you overwhelmed at the idea of having enough content to fill your brand new blog? Or how you’re going to keep it all organised?

Have you ever wondered how all the pro bloggers manage to do it? Spoiler alert, they use an editorial calendar. Which is why I decided to teach you how to create an editorial calendar for your blog.

For Heart Handmade, I use CoSchedule as my editorial calendar, but for StartACraftBlog I’m using Trello as my editorial calendar for now.

Trello is my absolute secret weapon for staying completely organised in all aspects of my life, and now, I’m using it for my biz.

Keeping all of my To Do lists in trellis keeps me on top.

I use a desktop app for my Mac called Pomello, which uses the Pomodoro technique to keep me as productive as possible.

Let’s go back to the beginning.

What is an editorial calendar and why do I need one?

We know that the number one way to get traffic to our blog is by being organised.

All editorial calendars will be different and tailored to how you work and what you’re working.

The best way to get started with an editorial calendar is to look what other bloggers are using effectively in their businesses.

If you’re struggling to start out, using a paper editorial calendar is a great way to help you get into the habit of using one.

Eventually, you’ll realise that using paper and converting to digital is wasting time as you’re inputting details twice.

I love to use paper and find that I write better on paper, but I’m wasting time when it comes to writing and then having to type it out.

1. Start with an annual review

 2. Begin collecting ideas

 3. Plug the content into monthly calendars

The reason being is, so you think about the big picture.

What is your end goal?

Knowing your end goal allows you to create content accordingly that will help you reach said goal.

If your goal is to make more affiliate sales for different programs, then you would divide your content into the various tools you want to promote.

Make sure the content is scattered, so you aren’t posting too much of the same content in a short space of time.

If you want to start with paper, coschedule have printable editorial calendar templates available.

Obviously, each of these options has pros and cons. Let’s explore them together.

I’ve included screenshots of my Trello calendar set up to show you the various features.

Find a template you can copy here  or here

You can do the same with Asana.

See how to integrate Google Calendar with WordPress via Elegant Themes

 WordPress plugins are useful because they integrate with software you’re already using, and they usually include a calendar view. Functionality is typically limited.

OTHER POSTS YOU MIGHT LIKE|||

Struggling to create content strategy? Do you need to learn how to create an editorial calendar or what tools to use? Let me help you out