As a developer, there is a high chance that you had a debate on the value of TDD in building software, especially if you apply it!

I had a lot of those debates!

A couple of months ago, I came across such a debate between Jim Coplien and Robert Martin (Uncle Bob). I found this discussion kind of interesting especially that it involves two leaders in software engineering.

You can watch the debate here:

Here are my takeaways from the discussion:

Uncle Bob defines the following three rules for applying TDD:

Jim points out that he has no problem with those rules, his concerns are more architecture related. Jim and Uncle Bob would argue for more than ten minutes to finally reach an agreement on the importance of architecture. The below five points summarizes what they agreed on:

Probably the only disagreement you can sense from this debate is what defines a professional software engineer. For Uncle Bob, it is irresponsible for a software engineer to deliver a single line of code without writing a unit test for it. Jim, on the other hand, considers ‘Design by Contract’ to be more powerful than TDD.

Personally, I have been applying TDD since I joined my team three years ago. After experiencing the benefits of this practice, we got to a point where we don’t write or refactor any line of code without having a corresponding unit test!

In addition to that, I had the chance to coach other developers by running coding dojo sessions at work.

All that makes me say that I agree more with Uncle Bob on the topic of professionalism!

Ahmad Atwi is a Software Developer at Murex Systems, which he joined in 2009. Overall he has ten years of experience. Currently, he is a member of an agile team distributed between Paris and Beirut developing a real-time database. He is an active member of the agile community at Murex and the animator of the CodingDojo sessions and meetups at the Beirut office. At the beginning of this year, he started his blog aiming to share his experience with the other developers. He spends most of his free time reading/listening to books or learning and enhancing his technical skills. On a personal level, he is squash player and a licensed scuba diver. ​ View all posts by Ahmad Atwi|||

As a developer, there is a high chance that you had a debate on the value of TDD in building software, especially if you apply it! I had a lot of those debates! A couple of months ago, I came across such a debate between Jim Coplien and Robert Martin (Uncle Bob). I found this…