This tale makes DB Cooper look like an Amateur…no, really!

To acknowledge all the work other Writers are putting out into the world, I tip my hat and would love to buy you a drink or pay your tab at The Grape. Whatever I’m trying to express, I do from a mentality of being helpful, constructive — explaining the “5 W’s and 1 H” is important to me.

Pardon if these are things you know, but I like the cadence as a summary:

All of these elements are important to the craft of writing a story, whether in Prose or Script format. These are the questions that your imagination has to fill in and then convey to your consciousness then, somehow, convince your drunken fingers to type things out somewhat coherently.

As I’ve mentioned before and elsewhere, some of my family have been involved with US Commercial Airlines. If it wasn’t for my physical handicap from birth, I’d like to think I’d be a Fighter Jock by now. Instead I’ve had to settle for triple digit speeds and heavy g-forces in cars.

The conversation in the room got to fun things, and soon I heard about a guy whose life almost seemed unbelievable. I started sketching notes, taking down the facts, the rumors, the essence of the story.

So that’s how I’ve learned to listen. When somebody starts laying heaps of Truth and Experience and Gratitude on a conversation, I can appreciate it. And, by proxy, I’ve been given access to stories that are too good to be true. A Pilot like Trey was making enough per month to buy a new Cadillac. The dude was a Cowboy of the highest order.

Early in the 1960s, airplane pilots were hard to find. Even harder were guys who could fly jets. Trey could fly jets, and by 1963, he was a Captain of 727s with Pan Am. He had the pick of the routes — Mexico, Hawaii, Panama…

Trey cashed his checks well — adventures in Hawaii and Colombia that could fill a highlight reel. No pictures though, what Trey did in his off time was his choice. Back in the time of rotary phones, nobody could really check in on him if he could help it. A loose canon with a skill for flying.

The legend went that Trey made some very questionable friends, somehow ended up in Panama, and was asked if he could fly a helicopter. Trey said yes, and he took an envelope of cash to airlift some Cartel Commandos into a Prison to bust out some VIPs. The mission was a success, and Trey almost felt like returning the money because it was so much fun.

Kicking his boots up onto a table in Las Vegas, Trent sips his Chivas Regal and tells the gathered Pilots he knows that he’s going to Alaska to pick up some used P-51s and DC-3s. He’ll pay top dollar if they’re willing to go…

Look at all those words I just wrote. It’s an exercise. I don’t think anybody on this Earth can read what I wrote and convert it into a screenplay better than me, and that’s why I’m sharing.

Life is in the grey areas. The intangibles. The Who What When Where Why and How of any subject or story you want to tell. Sometimes there are diamonds in the dirt waiting to be dug up and polished. Whether original ideas or adaptations of history, the point is the same…be Entertaining.|||

To acknowledge all the work other Writers are putting out into the world, I tip my hat and would love to buy you a drink or pay your tab at The Grape. Whatever I’m trying to express, I do from a…