Shure Asia is pleased to welcome the first batch of Shure Audio Institute (SAI) graduates in Asia Pacific region. The SAI program is a worldwide education vehicle of Shure for providing certification training on theoretical knowledge and essential techniques on different audio products, technologies and applications. Serving corporate A/V professionals, systems integrators, professional audio engineers, and technical support personnel, the SAI supports a broad range of customers and applications in the industry. SAI is worldwide recognized and flexible to obtain the qualifications.

“As a global leader in the microphones and audio electronics, Shure is committed to promoting the importance of good audio and raising quality standards in the industry,’ says Kennex Tse, Director of Regional Marketing of Shure Asia Limited. “SAI aims to help audio professionals in the global ecosystem to well-equip themselves with both theoretical knowledge and practical skills in their specialized segments, namely Pro Audio, Systems and Retail.”

Since its introduction in 2015, the free certification program has been proven to effectively empower audio professionals with theoretical knowledge practical skills required to pursue a successful career across retail, pro audio and integrated systems segments.

Over 100 graduates from over 12 Asia Pacific countries, have successfully completed all required modules of three different certifications according to their interests and goals. Nine of them are certified as Pro Audio Experts, another nine are accredited as Integrated Systems Experts while the rest have earned their qualifications as Retail Experts of Consumer Electronics/Music Instrument.



 “SAI is recognized across all Shure organizations worldwide, including Americas, Europe, Middle East and Africa. When I become SAI Certified, it is a great way for my customers, business partners and colleagues to know that I am equipped by Shure on a global standard, no matter where I go.” says Hyunchul Yoon, Associate Engineer of Sama ProSound Co., Ltd., who has certified as SAI Integrated Systems Expert, Pro Audio and Retail Expert.

Under the umbrella of SAI, there are three certification programs available covering three market segments: Integrated Systems, Pro Audio and Retail. These programs are designed and developed to meet the interests and backgrounds of the audio professionals worldwide today. Each of the programs incorporates audio fundamentals, up-to-date technologies and product applications.

Upon the completion of modules, all attendees will be assessed by a standardized online examination in order to obtain the qualifications. For Integrated Systems and Pro Audio streams, attendees will also need to pass additional written and practical examinations.

Additionally, Module 103 Wired Microphone Technology, Module 105 Introduction to Analog and Digital Wireless System Technologies and Module 240 Advanced Digital Audio Signal Transmission are accredited by InfoComm. Successful attendees of these modules can earn renewal units (RUs) towards their CTS accreditation.



 Apart from the credibility of the program, flexibility is essential for the audio professionals to upgrade their skills and enrich their career profile despite the busy working schedule.

To address this need, modules of the SAI program are delivered online at a dedicated learning portal (www.shure-sai.com/asia) through a mixture of course materials like reading notes, videos and webinars, so that all the modules can be completed independently at attendee’s own pace within the term.

Ivan Lam of Let’s Go Audio, a Shure Premium Authorized Dealer in Hong Kong, comments, “As a retail frontline staff, I need to work on irregular working hours and days. Therefore, in the past I never thought about getting any additional qualifications as it’s simply too hard to cope with the class schedule.”

“I really appreciate the SAI program,” continues Ivan, who has earned SAI Retail Expert of Consumer Electronics. “The program is designed in a flexible study mode via a very user-friendly website. I can access the modules online anytime anywhere and finish them one by one according to my own schedule. Its program content is very comprehensive and organized.”

More than just theories and technologies, SAI program covers value positioning and product positioning of Shure products, as well as the product benefits to end users. As a result, the attendees find it easy to apply what they learned to real life applications.

“Apart from product knowledge, SAI program also covers the content in sales and marketing aspects. It really helps me to get a deeper understanding about the brand, which is very practical for a retail salesperson like me to present Shure to customers and explain the technology well,” says Chen Liang, who is also one of the SAI Retail Experts from Shure Premium Authorized Dealer DCHAV Chengdu in China. “I am so proud to wear this pin to let my customers and colleagues know that I am a SAI Retail Expert.”

While Shure Asia is celebrating over 100 graduates that have achieved SAI expert level as well as transferring another 76 individuals from previous Shure Certified Applications Engineer (SCAE) to SAI, the new term of the three certifications will start soon. To learn more about SAI and enroll the program, please visit: www.shure-sai.com/asia|||

Training up hundreds of SAI Retail, Integrated Systems and Pro Audio Experts to serve the professional audio industry