With the USB port on TCL TV, you can play video, music or picture files on a USB storage device connected to TCL TV, however, the video must be included in TCL TV supported file formats or you will fail to open the file stored on the USB drive with the built-in media player on your TCL TV just as the conditions below:

“I have a copy of movies in my usb and i want to watch it on our TCL LED TV, but when i insert the usb on the port it does’nt play. I can only view the images that were saved on my usb but the movies is not playing.”

To fix above listed issue, we should be clear of what video formats can be played on TCL TV via USB drive.

From TCL official page, we get the information that you can play the following file formats played on TCL TV from USB drive: 

 Video formats: MP4 (MPEG-4 & H.264), MPEG-1, MPEG-2, Xvid 

 Audio formats: MP3 (MPEG-3)

From above lists, we can see that the file formats supported by TCL TV are limited to just few file formats. To expand the media playback capability of TCL TV, a powerful media conversion tool called Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate (review) is highly recommended to you. The program has full support for not only digital file formats (even including H.265, MXF, XAVC/XAVC S, AVCHD, etc) with the resolution of 4K/2K/HD/SD, in addition, but also commercial Blu-ray/DVD disc with complicated copy protection and region code, you can easily get TCL TV playable file formats with just few clicks: load the video or disc media, choose TCL TV supported file formats, hit the convert button.

The program supports batch conversion mode, you can save a lot of time by batching importing multiple files at one time. For Mac users, you can download the Mac version – Pavtube iMedia Converter for Mac to complete the conversion on macOS Sierra. The program supports to produce high-quality results, you can’t tell the difference between the converted video and the original source media.

If the source video uses an aspect ratio that doesn’t match with your TCL TV display screen aspect ratio, you can change output video aspect ratio to make it adapt with your TCL TV with the program’s crop function in the video editor window.

Start the application on your computer. For loading digital video, click “File” > “Add Video/Audio” or “Add from folder” (batch load multiple files) option. For loading Blu-ray or DVD disc, Insert your Blu-ray or DVD disc into your computer’s optical drive , hit “File” >  “Load from disc” option.

Clicking the Format bar, from its drop-down list, select one of TCL TV supported digital file formats such as H.264 video by following “HD Video” > “H.264 HD Video(*.mp4)”.

Tips: Click “Settings” on the main interface to open “Profile Settings” window, here, you can flexibly choose or specify exactly the parameters including video codec, resolution, bit rate, frame rate, audio codec, bit rate, sample rate, channels, etc as you like to get better output video and audio quality for TCL TV.

Open the “video editor” window, click the “Crop” tab. In the “Crop” window, switch to the “Advanced Mode”. To keep the cropped aspect ratio, there are several aspect ratios for you to choose from, including 16:10, 16:9, 5:4, 4:3, 3:2, and 2:1. Once you select TCL TV compatible”Display aspect ratio”, the “green crop frame” will keep this ratio to crop video and you are able to preview the final effect in real time. If you want to keep the same aspect ratio in your final output files, do remember to set the Video “Size (pix)” in “Settings” section as the same ratio as display aspect ratio.

After all setting is completed, hit the “Convert” button at the right bottom of the main interface to begin the conversion from video/Blu-ray/DVD to TCL TV USB supported format conversion process.

When the conversion is finished, click “Open Output Folder” icon on the main interface to open the folder with generated files. Then transfer the converted files to an USB flash drive, plug the drive into the USB port on your TCL TV for viewing.|||

