A couple of years ago, I was headed to Singapore to attend a marketing summit. I had my flight itinerary, the event calendar and my schedule for two days along with a roster of guest speakers to network with all planned out. I even spent some time on Google Maps getting acquainted with the city. A  week before the event, it dawned on me, I was yet to make a hotel reservation.

Except when I checked online, all the hotels in the vicinity of the convention center were filled up for those two days. For the next one hour, I jumped from portal to portal in the hope that one of them would have a hotel with an opening. Nothing. Finally, I remembered a blog post written by a friend of mine about attending the same event the previous year. He had mentioned a hotel in it. I found the post, which led me to the hotel website and I made a reservation there.

Once I reached the hotel, I was hit by an immense sense of deja vu. The lobby seemed familiar and it felt like I had walked down the hallway before. More prominently, when I entered the room I knew it was not my first time there. But I had a long day ahead so I let the matter lie and retired to bed early.

Interested in knowing more of the events that ensued? Why does it suddenly matter? After all, ten minutes ago you wouldn’t have cared about a trip made to Singapore by a stranger on the internet.

That’s the beauty of storytelling. When done right, you can build an emotional connection with the audience through any medium. We’ll get back to the story (for the sake of closure), but first, let us delve into what the title promised.

You’ve probably heard of “storytelling in marketing”. It’s slowly turning into another popular jargon used in brand marketing. Dozens of articles have already been written online without, if I say so myself, much insight to offer. Instead, let’s focus on how storytelling impacts the human mind and the ways it can be applied in marketing.

These are the factors discussed below.

Probably doesn’t make much sense yet. So let’s start from the top of the list.

Let’s face it, the audience already knows what you have to say. Unless you’ve come up with a revolutionary product or technology, it already exists (or at least, a version of it does).

So how do you make yours sound different?

A narrative structure suggests all stories are the same. In a way, we have been listening to the same handful of stories over and over again but they never fail to delight us. In fact, we even know the final takeaway, to begin with – “good triumphs evil”, “listen to your heart” etc. But we still follow the hero in his journey with bated breath. Why?

It happens because each time we are offered a newer setting with slightly different stakes set in the hero’s path. This fresh perspective makes us care. In the same way, you have to give a fresh perspective to the problem where your product is the final takeaway in the customer’s journey. Make the journey special in a way every type of customer can see themselves filling the hero’s shoes.

There is a golden rule in story writing, especially screenplays. Show; don’t tell. Simple, isn’t it? It means you have to let the audience understand the characters and the world they occupy through how the story unfolds. Instead of stating the hero is a good guy, the story would let the audience decide that subconsciously by showing him make a good judgment call before the main conflict arises. It is also handy in explaining the rules of the world the story is set in without tiring out the audience.

How would that work in marketing your product?

Show the customer how the features you offer come into play in making their life easier. Don’t tell them about its intricacies and what makes it special. It’s special to you but shoving that information down their throat will only drive them away.

Does this one sound familiar? It’s because you’ve encountered it several times in the lives of your favorite protagonists. Midway through the mounting obstacle, the hero loses the battle and it leads to a low point in the story. But being the hero, he doesn’t give up. He rises again and this time the audience roots for him even more. The redemption allows the hero to do away with his flaws and that makes him truly valiant in the eyes of the viewer.

Does that mean your brand has to fail?

No, but you have to recognize your shortcomings and redeem yourself for the customer. Watch for reviews, take surveys or make an attempt to know where your product doesn’t meet their expected standards. If you can identify those flaws and make an effort to better the product, you’d create loyal customers for life.

In every tale of good vs evil, the hero is haplessly mismatched against a stronger foe, to begin with. Furthermore, as the story progresses the point is driven home that he needs to triumph for the sake of everyone else. It’s not his sole fight; a lot more is at stake. The alternative that is projected through the story is the world no one wants to be a part of.

As the saying goes

In case your product is offering a fix for the customer’s situation, something has to be broken to begin it. For that, you have to make the customer see the bleak alternative of their situation without your solution. It would make your product not just a luxury, but a necessity for them.

Think of your favorite protagonist. Whether they were facing an intergalactic space boss or a mutant lizard wizard, there was something about their character that you could relate to. The story also shines a light on the very human side of the character. It shows their inner struggle and makes it relatable in a way you root for him till the very end. What the story secretly does is align the hero’s goals with your own and that makes you side with him.

You already know where I’m going with this. The goal you present for the product is to solve a problem the customer is personally facing. Just presenting the product with its plethora of killer features isn’t going to ensure the customer wants it in their life. But when you point out the common goal both are striving towards, you bring the product closer to the customer.

Everyone loves a good mystery. Even when we feel out of our element, we follow the story with attention. It’s not just limited to mysteries. In the account of my Singapore trip, all was in order until I couldn’t find a hotel.  Just when that problem got sorted, a new situation arose to build up intrigue.

Storytelling uses subtle elements to amp up the anticipation so the viewer stays hooked till the very end.

Is that applicable in marketing? Very much so. Your product marketing could use some build up where you lead the customer from a familiar situation they are comfortable into a circumstance where things seem out of place. That’s when you introduce your product as the one to restore balance to the universe you’ve presented. Similar to some mysteries, the answer might have been right in front of their face all along but the anticipation makes the conclusion worth it.

This one is right on track to the build up we discussed. The final boss fight raises the stakes higher than any preceding one. The hierarchy of the conflict in the story arc brings it all together towards the very end where the hero has to use everything he learned from the get-go to overcome the main obstacle. Of course, it all ties together to aid the hero match up to the overpowering foe.

But in your case, the product is the hero and the life lessons are just features. So figure out how they all tie together to be greater than a sum of parts. Then build up the customer’s dilemma so that your product appears as a complete solution to a multitude of problems.

A callback is a story element where you refer to a previous situation or object and this time it plays a bigger role in the story. You have encountered it in the form of a running gag or an easter egg in movies or shows. What it does is it relies on creating familiarity for the audience which leads to greater enjoyment using the same plot segment. Stand up comedians use callbacks a lot of the time in their bits where the first joke pops up again later on and the second time it receives a better reaction from the crowd.

How do you fit a callback in marketing?

A few brands do it very well. Their ads and messages feature repetitions of similar characters or formats and even though they change nothing, it makes the brand seem trustworthy over time. When the brain encounters familiar objects, it makes us more comfortable with it so we prefer it over other options.

These are the tactics storytellers have used through centuries to captivate the audience till the end. And they can be adapted into marketing to create a powerful campaign for your product.

Bear in mind that however you use these tips in your marketing, they need to fall in line with each other. My saga of strange episodes lined right up the next morning when I ran into the same friend whose blog led me to book the hotel. As it turned out, he was there attending the summit again and was staying in the room above mine. I recounted the odd deja vu incident when he pointed out that we were on video call a few times during the previous year. My mind must have picked up on the familiar surrounding, or maybe I was there in a different lifetime. Whatever it was, it made the story much more memorable.

Augustus Franklin is the founder and CEO of CallHub, a California-based Voice and SMS service company, bridging the communication gap for political campaigns and advocacy groups. When he is not working, he is either making toys with his kids or training for a marathon. Connect with him on Twitter or LinkedIn.|||

You’ve probably heard of “storytelling in marketing”. It’s slowly turning into another popular jargon used in brand marketing.