SAN FRANCISCO—Uber's love for arbitration is well-known, and it has sought to move its disputes with drivers into that more private forum. Now the question is, will it be able to steer a case as big as the Waymo litigation in the same way?

Waymo, Google's self-driving car division, sued Uber in February, claiming that Uber engineer Anthony Levandowski stole thousands of files that were trade secrets. Now Uber is seeking to move most of the case out of court and into arbitration. Waymo, in turn, wants to keep the whole case in federal court.

Judge accuses Uber and Levandowski of “obfuscation” in Waymo case Uber filed a motion (PDF) to compel arbitration in March, but most of the courtroom action so far has been about Levandowski himself. Levandowski, who is not a defendant in the case, has declined to answer questions about the allegedly stolen files. He has cited his Fifth Amendment right to avoid self-incrimination.

Today, the arbitration issue came up front and center. Waymo lawyer Charles Verhoeven told US District Judge William Alsup his client would be willing to litigate the case without relying on any Levandowski employment agreement, which could contain an arbitration clause. He said he wouldn't bring any such agreement up in the case, as long as Uber didn't open the door by referencing the agreements itself.

"The moment will come when you have to prove these files are trade secrets," said Alsup. "One of the things you look at is, did your company have security measures to safeguard the confidentiality of the information? To which you would normally say, well, we made him sign an agreement to keep it confidential."

Appeals court: Uber engineer can’t get help from the 5th Amendment "We have plenty of other evidence to support that standard," said Verhoeven.

"Waymo doesn’t get to pretend these contracts don't exist in order to avoid arbitration," said Uber's attorney, Hamish Hume. "Waymo chose to have a contract, that talks about information, about inventions, and about who owns what."

Verhoeven sought to reassure the judge that leaving Levandowski out of the case wasn't a ploy to avoid arbitration. He promised that Waymo wouldn't sue Levandowski over the same claims they had brought against Uber—although Waymo stopped short of making a blanket disclaimer that they'd never pursue Levandowski, because they don't know the details of what he has done.

"You have a competitor of Waymo attempting to escape the district court by citing to an agreement it had nothing to do with," said Verhoeven. "Our claims do not depend on any reference to this agreement at all."

"They are clearly trying to game this," said Hume. "The agreement says 'any dispute' about the relationship goes to arbitration. If Levandowski had a problem [with Google], it would be arbitrated. They want to come to court against Uber. But Uber hired Mr. Levandowski and hired the companies he created."

"We’re suing a third-party competitor [Uber], who we didn't have any agreement with," said Verhoeven.

In addition to trade secret claims, Waymo's lawsuit claims that Uber is violating certain patents relating to self-driving car technology. Those patent claims aren't subject to arbitration and will remain in court no matter what.

US District Judge William Alsup didn't indicate how he'll rule or when. The attorneys are answering additional questions in writing.

Next week, Alsup will consider Waymo's request for a preliminary injunction that would prevent Levandowski from working on Uber's self-driving car project. If granted, such an injunction could be a major blow to Uber, which is relying on advances in self-driving car tech to ultimately become profitable.|||

Will arbitration work in Waymo's trade secret case?