Mail.Ru Group examined user attitude towards social media advertising. The survey has demonstrated that social media advertising attracts more attention than ads on other platforms; content that companies publish on their official pages helps to build trust; and brand discounts and promotions generate the greatest interest. Women are more likely to subscribe to brand pages on social networks than men, and the most active users are between 25 and 34 years old.

60% of respondents said that social media ads attract attention. 53% think that music and films have the most interesting ads. 44% are mostly interested in campaigns dedicated to clothes, shoes and fashion, and 43% to entertainment. 41% are interested in ads for gadgets, home appliances and electronics, and 38% in travel ads.

Users were asked what categories of goods they bought after seeing social media ads. The survey revealed that ads for clothes, shoes and everything fashion-related have the highest conversion rates: 40% percent of users said they bought goods in this category after seeing ads. Ads in the beauty and health category prompted 32% to buy advertised products or services, while ads for children’s goods and games led 20% and 8%, respectively, to make purchases.

Two-thirds of social media users are subscribed to brand pages and groups. Women unsurprisingly show a greater interest in brand pages than men (72% against 58%). Among the main goals of subscribing, respondents cited the opportunity to receive relevant information about the promotions and discounts (79%) or about the brand’s products or services (74%). At the same time, the interest in taking part in contests and lottery drawings is quite high, attracting 55% of those asked.

The research was carried out in December 2016 in an online survey of 1,200 social media users over 14 years old. All regions of the Russian Federation are represented in the survey.

You can find more information about the research here (in russian).|||

Mail.Ru Group examined user attitude towards social media advertising. The survey has demonstrated that social media advertising attracts more attention than ads on other platforms; content that…