Leviathan is a mass audit toolkit which has wide range service discovery, brute force, SQL injection detection and running custom exploit capabilities. It consists open source tools such masscan, ncrack, dsss and gives you the flexibility of using them with a combination.

The main goal of this project is auditing as many system as possible in country-wide or in a wide IP range.

Discovery: Discover FTP, SSH, Telnet, RDP, MYSQL services running inside a specific country or in an IP range via Shodan, Censys. It's also possible to manually discover running services on a IP range by integrated “masscan” tool.

Brute Force: You can brute force the discovered services with integrated “ncrack” tool. It has wordlists which includes most popular combinations and default passwords for specific services.

Remote Command Execution: You can run system commands remotely on compromised devices.

SQL Injection Scanner: Discover SQL injection vulnerabilities on websites with specific country extension or with your custom Google Dork.

Exploit Specific Vulnerabilities: Discover vulnerable targets with Shodan, Censys or masscan and mass exploit them by providing your own exploit or using preincluded exploits.

Masscan: It’s a very fast TCP port scanner by Robert David Graham. Leviathan uses masscan for detecting services on a huge IP range. https://github.com/robertdavidgraham/masscan

Ncrack: Ncrack is a high-speed network authentication cracking tool. Leviathan uses ncrack to brute force services such as FTP, SSH, RDP, Telnet, MYSQL etc. https://github.com/nmap/ncrack

DSSS (Damn Small SQLi Scanner): DSSS is a fully functional and minimal SQL injection vulnerability scanner by Miroslav Stampar. Leviathan uses DSSS to identify SQL Injection vulnerabilities on specific URLs. https://github.com/stamparm/DSSS

For detailed installiation, please visit our wiki page.

Run installiation script. It will setup required tools (ncrack, masscan) and python libraries.

If homebrew is not installed on your system, please install it first:

Run installiation script. It will setup required tools (ncrack, masscan) and python libraries.

Python version 2.7.x is required for running this program.

Run the program with following command:

You can get basic usage information inside the menus. For detailed usage manual, visit our wiki page.

This project is written by Utku Sen and Ozge Barbaros

While this may be helpful for some, there are significant risks. You could go to jail on obstruction of justice charges just for running leviathan, even though you are innocent. Your are on notice, that using this tool outside your "own" environment is considered malicious and is against the law. Use with caution.|||

leviathan - wide range mass audit toolkit