Having written and maintained hundreds, if not thousands, of automated tests, I finally got tired of writing boilerplate code again and again. So I wrote this wrapper around Cucumber+Selenium which lets me execute Feature files without writing a single line of Java code. No Page Objects, No StepDefs, just a feature file which runs from the command line. And oh, this works on any website, just like regular Cucumber+Selenium.

Cucumber is designed to be used as a collaboration tool between BAs, product owners, developers, and automation engineers. According to its inventor, Aslak Hellesoy, a cucumber feature file should drive implementation, not verify it. This is a Nirvana state for a project where the full zen of Cucumber has been realized and the project ecosystem has accepted the philosophy of BDD - namely to let the behavior drive development, not test it.

Kheera, on the other hand, focuses on making testing easier. While Cucumber focuses on what a product should do, Kheera focuses on how the product does what it does and does the how accurately reflect the what. I know this sounds a little hand wavy but said another way, Kheera extends Cucumber into the automation realm. Do not use it to drive development. Use it to write tests faster.

Structurally, it is closer to Capybara DSL without its overly technical style of writing tests. Plus, you don’t have to write glue code.

Kheera can answer questions like the following:

We designed this framework with the these pitfalls in mind. The result is a versatile, lightweight framework (the framework itself is ~60kb) that lets you write and manage your web automation suites with complete confidence.

Read on to understand our philosophy..

Kheera reflects the following principles which makes it an amazing automation tool.

If you like our philosophy, read on..

Since there is no realistic level automation script, we will write a script to perform a fairly typical action on the web - search. The following script opens Github and searches for in the search box.

This framework is built on top of Cucumber and Selenium. Strictly speaking, to use this framework, you do not have to know either Cucumber or Selenium but it never hurts to become familiar with the technolog underpinning any framework.

Since the framework is built on top of Cucumber, we thought to name it Kheera which is the Hindi word for Cucumber.

Visit the Github link on the left.

Absolutely! Happy to help. Email me!.|||

