New REST API for configuring Rooms and receiving webhook status callbacks e’re excited to announce the general availability of release 1.0.0 of our Programmable Video SDKs for Android, iOS, and JavaScript. Along with the 1.0.0 SDK release comes a shiny new REST API, a simplified approach to Room configuration, Room access control, and an improved Console interface for historical Room logs. Want to know how to get started with Video? Dive into our sample applications for You’ve built thousands of apps with Programmable Video. If you’ve worked with our Video SDKs, you know that until today, each release of our Android, iOS, and JavaScript SDKs included a in its version number. Although we always try to minimize the impact of changes in our products and provide the highest quality support experience possible, the identifier indicated we were still refining the API and service behavior, and users should expect a sometimes significant evolution of the APIs and supporting services from release to release. You’re encouraged to join hundreds of others in using Video in your production applications—we’ll provide the same top-notch support we provide for all generally available Twilio products. uses Programmable Video to help millions of users see a doctor at a moment’s notice. Patients initiate a video appointment with a doctor using the Doctor on Demand app for . The doctor uses Doctor on Demand’s web application to take the call and consult with the patient. “We were already using Twilio for SMS appointment reminders, and we were really impressed once we tried out the Video SDKs,” said Kent Griffin, VP of Product at Doctor On Demand. Video is a critical component in delivering a positive patient experience, and our customers are really enjoying the superior video quality we’re able to provide with Twilio. that allows you to create and configure Programmable Video Rooms from your server-side code. Today, we’re also announcingthat allows you to create and configure Programmable Video Rooms from your server-side code. , control the maximum number of Room Participants, and more. Through this API you can create and complete Rooms, configure a Room’s TURN settings, set a URL to receive, control the maximum number of Room Participants, and more. DailyStandup” and receive webhook status callbacks at your server at , you could make the following API request: For example, to create a Video Room calledDailyStandup” and receive webhook status callbacks at your server at, you could make the following API request:

Once created, use one of our client-side Video SDKs for iOS, Android, or JavaScript to connect to and get your users talking.

The new REST API is great when you want to dynamically control Room configuration. Many applications, however, use the same settings for every Room. And sometimes, you want to be able to experiment with different options during development without having to make a REST API request each time.

We’ll use the defaults you configure here whenever a new Room is created in your Twilio account, unless you override the defaults when creating a Room through the REST API.

gives you more control over the security of Programmable Video Rooms. Now, w en you generate a client’s Access Token, you can add an optional grant. The client that uses this token to connect to Programmable Video will only be allowed to connect to the exact Room you’ve specified in the grant.

For example, to generate an Access Token that lets the client connect to the room DailyStandup using our JavaScript helper library, you’d do the following:

Check out our docs to learn more about Access Tokens and Room Access Control.

, it’s easy to get up and running without writing any back-end code:

When you’re done prototyping and ready to move your app to production, you can client-side Room creation, which will mean:

Before the REST API and Default Room Settings, Room configuration was governed by the Configuration Profile you set in your Video client’s Access Token. The Rooms REST API and Default Room Settings are simpler solutions, so we are deprecating support for multiple Configuration Profiles in favor of this REST API.

This means the following:

If you’re using an earlier release of our Video SDKs, you’re likely wondering How do these changes affect my app?”

If you’re using 1.0.0-beta1 or 1.0.0-preview1 or greater of our Video SDK, your application will continue to function without modification. All of the changes mentioned above are backwards compatible with earlier releases of our Video SDKs, and your app will continue working exactly as it does today. You only need to take note of the deprecation of Configuration Profiles on August 1 and make sure you have your Default Room Settings configured correctly.

If you’re using a release of our Video Conversations SDK releases older than 1.0.0-beta1 or 1.0.0-preview1), back-end support for these SDKs will be terminated on August 1, 2017. There are only a very small number of applications still using these early releases of our Video SDKs, so chances are you don’t need to worry.

The Video Conversations SDK releases impacted by this change are the following:

Additionally, we denote Developer Preview or Beta releases by appending

To start receiving updates from the Cocoa

We believe that technical and consumer trends are making embedded, in-app voice The global adoption of mobile devices means that we’re all carrying an incredible camera, microphone, and CPU in our pocket. Widespread support for means that billions of people now use a video-capable browser to access the internet every single day. And increasing wireless network bandwidth and reliability makes it possible to bring high quality video to all kinds of environments that were previously unreachable. very day, we see your applications validate these beliefs—and we’d love to see them in-person Join us on May 24 and 25 in San Francisco at SIGNAL, Twilio’s annual developer conference, to network, learn, and meet the Programmable Video product and engineering team. Sign up here to receive 20% off SIGNAL registration We can’t thank you enough for participating in the Programmable Video Beta. We look forward to meeting you face-to-face, hearing your feedback, helping you with your app development, and sharing our roadmap. We can’t wait to see you what you’ll build|||

SDKs for Android, iOS, and JavaScript now generally available. New REST API and Room-based access control. Connect with users with in-app voice and video.