Specifically, I ask them to recall a time in their lives when something happened that forced them to take action. Screenwriters (and readers of my posts) will recognize this as what Hollywood screenplay guru Robert McKee calls the “inciting incident”:

Executive leaders like Max attend my workshops to learn how to structure pitch narratives for their companies, products, and ideas. To familiarize them with narrative structure, I first ask them to share a story about themselves.

That’s when Max told the class about a van, the Discovery Channel, and a smelly cow—endearing himself forever to everyone who was there, and serving up a priceless opportunity to demonstrate how well-crafted stories help you build trust with people you’ve never met.

Aside from lacking a certain oomph, the story, as Max told it, made him come off as a bit of a quitter. I had the feeling Max’s story didn’t reflect who he truly was, so I asked him:

Last week I led a strategic storytelling workshop in which a millennial digital marketer named Max related the tale of how he came to his profession:

In the movies, inciting incidents kick off the action. Nemo gets lost. Vader kidnaps Leia. Harry meets Sally.

Max’s inciting incident, in his story’s initial telling, was simply that his Hollywood film career was “not working out.” But when I asked if he could recall the moment he decided to throw in the towel, this is what he said:

Nearly all of Max’s classmates were smiling now, so I asked them to share how their impressions of Max (whom they had never met before) changed after hearing the new details of his story. They said things like:

I sometimes say that stories are a “write API” for humans — that is, a channel for inserting beliefs into other people’s brains. After all, if Max had simply stood up and said, “I’m trustworthy, I can change course, and I’m creative,” I doubt that anyone would have come away believing those things about him.

Of course, in order for your story’s “API call” to work its magic on an audience, you have to structure it properly. Can we generalize about why the extra details made Max’s story more effective?

When you’re telling a story—whether writing a novel or relating recent events to a colleague—you’re constantly making a choice between the two narrative modes that writers call scene and summary.

“I took the cold keys out of my pocket, pressed the automatic unlock button, and heard the doors snap open” is scene.

The big change that I got Max to make was telling his inciting incident as a scene (“…this stinky, rotting mass of flesh…I could barely breathe…”) rather than as summary (“not working out”). The details, sights and smells put us right there with him in the van, forcing us to imagine ourselves facing the same decision he did.

In tribute to Max, I’ve christened this the Stinky Cow Principle: Stories connect better with audiences when you convey your inciting incident as a scene—especially when the incident involves suffering, failure, disillusionment or struggle on your part.

“I decided to start a high-quality printing shop,” a woman named Melinda said during another recent workshop I led. When I probed for scenic details, Melinda described her own Stinky Cow, which happened to be her boss:

I hope you’ll agree that the Stinky Cow version of Melinda’s story is far more effective at conveying her values — not to mention at positioning her as a compelling option for someone in need of high-quality printing.

Because my workshops are ultimately geared to business storytelling, the stories that participants tell often revolve around their careers.

But the Stinky Cow Principle makes any business or personal story more effective at connecting with people. For example, the next time you tell a customer success story, instead of just saying, “they had X problem,” paint a full picture — in all its Stinky Cow glory — of how your customers were suffering before you helped them make a change.

The Stinky Cow Principle also applies to happy inciting incidents: The next time someone asks why you first started dating your significant other, instead of summarizing the reasons, describe the scene.

As Max learned, everyone you talk to will feel more connected to the people in your stories — and to you.|||

Last week I led a strategic storytelling workshop in which a millennial digital marketer named Max related the tale of how he came to his profession: Aside from lacking a certain oomph, the story, as…