As of 2 April 2018, Acquia will no longer support or maintain the Mollom product.

Mollom launched 8 years ago to make it easy for people to ensure the quality of content posted to their online applications. Mollom has been used widely in the Drupal community and has blocked over 13.5 billion spam comments since its inception. Mollom has helped grow many web applications, but the online comment and SPAM blocking ecosystems have evolved over the years and unfortunately, Mollom’s spam-blocking days have come to an end.

As of 2 April 2018, Acquia will no longer actively support or maintain Mollom. After that point in time, the Mollom service will no longer be available. If you still have the Mollom module enabled on your site at that point, either all comments will be approved or all comments will be denied depending on how you have the Mollom module configured . We suggest disabling the Mollom module in advance of the end-of-life date.

On 1 May 2017, Mollom will no longer be available for sale on Mollom.com. You can continue to use the service for free with Mollom Free, which offers unlimited spam blocking and up to 50 legitimate posts per day. Users with existing Developer, Professional or Enterprise subscriptions may continue to use Mollom until one monthly billing cycle before the service end-of-life. You can still manage your sites and subscriptions or cancel an existing subscription through the site manager.

As an alternative to Mollom, Acquia recommends reCAPTCHA and Honeypot. These services provide similar spam blocking functionality and assist in the curation of user submissions.

We hope that you have had a positive experience using Mollom and we look forward to making other products that will improve the quality and content of your applications in the future. We would like to take this opportunity to thank you for being part of the Mollom community and the Drupal community as a whole.|||

Mollom is a free web service to get rid of spam, unwanted content and fake users on your Drupal, Wordpress and Joomla site or blog