In April 2015, we announced Scaleway, the first IaaS provider worldwide to offer a BareMetal ARM based cloud.

For our 2nd anniversary, we’re excited to disrupt once again the hosting industry with the first ARMv8 SSD Cloud Servers for developers.

We're introducing 3 Starter ARMv8 servers, starting at €2.99 per month or €0.006 per hour. Here is the full lineup:

All of these cloud servers are backed by Cavium ThunderX SoCs, high end processors designed for the cloud, and DDR4 ECC memory. They come with 200Mbit/s of internet bandwidth with unlimited transfer. This means you won't pay any bandwidth fee. 

 As all our cloud server, the new ARMv8 servers are billed by the hour.

The new ARMv8 servers benefit from all the features of the Scaleway Cloud platform: flexible IPs, native IPv6, Snapshots and Images are all there!

Scaleway is the first cloud computing provider worldwide to offer a true solution for multi-architecture project with ARMv7, ARMv8 and X86-64 cloud servers.

The servers are available now in our Paris Datacenter! 

 We currently offer Ubuntu 16.04 as base Operating System and are working to provide more OS and our InstantApps on these new servers.

These three new servers are flagged as a preview as we're still deploying nodes to handle large scale and multi-site deployments. ARMv8 Servers will be available in AMS1 in the coming days.

Let's be clear: our goal is to disrupt the cloud computing industry. 

 In 2013 we built the C1 server, a BareMetal ARMv7 server designed for horizontally scalable workloads, when nobody thought ARM would be able to enter the server market. This proved to be huge success and we ran out of nodes in a few month.

Since the launch of the C1, we were looking for competitive ARMv8 SoCs and for a semiconductor company able to work with us to disrupt once again the industry. 

 At the time, we didn't find an attractive ARMv8 SoC to build cloud servers on. We got back to X86 and tried to provide a compelling solution with the C2 and VC1 servers, BareMetal and virtual cloud servers based on the Intel Avoton SoCs. 

 The growth we've seen since one year shows these cloud servers are a success: the VC1 and C2 server have been massively adopted!

Today, we're glad to say we've found in Cavium Inc a partner able to provide a compelling ARMv8 SoC for our cloud offering. 

 We believe this is once again a huge move to disrupt the cloud industry!

Since the launch of the C1, our ARMv7 BareMetal server, we've been supporting a lot of opensource project in the effort of porting their project on ARMv7, including:

If you wish to support ARMv8 on your open source project, drop us a line at opensource@scaleway.com, we might be able to help!

To deploy one of our new ARMv8 cloud server, simply select it on the server creation page, click start and your server will be ready in less than a minute!

Alternately, you can automate the deployment of your new servers using the API or any scaleway compatible project. Starting a new server with the Scaleway CLI is a one line command, run , wait a minute and your server is up and ready!

If you need more server than your account limits currently allows, simply open a support ticket, our support team will take care of increasing your server quota.

If you have any pricing or technical questions, join us on the community platform, tweet us at @scaleway or open a support ticket, we're always happy to help.|||

