5:21 (MP3 9.7MB) (OGG 6.8MB)

 

 OpenBSD 3.5 CD2 track 2 is an

 uncompressed copy of this skit & song.

 

 

 

 A common theme used by the comedy crew Monty Python was to emphasize and exaggerate ridiculousnesses that their target had imposed upon themselves. Few things could be considered as humorous as making a redundancy protocol... redundant; e.g. being forced to replace it by Cisco lawyers and IETF policy. We've been working a few years now on our packet filtering software pf(4) and it became time to add failover. We want to be able to set up pf firewalls side by side, and exchange the stateful information between them, so that in case of failure another could take over 'keep state' sessions. Our pfsync(4) protocol solves this problem. However, on both sides of the firewall, it is also necessary to have all the regular hosts not see a network failure. The only reliable way to do this is for both firewall machines to have and use the same IP and MAC addresses. But the only real way to do that is to use multicast protocols. The IETF community proposed work in this direction in the late 90's, however in 1997 Cisco informed them that they believed some of Cisco's patents covered the proposed IETF VRRP (Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol); on March 20, 1998 they went further and specifically named their HSRP "Hot Standby Router Protocol" patent. Reputedly, they were upset that IETF had not simply adopted the flawed HSRP protocol as the standard solution for this problem. Despite this legal pressure, the IETF community forged ahead and published VRRP as a standard even though there was a patent in the space. Why? There was much deliberation at all levels of the IETF, and unfortunately for all of us the politicians within eventually decided to allow patented technology in standards -- as long as the patented technology is licensed under RAND (Reasonable And Non Discriminatory) terms. As free software programmers, we therefore find ourselves in the position that these RAND standards must not be implemented by us, and we must deviate from the standard. We find all this rather Unreasonable and Discriminatory and we *will* design competing protocols. Some standards organization, eh? Due to some HSRP flaws fixed by VRRP and for compatibility with the (HSRP-licensed) VRRP implementations of their competitors, Cisco in recent times has largely abandoned HSRP and now relies on VRRP instead -- a protocol designed for and by the community, but for which they claim patent rights. On August 7 2002, after many communications, Robert Barr (Cisco's lawyer) firmly informed the OpenBSD community that Cisco would defend its patents for VRRP implementations -- meaning basically that it was impossible for a free software group to produce a truly free implementation of the IETF standard protocol. Perhaps this is because Cisco and Alcatel are currently engaged in a pair of patent lawsuits; a small piece of which is Cisco attempting to use the HSRP patent against Alcatel for their use of VRRP. Some IETF working group members took note of our complaints, however an attempt in April 2003 to have the IETF abandon the use of patented technology failed to "reach consensus" in the IETF. A few years ago, the W3C, who designs our web protocols, tried to move to a RAND policy as well (primarily because of pressure from Microsoft and Apple), but the community outrage was so overpowering that they backed down. Some standards groups use this policy, while others avoid it -- the one differentiation being the amount of corporate participation. In the IETF, the pro-RAND agents work for AT&T, Alcatel, IBM, Cisco, Microsoft, and other large companies. Since IETF is an open forum, they can blend in as the populace, and vote just like all others, except against the community. Translation: In failing to "reach consensus", the companies who benefit from RAND won, and the community lost again. Left with little choice, we proceeded to reinvent the wheel or, more correctly, abandon the wheel entirely and go for a "hovercraft". We designed CARP (Common Address Redundancy Protocol) to solve the same problem that these other protocols are designed for, but without the same technological basis as HSRP and VRRP. We read the patent document carefully and ensured that CARP was fundamentally different. We also avoided many of the flaws in HSRP and VRRP (such as an inherent lack of security). And since we are OpenBSD developers, we designed it to use cryptography. The combination of pf(4), pfsync(4), and carp(4) has permitted us to build highly redundant firewalls. To date, we have built a few networks that include as many as 4 firewalls, all running random reboot cycles. As long as one firewall is alive in a group, traffic through them moves smoothly and correctly for all of our packet filter functionality. Cisco's low end products are unable to do this reliably, and if they have high end products which can do this, you most certainly cannot afford them. As a final note of course, when we petitioned IANA, the IETF body regulating "official" internet protocol numbers, to give us numbers for CARP and pfsync our request was denied. Apparently we had failed to go through an official standards organization. Consequently we were forced to choose a protocol number which would not conflict with anything else of value, and decided to place CARP at IP protocol 112. We also placed pfsync at an open and unused number. We informed IANA of these decisions, but they declined to reply. This ridiculous situation then inspired one of our developers to create this parody of the well-known Monty Python skit and song. 





 

 Hello, I would like to buy a CARP license please. 

 A what? 

 A license for my network redundancy protocol, CARP. 

 Well, it's free isn't it? 

 Exactly, the protocol's name is CARP. CARP the redundancy protocol. 

 What? 

 He is an.... redundancy protocol. 

 CARP is a free redundancy protocol! 

 Yes, I chose it out of three, I didn't like the others, they were all too... encumbered. And now I must license it! 

 You must be a looney. 

 I am not a looney! Why should I be tied with the epithet looney merely because I wish to protect my redundancy protocol? I've heard tell that Network Associates has a pet algorithm called RSA used in IETF standards, and you wouldn't call them a looney; Geoworks has a claim on WAP, after what their lawyers do to you if you try to implement it. Cisco has two redundant patents, both encumbered, and Cadtrack has a patent on cursor movement! So, if you're calling the large American companies that fork out millions of dollars for the use of XOR a bunch of looneys, I shall have to ask you to step outside! 

 Alright, alright, alright. A license. 

 Yes. 

 For a free redundancy protocol? 

 Yes. 

 You are a looney. 

 Look, it allows for bleeding redundancy doesn't it? Cisco's got a patent for the HSRP, and I've got to get a license for me router VRRP. 

 You don't need a license for your VRRP. 

 I bleeding well do and I got one. It can't be called VRRP without it. 

 There's no such thing as a bloody VRRP license. 

 Yes there is! 

 Isn't! 

 Is! 

 Isn't! 

 I bleeding got one, look! What's that then? 

 This is a Cisco HSRP patent document with the word "Cisco" crossed out and the word "IETF" written in in crayon. 

 The man didn't have the right form. 

 What man? 

 Robert Barr, the man from the redundancy detector van. 

 The looney detector van, you mean. 

 Look, it's people like you what cause unrest. 

 What redundancy detector van? 

 The redundancy detector van from the Monopoly of Cizzz-coeee. 

 Cizzz-coeee? 

 It was spelt like that on the van. I'm very observant! I never seen so many bleeding aerials. The man said that their equipment could pinpoint a failover configuration at 400 yards! And my Cisco router, being such a flappy bat, was a piece of cake. 

 How much did you pay for that? 

 Sixty quid, and twenty grand for the PIX. 

 What PIX? 

 The PIX I'm replacing! 

 So you're replacing your PIX with free software, and yet you want to license it? 

 There's nothing so odd about that. I'm sure they patented this protocol too. After all, the IETF had a hand in it! 

 No they didn't! 

 Did! 

 Didn't! 

 Did, did, did and did! 

 Oh, all right. 

 Spoken like a gentleman, sir. Now, are you going to give me a CARP license? 

 I promise you that there is no such thing. You don't need one. 

 In that case, give me a Firewall License. 

 A license? 

 Yes. 

 For your firewall? 

 No. 

 No? 

 No, half my firewall. It had an accident. 

 You're off your chump. 

 Look, if you intend by that utilization of an obscure colloquialism to imply that my sanity is not entirely up to scratch, or indeed to deny the semi-existence of my little half firewall, I shall have to ask you to listen to this! Take it away CARP the orchestra leader! 

 

 A zero... one.. A one zero one one

 

 VRRP, philosophically,

 must ipso facto standard be

 But standard it

 needs to be free

 vis-à-vis

 the IETF

 you see?

 

 But can VRRP

 be said to be

 or not to be

 a standard, see,

 when VRRP can not be free,

 due to some Cisco patentry..

 

 Singing...

 

 La Dee Dee, 1, 2, 3.

 VRRP ain't free.

 O P E N B S D

 CARP is free

 

 Is this wretched Cisco-eze

 let through IETF to mean

 my firewall must pay legal fees?

 No! CARP and PF are Free!

 

 Fiddle dee dum,

 Fiddle dee dee,

 CARP and PF are free.

 

 1 1 2,

 Tee Hee Hee,

 CARP and PF are free.

 

 My firewall just keeps running, see,

 bisected accidentally,

 one summer afternoon by me.

 Redundancy's good when free.

 

 Redundancy must be free.

 Redundancy must be free.

 

 The End

 

 Under the Geddy Lee?

 

 No, Redundancy must be free!

 

 Geddy must be free.

 

 

|||

the OpenBSD release song lyrics page