IoT hacks are unbelievably effective. By leveraging thousands (if not millions) of insecure connected devices, hackers can produce DDoS attacks that can cripple our infrastructure, systems, and way of life. Or, attackers can go straight for the kill by directly exploiting a device and using it as a gateway to deeper levels on a network where they gather sensitive and valuable private data.

And things are about to get worse. Forbes predicts that by 2025, we’ll have over 80 billion smart devices on the internet. Much of the embedded firmware running on these devices is insecure and highly vulnerable, leaving an indeterminate number of critical systems and data around the world at risk.

If you’re in the IoT space, read on to understand these hacks and vulnerabilities. They’ll open your eyes to how the future could (and likely will) look and prompt consideration on why devices must be secured today.

Here are the 5 Worst IoT Hacks and Vulnerabilities in Recorded History:



The Hackable Cardiac Devices from St. Jude – Early this year, wrote, “The FDA confirmed that St. Jude Medical's implantable cardiac devices have vulnerabilities that could allow a hacker to access a device. Once in, they could deplete the battery or administer incorrect pacing or shocks, the FDA said.



 The devices, like pacemakers and defibrillators, are used to monitor and control patients' heart functions and prevent heart attacks.”



 The article continued to say, “The vulnerability occurred in the transmitter that reads the device's data and remotely shares it with physicians. The FDA said hackers could control a device by accessing its transmitter.”

The Owlet WiFi Baby Heart Monitor Vulnerabilities – Right behind the St. Jude cardiac devices is . According to Cesare Garlati, Chief Security Strategist at : “This latest case is another example of how devices with the best of intentions, such as alerting parents when their babies experience heart troubles, can turn dangerous if taken advantage of by a sinister party.  Sadly, this is more often than not in the case of embedded computing within so-called smart devices.  The connectivity element makes them exploitable and if manufacturers and developers don’t consider this and take extra steps to secure devices at the hardware layer, these are stories that we will, unfortunately, keep hearing.”

The TRENDnet Webcam Hack – And, continuing with the baby theme, reports, “TRENDnet marketed its SecurView cameras for various uses ranging from home security to baby monitoring and claimed they were secure, the FTC said. However, they had faulty software that let anyone who obtained a camera's IP address look through it -- and sometimes listen as well.



 Further, from at least April 2010 [until about January 2012], TRENDnet transmitted user login credentials in clear, readable text over the Internet, and its mobile apps for the cameras stored consumers' login information in clear, readable text on their mobile devices, the FTC said.



 It is basic security practice to secure IP addresses against hacking and to encrypt login credentials or at least password-protect them, and TRENDnet's failure to do so was surprising.”

Knowing is half the battle: find out how secure your firmware really is.|||

IoT hacks are unbelievably effective. And things are about to get worse.