Strange foods around the world most Disgusting Weird foods people eat most bizzare foods in the world. Buy Here - http://amzn.to/2pgJwI8



Weird food combinations that taste good here are the strangest and most revolting eating items on Earth. Around the world, people eat tons of other weird items. 



Disgusting American food combinations challenges pictures Top 10 Most disgusting fast food facts people eat which could be weird for us can be a famous delicacy for people you didn't know there is an entire world of pungent, bizarre or just plain scary foods out there to sample.









Disgusting things found in food unfortunately, the world isn’t only full of those tasty breakfasts. List weird food combinations people eat Which Sound Gross but Taste Amazing. Don't judge a meal based on how disgusting it sounds.



In every culture, at least one food requires courage from those who try it for the first time. Take a look at some the most unusual Chinese foods to them this are strange food addictions and eating weird things disorder they like this disgusting things to eat dares. 

 

Strange foods combinations around the world and most bizzare foods in the world eating cooking in Thailand unique dishes in japan the Frog sashimi is a Japanese dish consisting of eat a live frog. There are many weird American foods having strange food names.



Unusual foods of the world and seafood Tokyo is known as the capital of the world especially when it comes down to strange dishes.

 

Strange foods show about Chinese, Asian, taste test combination.



Everyone knows sushi and sashimi but there's a whole lot more to Japanese We understand that some things that our culture considers strange or nightmarishly insane are perfectly normal in a place like Japan Weird Japanese food sushi.



1. Live Frog sashimi - Japanese restaurant serves live frogs as sashimi However, probably the hardest dish to look at, let alone eat, is the signature dish of the Asadachi restaurant: bullfrog sashimi.



2. Scorpion Soup - China used this traditional soup of southern scorpion. Not only poison that is cooked soup it is enough to scare even see many people ın addition, fried scorpions in china.



3. Sheep’s Head - Smalahove is a Western Norwegian traditional dish made from a sheep's head, originally eaten before Christmas.



4. Rocky mountain oysters Bulls Testicles – Rocky Mountain oysters, also known as prairie oysters in Canada, is a dish made of bull, pig or sheep testicles. The organs are often deep-fried after being peeled, coated in flour, pepper and salt, and sometimes pounded flat.



5. Live Octopus Dish - "Sannajki" is a live octopus dish from South Korea. It consists of nakji that has been cut into small pieces while still alive and served immediately, usually lightly seasoned with sesame and sesame oil.



6. Bats Soup - Bats are a food source for humans in the Pacific Rim and Asia, where they are sometimes known as chicken of the cave.Bats are consumed in various amounts in Indonesia, Thailand, Vietnam, Guam, and in other Asian and Pacific Rim countries and cultures. In Guam, Mariana fruit bats (Pteropus mariannus) are considered a delicacy.



Have you tried any of these weird foods and do you have any to add to the list? Let us know in the comments…|||

Strange foods around the world most Disgusting Weird foods people eat most bizzare foods in the world. Buy Here - http://amzn.to/2pgJwI8 Weird food combinati...