Some things I learned while building a GPU rig for deep learning

During this month’s briefing on the Mac Pro, Apple said, paraphrasing, that they tried to put a TITAN X in the 2013 Mac Pro, but it was too hot and caused the CPU to throttle. That was my interpretation at least.

Apple has a tendency to put underpowered GPUs in their desktops, so it’s great to hear they’re seeking to improve this for the next Mac Pro. They’ve gotten plenty of feedback that “pro” users want more powerful GPUs, such as NVIDIA’s GTX 1080 or 1080 Ti.

Decades ago, CPUs added SIMD units (e.g. Intel’s MMX) for number crunching. Despite techniques to improve use of the CPU, there’s no denying a recent shift away from the CPU to the GPU for this kind of computation.

GPUs have become so powerful that we’re using them more, leading to a rise in general-purpose computing on GPUs. It’s a prominent time for GPUs now, AMD will be competing at the high-end again with their Vega series, and NVIDIA Volta is coming soon after that.

It’s true some apps don’t take much advantage of multiple GPUs, but the real point is that old weak GPUs won’t compensate for a new powerful one, and we shouldn’t generalize beyond that context. It’s fairly likely that Apple will sell a Mac Pro configuration in 2019 containing two GPUs.

A few years ago, if you were to buy a new Mac Pro, you could spend as much to upgrade the CPU ($3500) as it cost for the whole machine by itself ($3000).

Earlier this month, Apple updated their Mac Pro configurations and pricing to something much more reasonable by today’s standards. A CPU upgrade from 6-core to 12-core is now merely $2000:

That cost matches the difference in Intel’s list price between the 6-core ($580) and 12-core ($2600) processors, so Apple is simply passing along Intel’s suggested pricing.

Note that the clock speed of the 6-core unit is 30% faster than the 12-core one, so you’d be upgrading to slower cores. Apps that rely upon single-core performance will actually run slower on the more expensive CPU.

Now consider that $700 will buy you an NVIDIA GTX 1080 Ti. Last month this was the most powerful GPU available to the public. For about the same cost as adding 6 CPU cores, you can have 3 of the most powerful consumer GPUs in the world.

It’s a shame you won’t be able to plug all three of those monsters into the next Mac Pro. Assuming, that is, Apple designs it with similar expansion constraints as the cheese grater tower, which was the most expandable Mac Pro they’ve ever made.

Apple supported dual GPUs before the 2013 trash can Mac Pro. In 2012, the cheese grater Mac Pro had a stock configuration that came with two AMD Radeon HD 5770 GPUs.|||

During this month’s briefing on the Mac Pro, Apple said, paraphrasing, that they tried to put a TITAN X in the 2013 Mac Pro, but it was too hot and caused the CPU to throttle. That was my…