It seems that eggs have received a bad rep. Here at FastFit we eat eggs after a workout, or for a filling breakfast before we start the day. We decided to do some research on this to see what the deal is.

Eggs are packed with nutrients both in egg whites and the yolk. A lot of people are scared of the yolk do to the rumors of raising your cholesterol and leading to heart disease. There was an actual case study you can read here, that shows that there is no correlation to heart disease or strokes by consuming eggs.

The amount of nutrients contained in eggs is sometimes more than your daily diet. The following nutrients are found in eggs: Vitamin A, Folate, Vitamin B5, Vitamin B12, Vitamin B2, Phosphorus, Selenium, Vitamin D, Vitamin E, Vitamin K, Vitamin B6, Calcium and Zinc.

There have also been studies out there that say eating 3 eggs per day have no adverse affects on your body. Depending on your daily activity and caloric intake you can probably eat more.

Eggs are also packed with protein and the perfect amount of amino acids. Whether you hit the gym 4 times a week or are just a busy individual, protein is an essential part of your diet. Many people aren't getting enough protein in their diet. One large egg contains 6g of protein! If you eat 3 you are already at 18g of protein from one meal.

If you are trying to lose weight eggs are a great way to start your day. There was a study done with 30 women who were overweight. These women ate eggs instead of bagels for breakfast and were able to eat fewer calories over the next 36 hours which, in return, helped them lose weight.

We hope this article has helped you feel a little better about consuming eggs on a daily basis. We eat eggs almost everyday, and have been doing so for years. Just keep in mind that eggs are packed with nutrients, protein, amino acids, and do not lead to heart disease or stroke.

If you haven't yet, follow us on Instagram!|||

It seems that eggs have received a bad rep. Here at FastFit we eat eggs after a workout, or for a filling breakfast before we start the day. We decided to do so