React is Javascript library for building user interfaces (UIs). React is the V (View) in MVC.

React is declarative, efficient, and extremely flexible. What’s more, it works with the libraries and frameworks that you already know like jQuery’s UI plugin.

React is probably one of the best choices for building UI. Good design, support and community.

React was built to solve one problem: building large applications with data that changes over time. To simplify the process of building complex UIs.

Short: Conceived at Facebook. Heavily used on products made by Facebook and Instagram. Built to simplify the process of building complex UIs.

The story of React started within the confines of Facebook. React was created by Jordan Walke, a software engineer at Facebook. Jordan deserves all the credit for creating React. He was influenced by XHP, a PHP-based component system that is still in use at Facebook, but also by functional programming ideas.

Pete Hunt wanted to use React at Instagram, so he helped to extract React from Facebook-specific code. This prepared React to be open sourced.

Later, Facebook put a team of engineers behind React and also received great contributions from the open source community. Significant contributors include Sebastian Markbåge and Ben Alpert, among many others. Source

React makes it painless to create interactive UIs. Design simple views for each state in your application, and React will efficiently update and render just the right components when your data changes. Source

I.e React is the V (View) in MVC that is used to render views like HTML pages dynamically based on some Props/state, which is often in the form of data. React then updates the generated views whenever the original state changes.

Declarative views make your code more predictable and easier to debug.

For the browser’s case, we write HTML using JavaScript in React relying on the power of JavaScript to generate HTML that depends on some data, rather than enhancing HTML to make it work with that data. Enhancing HTML is what other JavaScript frameworks usually do (for example, Angular.js extends HTML with features like loops, conditionals, and others). Source

Build encapsulated components that manage their own state, then compose them to make complex UIs.Source

Since component logic is written in JavaScript instead of templates, you can easily pass rich data through your app and keep state out of the DOM.

You can develop new features in React without rewriting existing code.

React can also render on the server using Node and power mobile apps using React Native.

Now that we know what React is and what you have to covre to write React first component. Let’s start exploring how to build things in the next article.|||

React is declarative, efficient, and extremely flexible. What’s more, it works with the libraries and frameworks that you already know like jQuery’s UI plugin. React was built to solve one problem…