Alan Barnard is 6’6” and 220 pounds, and his size certainly helped him appear confident as he stood before a hostile audience of mine managers facing yet another round of layoffs at their mine.

Barnard, a protégé of Dr. Eliyahu Goldratt, creator of the Theory of Constraints, was there to help fix a giant problem. The mine had a target of a million tons a month—and it wasn’t coming close. Just four months into the year, and they were already four hundred thousand tons behind.

Customers threatened legal action because they had to pay premiums on the spot market to get their demand satisfied. Shareholders stood to lose more than $30 million in profit from the lost production. Unless they could find a way to catch up, the mine’s management team stood to lose not just their bonuses but their jobs.

The Theory of Constraints is based on Goldratt’s idea that if you can identify and focus improvements or investments on the bottleneck you can normally achieve more with the same or even less resources, simply and quickly.

Barnard took a breath and told his impatient audience, “Firstly, it is clear that cost cutting will not fix your problem. The only way out is to find simple, quick and low cost ways to increase throughput so the mine can catch-up. That means we need to find the bottleneck. So, where is the bottleneck?”

Management explained that there are four main steps to getting ore out of the ground and on its way to customers: (1) expose the ore using explosives; (2) extract the ore using dragline excavators; (3) move the ore to the processing plant with trucks; and (4) process the ore to produce the grades desired by customers.

The mine manager explained that they didn’t have a single bottleneck. Their bottleneck was a moving target: if they had a good day exposing ore, the draglines became the bottleneck. If the draglines had a good day, they would run out of ore or out of trucks. And if there was a large enough buffer of the right ore, the processing plant often couldn’t keep up.

After what felt like an eternity, the supervisor finally said, “Okay, I’ll play your stupid game. It’s impossible unless we are willing to mine an area we’ve avoided mining over the past few years. This will allow us to catch up and sustain the ore buffer the draglines need.”

“Because these guys—” he jerked a thumb at the accountants — “will never agree. They will say that renting the special equipment we will need to mine this area will cost too much and there’s simply no budget.”

Barnard glanced at the Mine Manager and mine accountant, who, after first confirming the simple math a few times with a calculator,  excitedly nodded their approval. And just like that, the supervisor had his machines.

Barnard asked some more questions and found that at 1,300 tons per hour and $20/ton margin, the mine lost $26,000 an hour. And the mine was losing more than 10 hours every month just because they didn’t have standby drivers and maintenance crew to cover for absenteeism.|||

Alan Barnard is 6’6” and 220 pounds, and his size certainly helped him appear confident as he stood before a hostile audience of mine managers facing yet...