Here are some notes and extrapolations from reading The Righteous Mind (website) by Jonathan Haidt. The book explains several interesting aspects of human nature and why “some people” seem like they are evil, idiots, or both. It is highly relevant today, and its main points will likely endure.

Philosophy and psychology have offered up three different takes on the intuition/emotion vs rationality/reason divide:

Hume was right, and it’s pretty settled. Ouch.

Judgement is an intuitive, instant process, and is separate from justification, which is a reasoning, slow process, based on our earlier judgement. I.e. we have instinctive gut reactions that we then post-rationalize. Motivated reasoning is prevalent. We hold strong opinions that we can’t explain.

If you’re having a strong reaction against this and are currently looking for all the reasons this is wrong, then… well… yeah. You get the point.

This is why we can be well aware of cognitive biases, yet still be affected by them even though we think we’re not.

Affect (flash of like/dislike to guide behavior) is primary and colors all perception — whenever you see something, you feel something, however small, about it. It’s so compelling it limits alternatives for later thinking. This is particularly true of social and political judgement, and reveals subconscious preferences we may not think we have.

It goes further: reasoning requires the passions. The head can’t even do “reasoning tasks” without the heart — it gets overwhelmed. And emotions are not dumb. Usually they’re right, or right enough. The tricky part is when they’re not.

A big factor here is the timeline involved. Reason can affect emotion if given time. You can realize that your gut reaction was leading you astray. But this needs to be done in an atmosphere where you’re not under pressure / defensive.

If you want to influence people, you should therefore influence their intuitions (be friendly instead of confrontational, actually see things from their point of view, nudge), not provide new rationales (which they will automatically reject).

Those nudged intuitions can then revise the person’s judgment given time.

This goes beyond the traditional “know the opposition’s arguments, be able to make their case” to actually feeling what they feel, which is quite different — we usually quickly dismiss that part.|||

Here are some notes and extrapolations from reading The Righteous Mind (website) by Jonathan Haidt. The book explains several interesting aspects of human nature and why “some people” seem like they…