2000 years ago Stoic philosophers had a very practical approach to life. 

Theirs wasn’t the abstract dancing on the head of a pin that characterises so much of modern philosophy. To them the word philosophy was a way to get better at the art living. It was very much focused on how to live a life in equanimity, unruffled by extremes of passion.

One of their core ideas, as expressed by Epictetus, was to focus on what we have control over and to pay less attention to the things that we don’t have control over:

In reality this leaves us with direct control over a very small subset of the things that affect our lives. The things that we have direct control over are our thoughts, our emotions, and our actions. But even this is being optimistic! Getting control of our thoughts and emotions can be challenging to say the least. In fact much of the writing of the Stoics is on how to be more aware of our thoughts and emotions and how to have more control over them. Generally the idea though is that if we focus on what we are doing, and why we are doing it, we have a greater chance of influencing other people and the world around us.

Sadly in the world of work the norm is if anything the exact opposite. We are encouraged to focus on anything but our own thoughts. Sitting thinking is seen as doing nothing. We are encouraged to busy ourselves with what other people are doing and should be doing. In fact I once commented, while working at the BBC, that when promoted to a new post a senior manager couldn’t be seen to do nothing. They couldn’t look around, consider what was happening, and decide that things were working fine. They got more praise for being active and screwing things up than leaving things alone!

We have not been encouraged to develop the self-awareness required to think hard about our motivation and the effects of our actions. We are more used to be reactive than responsive in our work relationships. Even 2000 years ago this was a challenge:

We are taught to see solutions outside of ourselves. To sort the world rather than ourselves. To value externalities in the form of salaries, titles, and status rather than our own ability to deal effectively with life. There is a strong pressure on us to be seen to be doing things whether we are truly coping or not. To be seen to be succeeding. Even if sometimes our busyness is in the long term counter-productive, in the short term it gets our boss off our back.|||

2000 years ago Stoic philosophers had a very practical approach to life. 
Theirs wasn’t the abstract dancing on the head of a pin that characterises so much of modern philosophy. To them the word…