Bioluminescent fungi are spread throughout the globe, but details on their mechanism of light emission are still scarce. Usually, the process involves three key components: an oxidizable luciferin substrate, a luciferase enzyme, and a light emitter, typically oxidized luciferin, and called oxyluciferin. We report the structure of fungal oxyluciferin, investigate the mechanism of fungal bioluminescence, and describe the use of simple synthetic α-pyrones as luciferins to produce multicolor enzymatic chemiluminescence. A high-energy endoperoxide is proposed as an intermediate of the oxidation of the native luciferin to the oxyluciferin, which is a pyruvic acid adduct of caffeic acid. Luciferase promiscuity allows the use of simple α-pyrones as chemiluminescent substrates.

( A ) General mechanism of the fungal bioluminescence and synthesis of the oxyluciferin ( 2 ). Hispidin is hydroxylated by a styrylpyrone hydroxylase [hispidin-3-hydroxylase (H3H)] in the presence of O 2 and NAD(P)H, producing 3-hydroxyhispidin ( 1 ) ( 11 ), the fungal luciferin, which is enzymatically oxidized by O 2, giving an HEI that decomposes in CO 2 and the excited oxyluciferin. Fluorescence emission gives the ground-state oxyluciferin ( 2 ). The oxyluciferin was synthesized in two steps from 3,4-dimethoxybenzalacetone. LiHMDS, lithium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide; THF, tetrahydrofuran. ( B ) Comparison of HPLC-PDA-ESI-MS profiles of the enzymatic reaction (after 15 min) and the synthetic oxyluciferin. mAU, milliarbitrary unit. ( C ) Mass spectra of the luciferin 1 (R t = 10.1 min, m/z = 261 [M − H] − ) and compound 2 (R t = 12.2 min, m/z = 249 [M − H] − ). ( D ) Matching of the fungal bioluminescence (BL) spectrum and the fluorescence (FL) spectrum of 2 in acetone. The absorption spectrum of 2 is shown for reference (λ max = 380 nm).

Bioluminescent fungi are spread throughout the globe ( 9 ). The four known lineages of bioluminescent basidiomycete fungi contain around 80 different species ( 10 ). Recently, our group reported the chemical structure of fungal luciferin and its biosynthetic precursor ( 11 ). The enzymatic oxidation of the precursor (hispidin) by an NAD(P)H (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate OR its reduced form)–dependent enzyme, hispidin-3-hydroxylase, produces 3-hydroxyhispidin ( 1 ), which acts as the fungal luciferin ( Fig. 1A ) ( 11 ). However, the molecular mechanism and reasoning behind fungal bioluminescence remained unclear ( 12 – 15 ). Here, we report the identification and characterization of fungal oxyluciferin.

Many living organisms emit light, which is a phenomenon named bioluminescence ( 1 , 2 ). In most cases, light emission results from the chemical oxidation of a luciferin substrate catalyzed by a luciferase enzyme. The luciferin reacts with molecular oxygen, giving a high-energy intermediate (HEI) whose decomposition releases enough energy to produce the emitter oxyluciferin in the singlet electronically excited state. Fluorescence from this excited metabolite results in visible light emission used in nature for signaling and illumination ( 1 ). The luciferin/luciferase systems and the corresponding oxyluciferins of several bioluminescent insects, bacteria, and marine animals have been characterized ( 2 ). This knowledge has yielded major technological advances, such as genetically encoded labels using fluorescent proteins ( 3 , 4 ), pyrosequencing ( 5 ), ultrasensitive enzyme quantification using triggered chemiluminescent substrates ( 6 ), and imaging via bioluminescence resonance energy transfer ( 7 , 8 ).

We analyzed the enzymatic oxidation of 1 by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)–photodiode array (PDA)–electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS). After 15 min of the reaction of 1 with molecular oxygen in the presence of a luciferase-enriched protein fraction from the bioluminescent fungus Neonothopanus gardneri (16), two main chromatographic peaks corresponding to 1 [retention time (R ) = 10.1 min, mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) = 261.04 [M − H]−] and to an unknown compound (R = 12.2 min, m/z = 249.04) are observed (Fig. 1B). The mass difference of 12 u suggests the loss of a single carbon atom, which is compatible with the addition of O and release of CO by 1, leading to compound 2 (Fig. 1, A and C).

Compound 2 was then synthesized in two steps from 3,4-dimethoxybenzalacetone (17), and its chromatographic profile and fluorescence spectrum were compared with those acquired during the study of the bioluminescent reaction. The retention time and absorption maxima matched those of the unknown product of the enzymatic oxidation of 1 (Fig. 1B). The fluorescence spectrum of 2 in acetone (Φ = 0.011; fig. S1) is in agreement with the bioluminescence spectrum of fungi containing 1, for example, Mycena chlorophos, N. gardneri, and N. nambi (Fig. 1D). The fact that 2 is not fluorescent in water [that is, phosphate buffer (pH 6 to 8)] suggests that the luciferase-oxyluciferin complex is important for light emission. This requirement also provides an explanation for the higher full width at half maximum of the bioluminescence spectrum, analogous to the data reported for coelenteramide, the oxyluciferin of Aequorea victoria that is fluorescent only when bound to aequorin (2). Chemiluminescence and singlet quantum yields (Φ and Φ ) of the native luciferin 1 increase almost threefold when pH is increased from 6 to 8 (figs. S2 to S4, and tables S1 and S2).

The kinetics of enzymatic oxidation of the luciferin 1 in the presence of a microsomal luciferase fraction of N. nambi were monitored for ca. 6 hours and revealed that the oxyluciferin 2 hydrolyzes enzymatically into caffeic acid (fig. S5, A and B). Accordingly, replacement of the native luciferin 1 by 3-hydroxybisnoryangonin (3) (11) yields the corresponding oxyluciferin 4 and 4-coumaric acid (fig. S5, C and D). The maximum wavelengths for the enzymatic chemiluminescence (λ CL) of 1 and 3 are 20 nm apart, indicating different light emitters (fig. S6). The chemiluminescence spectrum of 3 in acetone matches the fluorescence spectra of the oxyluciferin 4, confirming that the fungal oxyluciferin is the pyruvic acid adduct of caffeic acid (Fig. 1D and fig. S6).

The enzymatic oxidation of hispidin does not result in light emission. Therefore, the hydroxylation of hispidin is one of the key steps in fungal bioluminescence (11). The investigation of hispidin and 1 by cyclic voltammetry demonstrated a reversible oxidation potential at 428 mV (versus Ag/AgCl) for hispidin and a considerably lower potential for 1 (211 mV versus Ag/AgCl), showing that the oxidation of 1 is more favorable when compared to hispidin in water (Fig. 2A). Computational chemistry at the density functional theory (DFT) level revealed that spin density surfaces, which are generated from the optimized structures of the radical cations of both compounds, are similar (Fig. 2B). However, for 1+•, the deprotonation of the hydroxyl group at C-3 in the α-pyrone ring is 25 kJ mol−1 more thermodynamically favorable than the deprotonation of the hydroxyl group at C-4 in water. The resulting resonance-stabilized radical shows high spin density at C-6, which is diametrically opposed to C-3 in the pyrone ring.

(A) Cyclic voltammetry of hispidin and the luciferin in aqueous KCl. (B) Spin density surface of the radical cations of hispidin and 3-hydroxyhispidin and the corresponding deprotonated radicals.

Endoperoxides have been proposed as HEIs in several chemiluminescent systems, including the notorious luminol reaction (18, 19). Despite the lack of examples of endoperoxides as HEIs in bioluminescent processes, previous studies (20–22) have shown that α-pyrone endoperoxides are chemiluminescent upon either thermal decarboxylation leading to 1,2-diacylethylenes or chemically initiated electron exchange luminescence. We then prepared the [16O]- and [18O]-labeled endoperoxides of the synthetic luciferin analog 3 by singlet oxygenation (Fig. 3A) (23). As expected, decomposition of the endoperoxide resulted in chemiluminescence (fig. S7). Unfortunately, the low intensity makes it impossible to acquire the chemiluminescence spectrum using conventional equipment. MS analyses of 3 (m/z = 245) before and after singlet oxygenation (given in Fig. 3B as normalized intensity difference) reveal the appearance of compounds with an m/z of 237 [(M + 4) − H]−. The main product ion upon collision-induced dissociation is found at an m/z of 163, indicating the loss of one 18O atom with the neutral fragment (that is, [(M + 2) − H]−; Fig. 3B). These results agree with the formation of a [4 + 2] cycloadduct between 3 and singlet oxygen (1O ), which, upon CO elimination, decomposes into the corresponding oxyluciferin. Carbon dioxide elimination should be a dominant dissociation channel in the negative mode for several carboxylic acids, for example, caffeic acid. Nevertheless, the formed oxyluciferins (2 and 4) are α-ketoacids (or α-hydroxyacids in their tautomeric form); thus, the loss of CO is readily followed by carbon monoxide elimination (fig. S8).

(A) General mechanistic proposal for the enzymatic generation of the HEI and the chemical preparation of the endoperoxide of 3 via methylene blue–sensitized photo-oxygenation with [18O]-labeled singlet oxygen [1(18O )]. (B) Difference between the normalized mass spectra signal intensity before and after photo-oxygenation of 3 and the structure proposal for product ion at an m/z of 163. Molecular structures represent the neutral form of 1 and 3, not the anion detected by MS.

According to these results, the presence of the 3-OH group is key to the formation of the HEI in fungal bioluminescence. The exact mechanism for the generation of the HEI is yet to be investigated; however, our results suggest that the oxidation and deprotonation of the luciferin are related to the addition of two atoms of oxygen and that the decomposition of the resulting endoperoxide leads to the formation of the oxyluciferin in the electronically excited state. There is currently no evidence for the formation of a 1,2-dioxetanone as HEI in fungal bioluminescence, and the chemiluminescence efficiency of such peroxides is as low as that reported for endoperoxides (24–26).

The chemiluminescence arising from the enzymatic oxidation of both the native luciferin 1 and the analog 3 suggests that the fungal luciferase has some degree of promiscuity (27). To test this hypothesis, we synthesized five styryl-α-pyrones containing substituted aromatic moieties or aromatic heterocyclic rings (Fig. 4A) (28–31). The incubation of all compounds with the luciferase homogenate from N. gardneri in the presence of molecular oxygen resulted in chemiluminescence emission, except the thiophene derivative 5. The lack of chemiluminescence of the analog 5 could be explained by either its low affinity for the luciferase catalytic pocket, which can only be confirmed in further investigations, or by the low H-bond acceptor strength of the thiophene ring. The chemiluminescence quantum yields (Φ ) and observed rate constants for the chemiluminescence decay (k ) of luciferins 1, 3, and 6 to 9 were determined (Fig. 4, C and D, fig. S9, and tables S3 and S4). The values of Φ depend on the substituent, and the maximum efficiency was reached with the N,N-diethylaniline styryl-α-pyrone 7. These results suggest that light emission is observed, provided that the substrate contains the 3-hydroxy-α-pyrone ring. Moreover, the chemiluminescence wavelength maximum depends on the substitution pattern, supporting the idea that the oxyluciferin is the true emitter in fungal bioluminescence (Fig. 4B).

(A) Natural luciferin (1), synthetic analogs 3 and 5 to 9, and enzymatic chemiluminescent reaction in tris buffer (pH 7). (B) Chemiluminescence spectra of luciferins 1, 3, and 6 to 9. The Savitzky-Golay filter (20 points) was used to improve the signal-to-noise ratio due to very low light intensity. (C) Chemiluminescence quantum yields (Φ ) and (D) the observed chemiluminescence decay rate constant for compounds 1, 3, and 6 to 9.

Our study provides insight into the mechanism of fungal bioluminescence by characterizing the oxyluciferin of 3-hydroxyhispidin and expanding the knowledge on how styryl-3-hydroxy-α-pyrones are chemiexcited in vivo. The enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis of the oxyluciferin produces caffeic acid, which may be recycled in the biosynthesis of hispidin via the styrylpyrone pathway (32). These results suggest the usefulness of fungal bioluminescence as a model system for continuous conversion of chemical energy into light emission. The promiscuous nature of the fungal luciferase was confirmed by developing a group of substrates bearing substituents that conveniently fine-tune the color of chemiluminescence without requiring enzyme mutation. Future work on the isolation, characterization, and heterologous expression of the luciferase will stimulate the development of fungal bioluminescence–inspired applications.|||

