Python is a very popular high-level language created by Guido van Rossum and first released in 1991. Python is named after the greatest comedy act of all time, Monty Python. Python can be used to create pretty much any type of application. Python has been popular for many years and it’s popularity shows no signs of stopping anytime soon. Been an in demand language, knowing Python is definitely something beneficial for your career as a software developer. Do keep in mind some of these books may be outdated by the time you read them, but the fundamental concepts should be the same. Bookmark and check back to stay updated with the best programming books that will help you improve your code!

Python Crash Course by Eric Matthes is a fast-paced ride through the world of programming with Python. Eric Matthes is a high school math and science teacher who teaches Python.

Python Crash Course will teach you everything you need to know top write your own programs and it will teach you fast. This does not mean that it is not through or doesn’t given an explanation of what exactly you are doing. Basic programming concepts like classes and loops are explained while you are shown how to write good code and test it extensively. Python Crash Course walks you though three epic projects where you will build a game, build data visualizations and a simple web app. After completing these three projects, you will  have all the skills necessary to build anything and everything in Python.

Python Crash Course has a great style of writing that is easy to read and understand, making sure beginners will not be overwhelmed at all. This book is packed with fundamentals that are useful to programmers of any skill level. Python Crash Course is the fastest way to get up to speed with Python.

Learning Python by Mark Lutz is considered by many as the defacto book for learning python. Mark Lutz is a leading Python trainer and author.



Learning Python is a comprehensive and in-depth look at the Python language and all it’s features. This book is packed with exercises, advanced language features and even illustrations to give you the best education in Python. features such as Python’s syntax and statements are explore. More advanced Python features such as  decorators, metaclasses and descriptors are also taught. Learning Python does not miss pretty much anything related to Python that maybe useful for you. This book is as detailed as it gets.



Learning Python is a great to begin Python, regardless if you’re a beginner or an advanced developer. This is a very conclusive and through book on Python, with over 1500 pages. Learning Python still remains one of the best ways to get started with python.

Fluent Python: Clear, Concise, and Effective Programming by Luciano Ramalho is for python developers who wish to ascend to the next level. Luciano Ramalho was a Web developer before the Netscape IPO in 1995, and switched from Perl to Java to Python in 1998.

Fluent Python is for programmers that are already familiar and comfortable with Python but what to reach the next level of proficiency. This hands on guide  teaches you how to write even better Python code by using often neglected features of Python. Your are taught how to write better code by making your code more elegant and using Python features properly in a more efficient way. Data structures, Functions as objects and meta-programming are some of the things Fluent Python teaches you to make you an expert in Python.

Fluent Python is aimed at Python developers who are serious about becoming better at Python. A wide range of topics and subjects is touched upon by the book that builds on your existing knowledge of Python. Fluent Python will make you better in Python.

Effective Python: 59 Specific Ways to Write Better Python by Brett Slatkin teaches you 59 tips and tricks to get better at Python. Brett Slatkin is a Senior Staff Software Engineer at Google.

Effective Python is packed with best practices, tips, tricks and code examples that you can implement into your Python coding.The code examples in this book will show you how to use Python techniques that you were not previously aware of. Some of the many topics addressed include: algorithms, objects, collaboration, etc. By the end of it all, Effective Python will teach you how to write good Python code that is effective and easy to maintain.

Effective Python is full of actionable tips and tricks that will take you Python to the next level. The books serves as a guidebook to improving your Python code. Effective Python will improve your Python code.

Python Cookbook by David Beazley & Brian K. Jones is full of tasty Python recipes that you can instantly cook up and use. David Beazley is an independent software developer and Brian K. Jones is a system administrator.



Python Cookbook is packed with practical Python recipes that cover a wide range of Python topics including data structures, algorithms, metaprogramming, etc.. The recipes also come with detailed code samples that tell you how and why to use them. Testing and debugging are also touched upon. Python Cookbook is all about writing code that is more robust, cleaner and faster.

Python Cookbook is a well written cookbook filled with all kinds of  recipes that can be used by Python programmers. It is well organized and easy to follow along. Any aspiring Python chef needs to have this on their bookshelves.

Python is a very widely used programming languages that can do almost anything. Having  working knowledge of high level programming languages is something any software developer should have. Whether it is a script you need to run or a complete application, Python is something you can use in your daily life as a programmer.

Check out the best JavaScript books, CSS books, ReactJS books and React Native books to further expand your programming knowledge and apply these best practices to write elegant applications.

Amazon Associates Disclosure: We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites.|||

The best Python books in 2017 to learn scripting and coding, Python Cookbook, Effective Python, Fluent Python, Python Crash Course, Learning Python