We all like to get something for nothing, which is probably why you’re here! One of the travel world’s ultimate freebies is the stopover. Including a stopover in your itinerary en route to your final destination is a chance to cross off another place on your bucket list without actually paying to travel there. It’s almost like getting two trips for the price of one!

A stopover can also make your airfare cheaper. Have you ever noticed that adding a stop to your journey often lowers the overall price of the ticket? It’s strange but true – flying direct is usually more expensive than a connecting flight.

Now, before we get started, it’s important to clarify what a stopover is exactly.



It’s NOT one of those short breaks between flights, where you’re stuck spending several hours in the cramped seating area by the gate, bored out of your mind. A stopover is a gap in your journey en route to or from your destination that lasts for more than 24 hours on international routes, or more than 4 hours on domestic ones. Anything less is considered a layover. In most cases, a stopover doesn’t magically appear in your itinerary. There’s an extra little step in the booking process which we cover later in details.

Be aware that not all airlines allow free stopovers and others do not allow stopovers. But luckily for you, we’ve done the homework for you and compiled this handy (but not exhaustive) list of our favorite airlines offering FREE stopovers on most international routes and fares.

Just fly with an airline that offers free stopovers in their hubs, and you’re ready to go! The trick here is to use the “multi-city” mix and match airlines buying separate tickets for each leg of your trip. For example, if you’re planning a trip to Asia from the US, you can break up your trip by buying one ticket from the US to Tokyo, and the other from Tokyo to your final destination in Asia. This way you’re also more likely to get a great deal by combining different airlines that might not otherwise work together. You see, when you put all your flights on one ticket, then you have to fly with one airline, or with its partners (usually within the same alliance) leaving all competing airlines are out of the picture. But what if an airline from another alliance is offering dirt cheap fares for part of your route? Then you have to split your journey into multiple segments. In this scenario, it’s a good idea to leave a few days between flights anyway, so that if there are any delays or cancellations, then you’ll have a buffer time between the flights. Keep in mind that if your first flight is delayed, and you wind up missing your next flight, then the airline won’t reimburse you and have no obligation to get you to your final destination since the two flights aren’t on the same ticket. free stopovers on award flights using your hard earned frequent flyer points. But bear in mind that it’s not as straightforward as a regular booking. Depending on the bonus program:  

 – A free stopover may only be available on round-trip journeys. 

 – Free stopovers may not be available at all. In this case, it might be a good idea to try to split your flights into separate bookings (see the “mix and match” tip above).  

 Award rules change every few months, so contact the airline for the latest information.

Readers, if we’ve missed a stopover-friendly airline, we’re counting on you to let us know. Please e-mail us at hello@flystein.com or leave a comment on our Facebook page!|||

We all like to get something for nothing, which is probably why you’re here! One of the travel world’s ultimate freebies is the stopover. Including a stopover in your itinerary en route to your final destination is a chance to cross off another place on your bucket list without actually paying to travel there. It’s almost like getting two trips for the price of one!