Husband: Morning. How’s my Livvy? Missed you last night. How are the girls?



Me: Having a lovely time. Was Beez [our dog] OK? Did he sleep?

Husband: He did. And he also did a poo in the kitchen.

Husband: It’s fine. On tiles and it rained so hard last night he didn’t want to poo outside.

This 2014 exchange marks the peak of my husband’s affection for me, according to Crushh, an “algorithm-driven app that reads your text messages and can interpret how much the other person likes you”.

The system reads your text interactions with another person, analyzing frequency, responsiveness and sentiment and taking into account demographic trends (40-year-old men don’t tend to use emoji) to spit out a score out of 5. The higher the score, the more into you the other person is. A solid 2.5 means you like (or hate) each other equally (as is the case in my marriage, thankfully).

“We overanalyze messages and tend to hand our smartphone to friends thinking they can be objective about it. But they can’t. Imagine the friend being a machine that has perfect recollection and can learn from hundreds of thousands of relationships,” said Es Lee, the creator of Crushh.

My teenage self thinks this app is a godsend. Finally I can know with scientific accuracy how much my crush is into me. Cast aside the plucked flower petals, origami fortune tellers or the crude love calculator tests, this is the real deal.

But let’s face it, it’s probably not.

Lee told the Guardian that he built the app after his friend moved to New York and was struggling to navigate the dating scene. The friend had gone on a date with a girl and thought he had hit if off but she wasn’t responding to his texts.

“I looked at his texts and could tell that she liked him; I have been on the dating scene for a while and can read between the lines,” he said.

At first he thought Crushh would most appeal to young people who haven’t yet mastered their emotions or ability to read others, but he was surprised to find there was appetite from a broader audience.

“Let’s say you are a 25-year-old woman and met this 40-year-old man and he doesn’t seem that interested in you. He replies three hours later with no emojis or positive things and he seems so blase. You would read that as face value: ‘I guess he’s not interested’.”

However, Lee explained, because Crushh analyzes the texts of thousands of people it knows “that’s just how 40-year-old men text”. Relationship angst averted.

The app has informed decisions in Lee’s own love life, helping him pick between two women. “I was unsure about how each of them felt about me. So I used the app.”

He was surprised by the results: the woman he thought was more keen produced a lower score than the one he thought wasn’t that into him. So he went on another date with the latter, while giving up on the former.

“While we’re in a relationship our emotions and desires can obscure obvious signs,” he said. The app in this particular case provided me some objectivity that I could act on.”

In another instance he sent an uncharacteristic emoji to woman he was dating. “The algorithm figured out that I never use emojis so when I did it was meaningful.”

The date responded enthusiastically, and there was a corresponding spike in the relationship score. “It was a good validation of the algorithm,” said Lee.

In addition to an overall score, there is also a bar chart indicating “engagement” and “interest”. Engagement quantifies how frequently the person contacts you and how quickly they respond. Interest looks for features in the text, including emojis and sentiment. “I am not very expressive [in text messages], so I make up for it with engagement,” said Lee.

Currently the app only acts as a diagnosis tool. It gives you a score and some charts but doesn’t offer tips on how to improve the relationship. Lee said he’s working with sociologists and psychologists to understand the data better before introducing such features.

Crushh has two major practical drawbacks: it’s only available on Android devices, not iPhones, and it only analyzes SMS messages – so it’s no good for WhatsApp, Facebook Messenger or any other means of communication.

Then there are the ethical drawbacks. Isn’t it a little creepy to be secretly scanning your interactions with other people?

“It is kind of creepy. I totally admit to that,” said Lee. “But people are going to analyze messages anyway, so we’re just using technology to our benefit.”

Beyond the creep factor, outsourcing our emotional intelligence to a computer seems a little dehumanizing. Shouldn’t grown adults be able to ask the other person how they feel?

“Relationships would be a lot easier if people worked this way, but often people won’t ask because of fear or the expectation they won’t get an honest answer,” said Lee.

“[Crushh] puts hard data to things we may already feel, which makes the how-do-you-feel-about-me conversation more broachable.”

The app launches on 29 April on the Google Play store.|||

Crushh claims it can objectively scan for signs of affection in texts from a friend, family member or first date. But does it work?