New York eyes a 'breathlyzer' for texting while driving

Known as a Breathalyzer for distracted drivers, emerging technology that can detect actions on a smartphone is being promoted by lawmakers.

Supporters of the technology gathered at the state Capitol this week to demonstrate the new tools and promote a legislative proposal to allow police to field test the devices at accident scenes.

"We are having more distracted driving accidents than drunk driving,'' said state Sen. Terrence Murphy, a Hudson Valley Republican. "This is the next step."

"Distracted driving impairment is equal to the drinking impairment and needs to be dealt with,'' said Assemblyman Felix Ortiz, a Brooklyn Democrat. Ortiz and Murphy are sponsoring the bill.

The technology is still in development. But the concept is a device that would use cutting-edge software to determine whether a person's smartphone was being used at the time of an accident. Supporters said police officers would be allowed — without a search warrant — to connect the device to a person's smartphone to scan it for recent activity. Drivers who refuse to turn over their phones would face penalties, according to the legislation.

A similar measure came up last year in the Legislature, but the technology has improved since then, said Ben Lieberman, a Westchester resident whose 19-year-old son Evan was killed when a car in which he was a passenger — and sleeping in the back seat — crashed in 2011.

"The landscape is a little different,'' Lieberman said, adding that the number of people injured in distracted driving crashes continues to grow.

Still, critics say the technology, being developed by Cellebrite, a data-extraction company, isn't ready.

The glitches include that the devices can't yet differentiate between whether someone was talking on a hand-held cellphone, which is illegal in New York, or using a wireless hands-free device such as a Bluetooth system, which is allowed.

There are privacy concerns as well.

"Enforcing this proposed law would violate people's privacy and could potentially impute guilt for innocent activities,'' according to a memo in opposition to the bill from the New York Civil Liberties Union, Electronic Frontier Foundation and others.

Those groups also note that police can get records of texting or talking from cellphone carrier records using search warrants. Prosecutors, and parties in civil lawsuits, also could obtain the records with grand jury or court-authorized subpoenas.

That's what Lieberman did after his son died.

Police at the Orange County crash site never obtained the records and the driver's phone was left in the vehicle when it was towed away. Lieberman obtained a subpoena for the driver's phone and the records indicated the phone was used to send a text about 10 minutes prior to the crash. But the accident occurred where phone service was not available, according to earlier reports.

Jody Wacker, vice president of marketing for Cellebrite, estimates they could have the devices ready within nine months if the legislation allowing their use is passed. It isn't yet clear how much the devices would cost.

According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 35,092 people died in crashes on U.S. roadways in 2015. Fatalities caused by distracted drivers rose 8.8 percent that year.

New York state instituted tougher penalties in 2014, especially for young drivers who are caught texting.

Distracted driving takes a motorist's attention off the road. It can include eating, rubbernecking in addition to fumbling with an electronic device such as a smartphone.

Experts say the human brain can only concentrate on one task at a time and activities such as texting create a dangerous cognitive overload when someone is driving.|||

Supporters of the technology gathered at the state Capitol this week to demonstrate the new tools and promote a legislative proposal to allow police to field test the devices at accident scenes.  Supporters said police officers would be allowed — without a search warrant — to connect the device to a person's smartphone to scan it for recent activity.  A similar measure came up last year in the Legislature, but the technology has improved since then, said Ben Lieberman, a Westchester resident whose 19-year-old son Evan was killed when a car in which he was a passenger — and sleeping in the back seat — crashed in 2011.  The glitches include that the devices can't yet differentiate between whether someone was talking on a hand-held cellphone, which is illegal in New York, or using a wireless hands-free device such as a Bluetooth system, which is allowed.  Enforcing this proposed law would violate people's privacy and could potentially impute guilt for innocent activities,'' according to a memo in opposition to the bill from the New York Civil Liberties Union, Electronic Frontier Foundation and others.  According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 35,092 people died in crashes on U.S. roadways in 2015.