Using a VPN while browsing the internet is a great way to protect your identity and prevent your ISP from using your personal data and habits for their own benefits. However, setting up VPN clients all of your devices can be very tedious and even impossible with devices such as a Chromecast / Firestick. Also, some traffic might not be necessary to route over the VPN (gaming and other latency critical programs).

A way to create a flexible VPNed network environment is to use VLANs to segment different network traffic. Properly configured VLANs will allow for outbound traffic of different segments to be routed to different VPN endpoints while allowing (or disallowing) normal internal routing between network segments.

This guide is based on the following equipment:

Qotom's performance with VPNs was reviewed in a previous post: PFSense Dedicated Micro Router

*To use VLANs, a managed switch is required.

In this set up there will be 2 different VLANs:

This configuration uses a TP-Link (TL-SG108E). They can be found for $30 and are fully manageable from a web interface.

If left blank, It will use the default DNS servers pfSense is assigned.

If multiple VPN clients have been created, they can be assigned to a gateway group. By doing this, if one VPN client stops working, traffic assigned to the gateway group will fail over to a different client.

Along the top are tabs for each interface that has been created.

For each interface assigned to a VLAN, groups of rules will need to be created to direct the flow of traffic.

This will tag the packet that matches the rule and can be filtered out with a floating rule.

With this configuration in place, there are now 3 effective network segments:

Any device attached to a port assigned to VPN will use the VPN Gateway Group to access the internet.

Attaching a Wifi Access Point to a port assigned to the VPN VLAN will serve all of the connected devices from the VPN Gateway.

Using VLANs to segment networks and traffic is a great way to implement different routing rules and traffic needs, especially when using a router that has limited physical ports.|||

Tutorial on how to set up a multi VLAN network with VPN routing and segmentation. Using pfSense and a managed TP-Link Router.