‘Chinese firms have become significant investors in American Tech start-ups’-What’s the deal?

The title of this post is from a New York Times article about why Chinese companies are actively investing American start-ups specializing in artificial intelligence and robots in order to advance both China’s military capacity as and its economy. Though these deals may be good for some investors, there are numerous questions and uncertainties which arise in terms of partnerships, intellectual property, and regulations on foreign takeovers. Read on

Who are the Tech VCs gladly funding? –It’s  Biotech!

According to an article by CNBC, Start-ups at the intersection of biology and tech are so hot in demand right now, so much that are receiving different valuations and checks.- “Tech investors will offer higher valuations if they believe you’re going to grow like a tech company…” Read on

Who would have thought that social networks would no longer be just simply about ‘socializing among friends and business people’? Those days are gone! In a blog post on LSE US Center- “How social media is changing the way people commit crimes and police fight them”, Ray Surette, a Professor in the Department of Criminal Justice at the University of Central Florida, writes that social media has consequently led to a new type of ‘performance crimes’, where perpetrators can break the law via  texts, images and video, and at the same time draw attention from the large public. The good news is that, social media is also making it easier for law enforcement officials to combat such crimes happening on these platforms. (Read on)  In another article by CNBC, Tech companies from Singapore to Finland are focusing on improving  artificial intelligence in order to automatically spot and block crime videos before they go viral on social media. Read on

High time we said ‘Tschüs und Ade’ to Fake accounts and false news spreading on Facebook?

Yes please! It’s about time someone did something about that!

Facebook recently published a paper “Information Operations and Facebook”- where the company highlights their efforts to add new technologies to spot fake accounts and to detect  false amplifiers and other forms of abuse on their platform. In the paper, Facebook explains how the company intends to expand their security focus from ’traditional abusive behavior, such as account hacking, malware, spam and financial scams, to include more subtle and insidious forms of misuse, including attempts to manipulate civic discourse and deceive people.’- Here’s what they’re doing about ‘False News’ and ‘Targeted Data Collection’ Read on here and here|||

The title of this post is from a New York Times article about why Chinese companies are actively investing American start-ups specializing in artificial intelligence and robots in order to advance both China’s military capacity as and its economy. Though these deals may be good for some investors, there are numerous questions and uncertainties which…