Envy is an Atom package that provides a switchable mode in which letter keypresses are mapped to text editing operations.

This approach is shared with the Vim family of editors, but only conceptually. Envy doesn't have any key bindings in common with Vim and augments, rather than modifies, the standard Atom editing experience. It simply wouldn't make sense to create yet another Vim clone or derivative – there are already so many. Instead, Envy is built from scratch to be an ergonomic modal editing system without any legacy baggage.

Where applicable, Envy's design choices seek to avoid problems associated with Vim and its descendants. Envy = N.V. = Not Vim. Unlike Vim/vim-mode, Envy

Envy offers a much smaller set of operations than Vim, but the easy accessibility of those operations and their tight integration with Atom's editing model means they can be used to their fullest, making Atom+Envy a competitive alternative to established modal text editors.

from the command line or search for in Atom's Install Packages settings screen and click the Install button on the package card.

Vim's default keymap is largely based on mnemonic abbreviations, that is, the letter pressed is found in the English name for the action performed. For example, in Vim, and move the cursor to the beginning and end of the word, respectively.

By contrast, Envy's keymap is based on the location of keys on the keyboard. The keyboard is divided into connected groups of keys that perform related actions in a consistent and predictable manner. Thus, on the default QWERTY layout, / move the selection to the previous/next bracket, / move it to the previous/next block (word, line or paragraph), and / move it to the previous/next match. For layouts other than QWERTY, patches are provided that produce the same key arrangement.

enters Envy mode and leaves it. In Envy mode, this keymap applies:

A detailed listing of all commands and their mapping follows. Note that the Key column shows the label of the letter key in the QWERTY keyboard layout, which may be different in another layout (but the physical position of the key is the same across all layouts).

Supported bracket pairs include all pairs defined by the bracket-matcher Atom core package.

In Envy, a block is either

Envy's keymap consists exclusively of letters. As the shapes and positions of the letter keys are identical for all standard keyboards (as opposed to, say, the and left keys), it is possible to achieve exactly the same Envy mode layout regardless of the keyboard layout used.

The only thing needed is to swap the bindings for any letter keys that in the local keyboard layout are rearranged compared to Envy's default layout (QWERTY). Most regional layouts have only minor rearrangements, and the necessary changes can be easily achieved by adding a "patch" to Atom's .

QWERTZ keyboard layouts are used mainly in the German-speaking world and in parts of Eastern Europe. As far as letter keys go, QWERTZ differs from QWERTY only in that and are exchanged, so the following will make Envy use its default positional arrangement on a QWERTZ keyboard:

AZERTY is the predominant keyboard layout in France, and is also used by French speakers in Belgium and some other countries. Compared to QWERTY, it swaps and , and , and has / in place of , giving rise to this patch:

Contributors are always welcome. However, please file an issue describing what you intend to add before opening a pull request, especially for new features! I have a clear vision of what I want (and do not want) Envy to be, so discussing potential additions might help you avoid duplication and wasted work.

By contributing, you agree to release your changes under the same license as the rest of the project (see below).

Released under the terms of the MIT License|||

envy - Text editing supercharger