Artificial Intelligence and the Growing Importance of Soft Skills

One of the major promises of AI is freeing people from mindless tasks, so they can do more meaningful work. When we’re not writing posts about AI, we’re building Journal to help you see and search your private work information, all in one place. Get Early Access Quick note before you dive in: This post (largely based on recent McKinsey Global Institute and Executive Office of the President reports) includes some doom and gloom about the negative impacts artificial intelligence may have on your life and career. The last thing I want is for you to leave feeling freaked out, so try reading to the end, where I discuss the potential AI has to change your work for the better. If you can’t make it that far, save it for later or share it with a friend so you remember to read it the next time you hear about AI or automation in the news. Either way, you’re taking a step towards preparing yourself and a friend to be more successful in the future. You rock! How to Use this Post By now you probably know that artificial intelligence has the potential to change every single one of our jobs and industries. In some cases, AI will be used to completely eliminate certain jobs. In others, it will only change how they’re done or how in-demand they are. And in other cases, it will pave the way for new jobs to be created — including those that none of us can yet imagine. The goal of this post is to help you understand what artificial intelligence is, and the jobs & aspects of work most likely to be automated by AI, so you know how to position yourself for success in the near future. WTF Is AI: A lot of confusion surrounds the definition of artificial intelligence, its domains, types, and techniques. Thanks to Samiur Rahman and Avi Eisenberger, you’ll find the relevant terms defined below. How AI Will Automate Certain Jobs Out of Existence: Every week, multiple articles are written about the jobs that are being killed off by automation. I give examples of the skills that will be easiest for AI to automate in the short term, and some of the industries where impacts will be felt. How to Thrive in an Automated Workplace: I break out the activities that are unlikely to be automated within the next few decades (and worth getting good at), the amazingly positive impacts AI will have on the future, and what it all might mean for you. Easter Egg: If I gave up the secret here it wouldn’t be an easter egg. Keep reading ;) If you're on your computer, click one of the images below to jump to a section or keep reading!

AI-driven automation won’t only be felt in faraway truck yards, but also in the office building you’re likely sitting in right now. Every year, knowledge workers spend at least 600 million human hours searching for and gathering information, an activity that a machine can do better (faster and more efficiently). We now have a methodology to automate people in these [white collar] roles. What this means is that if I have a company, I may not fire people — companies tend to try to minimize firings. But I may dramatically slow the rate at which I hire new people and instead invest in automation. Ultimately, this leads to fewer job opportunities in the long term in these areas. — Jack Clark, OpenAI You can imagine the excitement of a manager who is told that narrow AI makes it possible for software to show her salespeople the information they need, improving their productivity by allowing them to instead spend those 2 hours they lose every day searching, to an activity that is both far more valuable for the business and for narrow AI software to automate — helping a new customer to have a better experience with the product they’re being convinced to pay for. Like the radiologist whose job has layers beyond spotting abnormalities in a medical image, the salesperson (and many other types of knowledge workers) is more than her ability to track down information. Therefore, she’s more likely to be complemented by AI than automated — more on this in the next section. Demand for analysts for example, who are tasked primarily with conducting research, however will likely shrink as a “blend of machine learning algorithms and distributed labor” can replace much of their work. (“Machine Intelligence Will Let Us All Work Like CEOs”) Most knowledge workers spend less than half of their time doing things they’re really good at (i.e., what they’ve been hired to do). The rest is spent doing research, arranging meetings, coordinating with other people, and performing other minutia of office life. These tasks could be done just as well by a machine intelligence service. — Shivon Zilis, Bloomberg Beta The truth is, impacts of AI-driven automation will be both positive and negative. While some jobs are particularly susceptible to being fully automated and not having any need for a human in the loop, it’s more likely that specific activities will be automated, without taking the rest of the job with it. Only time will tell if our society will find a way to employ the people who suffer most from automation. It’s not worth devoting time and energy to mastering the above activities. AI-software will be better than most humans it in the very near future. A better use of your time would be to work on the skills below, ones that will be highly complementary to the advancements made possible by AI. And what are those skills, you ask? How to Thrive in An Automated Workplace The introduction of AI enabled technologies into our work will change all of our jobs and industries, but tomorrow’s most effective individuals won’t be very different than today’s. She will bring new ideas to the table, communicate effectively throughout and organization, use logical reasoning to be more convincing, and navigate the social and emotional waters of the company. While AI will be able to recognize known patterns, navigate autonomously, gather information and move objects, it won’t be able to think creatively, empathize, or logically reason and solve problems: a successful employee will. Candidly, guidance in this section will be most helpful for knowledge workers who are fortunate enough to find themselves in the positions that already pay a premium for thinking. No one can predict all of the ways that narrow AI will change knowledge work. To position oneself to be augmented, rather than replaced by AI, one should embrace the benefits of AI enabled technology and invest in the “soft” skills that will empower her to stand out as an adaptable, personable and multi-faceted employee. For many, these skills will be difficult to develop. However, they are worth building now, as they are unlikely to reach median level human performance before 2040 (“Harnessing Automation for a Future that Works”). Those who do develop the skills will be complementary to the new AI-powered technologies that are guaranteed to arrive in our workplace in the next few weeks, months and years.|||

By now you probably know that artificial intelligence has the potential to change every single one of our jobs and industries. In some cases, AI will be used to completely eliminate certain jobs. In…