Tablo is a new home for publishing that believes in giving everyone the opportunity to share their story. We've created an online platform where any author can publish their writing, connect with a global audience of readers, and find new possibilities for their work. Authors in over 150 countries write and publish stories on Tablo. You can write on any device (including the web), online and offline, and connect directly with a passionate audience of readers. Readers use Tablo to discover great free books. You can read stories from bestselling and breakout authors in the genres you love. At the heart of Tablo is human curation. Our editors uncover and promote the best upcoming talent on Tablo, so you can trust that the stories we recommend are bestsellers in the making. You can join a growing list of local libraries and publishers to meet experts and access amazing opportunities for your work. Writing and reading Communities help you meet and work with people around the world who share the same writing passions as you. There's a home for everything on Tablo, from Thrillers to LGBT+, all lead by passionate Tablo members. We think it's awesome, but naturally we're a little bias. Here's what other people have to say: "Tablo could well be the next Vine or YouTube for writers." - Matt Beechee, Startup Daily "A superior design aesthetic and a friction-free way to publish" - John Biggs, TechCrunch "Honestly, Tablo is like Wattpad for cool kids ;)" - Sabrina Bingle ***** That's pretty much it. We've tried to create the best home in the world for passionate writers and readers. A world of love, mystery, fantasy, horror, discovery and adventure awaits you :)

We've found and fixed a few bugs that snuck in with our big update. We'll be bringing more new goodness (including some amazing classics and collections) in the coming weeks. Thanks for enjoying Tablo.

---

Welcome to the new Tablo. This update introduces a brand new book browsing interface. We show you opening lines and synopses and a left or right swipe will let you build up a list of books to read. It's an incredibly fun way to browse, and a really effective way to surface new books.



The new Tablo is all about the reading experience. We're curating collections of stories, from great classics to upcoming novels, and sharing them with you for you to enjoy. It's easier than ever to find something new to read.



The browsing and reading interface is all new. You'll barely recognise it, but it still feels Tablo familiar. Book covers are more prominent than ever, interacting with a book is seamless, and there's even a new typeface (It's called Dante. It's lovely.)



This update also brings even more support to the iPad. Most people use Tablo on their phone, but we've designed this new interface from the ground up to suit a bigger screen.



If you like the new Tablo, please give us a quick review and rating on the App Store. We've been working super hard on these new updates, and we can't wait to see what you think :)|||

Read reviews, compare customer ratings, see screenshots, and learn more about Tablo - Read & Write Free Stories. Download Tablo - Read & Write Free Stories and enjoy it on your iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.