A few weeks ago I got an email, someone was kind enough to give me a heads up that there was someone out there doing embroidery work that looks a lot like my Minipops. And that this someone had their work featured in the T magazine section of the New York Times. I clicked. And this is what I found.

I had a look around the Internet and found the below images on another article, where my influence is mentioned. Seems like someone thought they could copy my Minipops, and then when she had exhausted that resource, continue to copy my style. My Minipops in the left column, her work on the right.

So I emailed her. In her reply she acknowledged my influence, told me that she mentioned my influence to the Times, and that I am mentioned on her Web site (which I’ve had a good long look at, and can’t find that mention*), but went on to say that she comes “from the school of thinking that “art cannot be created or destroyed, only remixed.”” Which is convenient, isn’t it? Very convenient that your school of thinking allows you to piggyback off my idea, my work, my hours and hours and thousands of hours to get yourself a sugary write-up in the New York bloody Times and exhibitions in New York.

I wrote an email to the public editor of the NY Times. Someone else had also done that. They addressed the issue. Saving you a click, here’s what they wrote:

I realise I am biased in this matter, but the reasoning there is weak as fuck. The writer finds her art “charming” and she is “gaining momentum and attention.” Those are not good reasons. Well, they are, but they’re bad good reasons. It also seems like the artist, having told me she mentioned my influence, didn’t do that.

The New York gallery showing her work put a post about the NY Times piece on their Instagram. After someone else left a comment about this issue, they described my work as “her inspiration spring board.” I replied:

I had a look the next day to see if there were any other comments, but the post on their Instagram had been deleted. Interesting…

The artist herself has turned off the comments section on any of her Instagram posts, too, that had comments left by other people about this particular topic.

Since then, I received an unsolicited second email from the artist. She is “aware of a vehement negative reaction to the piece that the NYT T/style magazine has just run about me,” and that it “must stem from a misunderstanding.”

Oh good, well at least it was only a misunderstanding, eh? And, apparently, “[i]f anything, it is an homage to your work.” She goes on to tell me other 8-bit imagery like “Nintendo, Atari” have also had an influence, which seems weird considering they all look like my drawings not like “Nintendo, Atari” stuff. In her more recent work she often puts characters next to each other and in the email seems to feel like this means she is doing something different.

There’s a lot more waffling on, self-justification. Y’know, I can understand this. It must be a pebble in the shoe of happiness to have this issue come up at this moment in your career. Doing some mental gymnastics to free yourself of guilt is what lots of us do at various points in our lives.

She finished her email like so:

“Never have I thought that what I was doing (beyond my first exploratory quilt) was anywhere near copying you. If, beyond this misunderstanding over images of this quilt, you still feel that I have copied you, such feelings are unmerited and unfortunate.”

So there we go, it was all a misunderstanding. It’s not an apology, so it can’t be considered a non-apology apology. But it’s along those lines, innit? Me feeling angry and annoyed by this person’s work is “unmerited and unfortunate.” Aw, well, if that’s how you feel, I’ll just stop, right? That’s not how this works.

So, yes, here we are. A heads up for you that this exists and I’m not cool with it. I feel like this person has created a career for herself off the back of my work. She may no longer be actively copying my work, but she’s still ripping the style, and would never have got to that place had it not been for copying my work in the first place. It feels wrong. I’m not happy about it. And I wanna be that pebble in her shoe. Minipops, these tiny pixelly versions of famous people, are mine. I’m proud of them and the many hours I put into them.

And for meta commentary, here’s a pixel drawing of an embroidered version of a pixel self portrait.

The song in my head when I woke up this morning

 Best Song Ever by One Direction

On this day

 Old drawings, 28 April 2011|||

