This tutorial presents ansible step-by-step. You'll need to have a (virtual or physical) machine to act as an ansible node. A vagrant environment is provided for going through this tutorial.

Ansible is a configuration management software that let's you control and configure nodes from another machine. What makes it different from other management software is that ansible uses (potentially existing) SSH infrastructure, while others (chef, puppet, ...) need a specific PKI infrastructure to be set-up.

Ansible also emphasises push mode, where configuration is pushed from a master machine (a master machine is only a machine where you can SSH to nodes from) to nodes, while most other CM typically do it the other way around (nodes pull their config at times from a master machine).

This mode is really interesting since you do not need to have a 'publicly' accessible 'master' to be able to configure remote nodes: it's the nodes that need to be accessible (we'll see later that 'hidden' nodes can pull their configuration too!), and most of the time they are.

You need the following python modules on your machine (the machine you run ansible on)

We're also assuming you have a keypair in your ~/.ssh directory.

Ansible devel branch is always usable, so we'll run straight from a git checkout. You might need to install git for this ( on Debian/Ubuntu).

At this point, we can load the ansible environment:

When running from an installed package, this is absolutely not necessary. If you prefer running from a debian package ansible, provides a to build it. You need a few packages to build the deb:

We'll assume you're using the deb packages in the rest of this tutorial.

It's highly recommended to use Vagrant to follow this tutorial. If you don't have it already, setting up should be quite easy and is described in step-00/README.md.

If you wish to proceed without Vagrant (not recommended!), go straight to step-01/README.md.

Just in case you want to skip to a specific step, here is a topic table of contents.

Thanks to all people who have contributed to this tutorial:

I've been using Ansible almost since it's birth, but I learned a lot in the process of writing it. If you want to jump in, it's a great way to learn, feel free to add your contributions.

The chapters being written live in the writing branch.

If you have ideas on topics that would require a chapter, please open a PR.

I'm also open on pairing for writing chapters. Drop me a note if you're interested.

If you make changes or add chapters, please fill the file and run the tests ( ). See the file for (a bit) more information.

When adding a new chapter (e.g. ), please issue:

For typos, grammar, etc... please send a PR for the master branch directly.|||

ansible-tutorial: