In recent years we face more uncertainty with the advancement of AI technology. New research frontiers are bringing challenges to higher education, disruptions to commercial industries, and creating a society that nervously watches out for technological unemployment.

What can we expect? — — There is not a single lab, university, company, or government institution that can accurately describe where we are at the moment, let alone having to make any predictions.

When Professor Steve Mann was a student at MIT in the 1980s, he was infatuated by something different that could provide an alternative to the binary opposite world of humans versus machines: wearable computing.

Before enrolling in MIT, Mann played with wearable helmet gadgets in the 1970s. He then started wearing the self-designed “EyeTap Digital Eye Glass” in 1999, thirteen years before the release of Google Glass, a product which he claims to be “much less ambitious than the computer-mediated vision systems I constructed decades ago.” Throughout his career, Mann developed his idea systematically, combining theory with application, experiments, and real-time simulations, coining what is called humanistic intelligence (HI).

In other words, humanistic intelligence (HI) is an umbrella term (similar to artificial intelligence (AI)) that steers the research and development of wearable computing. The HI system puts humans in the computing feedback loop alongside computers, where the two agents work together to enhance system performance.

The computer’s primary task is no longer computing, but to become an integrated part of its user. And Kurzweil, Minsky, and Mann tell us that “when a wearable computer embodies HI and becomes so technologically advanced that its intelligence matches our own biological brain, something much more powerful emerges from this synergy that gives rise to superhuman intelligence within the single ‘cyborg’ being.”

Why would any one of us want to merge with a computer?

This question can be answered in various ways. One proposition is that we need to start measure and record ourselves, enhance our physical and mental performance in order to navigate the increasing complexity of a global, hyperlinked world.

This sounds like climbing onto the next rung of the evolutionary ladder.

Instead of being scared by the idea that artificial general intelligence will eliminate all jobs, or that a superintelligence will emerge as the new god, pioneer researchers believe that human plus machine is the way to go.|||

In recent years we face more uncertainty with the advancement of AI technology. New research frontiers are bringing challenges to higher education, disruptions to commercial industries, and creating…