Compound movements can be on the confusing side, and we are sure a lot of people actually wonder, what is a compound movement?

A compound movement is defined as an exercise that that engages two or more different joints that work multiple muscle groups at one time.

One of the best things about compound movements is, it works more muscle groups at one time which is more efficient when it comes to building strength and hypertrophy. Fort those that don't know what hypertrophy is, it is the increase in muscle size. Some say that adding isolation exercises to compound movements will make you stronger, and bigger. At FastFit we decided to do our own research to see what we could find on this, and what we found may surprise you.

We found a study that was done at a University in Brazil, that took 29 untrained young men who participated in a 10 week training session. These young men were divided into two groups. One group was performing solely compound movement exercises, while the second group performed both compound movement and isolation exercises. Before the training was done they measured the muscle thickness with an ultrasound to compare the results after.

After the 10 week program was complete they did another ultrasound on the muscle thickness and saw that there was a significant increase in muscle thickness. However, comparing the two groups there was a very slight difference.

The group that performed only compound movements saw a 6.5% increase in muscle thickness. The groups that performed compound movements plus isolation exercises saw a 7.05% increase in muscle thickness. The researchers found that adding isolation exercises to your compound movement program resulted in no added benefits.

We hope this has helped to clarify for those who thought to add isolation exercises to their compound movement routine. There really isn't any added benefits in doing so, especially if you are crunched with time.

If you like what we are doing please follow us on Instagram. Don't forget to support us by checking out our original FastFit tee!|||

Compound movements can be on the confusing side, and we are sure a lot of people actually wonder, what is a compound movement? A compound movement is defined as