Every idea is created in the state of total inspiration. Though inspiration takes only 10% in entrepreneurs’ life, startupers cannot create something big without it.

Do you know why I am so much inspired about startups? Because of people standing behind them. Only inspired and motivated people are creators. All the others are consumers.

I was so inspired to start this blog that decided to devote an article to this topic and tell more about the importance of inspiration and where you can get it.

Look around, listen carefully and find something that brings you pleasure, reminds of positive moments. It can be your favorite song, interesting article or a beautiful picture on the wall. All these things bring us inspiration.

I love reading. I spend lots of time for reading books and blogs that inspire me.

And you know what?

It is not only inspiration I get from reading, but also knowledge I can use for my own business projects.

For example, the book Blue Ocean Strategy I described earlier, gave me a deep understanding of some important business processes.

Everyone needs a person, let me call him a mentor, who is a true expert in his sphere and inspires you to move ahead. His success is a motivation for you. His mistakes teach you how to act. Try to find him.

This mentor can be your friend John or a founder of Alibaba group Jack Ma. It doesn’t really matter. Just follow his habits, read articles about this person, listen to podcasts with him and you will get your dose of inspiration.

Sometimes we need to stay one-to-one with our thoughts and just relax. Meditation and concentration on your inner state will help to take a fresh breath and recharge your batteries.

Have you ever practiced to get rid of 5 things every month? I mean just take all that trash and throw it away.

When one door closes, another one opens.

Thus, when you throw away 5 unused things from your home and life, new things come into it. It really works! Just try it and you’ll be surprised.

I cannot live without inspiration. I try to find it in details and moments. Wall décor is a brilliant example of how you can bring inspiration to your space. It doesn’t matter if this place is your home or office.

I love minimalism in everything. For example, my minimalist home interior is designed in clean and white colors. My parents consider that such style is not homey enough, but I have the just the opposite opinion.

I need this atmosphere to feel relaxed. When my family was planning to move to our new home, I was a kind of interior designer and planned each and every detail. Clean design gives space for creativity and inspiration. And this style allows me to decorate space with different motivating posters which can be changed at any time.

Here is a free motivating art print for you to download and get inspiration today!

Find your own style and get inspiration on a regular basis.

I would be happy to know more about you. Feel free to share in comments how you get inspiration.|||

Have you ever practiced to get rid of 5 things every month? I mean just take all that trash and throw it away.