According to American Heart Association’s 2017 Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics Update, nearly 801,000 deaths in the US had cardiovascular disease as the underlying cause of death. That’s about 1 of every 3 deaths in the US [1]. Cardiovascular devices are used to diagnose and treat heart disease and related health problems [2]. The global cardiovascular devices market was valued at $40.05bn in 2016 and is expected to grow at a high rate in the coming years. These implants come with a hefty price tag and adding surgery and other hospital costs, can rip apart anybody’s savings hence many patients are unable to afford these implants [3][4]. If someone is paying a large sum of money for these implants, the quality and performance of these devices should be impeccable. These devices are tested both for biological and mechanical problems.

Talking about mechanical problems, these devices are susceptible to tribological problems like friction and wear. Below we will have a look on various friction and wear related issues related to these devices that can hamper their performance.

Ventricular assist devices: These are mechanical pumps that are used to direct blood away from damaged ventricle and provide proper blood flow to maintain blood circulation. These mechanical pumps contain metal bearings. Friction and wear of these bearings is common which results in reduced lifetime and overheating. This kind of failure can lead to ailments like Thrombosis (formation of a blood clot inside a blood vessel) and Haemolysis (rupture or destruction of red blood cells). [5][6]

As a solution to above problem, modern day pumps are now using magnetic bearings which do not have any mechanical contact, thereby reducing friction, wear, overheating, Thromobosis and Haemolysis [7]. In one of the research work carried out by Qian KX and co-workers [8], it has been found that use of rolling bearing instead of sliding bearings in rotary pumps reduces friction to about 1/15 of the sliding bearing. Also rollers made of ultra-high-molecular weight polythene has anti-wear property 8 times better than metal.

Apart from bearing, mechanical seals used in ventricular assist devices also suffers friction and wear. A mechanical seal in ventricular assist devices help in containing blood pressure and avoids leakage of blood. Koki Kanda and co-workers [9] studied the effect of surface texture on frictional properties of mechanical seals. Through their research they found that frictional properties of the mechanical seals were stabilized by creating small, dispersed concave features with wet blast fabrication, followed by coating with diamond-like carbon.

Stents and grafts: Stents are cylindrical metallic frames which are expanded at high pressure inside a blood vessel to keep the passageway open. On the other hand, Grafts are tubes that are shaped like blood vessels. These you used to bypass a blockage or defect entirely by creating an alternate vessel for your blood to flow through, rather than try and fix it [10]. The material used for stents and grafts should have low friction, wear and corrosion characteristics as they are in continuous contact with the soft tissues in the region and the endothelial cell layer.

Nitinol which is a Nickel Titanium allow is generally used to manufacture stents. Characteristics such as super-elasticity, shape memory effect, corrosion resistant, low friction and wear makes it a prime choice. Stents can also be coated with biocompatible coatings or polymer-free coatings which can also help achieve low friction and wear. UHMWPE (Ultra high molecular weight polyethylene) and ePTFE (Expanded PTFE) are the most preferred graft materials. Both UHMWPE and ePTFE have low coefficient of friction and anti-wear capabilities. [11][12][13]

Artificial heart valves: An artificial heart valve is a device implanted in the heart of a patient to replace a malfunctioning natural valve. Mechanical heart valves (MHV) are commonly used artificial heart valves. The material used for manufacturing of MHVs should be strong, durable, low friction and wear resistant. In the absence of these qualities, the MHV’s material can give rise to several other diseases. [14]

Pyrolytic Carbon or PyC is a fatigue resistant, biocompatible, durable material which is normally used for manufacturing MHVs. Diamond-like carbon (DLC) is an attractive wear-resistant coatings for MHVs. Biocompatibility and excellent tribological properties of DLC coating provide long durability to MHV’s material. [15]|||

According to American Heart Association’s 2017 Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics Update, nearly 801,000 deaths in the US had cardiovascular disease as...