Every once in a while I dump the links that land in my bookmarks. I find these links mostly through HN or Reddit, or somewhere else on the web.

My focus is mostly on "fun things", from web-development tools, machine learning to ethereum. Those are the areas of interest for me. The tools are handpicked, of course, what else.

Here are the links I found interesting since February 2017:

All images and videos on Pixabay are released free of copyrights under Creative Commons CC0. You may download, modify, distribute, and use them royalty free for anything you like, even in commercial applications. Attribution is not required. Everybody should know this by now, next to https://unsplash.com/

A collaboration tool on design. Never tried it, still found it interesting. Here's a screenshot: 



Find the perfect color scheme. Nothing to add here

Just click it. It's pretty cool! 



New free SVG editor! Designed to allow anyone to customize Vecteezy content before they download it, or create beautiful vector designs from scratch directly in your browser.

Who knows http://canva.com feels probably pretty familiar with this one :)

A collection of repeatable SVG background patterns for you to use on your web projects.

Yet another icon set. Next to bootstrap, fontawesome and all the others. Can't get enough of them...

An interesting writeup about the "perfect design for a search box". I did know a search box can be more complex than it looks like, but this exceeds everything I could imagine...

It's what the title says... 



Practical Color Theory for People Who Code. Interesting thing this.

Colormind can extract color palettes from images. Instead of finding the most representative colors, it aims to find good colors that work together in a color palette.

cf-ui is a set of packages used to build UIs at Cloudflare using projects such as React, Fela, Lerna and more.

Fast 3kB alternative to React with the same ES6 API.

HTML cleanup tool. Reduces a HTML document (or fragment) to basic HTML tags and attributes.

Markdown Presentations For Everyone on GitHub, GitLab and Bitbucket

30-second slideshows for hacker. Yep - kind'of the same as above, just different.

Everything you need to build and grow your startup. Reviews and advice you can trust from leading founders.

Redash was built to allow fast and easy access to billions of records, that we process and collect using Amazon Redshift ("petabyte scale data warehouse" that "speaks" PostgreSQL). Today Redash has support for querying multiple databases, including: Redshift, Google BigQuery, PostgreSQL, MySQL, Graphite, Presto, Google Spreadsheets, Cloudera Impala, Hive and custom scripts.

An alternative to git-filter-branch. The BFG is a simpler, faster alternative to git-filter-branch for cleansing bad data out of your Git repository history: Removing Crazy Big Files and Removing Passwords, Credentials & other Private data

A set of tools written in Python 3 with the aim to extract tabular data from (OCR-processed) PDF files. Before these files can be processed they need to be converted to XML files in pdf2xml format.

Cross-browser storage for all use cases.

This application will trace in real-time all File I/O, TCP IP, ALPC and RPC operations performed by a given process. It works on Windows 7+ and requires .NET 4.5.2+. 



Convox is the cloud solution you would have built. Interesting software - never tried it, but it's on my shortlist.

Simple, Composable, Open Source ETL. I recently investigated ETL tools for a task. So I ran across this. Here is the HN Comment: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=13763681

Press a button to send a call to your phone. Apologize sincerely as you pick it up. Then watch them walk away.

Blackbird Bitcoin Arbitrage is a C++ trading system that does automatic long/short arbitrage between Bitcoin exchanges.

Recall what you did on the last working day. Psst! or be nosy and find what someone else in your team did ;-) 



Create awesome mobile-friendly websites! No coding and free. And push it to github pages.

SOGo is a fully supported and trusted groupware server with a focus on scalability and open standards. SOGo is released under the GNU GPL/LGPL v2 and above.

A second number for your phone. Currently works only in Austria.

Time tracking and invoicing you can host anywhere. Full export support in multiple formats and easily extensible.

Stack - window manager. Must have tool for large screens or multiple monitors. Haven't tried it, but it looks cool.

A Blog/CMS in node. Looks interesting, haven't tried it. note to myself: write a blog-post about the most popular 100 CMS/Blogs

An interesting writeup. Even better: The list of tools at the end of the article ;)

A writeup from Cushion about their running costs. Conveniently also about the tools they are using. I found it deeply insightful.

A great resource if you are looking for a thorough design guide for APIs.

a huge list of places where you can post your brand new startup!

a fancy version of a notepad. I found it interesting. Thought to pre-order it. Now I am just lurking and waiting until I find the right time&mood to buy one.

Don't. Just. DO. NOT. CLICK! You'll loose the rest of the day!|||

