The AI Optify data team writes about topics that we think machine learning enthusiasts will love. AI Optify has affiliate partnerships so we may get a share of the revenue from your purchase.- For this post, we have scraped various signals (e.g. online reviews/ratings, covered topics, author influence in the field, year of publication, social media mentions etc.) from web for more than 30's Deep Learning & Neural Networks books. We have fed all above signals to a trained Machine Learning algorithm to compute a score for each book and rank the top books.

The readers will love our list because it is Data-Driven & Objective. Enjoy the list:

A step-by-step gentle journey through the mathematics of neural networks, and making your own using the Python computer language. Neural networks are a key element of deep learning and artificial intelligence, which today is capable of some truly impressive feats. Yet too few really understand how neural networks actually work. This guide will take you on a fun and unhurried journey, starting from very simple ideas, and gradually building up an understanding of how neural networks work.

This book, by the authors of the Neural Network Toolbox for MATLAB, provides a clear and detailed coverage of fundamental neural network architectures and learning rules. In it, the authors emphasize a coherent presentation of the principal neural networks, methods for training them and their applications to practical problems. Features Extensive coverage of training methods for both feedforward networks (including multilayer and radial basis networks) and recurrent networks.

This is the first comprehensive treatment of feed-forward neural networks from the perspective of statistical pattern recognition. After introducing the basic concepts, the book examines techniques for modeling probability density functions and the properties and merits of the multi-layer perceptron and radial basis function network models. Also covered are various forms of error functions, principal algorithms for error function minimalization, learning and generalization in neural networks, and Bayesian techniques and their applications.

For graduate-level neural network courses offered in the departments of Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Computer Science. Renowned for its thoroughness and readability, this well-organized and completely up-to-date text remains the most comprehensive treatment of neural networks from an engineering perspective. Thoroughly revised.

With the reinvigoration of neural networks in the 2000s, deep learning has become an extremely active area of research that is paving the way for modern machine learning. This book uses exposition and examples to help you understand major concepts in this complicated field. Deep learning is still a pretty complex and difficult subject to grasp. If you have a basic understanding of what machine learning is, have familiarity with the Python programming language, and have some mathematical background with calculus, this book will help you get started.

Artificial neural networks are nonlinear mapping systems whose structure is loosely based on principles observed in the nervous systems of humans and animals. The basic idea is that massive systems of simple units linked together in appropriate ways can generate many complex and interesting behaviors. This book focuses on the subset of feedforward artificial neural networks called multilayer perceptrons (MLP). These are the mostly widely used neural networks, with applications as diverse as finance (forecasting), manufacturing (process control), and science (speech and image recognition).

As book review editor of the IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, Mohamad Hassoun has had the opportunity to assess the multitude of books on artificial neural networks that have appeared in recent years. Now, in Fundamentals of Artificial Neural Networks, he provides the first systematic account of artificial neural network paradigms by identifying clearly the fundamental concepts and major methodologies underlying most of the current theory and practice employed by neural network researchers. Such a systematic and unified treatment, although sadly lacking in most recent texts on neural networks, makes the subject more accessible to students and practitioners.

Looking for one central source where you can learn key findings on machine learning? Deep Learning: A Practitioner's Approach provides developers and data scientists with the most practical information available on the subject, including deep learning theory, best practices, and use cases. Authors Adam Gibson and Josh Patterson present the latest relevant papers and techniques in a non­academic manner, and implement the core mathematics in their DL4J library. If you work in the embedded, desktop, and big data/Hadoop spaces and really want to understand deep learning, this is your book.|||

Top 9 Deep Learning and Neural Networks Books