I generally find myself happy. I like my everyday. I like my job, I like my tiny tiny apartment and spending time outside. Things go well, most days. And then they don’t. They really fucking don’t. This seems to happen more often now, at least physically, then it used to.

I still live under the delusion that if I take care of myself, my body will be invincible. Not immoral, but it will respond and overcome all challenges within normal limits. This concept is becoming harder and harder to cling to emotionally as I seem to explode every year or so at this point in my life. My bones are strong, my tendons seem to be getting a touch weaker or more likely, less flexible, every year.

Last week, I tore my left pinky tendon. It’s called a mallet finger. It looks like a droopy finger tip. I didn’t hurt, but it doesn’t work. My body needs 8 weeks and a splint to fix it. It’s more annoying than anything. It slows me down and tenses me up. This adds to my growing list of torn tendons and body parts including but not limited to ACL and labrum (shoulder) and too many muscles to list. Come on body, get it together.

I am angry. I am sad. I am annoyed. I am frustrated. I am going to have to tell the same story like 90 times to explain this to friends, family and random people who enter my life. Maybe I need to come up with a funnier or more unique story than I have now?

That’s right. I have based my life personally and professionally around health and I am telling you it’s trying to fight you, like all the time. Health is aggressive and moody and short sighted and LOUD! Your body makes, creates and shoots out noises all day, and that is healthy! We aren’t even considering how much louder and grittier health can be when you feel low. Sick or broken or blah! Health is a child that will never leave you alone, never wants to sit quietly and is constantly poking you in the side. It wants to annoy you, it wants to provoke you. BECAUSE — it needs you to respond.

Health doesn’t work without action. It might be small, tiny actions, but actions none the less. My stomach growls, I need to eat. Maybe not at this exact moment, but at some point. It’s crying out from inside of you. Health is starting to sound a bit like an alien to me. Coughing, sneezing, peeing — this is all part of the health experience. You are spending hours actively engaging with your health and none of that ensures you will be healthy. Health is so needy. What should we do about it?

Health neediness is balanced by one important thing, adaptation. Health is about adaptation. I can do all the things mentioned above on the go, I am not confined by my health. I can work with torn and exploded tendons (partly via the support of modern day medicine). This balance creates the flexibility and the limits of my self exploration. Sometimes it’s brilliant and elegant. Sometimes when I push on my health, it will push back. This means I get tired or sick or agitated and from time to time my body breaks.

I am presented with a conundrum to keep pushing it and know I might break or live within the confines that I know work (at least for now). Every other person, friend, and parent will tell you to slow down. I am not that person and I don’t give that type of advice. I believe health isn’t a test of age or athleticism or even intellect. It’s a test of lifestyle. I want my health lifestyle to continue to expand and grow and adapt. This means there are days when I will get thrown down or beaten up and fail in every aspect of my health. Today I am broken, I tested a limit and I failed. Tomorrow, I have a new limit to test to see how my health will adapt to what’s next.

You might say I should stop because I keep breaking. I would say I need to keep going because I am only just learning how adaptable I can be.

AND CLICK THAT GREEN HEART BELOW ↓ IF YOU LIKED OUR POST

Corevity | A Health Community for Millennials. A health community of beautiful people, images and experiences. We know you want to be healthy. We want to help. Coming spring 2017. Join our exclusive community.|||

I generally find myself happy. I like my everyday. I like my job, I like my tiny tiny apartment and spending time outside. Things go well, most days. And then they don’t. They really fucking don’t…