Welcome to my first Machine Learning project!

This post will be focused on solving the real problem. We will try to predict location and daily quantity of 911 calls in US Montgomery County (PA). Such project could enable help & rescue teams, such as police, fire department and emergency medical services  to prepare for upcoming events and better plan their work.

The intro story is totally made up. I create the story to let you dive in into the problem and understand better how Machine Learning can help to solve real-life problems.

You are the Montgomery County Executive. Since the end of 2015, your 911 call center team started to collect data regarding 911 calls in your county. These data contain date, time, location and type of 911 event that occured.

You have promised county citizens that you will improve reaction time of your public safety teams, including fire department, emergency medical services and police. One of the options is to spend more money on new equipment and employ more people, bu the budget in this year is very tight. Also, your rescue team managers complain that people are overworked, and there are many of them that had no vacations for at least two years. So you are looking for another option.

Luckily, you have recently read an interesting article about Machine Learning algorithms that can aid people in making decisions. If your rescue teams could know in more details, where and when they are needed in 2017? That would allow them to plan their shifts better, decide when it is better time to repair their equipment and when they can plan their vacations

Finally, you decide to find a Machine Learning professional and ask him to find solution for your problem.

The solution is a Machine Learning Regression model. I have used the scikit-learn implementation of GradientBoostingRegressor as it returned the best results of all of the several regression algorithms I have tested for this problem.

As a result, we can predict the number of 911 calls (events) per each 8 hours in a given day and the general location, according to grid on a map. The model score (R2) is 0.81, so its goodness is significant, at least for our purpose which is really an emergency teams work  planning.

Please review the notebook below for details of the solution.

You can also reviev the Notebook on Github.|||

