We all have dreams, goals, and aspirations.

We put so much of our lives into the pursuit of these dreams. Our time, energy and resources.

It becomes our life’s work.

Life is a journey filled with valleys and peaks. But that’s what makes it meaningful. You can’t truly appreciate the good without experiencing the bad.

Throughout my journey, I’ve found that people spend too much time trying to avoid failure. We spend so much time planning, strategizing and practicing how not to lose. And in the process, we miss a profound lesson.

You only have to be right one time.

Listen, you can lose hundreds of times in life but it only takes one win to change your lives forever.

Look at many of the most successful people in the world for evidence.

Vera Wang didn’t make her first dress until she was 40. Before that, she failed to make the Olympic figure skating team. If that wasn’t enough, she also got snubbed for the Editor-In-Chief position at Vogue.

Stephen King is one of the most prolific writers ever. His books have sold over 350 million copies, many of which have been adapted into movies and TV shows.

But did you know that he worked as a janitor, gas pump attendant, and teacher? Or that he lived in a trailer?

His uber successful novel, Carrie, was rejected by over 30 publishers. King was so discouraged that he threw the manuscript in the garbage. His wife found it and encouraged him to keep pushing forward. That one extra try lead to Carrie getting accepted by a publishing house. The rest is history.

Oh, and King earned $400,000 from his paperback rights.

Michael Jordan got cut from his school’s varsity basketball team for being too short as a sophomore. Determined to prove his worth, Jordan dominated on the JV team. He grew four inches the next summer and averaged a triple-double before going to UNC.

He’s now considered the greatest basketball player ever.

What all these people have in common is their focus on the one time.

I promise if you focus on this one principle your entire life will change. I’m not telling you to do anything drastic or over the top. I’m simply offering that you change your focus.

Focusing on the one time helps to build better habits. It builds optimism, resilience, and consistency. It shifts your focus from product to process.

I don’t know any of the people I mentioned, but I can assure you each one of them feels more determined with every loss.

When I first realized this truth it blew my mind. I spent so much of my life being a perfectionist, so much of my life being robbed of the desires of my heart. I didn’t realize that by avoiding failure I was also avoiding success.

So you don’t have to know it all. You don’t have to be the most talented. You don’t have to have a bunch of money.

This may sound crazy, but to truly be a winner, you have to have a losing record at first.

Because it’s not about all the loses. It’s about the one time you get it right.

Remember, you’re one win away from the life of your dreams.|||

Focusing on the one time helps to build better habits. It builds optimism, resilience, and consistency. It shifts your focus from product to process.