Everybody who has ever had the honour of setting up a bachelor party, knows that this quest can be a fickle thing: Finding a date, a destination, housing, who comes when. A recipe for tons of emails or a quickly collapsing WhatsApp group.

This is the exact reason why we built JayPads. We wanted to end this endless mess of communication and seriously start getting things done in a group. All it took was building a product with basically zero friction and a slightly different concept to collaboration tools: JayPads add a second layer onto a group chat in which more permanent information can be stored, additionally JayPads do not require an App download or setting up an account, which makes them the perfect solution for planning a bachelor party.

So this goes to you, dear groomsmen:

1.Get all contacts. This is where you need to talk to the significant other. She will have a list of names the bachelor has given to her. Alternatively he has already given it to you.

2. Set up a JayPad. Think of it as a mix of WhatsApp group chat and polling features as well as Post-Its. This will serve as the central hub of organizing the bachelor party and it will save you tons of time. Start with a note of the contacts you collected.

3. Now that you have set up your JayPad and with it a sense of getting-things-done, you can invite the others. Just add them directly via invite function or share the URL via messenger or email.

4. Find a date. This is what normally is the most excruciating part of any party: Finding the best time to get together typically takes ages when done in a group chat or via a mailing list. Oftentimes a powermove is needed in order to finally set a time. Again, this step starts with the fiancée: Ask for at least four weekends which she should keep open for you guys to figure out a time and settle the planning.

With a JayPad you now just poll the different dates and availabilities and decide democratically on the best time.

5.Destination. A larger group of people most commonly develops diverse ideas on how to best spend this day or weekend. Again, the best bet is deciding democratically: A quick poll on where to go saves you tons of time and discussions.

6. Where to stay. Once you have set time and destination of your party, you should start getting housing organised. A simple poll of different housing options settles this question in a matter of clicks.

7. Store the important info. At every group chat for planning anything with friends in the history of mankind at some point someone asked for “that link to the voting for a date” or “which address are we heading to?” or… These information can and should be neatly put into a note, which then serves as a sticky post and summarises all relevant information on your bachelor party and helps you guys keeping sanity.

8. Activities. Most people seem to shoot for the classics: paintball, steak house, tabledance bar, rooftop bar. We’d recommend to not overdo it and leave room for spontaneous adventure. You know what made the movie Hangover great? It showed the immense power a group dynamic can unfold and how much fun memories this can bring.

The greatest bachelor party we ever had: Gather a group of men, some total strangers, to celebrate Cologne carnival. Get them into a train to a total non-carnival city. At non-carnival summertime. Plan nothing and just wait and see. Single greatest day for every participant.

9. Afterwards. Upload pictures using the file- / picture feature of JayPads (coming soon) or post a filesharing link. Make sure everybody shares their pictures. These are treasures which need to be conserved. After everybody has synced the pictures you can decide whether to delete the JayPad.

If you like this article — please make sure to give us a follow here on Medium as well as on Twitter and Facebook. We will publish articles on other use case scenarios as well as our general take on collaboration software and the journey of a young startup.|||

Everybody who has ever had the honour of setting up a bachelor party, knows that this quest can be a fickle thing: Finding a date, a destination, housing, who comes when. A recipe for tons of emails…