As sad rich kids started posting about getting scammed out of thousands of dollars by the “ultra luxury” Fyre Festival Friday morning, a lot of people started flaming Fyre ambassador Ja Rule on social media. Of course, Ja was not solely responsible for the schadenfreudic delight all of us not stranded on an island in the Bahamas are currently partaking in. Most of that falls on Fyre’s founder, Billy McFarland, a 25-year-old tech entrepreneur from Short Hills, New Jersey. And, as it turns out, these are not the first people McFarland has screwed out of a lot of money.

Like any born hustler, repackaging an idea that’s already out there and charging a premium for it seems to be at the heart of a lot of McFarland’s previous endeavors. His first startup, Spling, was a social networking site based around on sharing links with your friends, which you could then forward to Twitter or Facebook. Basically, it was an added, unnecessary step — a middle man — that somehow earned the company $400,000 in series A funding.

That carried over onto McFarland’s next project, Magnises. It started out as a credit card, or more accurately, the appearance of a luxury credit card. Magnises was marketed toward millennials who wanted to experience the opulence of having an American Express black card before they actually had the money to qualify for one. So the company would copy the information off your standard Chase Freedom card and transfer it to a hefty, black Magnises card that came with additional perks, just like a regular credit card (minus the actual credit line).

Again, a middle-man selling a lifestyle, not an actual product. Magnises was referral-only, allowing cardholders to feel as though they were in a special, exclusive club, and that’s eventually what it became. The company scrapped the card and turned it into an app, Magnises NOW, which combined the social networking of Spling and the perks of the Magnises card. Magnises NOW’s 40,000 members could party at the Magnises club in New York, get concierge services (you know, like Yelp, before there was Yelp), and buy hard-to-get tickets for popular broadway shows (you know, like TicketMaster). They could even book getaways on Magnises Air to concerts at exotic destinations (you know, like Orbitz). All for a $250 annual fee.

In other words, Magnises was charging people a premium for things they could for the most part get elsewhere for free.

Except the company regularly failed to deliver. A Business Insider piece from January of this year profiled a number of Magnises members who said their experience with the enterprise was less than deluxe. One reported a Broadway show they had purchased tickets for that had to be frequently rescheduled, often last minute. On the day of the show, the tickets had yet to come in the mail, were not at will call, and had to be hand-delivered at a nearby restaurant.

Another member reported purchasing two trips with the company, one to Miami and one to Cuba. The charge didn’t hit his account for months.

“When they did finally charge me, there were no details at all about the trip — where we were flying to exactly, where we would meet, or anything like that,” he said. “It was one week before the trip to Cuba, and I still had no information. But then we get an email that the trip was canceled because of Hurricane Matthew, and that it would be rescheduled for the same weekend as the Art Basel trip.”

The Miami trip canceled, the member eventually received a detailed itinerary for the Cuba trip, which was subsequently canceled the day before the flight. Around the same time, they charged his credit card for his annual renewal three months early. The member eventually got all their money back, a month later.

Magnises currently has a one and a half star review on Yelp.

So how did Fyre, the reason we’re talking about this jabroni at all, get up and running? We’ll let him explain it in his own words:

And somehow, people keep giving this guy money.|||

Turns out he has a lot of experience in the area.