To evaluate the opportunity of growing through partnerships I recommend walking through these questions:

Is the type of integration/partnership repeatable across multiple partners?  Or is this a one off deal?

2.  Is it meaningful at a macro and micro level?

If the partnership is repeatable, how many potential partners are out there?  How big are those partners?  On a macro scale, what is the size of the opportunity growing through partners?  On a micro scale, what is the size of the opportunity for each individual partner in relation to the effort?  The best growth people know where their time is best spent.

3.  Who is the ideal first customer?

Your first partners are the most important ones.  They will set the tone for each additional partner.   Don’t start with the largest partner in the market (unless you are going to do a one off exclusive).  The ideal first customer is someone that is large enough to provide meaningful impact and credibility, but small and flexible enough that they aren’t going to be a giant pain in the ass to deal with.

4.  Why shouldn’t they build it themselves?

In some way shape or form, the most common question you will get in the sales cycle is “Why wouldn’t I do this myself?”  Having a very clear answer (backed with data if possible) is essential.  You want to take this question off the table as soon as possible.  The answer typically involves:

a.  It would be too expensive form them to do it themselves

b.  It requires resources/expertise that they don’t have in house

c.  It would take too long for them to do on their own vs partnering with you

d.  You have proprietary content, technology, etc that they can’t get anywhere else

In the previous step of evaluating the market, you sized up how meaningful the growth opportunity was at a macro level.  On a micro scale, what is the size of the opportunity of the individual partner? Find a metric that helps estimate how much the partnership could produce.

At Viximo we looked at DAU of the site and DAU/MAU.  A site that had high MAU’s but low DAU’s (indicative of low engagement) produced poor results.

Do they have a culture that emphasizes design?  Engineering?  Customer Support?  You can typically find this out by poking around their site, reading press about the company, and reading their blog.  Certain cultures will likely be better fits for your product.   It is also an opportunity to tailor your pitch to match what they care about.

3.  What are they like to work with?

High maintenance?  Experimental?  Try to find other companies that have partnered with them in some way.  Contact them to find out what their experience has been so you know what you are in for.

1.  Tie Your Pitch To Clear Revenue or Savings Numbers

Your pitch needs to easily equate to things that lead to additional revenue or concrete savings for your partner.  Bottom line, revenue and cost savings closes deals.

The biggest mistake I see (and have made myself) is selling increased engagement.  You are doing yourself a dis-service.  Make it obvious for them and show how the increased engagement leads to more revenue.

After the initial pitch, the first thing a potential partner will ask you for are a few examples of customers.  This can be tough.  Potential partners will want to see data while none of your existing partners will want to share it.  Find a way to anonymize the data.  Make sure you have the right to use this data in pitches.

Every smart Business Development executive will ask for an exclusive.  You want to avoid any type of exclusive (even if it seems narrow) at all costs.   Exclusives are dangerous for two reasons:

b.  The can put hand cuffs on your company in a business environment where either party may evolve in a different direction.

4.  Try To Get Money Up Front

You want your partner to have a vested interest in the deal.  Otherwise the effort they commit to making it work will be minimal.  The best way to make sure they are committed to success of the partnership is get them to pay some money up front for the time you put in for the integration.

Put an integration deadline in the contract that forces a penalty for not completing the implementation by a certain date.  It is easy to lose momentum after a deal is signed.  But remember, a signed deal with no implementation is worth nothing.

The most critical part of B2B2C partnerships is the integration.  Deals are worthless unless properly integrated.  The integration period is also the first time teams from both sides will be working together. This time period early in the relationship sets the tone for the partnership.

1.  Make the integration As Easy As Possible

For every extra step required in integration, your chances of signing deals and implementing correctly goes way down.  Engineering time is highly guarded as the most constrained and valuable time of any technology company.  In addition most larger companies plan their roadmap months in advance.  Getting them to change it is extremely tough, nearly impossible, if it requires more then a couple days of engineering time.

To play my own devils advocate, easy integration also has a downside.  The easier it is to implement, the easier it is to rip your product out or test you against your competitors.  At Viximo during the social gaming boom, numerous CPA offer companies like OfferPal, Sometrics, Gambit, SuperRewards, etc.  came onto the market in a very short period of time.  Their products were very easy to implement and rip out.  Social game developers started to implement 3+ different solutions at once, A/B testing them against each other.  The CPA offer market was a race to the bottom as margins in the business started at 50% and dropped below 10% in a matter of months.

b.  The relationship gets started on the best terms possible

c.  Distraction to your core engineering team is minimized

At Viximo, we had one primary integration manager.  He was a cross between being technical enough to dive into code, and the skills to manage the business relationship.  At times we also put engineers on site at our partner’s offices as a way to help close deals, and place pressure on the integration time.

The biggest reason a partnership can fail is that there isn’t a clear understanding of what needs to be done in the integration to produce successful results.  Verbalizing details about an implementation is one thing.  But people interpret and envision words very differently.  Having visual mockups/comps give each party something more concrete to discuss and follow which ultimately decreases implementation time, and increases partner happiness.

Once the implementation is complete, the relationship has just begun.  Here are my recommendations to successfully manage the partnership on an ongoing basis:

There should be one point person for each party.  All communications should either flow or involve that point person otherwise there too much room for confusion.

Set up regular meetings with the point person on their side to review progress, goals, and metrics.  This accomplishes a few things:

a.  Provides a regular outlet for your partner in case they are unhappy with anything.  Worst case scenario is that the unhappiness builds to the point where they schedule the conversation to discuss.

b.  Allows both parties to batch communications, rather than sending/receiving them piece meal .

Face time still goes a long way.  Do some of your regular meetings in person.  Also spend time with the other party outside of work over dinner, drinks, etc.  Or, involve your partners in some of your company events.

Land and expand.  Don’t forget to continue up selling your partners to deeper integration, more co-promotions, higher visibility, etc.

Part of the UI going to change?  Hour of down time for updates?  Account manager changing?  All of this is going to happen to happen over time.  They might be small changes to you, but always make sure you communicate these changes ahead of time to your partners.   Surprises only have the potential to deteriorate the relationship.

I hope you learned something from this post.  Subscribe to my email list to get early access to my essays.|||

A lot of  startups have a hard time acquiring users from scratch.  One 
channel is to access the distribution of others through integrated 
partnerships.  The initial thinking always seems simple: "Partner XYZ has 
tens of millions of users!  If we can capture only [enter some really small 
percentage] that would be huge for us!" It all sounds great, but there are 
many hidden traps.