You may know that Domobile/Applock is a security application which is installed on your Android or iOS device and protects your other apps, photos, videos, notes, etc. with a password. It is one of the most popular security apps available on the Play Store, and Millions of people are using it (I am one of them). It protects your sensitive data from the other people who are using your device. Today, I will show you the tricks for how to unhide Applock or how to crack Applock without password. Read ahead for Applock open methods.

If you don’t know how to open Applock, you can simply uninstall it from the device. Many people use Applock to protect other applications on their device, but most of them forget to secure the Applock itself from uninstalling without password access. So, this is the easiest way if you want to crack or unhide Applock without password.

Remember this can be done only when the Applock itself is not protected by the administrative rights. You can also crack this by going to Settings > Security > Device Administrators. In that menu, find Applock and uncheck the button next to it.

Sometimes, user protects the settings menu too with the Applock password. So you can change the administrative rights or uninstall the applications from the settings. In such cases, you can use app drawer. Open the app drawer and find Applock in that. Long press on the application and then click on the ‘Uninstall’ button when prompted.

You can also take help from the third party applications like ‘Easy Uninstaller’ to uninstall Applock without password.

If you have the latest version of your Android or iOS device, then you need to give permission to Applock for usage access to make it work properly. If you do not select this option, then there are chances that the protected apps can be opened without entering the password.

So if you want to crack the Applock without password, then go to Settings > Security. Then go to ‘Apps with usage access’ menu under the ‘Advanced’ tab. Now uncheck the button next to Applock, and you can now crack the Applock and other protected applications without password.

Applock service run continuously in the background as like other apps which enable it to monitor the usage access of other apps. If you Force Stop the Applock, then you can access the Applock protected applications and can use Applock without password.

Remember this will work only if the device settings are not protected with Applock password.

This is the easiest way to open Applock or crack Applock. Just restart the phone and as soon as the phone starts, just click on the settings and Force Stop Applock and disable usage access. After that, you will be able to access the applications protected with the Applock password.

These all are the trick on how to unhide (crack) Applock without password. It is always fun to play around with other’s devices and hack their passwords to access their applications and notes. You can use some or all of the above tricks to open Applock and unhide(crack) Applock even if you do not have the access password.

But, it is always advisable not to breach into someone’s privacy and protect yours too. If you are also an Applock user and do not aware of these tricks, then set a password protection for your phone settings, enable usage access for Applock, and hide it from the home screen. The latest Applock version also provide advanced protection feature to make the administrative rights more secure.|||

