Obviously, people and brands share all types of content. The ones with a true identity — that know themselves, know to share things that fall in line with what they are representing. If you share, keep it relevant.

Sorry, if your site is about kittens and you share someone’s link to making roasted broccoli and vice versa, as Google, I would think both of you are just colluding with one another and I would deduct one house point from both of you for irrelevancy.

Part two of sharing is: Is your post being shared by related sites? Is your video on “The Future of Design,” being shared by designers and creative people? Is your article about “A Possible Cure for Cancer,” being shared by doctors and established institutions in the medical industry?

Having people share your content is something you have little control over. You could and should ask (or pay) the people above to link/share, but the best thing for The Algorithm is to have it shared organically. That means growing through word of mouth . And to do that, you start with quality content. (And a marketing budget helps spread the word.)

Quality content leads to popularity, which leads to sharing (also known as linking or backlinking). Who and how many people link/share your content, are SEO variables:

Google likes to provide search results that have value. Whether it’s a tutorial video, a funny article, or an amazing photo series, it’s possible to create something of quality that benefits your brand’s bottom line, and, benefits your audience. Win-win.

If your content isn’t doing one or more of these things, then why are you even trying? Start by creating something that provides value, lasting value. Not some “mission statement” page, not some “about us” page. Actual. Quality. Content. You can follow almost every point on this page to 100% accuracy, but if the quality isn’t there, then good luck to you.

Quality content needs to have value to your audience. Value can be many things. Does your content do any of the following:

You may have been told, “Content is King.” If you think about it you can make all the content you want, but it doesn’t automagically make it good. No, the real word here is quality. Quality is King . This concept should be clear and ingrained into your head, and should be the number one priority when creating content.

Crosslinking is simple and easy to implement. So do it.

I only have one caveat here: do not crosslink if you have empty content . i.e.: If you link your Facebook page to your Twitter page, but your Twitter profile doesn’t have any tweets, that is just bad UX. Make sure your platforms have content if you link them.

A simple way to show relevancy in your brand is through crosslinking. If you have accounts on several networks and want Google to know they are all related to you, link them together.

Write out an accurate and optimized meta description. This description tag allows Google to index your page accurately. It’s not always used, but it’s a factor. Do not mislead here (do not!). If you attempt to misdirect, it will count against you in search rankings. Because why? Because that’s what I would do.

In addition to keywords in your title, there is the meta description tag in your html code. These differ from meta tags. Google and most search engines to do not use meta tags for indexing (but they use it in some context).

As for length, there are no strict rules on how long or short a title should be. The title of your content should be as long as it needs to be (but don’t make it too long).

It’s not easy to get this trifecta. Don’t let this point hold you back from a good title, but do take it into consideration. Use keywords in your title that people are likely to search for.

One important set of keywords is the title of your content. The title has to accomplish multiple objectives:

Your choice of words and keywords on your page matters. Every. Single. Word. Filling your page with search terms just for the sake of filling it is not impactful nor helpful to Google (and you will get a deduction for deception, and you know I’m all for deducting house points).

Keywords, or search terms, are what Google uses to index your site. While keywords do not hold the same weight as they used to, they are still necessary.

The URL of this article is:

https://medium.com/@benjaminbannister/seo-secrets-and-reverse-engineering-googles-algorithm-92fad4f5a39

The above is a perfectly fine URL. It uses the main keywords in the title to reinforce the topic and for consistency. I limited the duplication of this phrase to the title and the custom URL. The shorter the URL is, the less likely it will look like keyword stuffing, and the less likely it will be automatically truncated by some websites.

I would have a problem if my link was:

https://medium.com/@benjaminbannister/92fad4f5a39

Do you see a difference? The first link clearly describes the content, the second is some randomly generated link.

To summarize keywords/meta tags/URLs: Be accurate, interesting, and searchable.

I like to include images when I can. Accurate and relevant naming of your images reinforces your content, and also becomes indexed in Google’s image search.

Whenever I create graphics and save images, I make sure file names do multiple things:

Like naming the title of your content, two things matter in photos: the name of the file, and the caption you give it (or the text around it).

Again, relevancy is key. It’s important that the file name and caption/surrounding text accurately represents the picture.

Gone are the days where you could write a 300-word piece, throw in some links to other popular content, and end up at the top of the charts. Google sees this as “thin content.” You are probably aware of them when you encounter them as they leave you wanting more. Now, more points are given to content that has meat.

That doesn’t mean everything has to be epic in length. Google wants pages that give people exactly what they want, not pages that are longer than necessary or that slows down user experience.

If you write articles, read and reread and learn to axe unnecessary words and sentences. If you make videos, cut out the ums and uhs, and get to the point. Don’t waste people's time with unnecessary filler; ain’t nobody got time for that. Every creator loves their work but they should know when to edit themselves.

People don’t want scraps or fat, give them a delicious lean steak or a bite-sized rich dessert, whichever serves your content best.

A site that is well-designed, intuitive, and easy to use, will get points for being properly made. If you have confusing navigation, links that lead to broken/missing pages, navigation that requires more clicks than necessary, then it means you’re not maintaining it or hiring a proper web architect.

UX is a very in depth topic on its own. To keep it simple, having a website with great UX is like having an ergonomic chair. Make sure your chair is comfortable and natural to use. I shouldn’t have to think about how to use your chair.

Terrific UX on a computer should be similar: nice to look at and intuitive to use. If you can’t jump into a new system and figure things out like that (snaps finger), then the designers didn’t do a good job with the UX.

Another part of good UX is not being flooded by ads on a page. Yes, businesses and websites need to make money, and they make some of that with ads. It’s a necessary evil.

However, when you position your ads between your content, that does two things: it confuses the audience to think the ad is part of the content; and it annoys the hell out of them (and brand loyalty starts going out the window).

Then there’s the sin of having too many ads on your site where the question becomes: “is this a page of content, or a page of ads?” There is a fine line to walk between giving an audience good content, while still making enough money to run your business.

And lastly, we have the ratio of ads to content. Five ads for a paragraph of content? (GTFO, minus 15 points.) One ad for a paragraph? You’re fine. Consider coding ads that are responsive (automatically adjusts) to the amount of content. Keep your ad ratio in check.

And definitely do not auto-play video ads on a page (minus 10 points, Ravenclaw). That’s all.

Google has gotten smart to those that copy and paste popular content (usually without permission), onto their own sites in hopes of getting traffic and ad revenue (minus one hundred points in Life if you do this). Sure, you’ll get your AdSense money, but you won’t be ranked higher in results.

If you create something that gets 1 million views, while someone else shared it and gets 20 million views (because they’re a larger platform), yours will still be ranked first because:

Thank goodness for timestamps. The person who posted it first is considered the original source, and will in turn be ranked higher. Anyone else who has the same content is considered someone that copied it or shared it, no matter their numbers. Being first may not go into effect immediately, but The Algorithm will course-correct as time goes on and as more data is collected.

If you intend to post the same content across several platforms, make sure you post to the main site you want your audience to go to, then post to the rest. Don’t worry too much about people copying your content, The Algorithm will sort out the proper hierarchy.

Continually create. It doesn’t have to be every day, but enough to give your audience a steady flow of you and your brand. Google wants fresh content on top. Think of this like a supermarket putting new milk behind the old ones. Let people know you continually produce milk and it’s fresh.

For me, I try to create rich, quality content at least 2–4 times a month. For you, that might be a different number.

As a recovering perfectionist, I urge you to just post your creations. It doesn’t have to be perfect, and on most platforms (except video), you can pull George Lucas’ and keep editing and refining (like I do).

If you’re always updating your blog or site with well-researched and in-depth content, you should expect improved rankings. Sites that publish sporadically can expect the same irregularity in their rank positioning.

Produce a steady flow of fresh content. Once you get on a regular schedule it will be easier to maintain.|||

Attempting to game or cheat Google’s algorithm with this information will only backfire on you, because as an engineer, that’s what I would do (minus 30 points from Slytherin!).