About a month ago I noted that Pocket gets worse the more you use it, an unfortunately all too common feature of software these days. In fact, I'm heavily reliant on Pocket (or rather, what I wish Pocket were, but isn't), because the software that ultimately feeds into it -- Web browsers, specifically Chrome (abhorrently abysmal) and Firefox (slightly, but grossly inadequately better) are so bad at any sort of reasonable document management -- they also get worse the more you use them.

I've still had absolutely no human feedback on that post, though emailing several subsequent requests for same. Not even a "we're looking at this and considering your comments" response, of the sort I've previously received.

Maybe the response team has been gutted in the recent move to Mozilla?

After a long period of ... not much (visible) development[1], other than a "share your content" and promoted posts misfeature[2], there's finally been a new feature released today, for which I'm apparently a lucky "preview" candidate:

Which appears and is presented. Every. Fucking. Time. I. Open. The. App.

One of the indulgences I've discovered at Mastodon is the tootstorm, analogue of the Twitter "tweetstorm". The longer format (500 vs. 140 characters) makes this ... slightly less annoying to read. The form is frighteningly attractive as a writer, and post size corresponds roughly to the content contained in one of may many index cards accumulated with time. Ultimately I'd like to synthesise a few of these into proper essay forms.

After tossing out the term, I expanded on the concept, and tyranny, of the minimum viable user in software and services (or products generally). This is an adjunct to Moen's Law of Bicycles, "Good customers make for good products", and is yet another Gresham's Law mechanism.

The problem with this curse is that the overwhelming majority of users have exceedingly low skills. If you're producing a general-purpose application, this may be a valid focus, but if you're building an expert tool, it will lead you down the wrong path every time. Jacob Nielsen discusses a comprehensive multi-nation OECD user-skills survey, "The Distribution of Users' Computer Skills: Worse Than You Think".

As I explained in an email to Pocket on seeing this abortion, I basically have one purpose in mind for using Pocket: trying to impose some order on a completely out-of-control, and wholly inadequately served by existing tools, content management issue.[3]

When I go into Pocket, I usually have one of three goals in mind:

What I'm not interested in, at all, is wading through yet more goddamned online junk. Really, there's no shortage.

Which, as of the latest Pocket update, I am forced to do.

This is what is known in the trade as a Dark Pattern.

It's also a sign of tremendous contempt for the user. This rarely ends well.

And flies directly in the face of Mozilla's stated aim: "We will not sacrifice user control". Sorry, guys, but dumping me precisely where I have no interest in going. Every. Single. Time. ... is sacrificing user control.

As /u/AncientAmmonite notes, there is a preferences setting to control the default opening page. I've located that, and set the preference accordingly. Comments:

I'm aware that there can be a great deal of behind-the-scenes action, often firefighting and/or design and architectural hashing out going on. Still, no visible progress is no visible progress. Note to any service which injects articles directly into my, personally curated, highly-selected, anti-noise article archive: your web domain(s) are going straight into my LAN firewall blocklist. How out of control? Well, Google Chrome/Android lacks any sort of counter for tabs. So I can't tell you how many I have open. It also lacks any indication that a requested page is open, I can't specify my preferred Web search engine (DuckDuckGo, of course), or search through the extant tablist to find the open copies (almost always) of a given URL already open (Firefox, thankfully, offers this). I can see a grand total maximum of five tabs across the top of the screen, in landscape mode. It is not possible to navigate even from the head to the tail of the list, or back, in any meaningful way.. OK, I take that back. You can grab a tab, and drag it from the front of the list to the back (or vice versa). I did that a few days ago. It took over seven minutes to do so. Essentially, once a Chrome session grows beyond a few screensful of tabs, it becomes absolutely unmanageable and snowballs, and there is no possible option for managing the mess other than closing down the whole thing.[4] Firefox is somewhat better than this. It offers a count of tabs, up to 99, after which an infinity sign appears. Guess who's looking at an infinity most of the time. Thankfully, there's a tabs overview page (not as useful as a tree-style tabs view, but better than nothing), which shows up to about 30 tabs per screen. I can usually count screens of tabs to get a sense of where I'm at, and rarely have much over 300 tabs open. The miserable performance of Firefox (seconds, sometimes minutes, to respond to a new tab or URL change) makes it ... not entirely viable. The inability to reference tags from a presently-viewed article (that is: I cannot view other similarly-tagged articles), to search by multiple tags simultaneously (so that the search space is cut down), or, in fact, to search by tags at all, from the primary search interface, or to rapidly filter the complete tags list by keyword, makes my hopes of tags-based content access pretty much utterly deluded. Again: given Pocket's absolutely bastardised search for content which is already stored locally on a device I control and for which an index and search would cost Pocket nothing in server response this proves useless. I'm better off running a Web query, utterly obviating the utility of searching a vetted archive in the first place.|||

About a month ago I noted that [Pocket gets worse the more you use...