Back when Robert was kid, he had a chance encounter with then President John F. Kennedy. The interaction began with a hello and ended with a handshake. And like many of us who have touched greatness, 14 year old Robert was left wondering if maybe some of Kennedy would stay with him.  Now, 50 years later, Robert still finds himself pondering that encounter and question. And so with the help of brand new science and Neil Degrasse Tyson, he sets out to satisfy this curiosity once and for all.

Produced by Simon Adler with help from Only Human: Amanda Aronczyk, Kenny Malone, Jillian Weinberger and Elaine Chen.

Neil deGrasse Tyson's newest book is called "Astrophysics for People in A Hurry."

Radiolab needs your help! Please visit wnyc.podcastingsurvey.com and tell us a little about you and the podcasts you love in a 5-minute, anonymous survey. We really appreciate your help - knowing more about you helps us make more of the shows you enjoy. Thank you from all of us at Radiolab!

*** As of Wednesday, May 3rd, 2017 we've run out of kits. Thanks so much to uBiome for generously donating over 12,000 free kits, and thanks to everyone for participation. We should have some more details on the results in a few weeks. ***

uBiome is a California-based biotech company started in 2012 that sequences the DNA of the microbes that live on and in you.

Do I have to pay for my results?

No, as long as you are one of the 3,000 people to request a sampling kit with the code for Radiolab/Only Human listeners, the sequencing results are free! uBiome otherwise charges $89 to have a skin sample analyzed.

Am I going to find out if I’m sick?

This uBiome information isn’t for diagnosing any health condition.

How long will it take to get my results?

It can take from 3-6 weeks from when uBiome receives your sample to sequence, process and compile the material. So please send those samples back to the uBiome labs soon, so we can report back to you about the Radiolab/Only Human group.

What is uBiome going to do with my microbiome info?

uBiome scientists are going to share aggregate level analysis with Radiolab and Only Human so we can give general results about our group’s skin microbiome. Aside from that, what uBiome does with your results generally depends on whether you choose to be included in research or share your information. uBiome is HIPAA-compliant, and their practices are reviewed by an independent committee for ethical research (an IRB). For more information, see uBiome’s summary of its privacy practices (just 6 pages in regular-sized font).

Will I be able to get my raw data?

Yes! Once your results are in, you’ll be able to download it as a CSV, JSON or FASTQ file.

Will they take my DNA and clone me?

If by “me”, you mean the human you, then no, uBiome isn’t going to clone, let alone even sequence human DNA.|||

Neil Degrasse Tyson and some new microbiome science help answer the question - when we touch greatness how much of it ...