This is the first machine I’ve built using primitive technology that produces work without human effort. Falling water replaces human calories to perform a repetitive task. A permanent set up usually has a shed protecting the hammer and materials from the weather while the trough end sits outside under the spout. This type of hammer is used to pulverise grain into flour and I thought I might use one to mill dry cassava chips into flour when the garden matures. This device has also been used to crush clay for porcelain production. A stone head might make it useful as a stamp mill for crushing ores to powder. It might pulp fibres for paper even.

The fellow in Australia, who makes tools and shelters from his bare hands and natural materials, is back with a new video. This time, he made water-powered hammer. It's basically a log (hollowed out by fire) that pivots up and down when it receives and empties water from a stream.

Artist Kelly Magleby, went into “the backcountry of Southern Utah with a knife and a buckskin for 10 days to try to learn about Anasazi pottery by doing it the way the Anasazi did it.” Filmmaker Steve Olpin made a short documentary called Earth and Fire, that shows how Magleby started a fire, made dyes, […]

It’s no secret that Boing Boing (along with over 4 million other netizens) loves the Primitive Technology channel on YouTube. We’ve covered this channel numerous times (about a guy making primitive tech in the wilds of Far North Queensland, Australia with nothing but the gym shorts on his ass). I anxiously await each episode and […]

Primitive Technology is a YouTube video channel produced by an Australian guy who goes into the jungle with nothing but the clothes on his back, and makes things like shelters, tools, and weapons. There are no words or text in the video, only the sounds of nature for a soundtrack. Here’s his latest video. In […]

Drone race like it is the Boonta Eve Classic Looking to break into the rapidly growing world of drone racing? Maybe? Just looking for a solid remote-controlled camera quadcopter to shoot aerial footage? Either way, the Aerix Black Talon 2.0’s friendly controls and stable flight make it a great option for novice and intermediate flyers.The Aerix Black Talon drone is able to fly at 15 […]

Build out WordPress sites faster with this extensive library of themes If you need to quickly build a website for your personal blog, portfolio, or business, WordPress is a great place to start. Unlike drag-and-drop website builders, a WordPress site can be endlessly customized and configured for your needs. But finding a unique, high-quality theme can be tough, and paying a developer to make one for […]

Keep your electronics charged overseas with this international power adapter There still isn’t one unified AC power standard. Although USB power is definitely making plug convergence much more likely to happen down the line, plenty of older buildings still have whatever outlet made sense at the time they were wired for electricity. Since international travel will definitely require power adapters for the foreseeable future, anyone […]|||

