It’s important to give people work that challenges their abilities but that is still within their grasp.

People should not do boring and repetitive tasks and, at the same time, they should not struggle with too complex responsibilities that are above their skills.

You should adjust tasks accordingly to the experience level of each person. One mustn’t do job definitely below their abilities and anything they will struggle with.

People should be complimented for what they do. Not only punished when they fail (actually, this shouldn’t be done whatsoever).

Managers tend to give them remarks and criticism but very little praises. When someone does their job, it’s uncommon to applause. It was their job, wasn’t it? More often than not, leaders give only a negative feedback because it relates to unexpected results.

Actually, the thing is that desired outcomes should receive approbation as well. This gives lots of motivation and strengthen relations in a team.

Even though some activities can be boring, there should always be something new to investigate.

As mentioned in the previous point “people should not do boring and repetitive tasks” but we all know it’s sometimes unavoidable. Very often we have to deal with some copy-paste assignments that just need to be done by someone.

Make sure there’s a chance to be creative in every boring job. Try to propose some new way to complete the task or to figure out some uncommon approach to finish the assignment.

You must allow teams to make their own rules which team members will follow happily.

Principles should not be enforced externally but created and fostered internally. People themselves know the best what works for them and how they want to cooperate and perform.

Make sure team members will create their own processes they will stick to instead of proposing rules which sometimes have nothing to do with they day-to-day problems.

You are not just to make money. You are also making a contribution to the piece of world you are working on.

The thing is not to obfuscate the goal of making money by some high-level ideas. The thing is to solve a real-world problem and cover end-user needs.

People have to have some purpose, not just making money nor fulfilling a client’s goal. This purpose should give them the feeling of doing something really meaningful.

Allow them to be different from others, with their own tasks and responsibilities.

Don’t enforce e.g. dress code, a haircut or a language. Let people feel comfortable with their own identities.

Compliment their outfit and a hair style, appreciate their individuality.

People work better when they can rely on some minimal company rules and policies.

I’ve already mentioned about letting people establish their own rules and it’s still valid here. These rules just need to exist to emphasize some order and workflow.

People feel more convenient when they have some steps to follow. They are confident when then know what to do next and how to handle unexpected situations.

Make sure people have influence on what is happening around them.

Don’t just announce new decisions regarding their own team or a company. Let them at least vote and discuss about what is going to be introduced.

It’s good when team members have some impact on things around them, their work place and working environment in general.

Organize some kind of team building events like e.g. pizza parties, pub evenings, paintballs, bowling and so on. This can increase their work-life balance and feel comfortable in their work place when they know their coworkers more personally.

Team building in the workplace significantly contributes towards employee motivation and building trust among the employees.

It’s important for people to be meaningful in their organizations.

They shouldn’t feel like dangling somewhere at the bottom of a big hierarchy. They should not be just a small element of a big corporate machine but an important part of what they are building.

When people have the right to decide on and change things they feel responsible for their projects and other coworkers. Giving them power to make choices, puts them in position of having a status in the team they belong to.|||

It’s important to give people work that challenges their abilities but that is still within their grasp. People should not do boring and repetitive tasks and, at the same time, they should not…