After Linux 4.11 delayed for a week by NVMe glitches and rc8 fixes, Linux 4.11 is officially Released with New Features for storage, shared memory, CPU speed boosts, generic networking and touchy-feely types.

Linux creator Linus Torvalds posted to the Linux Kernel Mailing List, adding “So after that extra week with an rc8, things were pretty calm, and I’m much happier releasing a final 4.11 now.”

AMDGPU power management continues to mature with Linux 4.11. Likely due to TTM memory management improvements. Intel DRM driver is now capable of handling DisplayPort MST audio. Intel has enabled frame-buffer compression by default for Skylake hardware and newer. TinyDRM has also been merged. Linux kernel 4.11 Intel also has initial Geminilake graphics support. Geminilake SoCs will be shipping later this year. Intel’s Turbo Boost Max 3.0 is better supported and will allow this boosting feature to operate on more systems/motherboards. Support for a variety of new ARM SoCs and boards like the Banana Pi M64, SolidRun MACCHIATOBin, BCM958712DxXMC NorthStar2 developer board, and HiSilicon Kirin960/Hi3660 and HiKey960. For making the swapping of solid state disks easier and more scalable, Linux kernel 4.11 is here with new changes. This release adds Linux support for Opal nvme enabled controllers. It enables users to setup/unlock/lock locking ranges for SED devices using the Opal protocol. SMC-R is an IBM protocol that provides RDMA capabilities over RoCE transparently for applications exploiting TCP sockets. Kernel 4.11 brings initial part of the “Shared Memory Communications-RDMA” (SMC-R) protocol implementation. The Linux block layer is know to have different IO schedulers with different performance characteristics each one, and users are allowed to switch pluggable IO schedulers. New perf ftrace tool (This tool intends to be a simple perf front-end for the already existing ftrace interface)|||

After Linux 4.11 delayed for a week by NVMe glitches and rc8 fixes, Linux 4.11 is officially Released with New Features for storage, shared memory, CPU spee