As an Empath that takes in the emotions and energy of others, you might have learned several ways to protect yourself.

One of those ways is to imagine yourself inside a protective bubble where nothing can affect you.

Whilst this can be a solution for Empaths that just found out they’re Empaths and are still navigating and learning more about it, it is not a sustainable situation for too long and certainly it is not something to do for the rest of your life.

Because the thing is, the true purpose of you as an Empath is to go within yourself, find and connect with your inner power and let it come out fully into the open.

So when you go inside the protective bubble, you’re coming not from a place of empowerment, but instead from a place of fear.

You fear that other people’s emotions and energy will affect you negatively, that you’ll get exhausted, drained, taking advantage of. So you protect yourself inside that bubble.

But what truly happens when you go inside the bubble is that you close yourself to the world. You are in fear of it. You become disconnected from everything around you.

And fear comes from the ego. It is a survival thing. Your ego wants you to stay in a “safe” place because its goal is pure survival.

But survival is not living. It is certainly not living at your true potential and not sharing and using your gifts fully.

The journey for any Empath is the journey to Personal Empowerment.

All the experiences you’ve had all your life, even the very painful and traumatic ones, are wake-up calls for you to go within and connect with your inner power, with your true self.

For example, one pattern very present in an Empath’s life is to attract and relate to narcissistic people.

Narcissistic people live their lives relying completely on their false self. That’s why they act and react the way they do, because they’re powerless in their false selfs, but they want to make you believe the contrary.

When a narcissist comes into an Empath’s life (it can be a romantic partner, a friend, a family member, etc), they are being like a mirror to you.

A narcissistic avoids going within and connecting with their true self, and they are showing the Empath that they are doing the same, avoiding going within and finding their inner power.

This can be a long journey but when the Empath finally starts to wake-up and realising the only way to go is within themselves, instead of trying to save the entire world, that’s when their reality starts to change too.

That is the true path to personal empowerment.

When the Empath wakes up to this and takes the conscious decision to connect with their true selves and start living life from their truth, that’s when the narcissistic people stop showing up in their lives, as well as other painful experiences.

And that’s when you learn that you don’t need any protective bubble and never did.

When you step into personal empowerment fully, you become like a tree, grounded in who you are.

You are showing up fully into the world, you are connected with everyone and everything around you, but you don’t take others energy and emotions anymore, because YOU decide that’s not going to happen.

You find out that you do have the power to decide when, if, and how, you’re going to take in other people’s energy.

Like the tree that feels the wind but doesn’t become the wind. That feels the rain but doesn’t become the rain.

You can connect and be with other people, and even follow the calling to be a lightworker and help other people but without exhausting or draining yourself because you’re completely grounded in who you are.

You learn to set up boundaries not just for other people, but for yourself too.

You stop accepting things that don’t resonate with you and you stop saying yes to people and things you want to say no to.

That’s also when you start attracting people into your life that are in a completely different vibrational frequency than the type of people you used to attract before: people that respect yourself and your boundaries, because YOU do respect yourself first.

So, you needed the bubble before because before you didn’t have any boundaries and you were afraid of stepping into your personal empowerment.

When you live your life without the need to hide yourself inside a bubble, and you are able to show up fully into the world, you can be anywhere you choose.

You can even be around a crowd of people that you feel fine. Because you decide to feel fine.

You are still an Empath. You can still feel other people’s emotions and their energy, but you don’t attach yourself to it anymore. You don’t take it inside yourself. You feel it as something outside and you only take it within if you want to.

This is when you can start deliberately creating an amazing life that comes from your truth. No more giving your power away to others.

When you get to this point – and you will if you decide to do the work within – life starts flowing and you’ll realise that being an Empath is an amazing and beautiful blessing.

If you are reading this, the law of attraction brought you here. Your soul is craving for more and is telling you that you are ready to let go of the bubble – for good.

You are ready for the next amazing chapter of your life.

Click the Image to Book Your Spot at the FREE Webinar:|||

As an Empath that takes in the emotions and energy of others, you might have learned several ways to protect yourself. One of those ways is to imagine yourself