While earnings, tax reform and a looming potential government shutdown held the front page of the financial news this past week, the alt-currency market had a newsworthy week itself.

The Chinese exchanges announced that it would charge a 0.2% fee on bitcoin transactions. Japan said it would recognize bitcoin as legal tender. But the biggest news may be that the previously-rejected Winklevoss Bitcoin ETF (COIN) might be back on the table again. The SEC has agreed to review its decision to reject what would be the first bitcoin ETF in the marketplace. While it’s not a done deal that it’ll be approved, it now seems more likely than not we’ll have a bitcoin ETF sooner rather than later. The price of bitcoin shot up in response hitting a new all-time high of just north of $1340. Bitcoin was just over $1000 at the beginning of April.

Another alt-currency also hit an all-time high this past week. Ethereum’s ether token topped $65. What is Ethereum you may ask? Ethereum, like bitcoin, is a blockchain network. It’s an open software platform that allows developers to build and run the programming code for applications. Ether is used to pay for services and fees on the Ethereum network but, like bitcoin, can be used as a tradeable currency.

While the Winklevoss Bitcoin ETF may be getting most of the cryptocurrency headlines, the SEC announced at nearly the same time that it has begun considering approval of an Ethereum ETF. The backers of the EtherIndex Ether Trust, which would issue the fund’s shares, believe they have enough in place to get it approved. And it may actually end up hitting the market first.

So how would an Ethereum ETF differ from a bitcoin ETF?

At this point, the Ethereum network looks like it’s better built for a number of wide ranging long-term applications. That’s good for the outlook for ether but bitcoin is further down the road as a cryptocurrency. The Winklevoss Bitcoin ETF also looks like it’s further along in the SEC approval process but don’t be surprised if it’s the Ethereum ETF that gets the nod first.

David Dierking is a freelance writer focusing primarily on ETFs, mutual funds, dividend income strategies and retirement planning. He has spent more than 20 years in the financial services industry and his background includes experience in investment management, portfolio analytics and asset/liability management at both BMO Financial Group and Strong Capital Management. He has written for Seeking Alpha, Motley Fool, ETF Trends and Investopedia and was also included in the panel for ETFReference.com’s “101 ETF Investing Tips from the Experts”. He has a B.A. in Finance from Michigan State University and lives in Wisconsin with his wife and two daughters. You can connect with David on Twitter and LinkedIn. Also be sure to visit his new website, ETFFocus.com.|||

The SEC has agreed to review its decision to not allow the Winklevoss Bitcoin ETF(NASDAQ:COIN) to come to market, but another cryptocurrency challenger has