The war for control over Bitcoin's future took a bizarre turn yesterday when Greg Maxwell, a developer with Bitcoin Core project and CTO of Blockstream, announced that a certain chip contained the ASICBOOST optimization, and suggested a BIP that involves a Segwit-style commitment, which in practice would be coupled for a call to activate Segwit.

Here's my quick response to this turn of events:

You can stop reading here. If #1, #2 and #3 are false, then there's absolutely nothing but baseless accusations flying around. Someone needs to do a thorough study to instantiate the claims.

On the offchance that Antpool is actively utilizing ASICBOOST, there's still quite a lot to be said about the claims:

You can stop reading here as well. I almost stopped writing here. But someone will inevitably make the argument that patents can confer an uneven advantage to certain miners, and that this can skew the marketplace for mining equipment. Or more likely, they will not make this case, because it is highly unlikely that this patent actually is insurmountable, or that it will likely have catastrophic consequences that require a call to arms. Instead, they'll make an emotional argument for why patents are bad. For those, here are some additional thoughts.

This is another point where one can take a break.

Let's do our due diligence first, and dispassionately find a coherent strategy that represents the best path forward for all.

Empty blocks indicate ASICBOOST usage, though they can also arise out of datacenter connectivity issues or from headers-first mining. Counter to popular opinion, empty blocks help bury other blocks and thus provide security. (Thanks to the ever insightful Dan Robinson of Chain for bringing this up!) There are other ways of grinding through blocks to populate the tables in ASICBOOST, besides permuting transactions. Each grinding scheme exacts a cost for creating diverse inputs. These costs eat into the benefits of ASICBOOST. It would be interesting to perform a quantitative comparison of different grinding schemes.|||

My quick reaction to the latest salvo of shots fired in the war between Core developers and miners.