This is by far the most common argument I hear from Cloud proponents: “the cloud is so much cheaper than having your own rig”. And it simply is not true.

We build natural language processing and machine learning software for the medical domain. It’s not quite big data, the largest data set is about 400 gigabytes of text, but it’s “annoying-sized”. “Annoying-sized” data is the kind of data you cannot simply load up on your Macbook Pro, but isn’t really NSA sized either. I postulate that almost all data worth looking into is either small or annoying. Actual big data that can deliver real world insights is quite rare. Sure there are large databases, but you rarely want to consider all of it in tandem. But I digress.

So lets say that the unicorn you’re working on is of an equivalent size. You have a couple 100GBs of data, require some complex calculations, power some user interface, handle a couple thousand users. Pretty standard thing, especially if you’re just starting out.

Here’s what we did to deploy it: we rented half a rack (22U) in a co-location center, and placed our own SuperMicro servers.

Total cost for the hardware? Roughly $20 000. Total monthly cost for co-location at a nice secure data-center? $300. Monthly bandwidth (100Mbit 95th%) and electricity (~400kWh): $200. So our monthly costs are about $500. The hardware is ours.

Lets consider what this would cost at Azure. Not to pick on Azure, Amazon is similar but their price transparency is just horrible. Note that we need these machines running 24/7. We’re deploying a user-facing SaaS after all, really no point in turning it off. Now it is a bit tricky to find an equivalent, but an approximate: at least 128GB RAM, 6 cores, fast SSDs, and at least a node with GPUs. The A11 instance comes closest. For GPUs the L16 does. Granted, you get a bit more cores. But I’m sure they include HyperThreaded ones, so they don’t really count. That’s a whopping $4,477.39/month. And that doesn’t even include bandwidth, or disk operations for the database. Maybe there are cheaper options, but it’s all trade-offs, and the ballpark figure will remain the same. That is roughly $60 000/year. Compared to $6 000 per year. For hardware that costs $20 000. Lets remember, we pay $500/month. That’s almost 10x as expensive.|||

Just a nerd and a cynic.