Julia Silge recently wrote a blog post about co-occurances of words together with gendered pronouns. This made me dig up some old code that did the same, but with the difference that it also extends to gendered names besides pronouns. The data is a corpus of Swedish news texts, and I’ve used name statistics from Sweden Statistics (SCB) to parse out what names are male and female.

So let’s hack up a naive bookkeeping code to count all bigrams containing he/she/male_name/female_name. My corpus has already replaced all names with / since that’s what my gender monitor does. I’ll use for tokenization that uses the really fast behind the hoods. That said, this still takes some time to run. I did start to redo it in , but I realized that would take more time than to just let it run (see appropiate xkcd).

Now and holds the frequencies for co-occurances of he and vice versa for she. But we want it to be in percent so we can compare. About 75 % of all mentions in news media are of males, so we need to remove this bias to answer the question “How more often is word X used together with he rather than she”.

So let’s transform to percent and throw away some of the long tail to remove noise (keeping everything under percentile 95).

holding what we are interested in. Except the punctuation, and also some emails.

Now let’s compare the ratios to find out what words are more used in connection to and female names. We do this by joining/merging the and s. Taking the log of this ratio conviniently centers the bias around zero – positive meaning skewed towards females and negative towards male.

And positive gives skew towards females.

So men speaks, explains, says, thinks, [speaking punctuation] and statues. While women tells, describes, remembers, feels, live, recieves and sits. It’s clear that language is a mirror of what kind of values our society holds. Men are in news texts, other than just in real numbers more present – more in focus. More active and in the role as an expert. SAD!|||

Julia Silge recently wrote a blog post about co-occurances of words together with gendered pronouns. This made me dig up some old code that did the same, but...