I founded Talview back in 2012 when video interviewing was still an emerging space. Today it is mainstream, with all the leading organizations using it in one way or the other. Whether you like it or not, you have to adopt it to stay compettitve becuase of the benefits it offer in terms of time to hire, quality of hire and cost of hire.

This post aims at providing the most comprehensive overview of the most critical aspects of video interviews based on my learnings over past 5 years helping many of the leading employers across 100+ countries in adopting and exceling at video interviewing.

You will learn about pros and cons of video interviewing, comparison with various providers, pricing and how to select a video interview software for your organization.

It also discusses leading organizations are using video interviewing for hiring, a comparison with telephonic interviews and Skype interviews and what do candidates think about video interviewing candidate experience.

We will also cover legal aspects of video interviewing and the latest developments in this space.

But just in case you’re new to this whole thing, let's do a quick overview of what video interviewing is in the first place.

If you are familiar, skip to #1.

Video Interviewing or Video Recruiting or Digital Interviews is a fast emerging space in Recruitment today. There are three major formats of Video Interviews:

Recorded interviewing format is a screening methodology where the employer defines a set of questions in video interviewing software and invite a list of candidates to answer these issues.

Still not clear enough?

Questions are designed in such a way that candidates’ answers help the employer to get a holistic perspective of the candidate, their skills, experience, passion for the role and cultural fit.

The application is a cloud-based web application like Gmail where recruiters login to create an interview using a few video or text questions. They send email invitations to candidates to attend the interview.

When candidate opens the link in the email invitation, questions are shown to him/her one by one. The application records video response of the candidate through a webcam and a microphone.

So what happens after that?

Recorded responses will become available to the recruiter once candidate submits it. The employer sets the number of opportunities to re-record an answer. The time a panel typically takes to conduct an in-person interview for one candidate, he/she can review & rate up to 10-15 prospects in 45 minutes with this technology.

Since answering and review happen at different times, this is known as an asynchronous interview. It is also referred to as automated video interview.

Live Interviews is a selection methodology where instead of meeting the candidate in person the employer does an online video meeting where they have a free flowing discussion.

Isn't this similar to any video conferencing tool?

This is similar to video conferencing via tools like Skype, but many video interview tools which provide live interview solution offers additional functionalities.

These include but not limited to, interview scheduling capability, a whiteboard for writing/drawing, interview recording, embedded evaluation forms and integration with leading ATSs.

This is another screening methodology where the employer asks the candidates to submit a video introduction. The employer might give guidelines on what to talk about and how long the video should be.

But why do I want to listen to rehearsed answers?

This method is commonly used for roles where gauging candidate’s communication skills and body language is critical like hospitality or acting.

Now that you understand what is video interviewing and the different types available, let us look at the 12 most important aspects of its one should know.

Benefits of video interviewing most often cited by clients include:

Reduce the time required to hire by up to 50% using video interviews rather than just resumes. Invite, schedule, and hire, as simple as that.

Enabling candidates to attend online interviews across the globe, either via web or mobile at their convenience and at the same time providing a standardized experience.

Reduce the cost of hiring by up to 60% by saving efforts spent on manual screening, coordination, logistics or additional resources.

Video interviewing tools allow branding of the platform with banners, videos, color themes, and logo. Also, your organization will be perceived as tech-savvy and candidate friendly.

All the videos are available for reference in future. Same way, evaluations, comments are also saved for audits in future.

Many tools have advanced capabilities to analyze video interviews and generate behavioral profiles, recommend most releavnt set of candidates etc.

Reports are available to track panel bias, turn around time, etc. and improve an interviewing process.

Is that all?

No, a few more benefits are covered by Ben Karter in this blog. Here is a bonus link on Video Interviewing Best Practices from Ere Media.

Some of the drawbacks are:

1. Candidates need to have access to a laptop/PC or smartphone, not everyone might have one.

2. Live Interviewing requires reasonable internet speed, which is still a challenge in many countries

While one can try to carry out different forms of video interviewing through plain vanilla video tools like Skype, Hangout or Youtube, these methods are not scalable and cannot provide the best results.

A Video Interviewing or Virtual Interviewing Software helps employers to conduct various formats in a structured and scalable way.

What does that mean?

All standard online video interviewing software tools have user roles for recruiters, hiring managers and candidates. Each of them differs in the breadth of features and depth of capabilities.

For example, Talview provides detailed provisions to configure interview window, candidate instructions, email notifications, evaluation forms.

It also supports various other formats of online assessments like the coding test, psychometric analysis, objective test and essay test.

There are also audio interview softwares available in the market today.

Some of the popular online video interviewing software tools in the US are Talview, Hirevue, Sparkhire, Montage Talent and Take the Interview. Video Interviewing Software in the UK are Talview, Hirevue and Sonru.

Each of them varies in the breadth of features and depth of capabilities. Detailed comparisons are available at the following links:

Video Interviews are available in pay per interview, pay per job, user license and enterprise license models. SMBs typically use pay per interview/job model and it, cost them typically around $10 per interview.

In user license, the client pays for the number of recruiter users using the platform; panel user logins are provided free of cost. It costs around $500 to $1000 per month per user.

In enterprise license, the client pays in proportion to the number of employees they have. The cost varies from $4 to $10 per employee per month based on the scale of the organization and the features opted for.

Globally, many of the leading companies use video interviews for interviewing candidates.

Some of the companies who do video interviews are Accenture, Federal Services, BASF, Best Mark, Caleres, Citizens Bank, Enterprise South Jordan, Geico, PSEG, Starbucks, Goldman Sachs, UNICEF, Teach First, Societe Generale.

Each industry uses video interviewing in different ways. In some sectors, online interviewing is used only for screening and there is at least one in-person discussion before the candidate is hired.

In other sectors video interviewing is coupled with online assessments like technical or aptitude tests. Staffing industry uses it to showcase potential hires to its clients.

Need more indepth understanding? See a few detailed industry guides below:

There are many tools in the market today, and it is easy to get confused on which tool to use. However, the majority of them are very basic and might not support a full-fledged use case.

Talview Video Interviewing is one of the pioneers in this space, and our solution has evolved significantly over the past few years.

Things you should ideally evaluate when selecting a video interview tools are:

1. Maturity of the platform- ability to handle various use cases

3. Integrations with your existing ATS - Talview has integration with Successfactors, Taleo, IBM Kenexa Brassring, Smartrecruiters, iCIMS etc

5. Branding Support - Candidate experience is of paramount importance. Standard branding practice is private-labeled online pages where you can show prospects a welcoming video and offer them information about the job and your company.

See some examples of what we do for clients at Customer Landing Pages

6. 24x7 hotline support Speed of deployment - We help our clients provide best in class support through multiple channels- FAQ-Candidate.

Candidates feedback of video interviews have been very encouraging with almost 97% of them giving positive feedback.

See a whitepaper based on survey amongst candidates on video interviews here.

Video Interviews gives a more holistic picture. The panel can make a much better judgment by audio-visual interaction compared to a telephone interaction where the candidate can easily do malpractices like impersonation, googling or other help.

Also, you can maintain a record of the interaction, evaluation etc for a second opinion or future reference.

Here is the link to an article can give you much better insight into this topic:

The low-cost factor is the biggest advantage tempting several organizations to adopt Skype as their means to a virtual interview.

Most companies need to reconsider Skype as an enterprise solution whether large or small, due to many critical deficiencies, which mar this tool such as:

2. Connecting through a personal profile can seem intrusive and uncomfortable for the candidate

3. Many critical interview features like writing pad, recording, evaluation form are missing

4. It cannot integrate it with your Applicant Tracking System

5. It doesn't have features to schedule and send invites/reminders to participants

A detailed comparison between skype and video interviewing is available.

According to the EEOC, “Under Title VII, it is not illegal for an employer to learn the race, gender or ethnicity of an individual prior to an interview. Of course,

Title VII requires that all individuals be provided equal, nondiscriminatory treatment throughout the hiring process.

If an employer representative observes a job seeker in a video clip, and either learns or surmises the person’s gender, race, or ethnicity, such knowledge could increase the risk of discrimination or the appearance of discrimination.

Employers need to take care in training hiring officials and human resources staff about the appropriate responses when gender, race, or ethnicity are disclosed during recruitment.

Video clips might be analogized to information on a resume that clearly tells an individual’s race, such as, “President, Black Law Students Association.” In this situation, as with the video clip, the employer needs to focus on the person’s qualifications for the job.”

Summary of various legal opinions in this regard that becoming aware of such information through a video, even without the applicant affirmatively volunteering it, should pose no bigger problem for an employer than information that is volunteered or otherwise learned during an interview.

On a positive note, video interviewing assures that there will be a record of what was said during the interview process.

One important aspect of selecting a video interview software is candidate experience and feedback. We continously collect feedback from candidates on Talview and have prepared a whitepaper on the topic.

It covers topics such as what is the overall feedback on video interviewing experience, what candidates perceive as benefits of video interviewing for them and what are the other expectations.

The feedback we received had more than 90% positive responses along with indications for improvement in some areas.

The recorded responses were based on the questions we asked after they attended the interview on Talview Platform.

Coaching teams, especially sales teams, is the second most common use of video interviewing after hiring. Coaching video apps are used to help new team members practice customer interactions and objection handling as much as they want.

Coaching is becoming a popular use case.

Best responses are also showcased for the benefit of the entire team as a part of video coaching. Such online HR interviewing coaches are considered one of the best ways to accelerate sales.

Future of video interviewing is already here. Talview launched Talview Behavioural Insights earlier this years which builds a behavioral profile of a candidate based on video interview answers and became the first company to do so.

Talview Talent Insights also uses extraction of key info from video interviews to build a relevance score for each candidate to a particular job description.

Find out more at our website.

Video interviewing is a terrific tool for busy recruiters and hiring managers. It accomplishes almost everything an in-person interview can, but with much greater time flexibility in location and scheule.

It also provides the ability to pass interviews around for group feedback.

On one hand, you can give more candidates an opportunity to tell their story than just reject them based on resumes and on the other hand you can save your precious in-person opportunities for the real stars.

You've read the article, so now it's over to you.



 

Step 2: Go and implement a video interview tool for your organization.

Step 3 (Optional): Read history of recruitment below for a light hearted reading

Now a more light hearted reading! Here is a timeline of how hiring has evolved in my guess; I could be wrong.

Hiring is defined as engaging the services of a person for a fee. Organized hiring started in the roman era where army created a program to find the best candidates.

The process of hiring was primarily physical tests. And hiring has evolved a lot in the last 2000 plus years.

In its first form, companies used to accept applications for hiring. After some time, someone smart figured out that one doesn’t fill an application every time, rather I can create something can be called a CV or resume.

But hiring itself was very simple and in most cases involved the person hire demonstrating their physical strength and capabilities. Recruiting Interviews or Recruitment Interviews as a method to find a good match emerged much later when people started to hire for labor other than physical labor.

Hiring Companies, people who will do hiring as service was the next best innovation in hiring. First ever use of modern technology in hiring was when people started doing telephonic interviews.

Use of information technology in hiring is a very recent phenomenon. It started with hiring websites and multiple formats of hire.com were the first step in hiring online. Many of the were free hiring websites.

Online hiring companies soon emerged where people started offering service of finding the best candidates for jobs through hire com portals.

And then came Applicant Tracking Systems which were the first form of hiring systems or software.

Video interviewing started becoming popular around 2010 and today we are talking about using predictive analytics in hiring.|||

Learn of pros and cons of video interviewing, comparison of providers, pricing, legal aspects, candidate feedback and how to select a video interview software.