A film by Manuel Stagars

http://www.blockchain-documentary.com



In 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto invented bitcoin and the blockchain. For the first time in history, his invention made it possible to send money around the globe without banks, governments or any other intermediaries. The concept of the blockchain isn’t very intuitive. But still, many people believe it is a game changer. 



Economist and filmmaker Manuel Stagars portrays this exciting technology in interviews with software developers, cryptologists, researchers, entrepreneurs, consultants, VCs, authors, politicians, and futurists from the United States, Canada, Switzerland, the UK, and Australia.



The Blockchain and Us is no explainer video of the technology. It gives a view on the topic, makes it accessible and starts a conversation about its potential wider implications in a non-technical way. The film deliberately poses more questions than it answers. 



For a deep dive, see all full-length interviews from the film here: http://www.blockchain-documentary.com...



Credits:



Conversations with (in alphabetical order)



David Birch

Director of Innovation, Consult Hyperion

Guildford, UK



Perianne Boring

Founder & President, Chamber of Digital Commerce

Washington, USA



Christian Decker

Core Tech Engineer, Blockstream

Zurich, Switzerland



Taylor Gerring

Co-Founder, Ethereum

Zug, Switzerland



Marco Carlo Grossi

Director Audit & Risk Advisory, Deloitte Switzerland

Zurich, Switzerland



Caitlin Long

Chairman of the Board & President at Symbiont.io

New York, USA



R. Jesse McWaters

Financial Innovation Lead, World Economic Forum

New York, USA



Paul Meeusen

Head Finance and Treasury Services, Swiss Re

Zurich, Switzerland



Dolfi Müller

Mayor of the City of Zug

Zug, Switzerland



Matthew Roszak

Co-Founder & Chairman, Bloq

Chicago, USA



Guido Rudolphi

Founder, Cryptocash

Uster, Switzerland



Jan Seffinga

Partner, Deloitte Switzerland

Zurich, Switzerland



Elizabeth Stark

Co-Founder & CEO, Lightning

San Francisco, USA



Alex Tapscott

Founder & CEO, Northwest Passage Ventures

Co-Author "Blockchain Revolution"

Toronto, Canada



Lars Thomsen

Chief Futurist & Founder, Future Matters

Zurich, Switzerland



Eric Van der Kleij

Founder Adeptra, London Tech City, Level39. Adviser UK Govt, Kickstart Accelerator

London, UK



Roger Wattenhofer

Professor, Distributed Computing Group, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH)

Zurich, Switzerland



Rik Willard

Founder & Managing Director, Agentic Group

New York, USA



Steve Wilson

Digital Identity Innovator & Analyst

Sydney, Australia



Additional conversations and special thanks (in alphabetical order): Iris Belle, Ben Bledsoe, Thomas Bromehead, Richard Cheng, Dario Duran, Marie Farrar Knowles, Olga Feldmeier, Sony Fricker, Daniel Gasteiger, Daniel Grassinger, Johs. Hoehener, Richard Kastelein, Leanne Kemp, Thomas Kern, Francine Klopfenstein, Veronica Lange, Claire LaRocca, Adriano B. Lucatelli, Christian Mäder, Ruedi Maeder, Luzius Meisser, Michael Monceaux, Martin Müller, Mia Mutic, Ian Petchenik, Nathaniel Popper, Ramon Quesada, Kamesh Raghavendra, Brian Rogers, Jouko Salonen, Vadim Shamigulov, Raffaela Stelzer, Don Tapscott, Elizabeth Wesson



Many thanks to all conversation partners and all others who made this film possible



Additional thanks (in alphabetical order): Agentic Group, Blockchain News, Blockstream, Bloq, Chamber of Digital Commerce, Constellation Research, Consult Hyperion, Cryptocash, Deloitte Switzerland, Ethereum Foundation, Everledger, Flightradar24, Future Matters, ISO-20022.ch, Lightning, Lockstep Consulting, Municipality of Zug, nexussquared, Northwest Passage Ventures, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Swiss Re, Symbiont, World Economic Forum (WEF), Zurich Airport



Recording of live air traffic courtesy of Flightradar24



Russian subtitles: Vadim Shamigulov, Sergey Sevantsyan

Chinese subtitles: Richard Cheng

Dutch subtitles: Rein Jonkman

Spanish subtitles: Jose Felip Daras and Avalbit.org team

French translation: Thomas Bromehead



Many thanks to all individuals and teams who contributed additional subtitles and translations.



Cinematography, Editing, Music, Narration & Sound Design by Manuel Stagars



© 2017 Manuel Stagars



The goal of this film is to encourage the conversation about the economic and social impacts of blockchain technology. Participate in the comments and subscribe to the channel to stay in the loop.|||

A film by Manuel Stagars http://www.blockchain-documentary.com In 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto invented bitcoin and the blockchain. For the first time in history, ...