Do you ever find that by the second or third time you shop around for the same item, the price has increased or dropped by a few dollars?

Amazon changes their prices millions of times per day, but it’s almost impossible to determine the best time to buy items in order to get the best price.

Luckily, there are a few tricks out there that can help you get around these continuous price drops and make sure you never overpay again. 

 

Thanks to an app called Earny, I am able to get money back every time Amazon drops the price on something I already bought.

For example, before Christmas I bought a blender for $71.99. Two weeks later the price dropped to $57.59, and Earny got me $14.40 back!

Earny is a bot that automatically gets you money back when prices drop. I registered last year, and since then I have been getting money every few weeks.

I love it because I don’t have to do anything. I literally registered using the email address my receipts are sent to (they use online receipts to track price drops), and since then the money has been rolling in. 

 

 If you have a Chase or Citibank credit card, chances are your purchases are protected from price drops for up to 90 days.

I’m guessing that you haven’t used this feature yet. It is a hassle to track all your purchases for price drops and when you find one, it’s an even bigger hassle to send claims to your credit card issuer in hopes that they give you the money back. Earny makes this so easy and automatic — it’s really great.

 

Right now, you could be sitting on thousands of dollars owed to you by your bank and by the stores you shop at, but if you had Earny, you’d have the money back already.

 

Here’s how Earny works:

I registered my Chase card with Earny. If you have a Chase or Citibank cards, these get you much more money back than using other cards.

 

The best part about using a bot like Earny is that you know you will never pay too much on an Amazon purchase again.

 

If you think you can benefit from this like I did, register HERE.

Download the app here now|||

Do you ever find that by the second or third time you shop around for the same item, the price has increased or dropped by a few dollars? Amazon changes their prices millions of times per day, but it…