I’m often asked by founders what milestones they need to get to in order to raise an institutional Seed round or Series A and what size do those rounds tend to be. The short answer is, it depends; but below are some benchmarks I’ve seen, which is based on companies raising in the Bay Area and NYC. Keep in mind, there are always exceptions and outliers!

Average Round Sizes: I looked at Crunchbase data for Seed and Series A rounds in SaaS companies in NYC and the Bay Area over the last 2 quarters.

Benchmarks for getting a Seed round done:

Repeat and proven founders with past success can often raise a seed round pre-revenue, I’ll assume most founders don’t fit into this bucket. I’ll also assume your team is strong, you have founder-market fit and you are building a good product that is solving a real problem. Without those, it’s very difficult to raise money at all.

In a crowded market or one that isn’t obviously very large:

In a less crowded market and one that is clearly very large:

Benchmarks for getting a Series A round done:

Outside of team and assuming it’s a sufficiently big market ($300M+ in ARR possible), current and projected growth rate will likely have the largest impact on size of round and valuation. SaaS companies today are growing faster than ever, so the bar has gotten higher.

$250K – $1M in ARR: Some SaaS companies can raise large Series A rounds with less than $1M in ARR but they are few and far between. Obviously there is less data here to evaluate key SaaS metrics, but the companies that I’ve seen do it, tend to have the following characteristics:

$1M+ in ARR: This is much more common. Most SaaS companies that raise $5M+ Series A rounds from what I’ve seen are doing between $1M – $2.5M in ARR and tend to have the following characteristics:

Again, there are always exceptions and a lot of factors that go into a round getting done or not. If you are a SaaS founder, this is just meant to help provide some benchmarks as you start to think about your fundraising strategy.|||

I’m often asked by founders what milestones they need to get to in order to raise an institutional Seed round or Series A and what size do those rounds...