It provides a flexibility and an easiest way to build the mobile app. With the help of the MageNative app, you can convert the Magento® 2 website into a featured mobile app consisting of all the website functionalities.

MageNative is the Application Development Platform that enables to present the website in the Mobile Application Environment. You can customize the app to match the brand image and publish it to meet the requirements of the front-end users.

⦁ Attractive and User-Friendly Layout: Provides an attractive and user-friendly layout that makes the users to instinctively experience, how to use the interface.

⦁ Search: Enhanced search feature available to search the required product in the app based Name, description, Category of the product.

⦁ Barcode And QR Code Reader and Scanner: QR Code Reader is used for Product sharing and easy product search. Barcode Scanner is used for the Real world product search.

⦁ Push Notification: Using Push Notification the MageNative App sends the user a notification message regarding any new offer or any other app related messages without the user actually opening the app.

The notification is pushed to the mobile to draw the user’s attention towards the latest happening in the app, even when the screen of the tab or mobile is locked, and the app that is pushing the notification is closed.

⦁ Social Login: A single sign-on technology is used that allows users to authenticate themselves on MageNative App by connecting through a social media such as Facebook and Google. Thus, offering an option to register, log in with their regular social login ID and password rather than going through the regular process of registration for using the App.

⦁ Native Payment Gateway: Provides the Native Payment Gateway that makes the application run smoothly and even faster on the transactions performed by the users.

⦁ Voice Search: You can search the product with your own voice.

⦁ Support all the payment method available on the Magento 2 store.

 ⦁ Homepage Promotional Banner

 ⦁ Promotional Deals

 ⦁ Product Social Sharing

 ⦁ Google Maps

 ⦁ Google Analytics

 ⦁ Customize App Design

 ⦁ Filters

 ⦁ Sort|||

MageNative Magento mobile app builder is now available for 90 days’ free trial. This blog covers all the features available in the MageNative App.