Think you need seed money to start your business? While most startup success stories feature a funding round or two, many of the web’s most successful brands were built not with loans and venture capital, but through bootstrapping.

Below, we’ve profiled 13 successful entrepreneurs who built and grew their companies with their own savings. Think you need venture capital to grow your startup? Let these 13 inspiring stories prove you wrong.

Rob Walling is the co-founder of hugely successful email marketing software Drip, which grew from a minimum viable product into a $7,000+ per month business in less than 30 days.

Like most bootstrapped SaaS startups, Drip’s beginning wasn’t particularly smooth. Rob noted in an interview with Threadling that the company initially had no onboarding flow, and that new customers were onboarded manually using Skype.

The manual onboarding process gave Rob the ability to learn about the needs and priorities of his customers. The insights he gained from interviewing each customer (a process that would have likely been automated by a funded startup) let him improve Drip and increase retention.

Learn more about Rob Walling’s approach to bootstrapping in his Stairstep Approach blog post and book, Start Small, Stay Small: A Developer’s Guide to Launching a Startup.

37Signals (now Basecamp) is one of the most well known bootstrapping success stories, and for good reason. The company, which initially offered web design services, built Basecamp to help it solve its own problems and eventually grew it into a multi-million dollar application.

Within two years, Basecamp had grown into a large enough business that 37Signals switched its focus from web design to software as a service. Basecamp grew into a suite of applications aimed at individuals and businesses that manage and complete projects online.

The company’s focuses were simple: build a great product that you want to use yourself, and give people just enough to solve their own problems their own way.

After launching SmugMug in 2002, Chris and Don MacAskill ran the company from their family home for years before moving into a real office. By 2007, SmugMug had over 100,000 paying customers who had uploaded a collective 100 million photographs.

Not bad growth for a company that didn’t take any venture capital. As of 2016, SmugMug has more than one million passionate customers and billions of photos, making it one of the world’s biggest photo hosting and sharing websites.

SmugMug’s success, particularly in the face of such intense competition in the photo sharing vertical, shows that small, passionate companies are capable of growing just as fast as their funded competitors.

Email marketing software Campaign Monitor began its life as the idea of a Sydney web design studio. Co-founders Ben Richardson and Dave Greiner built the software out of frustration with existing email newsletter tools and originally intended for it to be an internal work tool.

The app was an immediate hit with their clients, as Greiner explained in an interview with Signal vs Noise. Six months after launch, it was bringing in an equal amount of revenue to their design consulting business. Today, it’s one of the web’s most successful email marketing applications.

True to its bootstrapped roots, Campaign Monitor grew from almost nothing into a multi-million dollar business without any outside investment. 10 years after launch, it took its first infusion of venture capital, with $250 million from Insight Venture Partners.

LessAccounting is simple, user-friendly accounting software for non-accountants. Like many of the other bootstrapped startups on this list, it’s the product of its founders solving a problem that they faced personally: dealing with complicated, boring accounting software.

Since late 2006, it’s grown continuously as far larger competitors with $3 million, $50 million and even $230 million attempted to compete, with many exiting the market as fast as they entered.

Co-founders Steven Bristol and Allan Branch have written extensively on their decision to build and grow LessEverything without outside funding in posts like How Bootstrappers Can Compete Against Funded Startups And Get Customers and Why We Bootstrapped Our Company.

Ian Landsman built helpdesk software HelpSpot into a profitable business, despite having no seed funding or venture capital. Like many other bootstrapped products, HelpSpot was built after Ian noticed how few fully web based help desk applications were available at the time.

Launching the first version of the software took about six months of development, beginning in 2004 and stretching into 2005. Ian podcasts about his experience building HelpSpot and other startup topics at Bootstrapped.fm.

Authentic Jobs is a job board for designers, developers and other creatives. Built by Cameron Moll, it started in response to employers contacting Cameron asking for recommendations for open positions and contracts.

For the first four years, Cameron ran Authentic Jobs as a side project before diving into the site full time in 2010 after it started to generate a full-time income. To this day, Authentic Jobs is an entirely bootstrapped business without any outside investment.

Since 2005, it’s been used by companies like Apple, Mercedes-Benz and Facebook to fill design and technical positions.

Simple Goods is the brainchild of Buffer designer Tyler Wanlass. Built to make selling online as easy as possible, Simple Goods is a lightweight, user-friendly ecommerce application aimed at small online businesses that need reliable payment and order management.

Designed and marketed without any external investment, Simple Goods is a great example of a bootstrapped product competing (and winning) in a crowded market dominated by large, funded companies.

ConvertKit is simple, powerful email marketing software designed for professional bloggers. As a bootstrapped competitor in a crowded market, it faced a major challenge in standing out from its larger, more established and wealthy competitors.

 Founded by Nathan Barry, the company was at one point a “failing product” with only $1,337 in monthly revenue. Nathan invested $50,000 of his own money into the company and grew it into a $30,000/month business using tactics like email outreach and an affiliate program.|||

We’ve profiled 13 of the web's best bootstrappers who built and grew their companies with their own savings.