Last week, I attended MicroConf in Las Vegas, and CartHook’s Jordan Gal, who was the first speaker, joked that he always sees his motivation around the dinner table. His motivation throws food at him. His motivation has dirty diapers that need changing.

I’m in the same boat. When I need a reminder of why I work so hard, why all of my business ventures are important in the first place, then I look at pictures of my wife Megan and our two children, Salem and Theo.

If I’m working from home, I will sometimes leave my laptop and go into the family room or upstairs to play with the kids for a couple of minutes. I need constant reminders of my Why in order to stay focused. I can walk twenty feet and see my goals personified.

When we’re in the weeds, we become reactive instead of proactive. We give the squeaky wheel the grease. But what if the squeaky wheel isn’t truly important and beneficial? What if that wheel/project/relationship will not get you to where you ultimately want to go?

Freelancing is a highwire act. We must balance the work that gets us today with future money.

During this act numerous concerns can bounce you off the wire:

You must put your goals first.

Okay, how do you do that?

The first step to achieving goals is keeping them in front of you.

After finishing Michael Hyatt’s Best Year Ever course in December 2016, I had a clear understanding of what I wanted to accomplish in 2017. Here are two of my goals:

I needed to put more intentionality into designing a “shutdown routine,” as the author of Deep Work Cal Newport calls it.

Though I value my work, I don’t want work to crowd out something else I value even more, being fully present with my family.

Most people call this “work-life balance,” but I prefer to think in terms of five buckets. We all get the same number of minutes each day, and multiple goals compete for those minutes.

How much time will you pour into each bucket?

I tend to get in the weeds and forget what truly matters. It sounds crazy to admit it, but I forget my goals.

Hopefully, you can take some advice for achieving goals from a flawed human being who often loses sight of what is most important: Keep your goals in front of you. Print them out, and carry them everywhere. Review them weekly, and chip away at them fifteen minutes at a time.

I have knocked out client projects this way. I have finished books this way. I have built profitable businesses this way.

You can too.

If you found value in this blog post, please subscribe below. I’ll send you more posts as I publish them.

P.S. Did you learn anything? Hit the heart button below and recommend the story. Also, please subscribe here. That way, I can share you more stories and insights as I publish them.|||

Last week, I attended MicroConf in Las Vegas, and CartHook’s Jordan Gal, who was the first speaker, joked that he always sees his motivation around the dinner table. His motivation throws food at him…