So here’s a new roadmap showing how HPC (High Performance Computing or Super Computing as it’s sometimes known) is currently being used and what HPC might be capable of in the distant future (unspecified).

There are five key categories of applications: Modelling & Simulation, Healthcare & Medicine, Security, Fintech and Materials, Manufacturing & Engineering. We had Data in there too in the beginning, but removed it because most applications seemed to be subsets of the other categories.

In an ideal graphic the various entries would connect. For example, design of nano-water filters is materials & engineering, but it’s also modelling and it’s healthcare.

There are a couple of jokes on the map to keep people on their toes (or maybe not!) and the point of the map is dead simple. It’s intended to stimulate discussion about what HPC is capable of and where HPC might be heading (my personal favourite entry is aesthetics prediction btw).

The entries are all largely tech-push of course. In the real world you’d need to overlay things like energy, security, privacy, regulation and human psychology to get a clearer picture of what’s next, but it’s a start. As far as we can tell it’s also far better than anything currently out there in terms of info-graphics about HPC.

The main audience is obviously the global HPC community, but hopefully it will appeal to anyone interested in computing, Big Data, predictive analytics and perhaps machine learning and AI. (BTW, why HPC isn’t called Big Computing is beyond some of us!)

Below are a few pictures showing the development of the map, which originally started off in the shape of a question mark with the really big question being either where is this all going or what is this all really for?

The really interesting category to our collective mind at Tech Foresight is simulation and modelling. It brings up ethical and even philosophical questions about how simulations impact reality. For example, if you have data that suggests something will happen, what level of certainty would you require to then act and where is free will and human agency in all this?

BTW, thanks to Jolanta Leonaite, Gavin Bravery, Prof. Peter Haynes and Prof. Nick Jennings for their input.

Nice bit of coverage in Forbes already too. @forbes

Modelling & Simulation

 Modelling impacts of climate change against specific species

 Predicting M&A activity/hostile takeovers

 Radiation shield modelling

 Monitoring and monitoring of nuclear waste storage

 Carbon sequestration modelling

 Simulation of fluid dynamics

 Subsurface water modelling

 Prediction of technology breakthroughs

 Preventing the invention of unnecessary technologies

 Creation of artificial actors, singers, poets and painters

 Individual volcano modelling

 Real time national mood modelling

 Hyper-local personal weather forecasts

 Complete human brain simulations

 Prediction of revolutions using social media feeds

 Automation of scientific research

 Finding new knowledge hidden in big data

 Aesthetics prediction

 Modelling tornado trajectory & speed

 Oil well forecasting

 Earthquake prediction

 Whole city simulations

 Pollution modelling & forecasting

 Modelling impacts of bio-diversity loss

 Space weather forecasting

 Major incident modelling & simulation

Healthcare & Medicine

 Mapping blood flow

 Cardiac simulations

 Dynamic prediction of life threating conditions

 Whole earth pandemic modelling

 Unravelling protein folding

 Acceleration of drug discovery & testing

 Foreign aid & disaster relief allocation

 Dynamic simulations of muscle & joint interactions

 Bone implant modelling

 Longevity prediction for individuals at birth

 Design of nano-filters for water purification

 Dynamic patient simulation based upon medical records

Fintech

 Pre-trade risk analysis

 Fraud and insider dealing detection

 Automatic regulatory control & compliance

 Dynamic allocation of tax revenues

 Flash crash prediction

 Whole economy simulation

Engineering, materials & manufacturing

 Space station design

 Design of new aeronautics materials

 Zero gravity manufacturing & design

 Predicting properties of undiscovered materials

 Design of smart cities

 Optimisation of crowd-sourced delivery networks

 Design of ‘impossible’ buildings|||

