White papers are those documents that establish the authenticity of an important topic. Also, White Paper is one of the marketing tactics that many organizations use to persuade their target audience and convert them into leads. You can see this trend followed by many SAAS organizations. Giving something valuable for free has always been a great strategy and attracts a lot of people on the internet. When targeted well, can create wonders and get you a lot of traffic.

You have created the white paper with valuable information; It doesn’t end here. Now it’s time to promote your white paper to your target audience. The white paper promotion will let you know how your target market responds to your valuable content. Through the white paper, you collect email id’s of interested people, and the next step is to convert them into real leads to use your product or service.

If you want to see great results, you need to test and try different tactics to promote your white paper. If something is working, scale it to new heights and reap the benefits by putting more time on it and leave the one’s that are not working.

A great landing page is the first impression your target market looks at, and all further actions depend on the UI/UX of the landing page.

What all it should include?

Note: Don’t ask too much of information for the visitor to download the white paper. He will just bounce out without downloading.

Using free tools like Sniply or CliClap and creating a custom CTA on popular articles/blogs and then sharing the links on all your social channels will help you get good traction. You can know the most shared content from BuzzSumo and use those articles to add your custom CTA.

Use your popular blogs as a tool to capture visitors attention. Creating a timed pop up on your popular blogs to download the whitepaper is easy and can work really well.

Including your white paper download link in the Newsletter that you send at regular intervals without annoying your audience is one good option to get good eyeballs to check your white paper.

Guest posting/blogging is one of the powerful tactics to use. Including the download link on guest articles on platforms like Medium and LinkedIn can boost some downloads.

Note: For this, you need to write great quality articles so it comes up on top posts. People read them and download your white paper attached. Write a clickbait title with article around the topic covered in the white paper.

You can leverage this platform SlideShare to spread your content and reach new audience. Slideshare PPT’s are well optimized so convert your blogs into pdfs or PPT’s and share them on SlideShare, at the end include a download link for your white paper.

Everybody wants to listen to something interesting from a thought leader or industry expert. Conducting compelling webinar series with topic influencers and asking the attendees to download the white paper at the end will be a good option.

Announce about your white paper with creative content on free PR distribution services such as a ClickPress.com, PR.com, or Free-Press-Release.com.

If you mention related topic influencers, journalists or publishers in the white paper, it is likely that even they promote it and this helps to amplify your promotion. But, you need to make sure you tell these people (influencers, journalists or publishers) prior that you are including their name in your white paper and ask for permission.

Interview an influential thought leader who is an expert on the topic. You can ask five questions to the influencer or a well-known thought leader in the industry, and he/she can answer back. You can publish it as a blog and at the end add a CTA ‘Download the white paper, ’ and you can expect some downloads.

SaaS related issues/topics are usually best-suited ones for LinkedIn. Join targeted groups and share the white paper download link.

Note: Don’t make it look like you are promoting your white paper directly. Talk some benefits about the white paper and how it helps the group, then share the white paper download link.

Leverage all your social channels and share your white paper download link at least once in two days. Use tools like Buffer or Hootsuite to schedule your tweets.

Use tools like Crowdfire to automate custom direct messages to your followers on social media. It works really well on Twitter. Crowdfire lets you send auto DM’s whenever someone follows you on Twitter. Along with some amazing message, you can ask your followers to download the white paper.

These are some manageable and easy white paper promotion ideas any SAAS company can make use of and generate buzz.

If you like this article, kindly tap the 💚 below:)|||

White papers are those documents that establish the authenticity of an important topic. Also, White Paper is one of the marketing tactics that many organizations use to persuade their target audience…