A library for writing better React components and data stores. Uses automatic subscriptions to reduce code and avoid common data flow pitfalls. Scales for projects of all sizes and works great with TypeScript.

In React’s early days, Flux gave us guidance on how to manage data flow in our apps. At its core, data would be placed into stores and React components would fetch it from them. When a store’s data was updated, it would notify all concerned components and give them the opportunity to rebuild their states.

While Flux works well, it can also be cumbersome and error prone. Separate actions, action creators, and stores can result in a great deal of boilerplate code. Developers can fetch data from a store but fail to subscribe to changes, or components can oversubscribe and cause performance issues. Furthermore, developers are left to implement these patterns from scratch.

ReSub aims to eliminate these limitations (and more) through the use of automatic data binding between stores and components called autosubscriptions. By using TypeScript’s method decorators, ReSub components can subscribe to only the data they need on only the stores that provide it, all without writing any code.

The easiest way to understand ReSub is to see it in action. Let’s make a simple todo app.

The heavy lifting in ReSub is done mostly within two classes, and . It’s from these that we make subclasses and implement the appropriate virtual functions.

First, we create a store to hold todos:

Next, we create a component to display the todos:

When future todos are added to the , will automatically fetch them and re-render. This is achieved because makes a call to which is decorated as an method.

ReSub is built with scalability in mind; it works for apps of all sizes with all scales of data traffic. But this doesn’t mean scalability should be the top concern for every developer. Instead, ReSub encourages developers to create the simplest code possible and to only add complexity and tune performance when it becomes an issue. Follow these guidelines for best results:

By default, a store will notify all of its subscriptions any time new data is available. This is the simplest approach and useful for many scenarios, however, stores that have heavy data traffic may result in performance bottlenecks. ReSub overcomes this by allowing subscribers to specify a string that limit the scope in which they will trigger.

Consider an example where our Todo app differentiates between high and low priority todo items. Perhaps we want to show a list of all high priority todo items in a component. This component could subscribe to all changes on the , but this means it’d re-render even when a new low priority todo was created. That’s wasted effort!

Let’s make smarter. When a new high priority todo item is added, it should trigger with a special key instead of using the default key. Our component can now subscribe to just this key, and its subscription will trigger whenever triggers with either or , but not for .

All of this can still be accomplished using method decorators and autosubscriptions. Let’s create a new method in :

Components that call inside will automatically subscribe to all future high priority todos triggers from .

Alternatively, this subscription can be made manually. Subclasses of would implement a method that returns a custom like the following:

Note: Of course it’s possible to separate high and low priority todo items into separate stores, but sometimes similar data is simultaneously divided on different axes and is therefore difficult to separate into stores without duplicating. Using custom keys is an elegant solution to this problem.

Once you’re comfortable with key-based subscriptions, you can push the concept further and eliminate even more boilerplate code. allows developers to create manual subscriptions that, instead of specifying a , will use whatever value is found inside of a given component .

For example, perhaps our receives the user’s as a prop, and it only wishes to subscribe to updates related to that user. This could be established like the following:

Here, will automatically read the value from and use this as the subscription key on . If is ever modified, the old subscription will be unregistered and a new one will be formed with the new key.

Key-based subscriptions are very powerful, but they can be even more powerful and can reduce more boilerplate code when combined with autosubscriptions. Let’s update our to add the decorator:

Now, we can establish the autosubscription for this user in :

will be called when triggers any changes for the specified username, but not for any other usernames. This eliminates the need completely for any manual subscriptions to be made in .

created inside of will call by default when they trigger. Instead, developers can specify a custom callback in definitions using either (with autosubscription support just like using ) or (no autosubscription support):

Custom callbacks are usually unnecessary, but they do give components the opportunity to do delta state management and other performance tuning.

To get the most out of ReSub, your components should inherit and should implement some or all of the methods below.

Returns true if the component is currently mounted, false otherwise. Subclasses should not override this method.

This method is provided by ReSub already, but can be overridden. Subclasses that override it do not need to call super.

ReSub’s implementation of this method uses to compare new state and props with their previous values and returns true if a change is found.

Note: is a deep comparison operator, and hence can cause performance issues with deep data structures.

Subclasses should implement some or all of the following methods:

This method is called to rebuild the module’s state. All but the simplest of components should implement this method. It is called on three occurrences:

Any calls from this method to store methods decorated with will establish an autosubscription.

React’s method should not be called directly in this function. Instead, the new state should be returned and will call .

This method is called during component construction and should return a list of all . These subscriptions will be registered and will work in addition to any autosubscriptions formed later.

This method is automatically called from and , as both of these methods typically do the same work.

Many of these methods are unnecessary in simple components thanks to and , but may be overridden if needed. Implementations in subclasses must call super.

ReSub’s true power is realized when creating subclasses of . Several features are exposed as public methods on , and subclasses should also implement some or all of the virtual methods below.

In addition to providing useful patterns for store creation, also provides features to squeeze out additional performance through heavy data traffic.

By default, a store will instantly (and synchronously) notify all of its subscriptions when is called. For stores that have heavy data traffic, this may cause components to re-render far more often than needed.

To solve this issue, stores may specify a throttle time limit by specifying (X being a number of milliseconds) during construction. Any triggers within the time limit will be collected, de-duped, and callbacks will be called after the time is elapsed.

In applications with heavy data traffic, especially on mobile browsers, frequent component re-rendering can cause major performance bottlenecks. Trigger throttling (see above) helps this problem, but sometimes this isn’t enough. For example, if the developer wants to show an animation at full 60-fps, it is important that there is little to no other work happening at the same time.

allows developers to block all subscription triggers on all stores until the block is lifted. All calls to in this time will be queued and will be released once the block is lifted.

Because certain stores may be critical to the app, allows stores to opt out of (and completely ignore) trigger blocks by passing to the constructor.

Multiple stores or components might want to block triggers simultaneously, but for different durations, so counts the number of blocks in effect and only releases triggers once the block count reaches 0.

Manually subscribe to this store. By default, the method will be called when the store calls with any key, but this can be reduced by passing a specific . For more information, see the “Subscriptions and Triggering” section.

returns a token that can be passed to .

Trigger all subscriptions that match the provided to be called back. If no key is specified, will be used and all subscriptions will be triggered. For more information, see the “Subscriptions and Triggering” section.

This method returns a de-duped list of all on which subscribers have subscribed.

Returns true if a subscription has been made on the specified , or false otherwise.

Calling will halt all triggers on all stores until the trigger block is lifted by a subsequent call to . For more information, see the “Trigger blocks” section.

Lifts the trigger block on all stores and releases any queued triggers. If more than one trigger block is in effect (because more than one store or component wants to block triggers simultaneously), will decrement the block count but not release the triggers. For more information, see the “Trigger blocks” section.

Subclass constructors should call super. refers to the throttle time (see “Trigger throttling” section). refers to the trigger blocking system (see “Trigger blocks” section).

uses reference counting on subscription keys. This method is called whenever a subscription is created using a new .

In certain applications, a store will be passed data that it chooses to ignore until it knows that a subscriber is interested in it. This method will notify the store to begin collecting that data.

Subclasses do not need to call super.

uses reference counting on subscription keys. This method is called when the last occurrence of this is unsubscribed.

In certain applications, a store will be passed data that it chooses to ignore until it knows that a subscriber is interested in it. When there are no longer any interested subscribers for a given , this method gives the store the opportunity to flush this data.

Subclasses do not need to call super.

ReSub avoids taking a strong opinion on data flow in your project.

While it’s not encouraged, it’s fine for components to make calls to modify store data, for components and stores to make AJAX and other asynchronous calls, and for stores to subscribe to one another. Action creators may be used to organize data flow, but they’re not required and often not necessary.

Whether using ReSub or not, your app will likely scale best if it follows these guidelines:

It is fine to use ReSub without TypeScript, but without access to TypeScript’s method decorators, stores and components cannot leverage autosubscriptions, and as such, lose a lot of their value.

At the very least, developers can still leverage the organizational patterns of and , and any virtual functions that subclasses implement will still be called.|||

ReSub - A library for writing React components that automatically manage subscriptions to data sources simply by accessing them