Building something from scratch is hard. Take baking a cake for example. Baking a cake from scratch takes several hours and an immense amount of effort. On the other hand, you can go to the store and buy one in less than 15 minutes without doing any work.

Going back to our cake example — more effort and time was spent on the cake built from scratch than the store bought one. As a result, the cake built from scratch will be more aesthetically pleasing, tailored a certain set of specifications, and taste amazing. The store bought cake, on the other hand, will be lackluster and uninspiring.

For UNUM messenger, we decided early on that we build cakes from scratch because store bought cakes just flat out suck.

Back in December our journey started with the idea of building an all in one messaging platform to simplify communication. We wanted to be the Buffer of messaging apps (so to speak.)

The problem is, unifying messaging is complex because there are hundreds of messaging apps that all boast massive user bases. We wanted to combine all of these platforms and let people communicate from one central location.

While the idea is solid, we have come to find the execution to be nearly impossible. (At least with a team of two.) Each one of these messaging platforms has teams consisting of hundreds of people building their apps. Along with massive teams, they also make it increasingly hard to siphon users away from their platform.

Every app wants to keep their users native to their app to advertise and monetize them in various ways. It comes down to the more time users spend inside their app, the more money the companies can make. For this reason, these platforms do everything they can to prevent their users from using 3rd party apps to access their platform.

After completing a few integrations with limited functionality, we realized we needed to adjust.

After all of our work to date, we feel stronger than ever that messaging is broken. As we did research and built our product, we found a much bigger problem with messaging.

The world’s most popular social and messaging apps are starting to look almost exactly the same.

Companies like Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, WhatsApp, and Snapchat have all started to just steal products from one another.

Copying features that are popular with competitors are one way to try and increase time spent, which explains why we’ve seen so much of it in the recent past.

The result, though, has been a rather uninspiring race to the middle. Each app is losing its unique identity for features offered by numerous competitors.

We’ve always said, there are so many messaging apps because they are all beautiful in their way. Every messaging app seemed to have it’s own niche, making it’s popular in their own respect. Now they all just want to be the same.

Competition drives innovation, but not when they are all trying to do the same thing. While all the other platforms are fighting for the now, we want to pave the way for the future.

The world has a more holistic approach to the digital landscape we face today. People grow up speaking a digital language natively and understand in a comprehensive manner what implications their online actions have.

We can expect to see this trend continue in the future by witnessing people embracing the idea of keeping a tight and intimate circle of friends. (Have you heard of Finstagram?)

This makes sense considering the number of people the average person can have in her social group is a hundred and fifty. As science and reality clash, most people’s online friend groups are going to shake out to around a hundred and fifty people.

In the end, it’s intimacy and the cultivation of personal relationships that will continue fueling messaging’s meteoric growth.

The new UNUM messenger will be a place for groups of people to connect in a private and secure environment. Friends and families alike can safely share messages, updates, photos, and videos without worrying about wandering eyes seeing their personal messages (or other information.) Think of it as a community YOU have the power control.

Group messaging is great for communication, but it’s a one-dimensional way to connect with others. Communities allow you to not only send messages but also post updates to keep the community informed. Think of it as a mini social media network, exclusive to your community.

Messages often get lost in the endless loop of threads. (Yes, we’re talking about you Slack.) Updates allow you to post relevant news, share what you are up to, and keep your community updated. Instead of having something you say getting lost in a group’s messaging thread, you can use updates to highlight things you want the community to see. Important information will no longer get buried in a sea of messages.

There will be times when you don’t need a community, but rather just group messaging. In this case, you can create a group to communicate with. In the messaging section, you can easily tab between your group messages and your direct messages.

Of course, you will want to have conversations with individuals. In this case, you can easily message anyone you are friends with to chat with them.

Privacy — By default, no one will be able to find you without your exact [username]. There will be end to end encryption on all of your messages to ensure they are secure. No one will be able to find or access you, your community, or your group if you want to keep everything private.

Adding Friends — You will have the option to add friends from your contacts or invite people in a variety of different ways.

Private or Public — Communities will have the option to be set to private or public. By default, your community will be set to private and unsearchable. You will have the option to make it public and set the group so anyone can join or anyone can request to join.

We are thrilled for this new path because it’s a huge opportunity. We want to help people succeed in connecting with people the really care about and being comfortable about it. We can think of thousands of different groups that will be able to benefit from this new way to connect. A quick few include:

By helping groups stay private and secure, we aim to help people connect more intimately. Knowing exactly who is going to see what you send will help people to be more open and sincere.

While it’s not easy to change paths, it’s something we need to do. With our old idea in mind, we initially planned on building a native messaging feature. Since this was something we were working on already, a lot of our code will be salvaged.

We don’t want to rush our timeline for this new idea, so we will be sure post frequent updates to keep people up to date.

Thanks for your support to date and prepare for amazing things in the future!|||

Building something from scratch is hard. Take baking a cake for example. Baking a cake from scratch takes several hours and an immense amount of effort. On the other hand, you can go to the store and…