Incentives for installing insulation and for buying energy-efficient appliances like refrigerators, washing machines, and air conditioners are often available from local and state governments and utilities. You can see what's available at DSIRE , Energy.gov , and Energy Star .

You found it.  If you have a question about saving electricity, or how much electricity something uses, this is the place.  I cover pretty much everything.

And I've put lots of effort into making the information truly useful:

For starters, I explain exactly what a kilowatt hour is and how much you pay for one. I then show you how to calculate exactly how much electricity your household appliances use, so you know which items are guzzling the most juice (and which ones are the best targets for savings).  You'll also learn exactly how to read your electric meter, if you like. (Find that on any other website.)  Finally, I've answered countless questions from readers about saving electricity. If you have a question, it's probably answered here already.

Saving electricity doesn't just save money, it also saves energy, which means less pollution.  This might be surprising, because you don't see or smell any pollution when you turn on the lights, unlike when you fire up your car.  But the pollution is there—it just happens at the power plant instead of on-site.  Most electricity is generated by burning coal and other fossil fuels.  Every time you turn on the lights, you create a little pollution. (See the sidebar.) In fact, the average home pollutes more than the average car! (See my Carbon Footprint Calculator for the numbers.)  So saving electricity doesn't just put money in your pocket, it helps keep the air and water clean, too.

But don't just take my word for it. The legendary James Hansen, one of the first scientists to warn about global warming way back in the 80s, recently said that the real key to preventing climate change is reducing home energy use.  That's because, as he says, we can't stop the oil from being burned for transport, since if we don't use it, another country will. But we can certainly stop burning our own country's coal.  And the quickest way to reduce coal emissions by 50%, is to reduce our electricity consumption by 50%.

Note also that as the age of oil is coming to a close (we've already used more than half of the oil that exists on the planet), our energy appetite puts more pressure for utilities to build dangerous nuclear power plants.

Thinking about going solar?  Solar is indeed now affordable in most cases, and is often cheaper than grid energy.  My concern about this is that, just like with cars, people are looking for an alternative fuel source so they can continue blissfully using ridiculous amounts of energy.  A better approach is for us to just stop using such a ridiculous amount of energy in the first place!

In reality, conservation is pretty easy; the problem is that most people don't want to do it.  That's why people buy gass-guzzlers in droves.  When I go to the gym, I see that almost everyone has turned on the little TV attached to the treadmill or exercycle, never turning them off when they're finished.  That's an easy way to see why we've got a problem. If most people won't do an easy thing, like turning off a TV when they're not using it, how can we expect them to do things that actually require a tiny amount of effort?

But you're here, you're reading this, so you're the kind of person willing to make some modest changes, if not for the environment, then at least to save some money.  Either way, good for you!  If you want to ave energy, then there's no better place to find out about it than here.  And the time is right, too. U.S. taxpayers can now get a whopping 30% tax credit for installing things like heat pumps and solar energy systems.

And if you really want to lessen your carbon footprint, you'll also want to look into eating less meat and driving less.

I hope you find this website useful. Happy savings!

Before we get to the tips on specific appliances, remember one simple thing: You'll save more electricity by dealing with the biggest electricity-guzzlers rather than worrying about items that don't use much electricity. Obsessing about whether it's better to boil a cup of water on an electric burner or in a microwave, or whether you wear out your lights quicker by turning them off rather than keeping them on, is a waste of time and misses the point. Such trivia won't make a dime's worth of difference in your electric bill. It's the bigger things that matter. With that in mind, you'll first want to address the big energy users in your home first, such as your:

Here are some sample savings you might be able to enjoy:



»» Next: How much electricity costs »»|||

The #1 site on the net for saving electricity, which will save you money and decrease pollution. As seen in Newsweek.