We are pleased to announce that SpinaliS Canada was selected to present its pitch at the Dragon’s Den. Watch it on TV in the Fall of 2017.

Here are some of the behind the scenes photos:

Launching a business is no small task. No matter how big an idea you think you have, it still takes a lot of work and a ton of cash. Enter the Dragons’ Den, where aspiring entrepreneurs pitch their business concepts and products to a panel of Canadian business moguls who have the cash and the know-how to make it happen.

They’ve all been there themselves, so you better not walk into the Den unprepared. It takes more than passion to convince these boardroom giants that your idea is worth their attention.

The Dragons are ruthless and rightly so – it’s their own personal money on the line.

For more info call 844 777 0489

 or drop by any of our three stores

Order online at https://www.spinalis-chairs.ca/spinalis-chairs/ and we will deliver any of the SpinaliS chairs of your choice right to your door!

FREE Shipping Anywhere in Canada

 Alberta AB, British Columbia BC, Manitoba MN, New Brunswick NB, Newfoundland and Labrador NL, Northwest Territories NT, Nova Scotia NS, Nunavut NU, Ontario ON, Prince Edward Island PEI, Quebec QC, Saskatchewan SK, Yukon YT (Alberta, Colombie-Britannique, Nouveau-Brunswick, Terre-Neuve-et-Labrador, Territoires du Nord-Ouest, Nouvelle-Écosse, Nunavut, Ontario, Île-du-Prince-Édouard, Québec, Saskatchewan, Yukon)

Medical Device

 SpinaliS chairs were developed with a help of doctors and evaluated as a Class I medical device. Clinical evaluation of the medical device was processed by multiple clinics in Europe. However, in Canada, it is not possible to claim SpinaliS chairs to write your taxes off and they are not covered by any kind of medical insurance or health plan, yet.

Abs and Back Workout

 Work out while sitting on any of the SpinaliS chairs and performing your daily tasks at the office or home.

Back Pain Relief

 SpinaliS Chairs will work out your core muscles for you. Just sit, do your thing and leave everything else up to SpinaliS.

Stylish Office Chairs

 Design of the SpinaliS Chairs is an eye candy – your customers will definitely notice them!

Yoga Ball Alternative

 It is recommended not to sit longer than 2 hours on a yoga ball, but on the SpinaliS chairs you can sit all day long.

Standing Desk Alternative

 SpinaliS chairs will actually make your body to work out and get you into a great shape without the hard task of standing or exercising.

Who does use SpinaliS?

 Google, Dubai Airport, SONY, IBM, DELL, Skoda Auto, CSOB Bank, Unicredit Bank, Vodafone and many more.

Ness Op Media Ltd. offers powerful web marketing and marketing solutions for the medium size businesses and start-ups. We guarantee rapid growth of your company without spending money on expensive Google AdWords and Facebook Newsfeeds. Tell us what you want and see the difference within a month .. guaranteed!

Call us now at 778 938 9883 for a FREE CONSULTATION!|||

