or maybe you see yourself as a Failure.

How about your children?

Facebook is great at exploiting your child’s feelings and consider themselves experts on determining your child’s emotional status. They also consider themselves experts at exploiting said emotional conditions for their financial gain

According to an article in the  The Australian which obtained internal documents from the social media giant which reportedly show how “Facebook can exploit the moods and insecurities of teenagers using their platform for the  benefit of advertisers.”

The confidential document dated this year detailed how Facebook watches your childs posts, comments and interactions on the site. Facebook can figure out when people as young as 14 feel vulnerable and take advantage of it.

Information gathered through a system named  “sentiment analysis” is  being used by advertisers to target young Facebook users when they are potentially more vulnerable.

The Social advertising industry was worth about $80 billion last year. The leaked document shows it has been honing the covert tools designed by coders using advanced mathematical algorithms to gain useful psychological insights on young Australian and New Zealanders in high school and tertiary education. Facebook did not return attempts by news.com.au to comment on the issue but did  issue an apology and told The Australian that it will conduct an investigation into the matter, admitting it was inappropriate to target young children in such a way.

Facebook has been testing algorithms associated with youngsters emotions since 2012 and in there own guidelines they state.

Facebook’s Data Use Policy warns users that the company “may use the information we receive about you … for internal operations, including troubleshooting, data analysis, testing, research and service improvement.”

Currently information about your relationship status, location, age, number of friends and the manner and frequency with which you access the site is sold to advertisers. But according to the report, Facebook is also selling ads to users concerned with insights gleaned from posts such as those concerned with body confidence and losing weight.

Results on the testing done on children at Facebook have been reported in a  published in a scientific journal and spell out what most of us all ready know.

What to do about it and how we can protect our family is a growing concern for many of us. Online communities have pledged to launch programs of their own to counter social media giants including Google, Facebook and Twitter.  Start ups such as Gab struggle to provide alternatives to Sites like Facebook. Unfortunately other known advocacy groups are small and underfunded. Our best defense in this matter is our own watchful eye. As  parents we are responsible for the content our children see. We here at home believe in educating yourself dutifully as to provide alternative narratives to mega social manipulators.

and we are anonymous|||

ARE YOU? Defeated Overwhelmed Stressed Anxious Nervous Stupid Silly Useless or maybe you see yourself as a Failure. How about your children? Facebook is great at exploiting your child's feelings and consider themselves experts on determining your child's emotional status. They also consider themselves experts at exploiting said emotional conditions for their financial gain Their…