Speed Racer is a performance runner, like a test runner, but for performance . It runs scripts (races) in Chrome (headlessly if possible) and produces detailed traces and reports on scripting, rendering and painting.





 See what's new in 0.2.0 or what's being cooked for 0.3.0 





Speed Racer needs Google Chrome to run your files. It will run it headlessly if it finds a proper intallation of Canary (Mac OS X only for now).

Speed Racer comes with two commands right now:

A race can be seen as a unit test. It contains a piece of code that will be profiled by Speed Racer. Under the hood, it uses Chrome DevTools protocol to drive Chrome and collect traces. Races can import / modules and use most of features, depending on your version of Google Chrome: es6 support

Here is an example of a file containing a race:

You can define as many races as you want per file, Speed Racer will collect and run them sequentially.

You can also define asynchronous races like so:

Then you need to collect metrics!

For each race, Speed Racer will produce two artifacts:

Those artifacts will be saved in the directory by default.

To run races, type or simply . Note that it will run all files in the directory by default, so you can omit if you are using this directory.

For more details, type . You can browse examples here.

Once the artifacts have been created, you can quickly display a summary report for each run. Type to see all the reports or to see the reports of a specific file.

Speed Racer is still a baby so it does not provide advanced analysis yet, just a basic summary. But it has several goals:

If you want to use Speed Racer for one of this use cases, you can leverage it and analyze the traces and reports it produces. I would be glad to receive your feedback and ideas on the subject!

Traces are files with the extension. They are basically huge arrays of events produced by Google Chrome. Those events give tons of informations about the overall performance of race. Here is the detail format.

Traces can be pretty big, so they are saved .

You can analyze them the way you want or load them in the Timeline/Performance tab of Chrome like so:

Reports are files with the extension. They provide a performance summary for a given race.

Here is the format:

You can display, analyze or compare them depending on your needs.|||

speedracer - :racing_car: Collect performance metrics for your library/application.