“We present the Dubai Font to the world today, to restate the essential role played by the United Arab Emirates in promoting the values of giving and tolerance not only within the country but also around the world. The font also supports the technology sector in general by offering a high-quality digital font with unique specifications in different countries of the world without any costs. The font carries special characteristics that facilitate reading and supports printing and display on electronic screens. Dubai Font happens to be the most exemplary font to use in designing promotional ads to be used in larger sizes. It is important to note that the high technical quality of the font fills an important need for high-quality Arabic fonts as part of the Office 365 program by Microsoft.”

President of Microsoft in the Middle East and Africa Samer Abu Ltaif said: “Complementing the city’s efforts to adopt more designs and technology on a global level, we are happy to confirm that the ‘Dubai Font’ will be available globally to over 100 million users around the world through Office 365. The debut of this font is a great example of successful collaborations between the public and private sectors to encourage reading and adopt more technical solutions to serve the communities. This reinforces the vision of Dubai, which aims to become one of the most inclusive cities, as well as Microsoft’s vision to provide better fonts to the world that are accessible to everyone.” The Dubai Font was designed by Dr Nadine Chahine in collaboration with a team from a global agency Monotype. It was developed as a font with unique specifications that aims to encourage self-expression and reading. Created from scratch, the Dubai Font fills a design gap between Arabic and Latin texts and presents harmonious typefaces combining the two scripts seamlessly. “The openness and harmony of the people in the UAE, the essence of Dubai and its vision to become the quintessential modern Arab city were our source of inspiration to design the Dubai Font”, explains Dr Nadine Chahine, Type Director and Legibility Expert at Monotype. “The challenge wasn’t to create a quality font but to create a new and a special medium of expression to unleash ambitions and transcend borders.” The Dubai Font helps people around the world to express themselves and share their views, thoughts and life experiences with everyone around them. To achieve that, the need emerged to design the Dubai Font as a means for expression in its fullest details. On the other hand, the design of the font captures the unique nature of the Emirate of Dubai. The Dubai Font mirrors the city’s qualities and promotes its global standing. The font includes 23 languages. New rules for modified vehicles from June 1|||

Directs Dubai government entities to adopt it in their correspondence