In user experience design we’re familiar with user research techniques like workshops and interviews. We synthesise our research into user stories and process flows. We communicate our thinking and solutions to our teams with artefacts like personas and wireframes. But somewhere in all of this lies the real people for whom we’re designing. In order to make our product better, we must understand what’s going on in their worlds and how our product can make their lives better. And that’s where storyboards come in.

In this article I’ll focus on storyboards as a medium to help explore solutions to UX issues, as well as communicating these issues and solutions to others.

Storyboards are illustrations that represent shots that ultimately represent a story. Basically, it’s a sequential art, where images are arrayed together to visualise the story. This method came from the motion picture production. The Walt Disney studio is credited with popularising storyboards, using sketches of frames since the 1920s. Storyboards allow them to build the world of the film before they actually build it.

Stories are the most powerful delivery tool for information:

Storyboarding in UX is tool which help you visually predict and explore a user’s experience with a product. It’s a very much as thinking about your product as if it was a movie in term of how people would use it. It would help you to understand how people would flow through the interaction with it over time, giving you a clear sense of how to create a strong narrative.

Stories are an effective and inexpensive way to capture, relate, and explore experiences in the design process. In relation to UX design process this technique has following benefits:

When thinking about storyboarding, most people focus on their ability (or inability) to draw. The good news is that you don’t need to be good at drawing before you start drawing scenario storyboards.

What is far more important is the actual story you want to tell. Clearly conveying information is a key.

If you are going to create a visual representation of stories to communicate user issues to others, there’s some preparation to be done to make them logical, understandable and convincing in their arguments. By understanding the fundamentals of the story and deconstructing it to the building blocks, we can present it in a more powerful and convincing way. Each story should have following essential elements:

To make your story powerful, here are some points to think about:

Starting the storyboard can be a little daunting, especially if you’re not confident in your drawing skills. But don’t worry, the guideline mentioned below will help you turn out a better scenario storyboard:

Storyboarding in UX is not easy. But it does work. Visuals are a great way to bring a story to life, so try to utilise them wherever possible. Every bit you can do to understand a user is tremendously useful.|||

In user experience design we’re familiar with user research techniques like workshops and interviews. We synthesise our research into user stories and process flows. We communicate our thinking and…