In this tutorial I'm going to show you how to build a simple note taking app that can be used inside of your command line. We're going to use Cosmic JS which allows us to view these notes from anywhere on any device.

Download and install the app on GitHub

In an empty directory start a new npm project.

Next you'll need to add the following packages.

Now let's take a look at the package.json. If you did everything right so far it should look like this.

Now let's take a second to setup our index.js file. First thing we need to do is import our packages at the top of the page

When we have done that next we need to setup our buckets information to be used later.

You will need to fill in the above object with your buckets information. Now we need to setup the main menu this is what you'll see when you start the program.

Let's break this down so it's easier to understand.

Now we are going to create the interface for adding a new note. Buckle in because this is where it gets slightly more confusing.

This isn't too confusing don't worry we'll walk through it together.

The next menu is a little more confusing so we're going to break it down into smaller chunks.

If this seem like absolutely gibberish that's okay we can take it one piece at a time. Let's start with the top half where we get all of your notes (up to ten) and display them in a list view.

That was the basics of fetching the data and manipulating the return in a manner that we can use it correctly in this instance. Now we're going to take a look at the second half of the view function. This is where we can edit and delete our selected not from before.

After all of that code it wasn't too bad in the end. After reading that overview you should have a pretty rough idea of what the program is doing. If your still having problems understanding what is going on I'm just an email away. There are still a few more things that need to be done though. First things first we need to make some adjusts to the package.json file.

This will make it so that the application is installable system wide and can be called by using 'notetoself'. All that's left to do is install the package to your system.

Once this is done simply run this command:

and you'll have system wide notes available anytime you want.

If you have any questions about this installing and using this app join the Cosmic JS community on Slack, or follow and reach out on Twitter.|||

Cosmic JS is a cloud-hosted content platform that offers a flexible and intuitive CMS API.  Build websites and applications with more freedom and manage content easier. Get started for Free.