Microsoft is back in New York City for another hardware and software event, and we'll be live on the scene to tell you everything that's going on. Our liveblog, and the event itself, will kick off at 9:30am EDT (2:30pm UK, or see here for your own timezone).

The event will have an education focus, with Microsoft promoting it with the hashtag "#MicrosoftEDU." Google's Chrome OS, and the Chromebooks it runs on, is making headway in the education space, and we're expecting Microsoft to announce new products to take on this new threat.

On the software side, this should mean that a new version of Windows 10 will make its debut. Leaks and rumors have indicated that a new Windows SKU, variously known as Windows 10 Cloud or Windows 10 S, will be released. This will be a full version of Windows 10, but it will be restricted to running apps acquired from the Windows Store. Removing this restriction will be a paid upgrade of some kind. The Store restriction should mean greater simplicity, security, and reliability. Store apps all offer clean installation and uninstallation, for example, and also provide some ability to roam between machines, bringing all your applications and settings with you.

This new Windows SKU should also see an important application come to the Windows Store: Office.

On the hardware front, things are a little less clear. Though both systems are in dire need of a refresh, we certainly won't be seeing new releases of the Surface Pro 4 or Surface Book. Instead, we're expecting something much more affordable to go up against the cheap laptops running Google's operating system. Microsoft's last cheap system, the Surface 3, was discontinued last year, leaving a gap at the lower end of the market. There has been some speculation that Microsoft has developed a new Surface system using a conventional clamshell form factor; perhaps this will be the new low-end offering.

Microsoft won't be going it alone, either, and third-party devices running the new operating system are also in the cards.|||

Join us at 9:30 EDT today to hear how Microsoft plans to take on Google in education.