The following general rules and precautions are to be observed at all times in the laboratory. These rules are for the benefit of the experimenter as well as those around him/her. Additional rules and precautions may apply to a particular laboratory.

1. There must be at least two (2) people in the laboratory while working onlive circuits or chemical processing.

2. Shoes must be worn at all times.



3. Remove all loose conductive jewelry and trinkets, including rings, which may come in contact with exposed circuits. (Do not wear long loose ties, scarves, or other loose clothing around machines.)



4. Consider all circuits to be "hot" unless proven otherwise.



5. When making measurements, form the habit of using only one hand at a time. No part of a live circuit should be touched by the bare hand.



6. Keep the body, or any part of it, out of the circuit. Where interconnecting wires and cables are involved, they should be arranged so people will not trip over them.



7. Be as neat a possible. Keep the work area and workbench clear of items not used in the experiment.



8. Always check to see that the power switch is OFF before plugging into the outlet. Also, turn instrument or equipment OFF before unplugging from the outlet.



9. When unplugging a power cord, pull on the plug, not on the cable.



10. When disassembling a circuit, first remove the source of power.



11. "Cheater" cords and 3-to-2 prong adapters are prohibited unless an adequate separate ground lead is provided, the equipment or device is double insulated, or the laboratory ground return is known to be floating.



12. No ungrounded electrical or electronic apparatus is to be used in the laboratory unless it is double insulated or battery operated.



13. Keep fluids, chemicals, and beat away from instruments and circuits.



14. Report any damages to equipment, hazards, and potential hazards to the laboratory instructor.



15. If in doubt about electrical safety, see the laboratory instructor. Regarding specific equipment, consult the instruction manual provided by the manufacturer of the equipment. Information regarding safe use and possible- hazards should be studied carefully.|||

