"Zurich - As of Monday, May 1, 2017, the Swiss International Air Lines (SWISS) will abandon the rule of two people in the cockpit. An internal audit showed that this precautionary measure, taken in 2015 after the Germanwings crash, did not improve safety, according to the company officials."

The rule was provisionally adopted following the Germanwings crash in the French Alps on 24 March 2015. The first officer Andreas Lubitz of the Flight 4U 9525 had locked himself alone in the cockpit and had killed 149 people with him.

As a result of this accident a safety recommendation issued by the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). The agency recommended that if one of the pilots is absent during the flight, another crew member should always be present in the cockpit.

However, EASA amended its recommendation in the summer of 2016, taking into account the results of an extensive analysis of the experiences, deciding to allow each company to apply or abandon the rule of the two people in the cockpit.

The second option was chosen by SWISS. "On 1 May 2017, SWISS will abandon the so-called" two-person rule "in the cockpit and reintroduce the former access arrangements to the cockpit," said the company, stating that the decision was taken in consultation with the other airlines of the Lufthansa Group.

SWISS justifies its decision with that an internal study which has shown that the two-person rule in the cockpit doesn't provide an improvement in safety, but, on the other hand, generates additional risks, leaving the cockpit door open more frequent and longer.

The airline will accompany this change with additional safety measures. SWISS indicates that it also meets all of EASA's requirements to overcome the rule:

- Implementation of recruitment criteria and selection procedures to verify the psychological and security requirements for pilots.

- The assurance that pilots are in stable employment.

- The (easy) access for pilots to counseling and psychological support programs.

- The company's ability to reduce the psychological and social risks to which pilots may be exposed, particularly in the event of a license loss.

According to SWISS, the abandonment of the rule is encouraged by the Swiss Federal Office of Civil Aviation (OFAC).

The rule of the two people in the cockpit was criticized by the pilots. For some, the rule has not been sufficiently evaluated, at the operational level as well as on the threats and risks involved.

The European Association of Pilots (ECA) also put forward three arguments against the recommendation. "In the first place, saying that pilots need to be monitored when they are alone in the cockpit, reduces the confidence of the passengers," said the association in May 2016.

The association also found it highly doubtful that the presence in the cockpit of a person without operational knowledge would really improve safety. On the contrary, it could create, in the ECA's view new security and operational concerns.

Finally, the more people entering and leaving the cockpit the greater risk of seriously compromising flight safety, the Association said.|||

"Zurich - As of Monday, May 1, 2017, the Swiss International Air Lines (SWISS) will abandon the rule of two people in the cockpit. An internal audit showed that this precautionary measure, taken in 2015 after the Germanwings crash, did not improve safety, according to the company officials." The rule...