May is Mental Health Month.  You’ve probably noticed that antidepressants are being prescribed now more than ever by conventional  doctors for a variety of health symptoms.  This is a powerful phenomenon in America today that is doing a disservice to women because it is actually harming their mental health, not helping it.  This pattern leads to the prescription of dangerous mind altering drugs for symptoms that your doctor can’t find diagnosis for.

Have you been prescribed an antidepressant for any combination of these symptoms?

 Loss of energy (malaise/fatigue)

 Difficulty losing weight

 Cold intolerance

 Difficulty concentrating and short term memory loss

 Muscle pain and cramps

 Joint pain

 Tiredness after a full night’s sleep

 Recurrent and chronic infections

 Decreased mental sharpness

 Brain fog

 Dry skin

 Brittle fingernails with ridging

 Low basal body temperature

 Elevated cholesterol and triglycerides

 Depression or mood swings

 Constipation

 Menstrual irregularities

 Headaches

If you are a woman who shares more than three symptoms with your doctor, you will most assuredly be a candidate for an antidepressant.  The bottom line is that your doctor probably doesn’t really know what is causing your symptoms.  He was taught to do a single blood test to diagnose his patients for hypothyroidism.  This single blood test fails the patient more often than not. However, there is not a blood test to determine if you need an antidepressant.  Doctors don’t hesitate to give out antidepressants like candy without any type of medical test at all.

Depression is a Symptom of Hypothyroidism

 Did you know that depressed moods are a common symptom of low thyroid function? Research shows a significant association of hypothyroidism with psychiatric disorders, an increased frequency of depression and anxiety symptoms.(1) Patients with thyroid disorders are more prone to develop depressive symptoms. Both excess and insufficient thyroid hormones can cause mood abnormalities, including depression, that is generally reversible with adequate thyroid treatment. Furthermore, thyroid hormones are reported by many to be an effective treatment for depression. (2)

Do I really need antidepressants?

 No!  Antidepressants don’t solve the symptoms of hypothyroidism and hormone deficiencies.  Find a doctor who will work with you to discover the underlying causes of your symptoms.

Dangerous side effects of antidepressants

 New or worsening depression

 Homicidal and suicidal tendencies

 Feeling restless, angry or irritable

 New or sudden changes in mood

 Flattened emotions

 Agitation

 Fast or irregular heartbeat

 Anxiety or panic attacks

 High or low blood pressure

 Nervousness

 Hallucinations

 Difficulty breathing or swallowing

 Headaches

 Dry mouth

 Nausea

 Excessive sweating

 Insomnia

 Jitters

 Low sex drive

 Confusion

 Abnormal bleeding

 Manic episodes

 Severe muscle stiffness

 Swelling of the face, throat, tongue

Caution: Do not stop taking an antidepressant cold turkey.

 If you are currently taking antidepressants, you should never stop them abruptly since they are addicting and can cause severe, dangerous withdrawal symptoms.  Work with your doctor to wean off of them slowly and safely.  We recommend reading, “The Antidepressant Solution: A Step-by-Step Guide to Safely Overcoming Antidepressant Withdrawal, Dependence, and ‘Addiction,’” by Joseph Glenmullen, M.D. This is a great resource to give to your doctor.

Dr. Hotze explains the dangers of taking pharmaceutical drugs and how they poison patients:

There is a safe, natural solution for your symptoms.

 In honor of Mental Health Month, let us tell you that you are not crazy and these symptoms are not “all in your head.”  Always ask your doctor “WHY am I having these symptoms?”  We urge you to work with your doctor to find the underlying cause and take a natural approach to treating them.  We want to offer you hope.  There is an answer, and it doesn’t require a dangerous pharmaceutical drug.

Do you want to know if hypothyroidism or hormonal imbalance is causing your symptoms? 

 Click here to take our health assessment today, and get the answers you have been searching for!

Related Content

 The Antidepressant-Placebo Effect

 One More Reaston to Avoid Antidepressants

 Depression: A Common Symptom of Hypothyroidism

Research

 1. Subclinical Hypothyroidism: Psychiatric Disorders and Symptoms

 2. The Link between Thyroid Function and Depression|||

Did you know that depression is a common symptom of hypothyroidism? You don't need antidepressants for hypothyroidism symptoms.