5. Build Things That You Care About: Don’t tell my professors, but in my time on campus during the first year of my MBA, I managed to write and publish my first book, Building Digital Products.

Although my book was completely outside of the scope of my MBA coursework, an MBA provides you countless opportunities to start companies or non-profits you care about.

Startup pitch competitions, surplus engineering and business talent/enthusiasm, and abundant creativity from a younger generation (undergrads) all provide an incredible and incubative environment for you to build the next big thing.

Don’t get bogged down by the day-to-day class work, focus more on what you achieve outside of class!

1. Lock Down a “Next Level” Position in the Career of Your Dreams: In almost all industries, an MBA is a strong credential to have. It’s a powerful signal that you care about continuing your learning and bettering yourself. However, it is no longer a guarantee of what I call a “next level” position in the career of your dreams.

If you’re looking to change careers, for example, moving from Finance to Consulting, an MBA will help facilitate that move by buying you enough credibility for the interview, but it won’t get you to partner any faster. In today’s world, a consultant with only an undergraduate degree who proves him or herself day in and day out may rise faster.

The MBA will be your key to the door, but how much did you pay for that key? Let’s get to cost.

When I was considering my MBA close to 3 years ago, cost was a major concern. And I was just thinking about the tangible dollar cost of the credit hours…

Let’s break down the true costs of an MBA, using GW’s current tuition rates.

Missed Opportunities: Incredibly difficult to value, but what did you miss while you are in your MBA classes? In my case, it was DC Tech Meetup events and other opportunities to build my tech network in D.C.

$334k! Even if you can make a 25% higher salary with your new and shiny MBA, it would take close to 14 years (!) to pay back the cost of a full-time MBA. For me the choice was simple, a part-time MBA was the way to go, but as you can see, it still wasn’t cheap.

Had I not received support from both GW and my employer to cover much of the cost of my degree, my choice to pursue an MBA may have been different.

3. Learning Hard Skills: In my undergraduate years at Michigan, I was in the Ross School of Business. Because of this early exposure to business, I can’t say that I learned many new “hard” skills in my MBA. I already understood double-entry accounting, discounted cash flows, and how to break down a business case.

However, even if I hadn’t studied business in my undergrad, I believe that the hard skills learned in an MBA are only somewhat valuable. While they provide exposure to the different aspects of business (see benefit #1), what is taught will often lag what’s happening in the private sector by 3–5 years.

The typical MBA program isn’t on the cutting edge as it takes a long time to build a curriculum and find experts from a new field (i.e. AI or VR) to teach.

Think about your career goals. Will you be helped by the benefits I’ve mentioned above or hurt by both the intangible and very, very tangible costs?

Knowing what I know now, if I could go back 3 years in time and choose again, I would still decide to get my MBA at GW. But, it does feel good to be done!

If you’d like to talk about your personal goals and hear more about my experience with my MBA, reach out to me on Twitter! I’d be happy to help you make your decision.|||

MBA’s aren’t for everyone. Learn what you will (and won’t) get from the degree from a recent graduate.