SiriControl is an open source framework designed with developers in mind. It provides a simple way of using Siri commands, stated in my previous post, by dynamically loading modules created by the user. This means that you can add voice controlled capability to any project, with Siri.

So why use SiriControl?

Overall, you will be able to add accurate voice controlled capabilities to any project for free.

With Siri, you can create Notes by using the command word ‘Note’, which can be synced to a Gmail account. SiriControl works by fetching Notes from this account. It dynamically loads modules, created by the user, meaning that you can set it up to control anything you want, when the specific command words are heard.

This ingenious hack helps you to easily add Siri controlled capability to any project.

1) A Gmail account is required for SiriControl. For security reasons, I suggest creating a new Gmail account as you will have to enter your username and password in a python script. This won’t matter as you won’t be using this for personal everyday use – just for speaking commands.

2) Then, access for less secure apps needs to be turned on, which can be done here. This is because Google identifies the connection between the python script and mail servers as less secure.

3)  As the script uses the IMAP protocol to fetch new Notes, IMAP  needs to be enabled, under the Gmail settings.

1) Now, navigate to the following, in your Settings and add your newly created Gmail account:

2) Turn on Notes for that account.

3) Ensure that the default account for creating Notes with Siri is your new Gmail account.

That’s it! Now, just tell Siri to create a Note like this:

The new note should appear under the Notes label in your Gmail account. If not, please follow the above steps again.

2) Then, open up siricontrol.py and add your username and password of your new Gmail account. This should be self-explanatory.

3) Now, run the script and say to Siri:

The answer should be printed out,  because of the ‘life’ module in the modules folder. The setup is now complete.

Here is the default module that comes with SiriControl:

moduleName – This is the name of the module which can be anything you want.

commandWords –  This array will have the words which need to be said in order to call the execute() function.

execute(command) – This function is called when all the words in the commandWords array are said. The ‘command’ parameter is the command said by the user, to Siri.

That’s all there is, to add Siri control to any project you want, whether it is as simple as turning on a LED to controlling your TV with infrared – the possibilities are endless, with the power of Siri behind it!

Hope you enjoy SiriControl! Please share your ideas and opinions below.|||

SiriControl is an open source plaform designed with developers in mind. It provides a simple way of using Siri commands, stated in a previous post, by dynamically loading modules created by the user, meaning that you can add voice controlled capability to any project with Siri.