A little earlier this year, Google released the newest benchmarks for mobile page speed among businesses. The report showed us two things:

With these points in mind, let's look at some of the details from the Google mobile speed benchmarks, and see just what we're up against.

Oh boy, this is a bad one. Load time refers to how long it takes a site to load up and become fully usable (this includes images, access to video, menus, etc.). The average landing page load time is an incredibly poor 22 seconds.

For reference, more than half of users leave the site if it hasn't finished loading by 3 seconds, and that number sharply rises after the 3 second mark. Google currently prefers sites to load in half a second. Yep, that means that the average mobile site is around 4400% too slow to meet even Google's minimum expectations. Phew!

So what's going on here? It's mostly a lack of interest: Many businesses created their mobile sites with old scripts and old tools that are now weighing those sites down, and they haven't shown any signs of updating those sites. Stand out by having a rigorous mobile updating schedule – and not being afraid to change how your site is constructed.

Visual content refers to how long it takes images, graphics, and related media to load on a mobile site. Google benchmarked this for "above the fold" data, which means all the images that load without scrolling down. In theory this makes the benchmark even easier to meet, but Google found that 70% of pages take 7 seconds for that first-seen visual content to load. Again, that's around 4 seconds too slow for the average user, who will just skip out and find another site if they see the images aren't loading. This is a classic optimization problem: Images aren't being formatted and loaded in ways that work for mobile devices, and need to be redone.

The more data contained in a web page, the longer it takes to load: One of the goals with Google's mobile tools and coding work is to reduce how much data has to be pulled to successfully load the site. An adequate site will have less than 1MB of data to load, reducing its load speed to only a few seconds on the average mobile data plan. Google found that around 70% of pages fail to meet this mark, going well over 1MB. Around a third are over 2MB, and 12% are over 4MB – which makes that 22 second number a bit easier to understand.

All right, let's break it down a little more. How did specific industries rate on the mobile speed test? Well, no one did great, but some did better than others – and the reasons may surprise you. Take a look at the best and worst among U.S. industries (which on the whole are still much faster than the global average).|||

Mobile page speed is important, half a second load time important. Page speeds affects grading and ranking of your mobile site. Improve with these mobile tips.