You may have given the social media site a lot more information than you realised

Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

EVERYBODY knows that Facebook stores a lot of data about its users.

The insights into your life created by your social media footprint can be used by the company to make sure they are always showing users the advertising content most relevant to them.

Their ability to target advertising means they can charge brands more for the service, as it is directed to the people most likely to respond well to it.

But what does Facebook know about YOU?

The world’s most popular social media site has been around for almost 13 years and in that time users have uploaded A LOT of information.

But there are steps you can take to see exactly what they know about you and what they are sharing with advertisers.

Start off by going to your settings, this can be found by clicking on the drop down arrow at the top right of the screen.

Once you’re in settings click on “Adverts” towards the bottom of the list on the left hand side.

This will take you in to your advert preferences, where they have a record of your interests (based on what you’ve liked) and your top advertisers (based on who you’ve interacted with).

Next click on “Your information”, where you will see what of your personal information is being shared, at the top of this box there is an option “Your categories” click on that to see exactly what Facebook knows about you.

Facebook explained: “The categories in this section help advertisers reach people who are most likely to be interested in their products, services and causes.

“We've added you to these categories based on information you've provided on Facebook and other activity.”

Categories can include: "millenials", "housemate based households" and "close friends of ex-pats".

But you don’t need to stick with these social media imposed categories, un-pigeonhole yourself by simply clicking on the “x” that pops up when you hover over the category in question.

This will remove you from the group. You’re welcome.|||

You may have given the social media site a lot more information than you realised