Chinese translation by Lai FeiPei, (Taipei: Dong Hua Publishing Co., 1990), xv+731pp.

 Chinese translation by Chen YanWen, (Taipei: Ru Lin Publishing Co., 1991), xii+695pp.

 Chinese translation by Xingu Zhuang, (Xi'an: Xi An Dian Zi Ke Ji Da Xue Chu Ban She, 1992), xii+539pp.

 Chinese translation by Zhang Mingyao and Zhang Fan, (Beijing: Turing Books, 2013), xii+564pp.

 Italian translation edited by Giovanni Monegato, (Milan: Editore Ulrico Hoepli, 1992), xviii+607pp.

 Japanese translation by Makoto Arisawa, Michiaki Yasumura, Tatsuya Hagino, and Kiyoshi Ishihata, (Tokyo: Kyoritsu-Shuppan, 1993), xvi+606pp.

 Portuguese translation by Valéria de Magalhães Iorio, (Rio de Janeiro: Livros Técnicos e Cientíicos Editora, 1995), xii+477pp.

 Russian translation by A. B. Khodulev and B. B. Pokhodzei, with foreword by V. Arnol'd, (Moscow: Mir, 1999), 703pp.; see also (Moscow: Binom, 2009).

 Polish translation by P. Chrzastowski, A. Czumaj, L. Gasieniec, and M. Raczunac, (Warszawa: Polskie Wydawnictwa Naukowe, 1996), 718pp. (Another edition is planned for 2015.)

 Hungarian translation by S. Fridli, J. Gonda, A. Kovács, L. Lakatos, and Cs. Láng, (Budapest: Műszaki Könyvkiadó, 1998), xvi+647pp.

 Spanish translation (Addison-Wesley Spain and Universidad Autónoma de Madrid), in preparation.

 French translation by Alain Denise, (Paris: International Thomson Publishing, 1998), xiv+688pp.; now distributed by Éditions Vuibert.

 Croatian translation (Zagreb: Golden Marketing), in preparation.

 Greek translation by Christos A. Kapoutsis (Athens: Klidarithmos), 2011), 640pp.

 Macedonian translation (Skopje: Ars Lamina), in preparation.

 Korean translation (Seoul: Insight Press), in preparation.



Introduction to the mathematics that supports advanced computer programming and the analysis of algorithms. An indispensable text and reference not only for computer scientists --- the authors themselves rely heavily upon it --- but for serious users of mathematics in virtually every discipline. Based on the course Concrete Mathematics taught by Knuth at Stanford University from 1970--1989. The second edition includes important new material about the revolutionary Gosper-Zeilberger algorithm for mechanical summation. Complete answers are provided for more than 500 exercises.

Available from the publisher, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.

For a list of corrections to known errors in the pre-1998 printings of the second edition, you may download the 1994--1997 errata file in compressed PostScript format (74K bytes). This file was generated by the TeX file in directory using special macros and fonts found in that directory. Errata lists for various printings of the first edition can also be found there. See also the list of errors corrected between January 1998 and May 2013, which is in HTML format.

And here is a list of all nits that have been picked so far since the 27th printing (May 2013). An asterisk (*) marks significant technical errors that are not merely typographical:

With these corrections, the authors hope that the book is now error-free. But (sigh) it probably isn't. Therefore Knuth will gratefully deposit ($2.56) to the account of the first person who finds and reports anything that remains technically, historically, typographically, or politically incorrect. Please send suggested corrections to , or send snail mail to

In either case please include your postal address, so that I can mail an official certificate of deposit as a token of thanks for any improvements to which you have contributed.

DO NOT SEND EMAIL TO KNUTH-BUG EXCEPT TO REPORT ERRORS IN BOOKS! And if you do report an error via email, please do not include attachments of any kind; your message should be readable on brand-X operating systems for all values of X.

SPECIAL NOTE TO THE SPEAKERS OF FRENCH AND OTHER EXOTIC LANGUAGES: Numerous quotations and bibliographic citations found in this book have been copied verbatim from the original sources. If you believe you have found a typographic error, you must prove it by showing that the original was incorrectly transcribed; believe it or not, your language has changed over the years, just as English has.

Midterm and final exams from the last two times Knuth taught this course at Stanford (1988 and 1989) are now available, together with the answers, as compressed PostScript files. The teaching assistants who helped to prepare these exams were Sheralyn Listgarten and Sridhar Raman (1988); Alan Hu and Robert Kennedy (1989).|||

