Everybody loves a good dashboard. One of the most common questions we get asked here at Cascade is how to create a strategy dashboard – so today I wanted to answer that, whether or not you’re using our cloud-based strategy platform. Not only that, but we’ve also included examples of strategy dashboards that you can download and use as inspiration for your own. There are 5 different examples of strategy dashboards to check out below! I’m going to be writing a ton more articles about strategy dashboards in the coming weeks, so consider this a ‘strategy dashboards 101’ style introduction. Here’s a quick list of the dashboards covered:

So let’s start with the most important question of all…

Before getting into the specifics of exactly how to create a strategy dashboard, we need to address the question of audience. Who your audience is will have a huge impact on how you go about creating your strategy dashboard. There are two questions you need to ask yourself:

In reality, question 1 should be easy – but question 2 might be a little harder, given that you might have a bunch of different personality types looking at your dashboard. We’ve decided to structure this article around the most common audiences we are asked about. Even if your own need is slightly different, you’ll likely find a close enough match in the list below. And if not, give us a shout and we’ll try to update the article with guidance for your particular audience needs 🙂

The number one most commonly requested type of strategy dashboard we see our clients needing to build is for board members. This job is often given to the CEO or the Head of Strategy, and the request we get tends to look a bit like this:

Sound familiar? Let’s break this group of people down in a way that will help us to more effectively build a strategy dashboard for them:

Boards are there to maintain general accountability for the CEO / senior leaders of an organization. They’re interested in the key success factors of the business, and how the strategy is generally progressing. They’re also there to help resolve pin-point issues that may arise which threaten the organization. CEO’s have a responsibility to keep their boards up to date and well informed.

You want to give your board confidence that you’re on top of things. That you’ve given due consideration to the strategy of the organization, and that you’re on top of the KPIs and the major issues that could disrupt success. You want to give them enough information that they feel confidence in the depth of your data, but not so much information that they become distracted by detail and lose sight of the bigger strategic picture that you’re trying to paint. You also want them to be aware of and give credit for major wins had by the organization. Finally, you want them to help resolve any major issues that need their attention.

Keep in mind the following points when you create your strategy dashboard for the board:

Here’s an example of a strategy dashboard for a board (click to enlarge):

The second most commonly requested type of strategy dashboard we see is a strategy dashboard for your own team:

There are a bunch of different reasons why you might want to create a strategy dashboard for your team. Here’s how this group of people breaks down:

Your team are the biggest determining factors in whether or not your strategy will succeed. They’re working on various goals, projects, and KPIs which are the direct drivers for moving your organization forward. They won’t all necessarily see themselves as directly contributing to the strategy, and will likely have varying degrees of engagement with the strategy as a whole.

The primary outcome of implementing a team strategy dashboard is most likely to be engagement. Strategy dashboards help to keep your team focused on the outcomes of their work – rather than simply executing their roles mechanically. Ideally, the dashboard will also help to motivate your team by showing them exactly how they contribute to the strategy of the organization. Finally, it may also play a more operational role, in that it helps the team share updates to assist with collaboration, and discuss major issues that they need to work on together to resolve.

Keep in mind the following points when you create your strategy dashboard for your team:

Here’s an example of a strategy dashboard for your team (click to enlarge):

One of the coolest trends we’re seeing in the strategy space is the drive towards increased transparency and accountability. We’ve had lots of requests from clients to help them build strategy dashboards that they can share outside of their organizations – with the general public. Typically we see these requests come from non-profits or organizations focused on corporate social responsibility.

We love building these types of dashboards at Cascade. Here’s a few things about this group of people to keep in mind:

Often when you’re creating a public dashboard it’s because the public are a major factor in your success. That could simply be because they’re customers – but often the relationship is more direct than that. Maybe you’re a charity soliciting donations and want to share the results of your work to help motivate people to donate more? Or maybe you’re in an elected office of some kind and want to share with your constituents the progress of major projects that will affect their lives.

Usually, public dashboards will be all about good news stories. You want people to be motivated and impressed by what you’re trying to achieve in your strategy. You also (hopefully) want them to see what a great job you’re doing at the things you’ve committed to. That said, in reality you won’t always be able to communicate a pretty picture, and it’s important that your public dashboards also include things which aren’t going so well. That will ensure that the overall credibility and integrity of your message remains intact.

Keep in mind the following points when you create your strategy dashboard for a public audience:

Here’s an example of a strategy dashboard for the public (click to enlarge):

In larger organizations you might want to showcase the work that your team is doing to other teams or divisions.

These dashboards tend to be focused around the core purpose of the team as a whole – for example a ‘Marketing Dashboard’ or an ‘IT Dashboard’. Let’s look at the audience for these dashboards:

Your audience here is potentially very broad. It could be senior managers looking at your dashboard to get a sense of how this part of the business is doing. Or it could be more junior employees in other teams that are interested in the sort of work your team does. As such, these dashboards need a balance of high level information and detail.

You’ll want to give people a fairly detailed look at what your team is doing. This is an internal dashboard so you can share a fair amount of information. That said, you don’t want to over-share details of sensitive projects and end up creating doubts or worries for other people or teams. You want people to feel confident that you’re on top of things, but also leave the door open to them to offer help and support for your outcomes. You might also want to use these dashboards as a way of attracting awesome internal talent to your team.

Keep in mind the following points when you create your strategy dashboard to represent your team or division:

Here’s an example of a strategy dashboard for your division (click to enlarge):

Last but not least, creating a strategy dashboard for your boss – both the easiest and the hardest dashboard of them all to create…

A big driver of how you create this dashboard is going to be your boss’s personality. Are they analytical or theoretical? Data-driven or word-obsessed? Think about this before you embark on the design of your new dashboard.

Remember that your own success is the primary driver of your boss’s success. You share vested interests and their role should be to help guide you towards delivering awesome outcomes. That said, they are also the one responsible for your career progression and are constantly assessing your performance.

If things are going well, you’ll want that to come across. That said, if you’re experiencing challenges, these need to come across too so that your boss can help you to resolve them. You’ll also want the dashboard to facilitate any conversations you need to have with your boss around expectation setting.

Keep in mind the following points when you create your strategy dashboard for your boss:

Here’s an example of a strategy dashboard for your boss (click to enlarge):

These are the 5 most common requests for strategy dashboards we see at Cascade. But what other strategy dashboards do you want us to tackle? Let us know in the comments below or via social media. And last but not least….

<shameless-plug>

 Yep you guessed it, all of the strategy dashboard examples on this page were created live in Cascade – the tool for creating strategy dashboards. Give the free trial a spin for 14 days if you like what you see.

 </shameless-plug>|||

Learn how to create awesome strategy dashboards with our detailed guide including downloadable examples.