A frontend Framework for building admin applications running in the browser on top of REST services, using ES6, React and Material Design. Open sourced and maintained by marmelab.

Bugfix PRs that don't break BC should be made against master. All other PRs (new features, bugfix with BC break) should be made against next.

Admin-on-rest is available from npm. You can install it (and its required dependencies) using:

Read the Tutorial for a 15 minutes introduction. After that, head to the Documentation, or checkout the source code of the demo for an example usage.

The component is a configuration component that allows to define sub components for each of the admin view: , , and . These components use Material UI and custom components from admin-on-rest:

Admin-on-rest uses an adapter approach, with a concept called REST client. Existing rest clients can be used as a blueprint to design your API, or you can write your own REST client to query an existing API. Writing a custom REST client is a matter of hours.

See the REST clients documentation for details.

Admin-on-rest is designed as a library of loosely coupled React components built on top of material-ui, in addition to controller functions implemented the Redux way. It is very easy to replace one part of admin-on-rest with your own, e.g. to use a custom datagrid, GraphQL instead of REST, or bootstrap instead of Material Design.

You can run the example app by calling:

And then browse to http://localhost:8080/. The credentials are login/password

Pull requests are welcome. Try to follow the coding style of the existing files, and include unit tests and documentation. Be prepared for a thorough code review, and be patient for the merge - this is an open-source initiative.

If you want to contribute to the documentation, install jekyll, then call

And then browse to http://localhost:4000/

Note: if you have added a section with heading to the docs, you also have to add it to (the links on the left) manually.

You can run the unit tests by calling

If you are using admin-on-rest as a dependency, and if you want to try and hack it, here is the advised process:

Tip: If you're on Windows and can't use , try this Gist.

Admin-on-rest is licensed under the MIT Licence, sponsored and supported by marmelab.

This library is free to use, even for commercial purpose. If you want to give back, please talk about it, help newcomers, or contribute code. But the best way to give back is to donate to a charity. We recommend Doctors Without Borders.|||

admin-on-rest - A frontend framework for building admin SPAs on top of REST services, using React and Material Design