We’ve recently added a new feature in AWS Database Migration Service (AWS DMS)—the ability to receive DMS events notifications, such as email messages, text messages, or calls to HTTP endpoints, through Amazon Simple Notification Service (Amazon SNS).

You now can subscribe and receive notifications for two types of events—events related to DMS instances and events related to replication tasks. Events related to DMS instances include those for availability, configuration change, creation, deletion, and maintenance. For example, when a DMS instance goes down for maintenance, a notification is triggered.

Events related to replication tasks include those such as start, pause, finish, Full Load completed, CDC started, and many more. For example, when a migration task finishes to migrate the entire data, it will trigger a “Full Load completed” notification. If the task is configured to follow Full Load mode with CDC mode (that is, replicate the changes in the data since the Full Load began), a “CDC started” notification is triggered next.

In addition, AWS DMS groups events into categories that you can subscribe to using the AWS DMS console or the AWS DMS API. This subscription means you can be notified when an event occurs in the category you subscribed to. For example, if you subscribe to the creation category for a given replication instance, you are notified whenever a creation-related event occurs that affects your replication instance, such as a replication instance is being created.

The following list represents the possible categories for subscription for the DMS replication instance at this time:

The following list represents the possible categories for subscription for the DMS replication task at this time:

For a list of the events and event categories provided by AWS DMS, see AWS DMS Event Categories and Event Messages in the documentation.

To subscribe to AWS DMS events, do the following:

When you have confirmed the subscription, the status of your subscription is updated in the AWS DMS console’s Event Subscriptions section.

You then begin to receive event notifications.

For more information about table mapping using the console, see the DMS documentation.

For more information about AWS Database Migration Service in general, see our website.|||

