Nokia 5 is a Middle brother of Nokia’s new age android smartphones. There are three of them. This one is middle one in terms of specifications and Price both.

The Nokia brand is making a comeback with these three new age android Smartphones. This Nokia 5 model is smaller than Nokia 6, you can read about Nokia 6 from our previous blog.

Since, This Nokia 5 is smaller than Nokia 6, it is more manageable in the hand and the curved edges make a noticeable difference. The Body is made of metal and it feels quite sturdy.

Take a Look at 360 Degree View of Nokia 5 in the Following Video

Nokia designed Nokia 5 with their hallmark attention to detail. The smooth, minimalist body is made from a single piece of precision-milled aluminium with great care in order to give the phone added durability. The organic form nestles perfectly in your hand.

Nokia 5 has a totally clean, pure back without any antenna lines, which have been moved to the top and the bottom of the phone. Together with the display with sculpted Corning Gorilla Glass, this makes for a clean look unspoilt by seams or lines.

For decades, Nokia phones have stood for beautiful, crafted design and excellent quality. This phone is no different: it’s built to take on life as you know it – with durable and beautiful materials, great feel, and an ideal balance of performance and battery life. What’s best, your Nokia phone will stay secure and up to date with regular software updates.

Getting great photos with Nokia 5 is easy: automatic scene detection helps you get good shots wherever you are, while colors look natural thanks to the dual-tone flash.

Fit all of your friends into a group selfie with the 8 MP wide-angle lens on the front.

Your night-time photos just got upgraded, thanks to the Nokia 5’s phase detection autofocus, wide aperture and dual-tone flash. That’s a fancy way of saying that you get great pictures, even in low light.

Good-looking photos, natural colours and excellent brightness – say hello to Nokia 5’s fully-laminated 5.2” HD display. What’s best, the polarizer makes your content easy to read even in bright sunlight.

I would say the screen is smaller, 5.2 inches and the resolution has been reduced to 720p. But it actually looks good enough to the naked eye. In addition, it has been laminated to make it more durable.

Nokia 5 comes with Android Nougat, the full spread of Google Services and no unnecessary extras. You get an experience that’s focused and clutter-free, and you will keep getting regular updates, so you’ll always stay on top of features and security.

The Nokia 5 also comes with a fingerprint scanner. Which doubles as a home button.

Combining its lower power demand with the 3000 mAh battery inside. I expect it back to realize to be way beyond the average.

But the 2GB of RAM is a bit worrying as modern apps demand more and more of the Stuff till the units that I tested was quite responsive.

May be the fact that the Nokia science pre match stock Android has something to do with that. The Experience is very similar to what you would get on the Google Pixel and even Google’s Assistant is available.

Can be available by May, 2017

 For India, price could be around 13,000-14,000 INR.

Nokia 5 is pretty similar to its elder brother Nokia 6, with just a little less everywhere. So, does less at price. Nokia 5 is pretty good regarding a Budget smartphone.

Smartphone this good from Such brand like Nokia, is a great thing in it self. Overall, the main selling point of the Nokia 5 could be its affordable price and at 189 Euro, it could be worth checking out.

But if your budget isn’t set tight, you should definitely consider the bigger and better equipped Nokia 6.

So, which one gonna be smartphone of your choice? Are you looking forward to go with Nokia 5 or Nokia 6? Let us know in comment section below.|||

Nokia 5 is a Middle brother of Nokia's new age android smartphones. There are three of them. This one is middle one in terms of specifications and Price both. The Nokia brand is making a…