With the ever-growing sector of mobile technologies, Android app development is one of the latest business trends, empowering businesses with great capabilities like greater target audience, better customer reach, effective brand promotion, quick and great Return on Investments and enhancement in the delivery process of their services. Talking about the perks of ‘better delivery of services’ using the functionality of an Android application, many businesses have gained in customer loyalty from it, but the business that has earned the highest benefits in this area is the Hospitality or the Hotel Business.

Hospitality or the Hotel Industry where ‘service’ remains the quintessential feature to be displayed as a USP, an Android app professionally built by a capable Android app development company can serve as a productive catalyst in gaining your business a great customer base along with improving customer loyalty. So if you are planning to employ professional Android app development services, we will guide you through some benefits of Android app for your hotel industry or hospitality business and along with them are the features of your Hotel Android App that you can use to boost your business revenue.

Why should you create a Mobile App for your Hotel Business?

Before you hire Android App Developer you need to assess thus your hospitality business require a mobile app or an Android app. To judge this perspective you need to know the benefits of having an Android application for your hotel.

Benefits of Mobile or Android App for Hotel Business-

•    Advantage of direct bookings through your hotel app

•    Better services and gaining in the customer loyalty graph

•    Expanding target reaches through promotion of offers and deals

With these benefits of Android app for the hotel industry, the actual question that comes to the mind is - What are the features that you should ask the Android app development company to include in your Hotel mobile app so as to gain the optimum benefits?

Customers prefer to make hotel reservations beforehand so as to save themselves from the tiresome task of searching hotels manually. Mobiles being the handy devices while travelling can avail them with the functionality to book hotels with just a click on your hotel mobile app icon and making their reservations confirmed. For this, you just need to hire an Android app development company to help you develop a functional hotel booking app for you. With this, you can further ask your Android app development service provider to craft your hotel Android app with sole intuitiveness to gain with high customer loyalty graph based on your application.

You can ask the Android app development company you hire to craft a point system based on the customer loyalty and include the rewards or offers for regular customers. Thus boosting the customer loyalty graph.

As a hotel website, a mobile application also gives you a substantial area to promote the hotel facilities and services using photo galleries and relevant content displaying the superiority of your services. So you can ask your Android app development service provider to incorporate a presentable and effective app design for your hotel mobile app, to boast some amenities like-

One of the most beneficial features that need to be integrated with the Android app development process for your hotel mobile app is the feature of push notification that allows you to send limitless messages to the users on the real-time basis. You can select the receivers of this message and can easily promote your services and other offers anytime on a one-to-one or one-to-all basis.

With the help of a professional Android app development company, you can integrate the feature of easy check-in and check-out where the check-in and check-out formalities can be done using the mobile app. With this, your hotel mobile app can act as a virtual key to getting an access into the rooms. This will help your customers to escape from the hassle of standing and filling check-in formalities after their tiresome journey. While a virtual key in the form of their Android devices via your app would save them from the risk of losing the key to the room.

Your Android app development partner should integrate your hotel app with Geo-location so that the users can easily the location of your hotel. And the hotel app can be further integrated with travel guide where the users can search for places to visit, bars, restaurants, etc. Here you can add recommendations and the advertisement space so as to earn extra business revenue.

These are the top features that you can discuss with the Android app development company you hire and implement them to gain high business revenue owing to your Hotel Android application. With this, if you wish to get started with your new Hotel mobile app we can help you with our peerless yet cost-effective Android app development services. Contact us at – sales@endivesoftware.com|||

How to Boost Your Hospitality Business using Android App With the ever-growing sector of mobile technologies, Android app development is one of the latest business trends, empowering businesses with...