Business, Internet and Businesses Online, Self Improvement, Reference and Education

You need to realize that more millionaires are being created, and faster than we have ever seen before from working online in what is called the digital revolution in this age of automation.

You can research this information yourself; it is everywhere. You need to begin to take control of your money and time and think of your future. It has never been easier than it currently is, as long as you invest in yourself and keep momentum over all else.

What is your plan B? Do you even have one? How will you live?

I ask you because one of the words in the English language which many of us use is the term ‘JOB,' but you should know that it is one of the best abbreviations there is which means: “Just Over Broke!”

Nowadays, there is no more job security, only skills, and services security! I dislike being the bearer of bad news, but it is true. And if you do not want to become an old feature, you will have to find a way to survive the uprising of automation.

It may be that the only real haven here is in developing and improving your talents and abilities by creating your own business or working online.

I am not asking you to go back to some school and get degrees, of course, you could, but I am telling you about gaining new skills and improving your current practical ones. You have to be a life-long learner that will bring value to others, your business and your life.

This age of automation is the perfect moment for you to be open to new ideas along with taking the appropriate actions which will lead you to new opportunities, help you become more valuable to others or your employer, and ultimately gives you a better chance to subsist and succeed.

You need to add more value to yourself and give it freely to others. As an expert, you can always improve and get better than you are now. Remember, practice makes you grow; it does not make you perfect.

You might imagine a vision of the world where computers take over keeping only wealthy elite and drive the rest into poverty, like in many of these movies we see today. You may think what kind of jobs will be left once automation has created the skill of driving, typing, translating or any other tasks once meant to the field of humans.

All of the old and current technologies just as the uprising of automation have turned over businesses and activities for ages. But it never deprived people of labor permanently. The point I am trying to make is that the fast pace at which digital technologies grow shows that computers are already decreasing the role people have to play.

More and more robots are taking over occupations once made for people. Car assembly lines are filled with automation arms that can accomplish tasks quicker and in a cheaper way than any human. Intelligent machines have even begun replacing cashiers.

In Austria, where I live, even journalists are not safe. Many of them are writing online articles at low prices to make a living because the internet has generated an automatic way of writing news stories raised by an uprising of an automation system and fewer people feel like buying the Newspaper.

It is just the beginning. So, why should you fear?

The estimation of age automation reveals that technologies can easily automate half of the activities you perform each day at work. Whatever you believe, it will happen.

But again and again, history has proven the new technology to create new jobs, and not to destroy them. Technology and the uprising of automation are creating more jobs in the last century than ever before, helping many to survive from boring and repetitive work.

Today, there is a high need for people to code or even build the machines, which will lead to a new wave of rising automation. But there is also an increase in people getting involved in the digital economy world.

Your focus should be now on the training and education system you will adopt to provide you with the skills you need to keep up with, in this age of automation. So if you want to know more about the education system I have been using for my business and future, and how it helps me create my success, click here to learn more.

You will see great value which provides you with a ton of tools.

You need to understand the importance of continuous learning because it is a part of your future and lifelong journey. You always have to dig for new possibilities, ask questions, surround yourself with diverse, talented people and get outside the box, even if it goes against your way of thinking.

By knowing how to survive the uprising of automation, you will create greater and better opportunities for yourself, which will help you succeed in life and business.

Sergei VanBellinghen, Founder & CEO of First-Class Lifestyle and sergeivanbellinghen.com, Success & Self-Improvement Consultant, Freedom entrepreneur & business partner of Stuart Ross, also counselor in East Europe-West relationships, a passionate Globetrotter and an avid audio booker|||

Learn how to survive the uprising of automation in this digital age by creating new opportunities and a better future for yourself.