In Facebook's recent report, social media giant claimed that its total video views had hit 8 billion per day. A similar trend is noticed in other social networks, showing that video content has a grand domination now days.

A great marketing video can boost your social shares, boost traffic to your site and increase conversion rates. Marketers claim - by 2017 video marketing will be 69% of all consumer traffic, mobile video ads will grow 5 times faster compared with desktop and landing pages with videos will boost 800% more conversion.

Why videos are great? Simply, because videos are multisensory, they are great to use in multisensory topics such as product and service demonstrations.

Video uses color, motion, and sound effects and builds a strong bridge to connect with viewers' emotions. That’s why they are so memorable, and that’s why it’s the winner platform for those, who want their messages get across with potential buyers.

No doubt, “a picture is worth a thousand words”, but an engaging 60-second video is worth 1.8 million words, according to Forrester. If you are looking to win users’ attention, use video as a powerful marketing tool. To help you start, here are 15 tips for successful video marketing campaigns in 2017.

The first thing you have to do is set your video budget. Resource management is vital in this case! Don’t start without knowing how much you’re able to invest in the video.

If you’re tight with money, know that you don’t need to hire an entire studio with professional equipment to create a great video. You can hire a freelancer or even make the video yourself – using various online video making platforms.

If your budget is tight and there’s no option to hire an A class studio for animation video production, then the online video making platforms are just what you’re looking for. One of the best ways to develop your company image is through animated videos. Animation gives your company a chance to engage customers on an emotional and informative way. Creativity is a crucial here: You have to stand out from the crowd. In Renderforest you can find hundreds of templates to meet your expectation of how an ideal animated video should look like.

Understanding your targeted audience is vital as well. The content and style of your video, the choice of platform you use to diffuse your advertisement and etc.. Everything depends on your target group. No doubt, you have seen some engaging videos on Facebook or other social platforms, that caught your attention.

Facebook Audience Insights can be used, if you are looking for a way to understand your Facebook target audience. Here you can choose which viewers you want to learn more information about. Do some homework to find the information of the people that have liked your page, for understanding your  target audience better.

Based on the gathered data of your target group, you will get a clear image of the type of video to create.

Nowadays, a simple video that presents your  product isn’t impressive anymore. Today the audience is spoiled enough. You need something more. People love to watch videos of interesting stories. In fact, the most engaging videos are often based on  inspiring story that catches audience emotionally. Trust us, if  you want to create a fun and engaging story that  goes viral, you will need an outstanding story first.

Here’s an example of a interesting, yet entertaining video that tells an engaging and fun story.

5. The center is a Story, Not The Sale

An active buzz with the sales is annoying and it always drives away your customers. Don’t let your brand be like others – instead, your video should be focused on the story and not the sale. Just remember: the same rules apply to both written content and video content. Concentrate on the values of your company.

Video length is vital for the success of your marketing strategy. Today most customers have a lower attention span, so you need to make your videos short and engaging.

Even, when the length of the video mainly depends on what you’re trying to tell, be sure to be as brief as you can. The perfect length is under 1 minute. Everything longer than 1 minute most likely will make people  to close the video before it ends. Short and fun videos are particularly important for companies that are just trying to form their viewer base. Once you get a constant audience, you’ll have a chance to experiment with the video length.

"The worst thing to do is to have a boring video. Videos that are purely marketing stuff don’t spread”, Dharmesh Shah, Founder and CTO of HubSpot says. So how to engage your audience? The answer is evident: They want to laugh, they want to be impowered, they want to leave  their boring daily routine  and forget about their realities. HubSpot is operating according to this rule - they don't take themselves too seriously. Dharmesh insists that humor works well for their video marketing campaigns. Than he goest on, saying, that HubSpot tries not to be too conservative. Instead, they actively encourage video creators to be creative and take risks. Conclusion? Stop being boring! Stand out and take a chance on being funny.

Do you know, that most likely the one fifth of your viewers will close the video within 10 seconds or less. So this period is too important, don't overview it.  Try play with your audience’s curiosity by asking questions and using teasers to catch their attention. Your video should  convey your company's values and answer that “why should I watch it?” question, which is on your audience’s mind. Should they watch it, because it is fun or inspirational, or maybe it teaches something new?

SEO is important as well, especially for organic search results. Guess you uploaded  video on your YouTube channel. For SEO there are actions to be taken.

Always provide additional links in video description box. Contact info, special offers, promos are very important, so ALWAYS do it.

65% of audience are visual learners. One of the most effective methods you should use in video marketing is to teach your audience. Education and knowledge comes in many forms. Show your customers how to use your product or service, make video tutorials - they are extremely popular. You can also organize a webinar to communicate with your audience and speak about the sector you know best.

Customers’ behavior and preferences are not stable, and companies always looking for a new and innovative ways to connect with their audiences. Video is not an exception, and here sometimes traditional methods don’t work. One innovative and trendy solution is an interactive video. These videos allow the customer to take part in the video and affect its outcome.

You create a changable storyline that  enables viewers to make different decisions and have control over your video outcome.

12. Call to action button at the end is a good idea

Guess, you have  kept your video short and engaging. However, end it as effective, as you started. Use the few seconds at the end to add contact info along with links to other videos. This is called "call to action" button. How do you get from one video to the next, or to another websites entirely. Use this technique, put them into a video, which greatly enhance your chances of gaining views on your other content.

You’ve made an amazing video, using all the tips we’ve talked about. Now, it’s time for promotion. Post it on as many places as you can. Most video platforms offer both free uploads and paid subscription .

Facebook generates 8 billion video views each day. This fact speaks for itself. Just imagine the reach your video can have. Another positive side of social media ads  is that it shows analysis, such as demographics, gender, and age of people, who saw your video. But the greatest advantage of all this is getting a relevant traffic, which in fact brings to higher conversion rate.

Analyzing results are the final step to take for understanding an effectiveness of the campaign. Data that you collected from the campaign will lead you to even more successful video marketing campaigns in the future.|||

Recently Facebook's reported, that its&nbsp;total video views hit 8 billion per day. Video content has a total domination and here&rsquo;s how you can maximize its affect. | en |