MDXC is a tool to convert Markdown into React Components. It lets you and use other Components within your Markdown. Like so:

To see all this in action, try out some of the examples.

This website is built with MDXC. In fact, once the page has loaded you can edit it live! Just click in the left pane – or click the “Source” button if you’re on a small screen – and start typing!

To start using MDX documents, you can either use the supplied command-line tool, or you can configure Webpack with mdx-loader.

MDXC works great with Webpack , allowing you to and use your Markdown documents as React components. For example:

To make this magic happen in an existing Webpack-based project, you’ll need to install and configure mdx-loader . Bearing in mind that MDXC outputs ES2015, you’ll also want to run the result through Babel.

Assuming you’re using Webpack 2, you’ll then need to add an entry to your array:

At its core, MDXC is just a wrapper around the excellent and highly configurable markdown-it project. This means that its API is mostly the same.

The major difference is that the default renderer from markdown-it has been replaced with a non-configurable renderer. Existing markdown-it plugins will work, but any hooks on the renderer will silently fail. This is the behavior you want, as these hooks transform HTML strings, and MDXC doesn’t use any HTML strings. If you need to transform the output, use factories instead.

To transform MDX into JavaScript, create an instance of the class and then call its method. If you’d like to load any markdown-it plugins, call the method on your instance before calling .

The options to are mostly the same as the options for markdown-it. For details, see the markdown-it API docs.

MDXC also provides a few extra options.

Mad props to markdown-it for doing the hard yards which make MDXC possible. Also, markdown-it-jsx provided the base for parsing JSX tags out of Markdown files. Finally, there would be no use making MDXC unless React, Webpack and Babel already existed.

Help is muchly appreciated! In particular, PRs for the following would be super duper great:|||

MDXC is a tool to convert Markdown into React Components, making it possible to import and use React Components within your Markdown!