This is a semi serious post about something I think is a serious issue.

Being a founder is sometimes emotionally hard, ruts can form, it can f#*k you up for a while, but it gets better, talk about it =]

Founders are ducks. On the surface (to press, the public, interested parties) we look cool and collected gliding across the pond towards our goal. However under the surface if feels like we are kicking, yelling and screaming like mad to get anywhere!

And this is the strange part, I have noticed that as founders we don’t actually talk a lot about the kicking, yelling and screaming part. Especially when it has us as individuals feeling emotionally down.

Startup communities are amazing, they are supportive like no other. Have a problem, need a contact or intro, people will literally bend over backwards to help you in an incredible pay it forward community.

But, I think there is a distinct lack of founders talking up when the weight of the world is getting them down.

This bothers me. As someone that has previously dealt with periods of depressive moods I understand that talking with others, be it friends, family or professional help is the best/only way to clear the fog that plagues your mind.

Startups are hard, and I wouldn’t have it any other way. We often can’t imagine a world in which we don’t live life this way. But it is important to understand that it will get you down, and when it does you won’t lose face by talking to others about it.

Shit, i’d imagine even your investor would prefer you go to them with emotional problems to talk about rather than you get into a silo depressive rut and have an emotional breakdown in 6 months and never be heard from again.

Thus I encourage you all to talk with one another, especially about the personal down parts. And handle your stress as you go, as a very wise friend once told me “these things are marathons, not sprints”. This is how I handle my stress.

And if you feel like shit, talk about it. Don’t say ‘great’ when someone asks you how it is all going.|||

Being a founder is sometimes emotionally hard, ruts can form, it can f#*k you up for a while, but it gets better, talk about it =] Founders are ducks. On the surface (to press, the public, interested…