King Jackpot UK offers £20 free no deposit bonus plus 300% welcome bonus up to £60 free with a first deposit, powered by Leap Frog Gaming software.

King Jackpot UK is a 3D online bingo site that is on the Wagerworks and Leapfrog software platform. You do need to download the software in order to play here, but don’t panic – it’s a safe and secure download.

 The theme of the bingo site is rather medieval and holds a purple colour scheme. When you’re inside the site you will find images relating to kings, queens and knights among other characters. There’s not a lot going on in terms of promotions and I find that the people who are behind this website can be rather slow in removing old and outdated promotions. Although the site did change hands in 2015 and this may improve.

 Once the download has been completed the first time there will be a shortcut to the bingo site displayed on your desktop home screen. This allows you to be able to click straight to the action.

 There are usually just two bingo rooms open, one 90 ball and one 75 ball. Then there is the bingo room that is called ‘Mega Bingo’ but this is just for the daily linked games with the guaranteed jackpots.

Not just reserved for royalty, King Jackpot offers its players a unique and secure gaming environment thanks to its

download client and exclusive proprietary software. The main pull of this platform is the high quality of the slots and

the fact you can’t find these games elsewhere.

Upon sign-up you’ll get a £20 free cash play, then £10 additional once you register your card details and a further

300% up to £60 giving you a huge amount to get started. Unlike many sites, you can use your welcome free money

Slots and casino players are offered regular cash bonusing and are rewarded for their play with cash loyalty bonuses

that they can play on the slots of their choice. Tiered to your loyalty level, enjoy reloads on every purchase plus a

At King Jackpot, all the regular payment methods are available including PayPal, MasterCard, Visa, a selection of

prepaid cards, as well as numerous e-wallets including Neteller and Ukash. Licensed by Alderney, all games are

Spin your way through 11 progressive slots and a multitude of popularly themed slots and casino games – all built inhouseby Leapfrog Gaming. A regular slots tourney takes place every week rewarding high rollers and casual spinnersalike. Casino classics including single and Multi-Player Blackjack, Roulette, Jacks or Better and Keno are available from the Lobby.

Live help is available 24 hours a day providing support to those who need a quick response and unlike many sites –

 these are real agents on the other side. There is also the option to use the clever Insita Messenger from the Lobby if

 you wish to use an email facility to log your query.

King Jackpot UK rewards all of our loyal players with exclusive benefits each month. You’ll immediately gain entry into the Bronze level once you make your first deposit. Then once you make your second you’ll jump to Silver! Entry to the loyalty levels from Gold onwards is by invitation only and based on a range of criteria.

You can also play anytime, anywhere with our mobile site. All you need to do is go to King Jackpot UK from your mobile, save us to your home screen as a favourite and play your favourite slot games on the go. You can also choose to select a cash bonus offer on your 1st, 2nd and 3rd deposit with us when you play on mobile.

Keep your eyes peeled to see what level you’ll fall into each month!

Despite the smaller selection of games than those offered by the larger casinos, King Jackpot have put the best

 games forward for players and more importantly, the product affords a unique experience and not just another

 homogeneous off the shelf white label.

King Jackpot UK – £20 Free NO Deposit Bonus

 Online since 2007 and powered by Leap Frog Gaming software, this bingo site offers 75 and 90-ball bingo, video poker, slots and more.|||

Play Bingo at King Jackpot today. Connect with bingo players and play with NO DEPOSIT REQUIRED at one of the top UK Bingo sites.