Our country has a hazardous waste problem. I will mostly feign politicial ignorance moving forward, but part of my aim here is to persaude you that this country has trended positively when it comes to improving our environment and we can’t just let this one mudslide (like what I did there?).

With Trump’s appointment of Scott Pruitt, I have really started to worry. There are few things nearer and dearer to me than mother nature itself and if I can convince you to take any action here, it would be this:

Did you do it??? If you are still stuck on how to make a specific comment, perhaps this information can help you. Recently motivated by the May 15 deadline for comment, my love of the outdoors, my wife’s recent visit to Denver (apparently it’s the most polluted zip code in the country), and the availability of an EPA open data set that hasn’t yet been removed by Trump’s administration, I decided to make a few charts. Who doesn’t like charts!?

Like any good market-sizing problem, I first wanted to understand the volume of potential pollutants. Understanding the year over year waste generation seemed like a good starting point. Interestingly, our past production of hazardous waste declined significantly over time and is most evident post-2003. The uptick in hazardous waste doesn’t increase again until 2013.

This data comes from the Biennial Reporting System (BRS), which is one of EPA’s primary tools for tracking the generation, shipment, and receipt of hazardous waste. It contains information from Hazardous Waste Reports that must be filed every two years (which means that the data you see above represents waste from a year in arrear) under the RCRA program. RCRA (the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act) is the Federal statute that regulates the generation, treatment, storage, disposal, or recycling of solid and hazardous waste. Facilities must report their activities involving hazardous waste to BRS if they fulfill one of two criteria:

Of particular importance here, are the definitions of generated waste and received waste:

So, I’m not an expert, but this seems like a massive amount of waste. Remember, the unit is in MILLIONS of TONS. There are specific rules about how long that waste can sit on site (90 days) before it’s sent off-site to be handled by a waste-management company. If you can believe it, this waste sits in sealed containers, tanks, drip pads, or containment buildings. If the treatment happens on site, which can eventually include land disposal, a waste analysis plan has to be created and maintained.

Now imagine if this got de-regulated and these companies started disposing the waste in your local river or watershed because when given the chance, why wouldn’t a profit-maximizing company reduce the cost of proper waste disposal! It sounds sensational, but these are the specifics we need to acknowledge to bring light to what we could lose - mother nature, man. I think both sides of the aisle can agree on this one. If you are interested, please read a concise summary of the requirements here: Requirements

But enough about this, we want to know who the hell is generating this waste. Well, without further ado, I present the top 5 companies of hazardous waste generation, from 1991 - 2003 and 2005 - 2015, respectively. Because there was such a stark difference in the waste generation pre and post-2003, I really wanted to understand who the latest movers were. Now, let’s remember, these aren’t the bad guys, necessarily. They produce waste as a by-product of their manufacturing processes, and if it’s reported in this database, they are following the law. That’s a good thing, but like I said earlier, if this gets de-regulated, would you really trust every single one of these companies to deal with their waste appropriately? I’m not sure I would.

I feel a little out of breath. How about you? That’s what my wife said when she was in Denver and interestingly enough, the largest producer of hazardous waste in 2001 (really 2000) appears to be Denver Metal Finishing, based out of, you guessed it, DENVER! Check out this article on the most polluted zip codes and tell me I’m crazy. The zip with the highest Environmental Hazard Index is Denver (80216). Now, I would never claim to have the full picture, but this paints an interesting one. Also, Kodak in 2013 (2012 when the waste was reported)…what is going on there? If anyone has any thoughts, please comment. This might be useful context: Eastman Kodak Files for Bankruptcy

Now to the fun part. The data also contains waste generated by each state for each reporting year. I thought it would be informative to see how the waste generated each year changed, and what better way to vizualize then with a fun interactive map. Please note that the intial scale is linear and represents total volume of waste generated for ALL years. The scale for this initial chart is 0 - 800 million tons. Once you click on a year, the scale becomes somewhat non-linear to account for the lower volumes for each individual year. You can further click on a state to get the exact waste generated for any given year. 

 

|||

