It’s year 2017. You are a simple man, an ordinary worker. You have heard about Elon Musk and his plan to make humankind an multiplanetary species. He promised spaceships to Mars by 2030. Future is near. But let’s be honest. You are never gonna be on that ship and frankly you do not want to be on that ship. You are young and there are bigger problems for you to handle. You are about to finish school and start your own career.

The employer where your father is working is replacing 90% of workers with robots. They say it is good for business. From 650 employees are laid off 590. It will increase production by 250% and decreases number of product defects from 25% to just 5%. Your oppurtunities to get a good job are not too bright, eh !? So, what is your plan? Maybe you do not need to have a job at all? Let robots work and you live off of universal basic income. In near future it might be possible, but then what about your needs and passions?

Humans have different needs. Basic needs are food and a warm place to live. With universal basic income you might meet those needs. But then what? You sit and watch TV allday? You need self-fulfillment and togetherness!

World is rapidly changing around us. It is getting better if we make it better. In near future we all have oppurtunites to make life better around us and within. We are capable for much more than 8-17 factory jobs. It is in the past. Let robots do them. Work smarter not harder!

Future is much more brighter. Politics aside(no need to go there) for common folks future is beautiful. Do not let main stream politicians and media frighten you. We are not slaves for corporations anymore! We make our own future. Great examples are likes of AirBnB or superwork.io

It’s our responsibility to use new tools that are given to us. Lets mix new technology to old knowledge. We can grow our own food with help of technology, we can share our skills and work together for greater good not for someone’s greed. New energy is renewable. New economy is collaborative consumption(sharing economy). New worker is self-driven individual in a self-sufficient community with a common goal!|||

