We are pleased to announce the availability of new version 17.4.0 of Aspose.3D for .NET API. The new version of the API adds support of converting 3D models to the Google Draco (.drc) format. Developers can import any supported 3D file, and then export in DRC format. All 3D import formats are listed on this page: Import an Existing 3D File. The Draco saving options of the API allow to specify the compression level. This help topic shows how to specify Draco saving options: Use of the Google Draco (.drc) Save Options



Developers can also encode a Mesh in the Google Draco file. All other regular fixes and improvements are also included. Developers can install Aspose.3D Nuget package in their .NET applications because we publish each version as a NuGet package on the NuGet gallery. We recommend our clients upgrade old version of the Aspose.3D API to this latest one. For details on API fixes, please check Release Notes having a complete list of the features, enhancements and bug fixes.

3D meshes are widely used in computer graphics applications for approximating 3D models. When representing complex shapes in raw data format, meshes consume a large amount of space. Using Aspose.3D for .NET API, developers can retrieve a mesh of any 3D shape, and then encode it in the Google Draco (.drc) file. This help topic will help to know the way of encoding a mesh in DRC file: Encoding a 3D Mesh in the Google Draco File

Using Aspose.3D for .NET API, developers can already place a camera in 3D scene to define a view as narrated in this help topic: Take a Picture of 3D Model from the Camera. Developers can now find improvements in the and movements with orthographic projection mode. There are two rotation modes as below:

mode is compatible with old code in real time rendering. The orientation of the Frustum (base class of Camera and Light) is specified by its property which is an absolute position in the world space, in this mode developers can always get different property when its position get changed. mode is useful in designing tools like CAD or FPS game. It will no longer look at a target, but keep the same direction (specified by its property) relative to its position. In this mode, developers can always get different property when its position gets changed.

Developers can also zoom out camera to quickly magnify the view. The following source code demonstrates how to set the rotation and magnification of a Camera object:

The following API changes in the new version are also worth noting:

The following resources will help you work with Aspose.3D for .NET:

We hope you will enjoy this new release that save time and efforts. The API is quite simple and developers can use it in application easily.|||

We are pleased to announce the availability of new version 17.4.0 of Aspose.3D for .NET API. The new version of the API adds support of converting 3D models