Spend more than about five minutes on Hacker News and you’ll see them: the moonlighters. The side-hustlers. The dedicated cadre of people working a full day at their jobs and then rushing home to jump into their other project.

This kind of crazy ambition has paid off for a lucky few (Ryan Hoover of Product Hunt comes to mind), but the vast majority of people who attempt it eventually quit.

Quitting is so common because it is really, really hard to jump from your day job to your side project. It’s difficult and stressful, and so people tend to either avoid the work and not accomplish anything, or force themselves to do it until they’re completely burnt out.

The common advice for avoiding burnout is the same macho bullshit you hear all over the valley: don’t avoid it. Hustle. Grind. Grind harder. Grit your teeth and have more fortitude.

Be willing to burn the candle at three ends or quit — you’re not cut out for this game.

The ‘grind grind grind’ mentality doesn’t stand up to science, for two main reasons: you are very bad at switching tasks from your 9-to-5 to your side gig.

You literally can’t be productive for more than about 70 hours per week. You can’t grind your way to success, but you can put in an hour or two after work every day, stacking bricks, until you’ve built a successful business.

If you’re going to work after work, you’re going to have to stop thinking about your 9-to-5 and start focusing on what you have to do to make your passion project succeed. Too bad you’re naturally terrible at switching focus.

Nothing personal, of course. Not only is the human brain bad at doing two things at once, it’s not even good at switching to a second task after its current task is finished.

A study by Sophie Leroy at NYU named this phenomenon attention residue: the old task lingers in your brain even when you stop working on it, using up additional cycles in the background.

It’s even worse when your brain feels that whatever you were doing remains unfinished — you might want to move on to a new task, but your subconscious has no interest in doing so.

If you’ve ever spent the entire commute home lingering on problems from work, or let a Friday afternoon email ruin your weekend, then you know what I’m talking about.

But if you can convince your subconscious to shut down all of those extra processes running in the back of your head, you might actually have a shot at finding the mental energy to spend the evening on your side hustle.

A shutdown allows you to clear your mind of all of your old work, and a spin-up helps you more concretely shift into your new mental frame while being physically restorative — a burst of physical energy to accompany and encourage your newfound mental energy.

In Cal Newport’s excellent book Deep Work, he recommends an end-of-work routine to allow your mind to free itself, rest, and relax. It’s a great practice for the end of the day, but if you’re trying to squeeze more work out of the day, it can also be a useful tool to encourage effective task-switching.

What you’re looking for here is a ritual that tells your subconscious “I’m done (with that) for the day.”

Key component — this is the important part—don’t miss this:

I rip up that day’s 3x5 to do list and say “done!”|||

This one’s for the the moonlighters. The hustlers. The dreamers.