7 'new features' iPhones may get in September Apple recently announced the dates of WWDC 2017, its biggest software event of the year.

 

 Like past many years, this time too the event will see the company unveiling the next- generation of its iOS operating system, iOS 11. The iOS powers the company's iPhones and iPads.

 

 The all-new iOS will debut with the company's 2017 edition of iPhones in

 

 September and will also be rolled out to previous-generation (eligible devices) iPhones.

 

 Here are seven 'new features' that Apple iPhones are speculated to get in September 2017.

While this feature is already available in iOS 10, its limited to the OS’ beta versions only. It allows users to transcribe all their voicemails to texts.

Rumours claim that the Cupertino-based technology giant is planning a slew of changes for its digital assistant.

 

 These reportedly include ability to use Siri offline. Another rumoured feature is Siri may get across-platform support, which means it can follow a command you gave on your iPhone on your iPad. 

 

 The company is also said to be working on changing the voice of Siri. Reports claim that Apple is working on making Siri sound more natural and less robotic.

This is supposed to be one of the biggest features of the upcoming iPhones. The company is said to be betting big on it.

 

 Earlier this year, CEO Tim Cook termed AR 'as a big idea like the smartphone'. The famous Apple analyst KGI Securities Ming-Chi Kuo too said that Apple's upcoming iPhone, dubbed iPhone 8, will support 3D sensing, AR and biometric authentication. In a note to clients, Kuo reportedly wrote that a pair of sensors on the FaceTime camera will help iPhone 8 provide features ranging from 3D sensing and modelling to advanced biometric authentication.

Apple is reportedly all set to drop 32-bit support with the iOS 11 release.

 

 The company has been warning about this to developers since February this year. This means that the apps that haven't been updated to support 64-bit processor will not work on Apple's next version of operating system, iOS 11.

 

 Some 200,000 apps on App store are said to be become obsolete due to this.

 

 (Image Courtesy: findicons.com)



iOS 11 may finally bring ‘Dark mode’ to iPhones and iPads.

 

 The feature is already available in beta version(s) of iOS 10 and may finally be rolled out to all users with the new mobile operating system.

Group FaceTime calling is one of the biggest features of Microsoft's Skype that has been missing in Apple's chat app Facetime.

 

 With iOS 11, the company is speculated to add 'group calling' to Facetime.

Attempting to catch up to rival Google Maps, Apple is reportedly planning to use a fleet of drones to improve its mapping data.

 

 The company is believed to have assembled a team of data collection experts and robotics, responsible for mapping location and map data using drones, instead of the regular mini vans with cameras and other sensors.|||

Apple recently announced the dates of WWDC 2017, its biggest software event of the year.  Like past many years, this time too the event will see the company unveiling the next- generation of its iOS operating system, iOS 11. The iOS powers the company's iPhones and iPads.  The all-new iOS will debut with the company's 2017 edition of iPhones in  September and will also be rolled out to previous-generation (eligible devices) iPhones.  Here are seven 'new features' that Apple iPhones are speculated to get in September 2017.