There is an escalation of privilege vulnerability in Intel® Active Management Technology (AMT), Intel® Standard Manageability (ISM), and Intel® Small Business Technology versions firmware versions 6.x, 7.x, 8.x 9.x, 10.x, 11.0, 11.5, and 11.6 that can allow an unprivileged attacker to gain control of the manageability features provided by these products.  This vulnerability does not exist on Intel-based consumer PCs with consumer firmware, Intel servers utilizing Intel® Server Platform Services (Intel® SPS), or Intel® Xeon® Processor E3 and Intel® Xeon® Processor E5 workstations utilizing Intel® SPS firmware.

For general guidance on this issue please see - http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/architecture-and-technology/intel-amt-vulnerability-announcement.html

As Intel becomes aware of computer maker schedules for updated firmware this list will be updated:

There are two ways this vulnerability may be accessed please note that Intel® Small Business Technology is not vulnerable to the first issue.

The issue has been observed in Intel manageability firmware versions 6.x, 7.x, 8.x 9.x, 10.x, 11.0, 11.5, and 11.6 for Intel® Active Management Technology, Intel® Small Business Technology, and Intel® Standard Manageability.  Versions before 6 or after 11.6 are not impacted.

Intel has released a downloadable discovery tool located at downloadcenter.intel.com, which will analyze your system for the vulnerability. IT professionals who are familiar with the configuration of their systems and networks can use this tool or can find more details below.

Step 1: Determine if you have an Intel® AMT, Intel® SBA, or Intel® ISM capable system.  If you determine that you do not have an Intel® AMT, Intel® SBA, or Intel® ISM capable system then no further action is required.

Step 2: Utilize the INTEL-SA-00075 Detection Guide to assess if your system has the impacted firmware. If you do have a version in the “Resolved Firmware” column no further action is required to secure your system from this vulnerability.

Step 3: Intel highly recommends checking with your system OEM for updated firmware.  Firmware versions that resolve the issue have a four digit build number that starts with a “3” (X.X.XX.3XXX) Ex: 8.1.71.3608.

Step 4: If a firmware update is not available from your OEM, mitigations are provided the INTEL-SA-00075 Mitigation Guide.

For assistance in implementing the mitigations steps provided in this document, please contact Intel Customer Support; from the Technologies section, select Intel® Active Management Technology (Intel® AMT).|||

