Before you went to bed last night, what did you do to make sure you woke up at a certain time this morning? You set your alarm clock. But more than likely, it wasn’t a physical alarm clock that you set. You know, the ones that had colorful lights and the loud, annoying sounds that gave people no choice but to get out of bed as soon as it invaded their eardrums. Instead, it was probably a default alarm clock or another downloadable alarm app on your phone that you used.



 Old Home to Smart Home: Ways to Modernize Your Living Space

From the time we wake up in the morning to the time we go to bed at night, our day is ruled by technology. Considering that there are a plethora of new apps both failing and being built every single day, technology’s influence on our lives has only just begun.

Of course, technology isn’t just impacting our lives through our mobile devices. Computers have become a necessity in almost every industry in the world, and even when we aren’t using it for business-related tasks, we still have the opportunity to find many forms of entertainment through the screen of our choice.



 The Future Is Now! Tech Trends To Look For In 2017

Want to find the coolest gear for your Mac? How about an in-depth look at the world of fantasy football? Or what about watching your favorite TV show or movie? As the saying goes, “there’s an app for that.”

Innovations in technology allow us to have all of those options at our fingertips. We are just a tap, click, or scroll away from experiencing all that technology revolution has to offer.

And there’s no limit to our technological intake. Most smartphones offer anywhere from 16 to 64 gigabytes of storage space, while computers offer massive amounts more in a quest to give us anything we want in the wild world of technology.

We can do what we want thanks to advances in technology. However, that isn’t always a good thing.

Like with all good things in society, moderation is important. Our daily lives can spin out of control when we find ourselves perusing our Facebook timeline or logging three hours in an addicting game app while at work. After all, it’s only a simple click away.

The addiction factor with technology is real. It’s easy to spend a lot of time behind a screen and forget to embrace the reality that is in front of you. When at a restaurant or similar setting, some people spend more time checking their phone than they do conversing with the person that they’re with. When you consider just how much we can do with a simple tap of a thumb, it’s understandable how these types of scenarios happen.



 Unexpected Ways Tech Can Encroach on Your Life

The question is, as more technological innovations widen our options as to how we spend our time each day, will we be able to consume it all in moderation? Or will it consume us? Those answers will ultimately determine how our society operates in the next 10 years.



 AS TECHNOLOGY GETS BETTER, WILL SOCIETY GET WORSE?

However, in the grand scheme of things, all these innovations have provided us with extraordinary possibilities in life. For those that understand how to put all of these modern inventions to good use, the rewards can be astronomical.

Never has there been an easier way to share our favorite products, photos, or anything other relevant information with our friends and family. It’s also never been easier to educate ourselves, whether it be finally mastering those pesky mathematical equations or learning a foreign language that we’ve always dreamed of speaking. We have the ability to connect with any person or any idea in the world, and that’s a very powerful tool.

The technology boom is far from finished. More changes are on the way, and it’s up to us to use these innovations in a way that is beneficial to ourselves and the rest of society.|||

Before you went to bed last night, what did you do to make sure you woke up at a certain time this morning? You set your alarm clock. But more than likely,