EAPHammer is a toolkit for performing targeted evil twin attacks against WPA2-Enterprise networks. It is designed to be used in full scope wireless assessments and red team engagements. As such, focus is placed on providing an easy-to-use interface that can be leveraged to execute powerful wireless attacks with minimal manual configuration. To illustrate how fast this tool is, here's an example of how to setup and execute a credential stealing evil twin attack against a WPA2-TTLS network in just two commands:

Leverages a lightly modified version of hostapd-wpe (shoutout to Brad Anton for creating the original), dnsmasq, dsniff, Responder, and Python 2.7.

Will this tool ever support Karma attacks?

Begin by cloning the eaphammer repo using the following command.

Next run the kali-setup.py file as shown below to complete the eaphammer setup process. This will install dependencies and compile hostapd.

If you are not using Kali, you can still compile eaphammer. I just haven't written a setup script for your distro yet, which means you'll have to do it manually. Ask yourself whether you understand the following:

If you looked at this list and immediately realized that each pair of items was to some extent equivalent (well, except for service vs systemctl, but you catch my drift), you'll probably have no problems getting this package to work on the distro of your choice. If not, please just stick with Kali until support is added for other distros.

With that out of the way, here are the generic setup instructions:

Use your package manager to install each of the dependencies listed in . Package names can vary slightly from distro to distro, so you may get a "package not found" error or similar. If this occurs, just use Google to find out what the equivalent package is for your distro and install that instead.

Once you have installed each of the dependencies listed in , you'll need to install some additional packages that ship with Kali by default. These packages are listed below. If you're on a distro that uses httpd instead of apache2, install that instead.

Compile hostapd using the following commands:

Open config.py in the text editor of your choice and edit the following lines so that to values that work for your distro:

Eaphammer provides an easy-to-use wizard for generating x.509 certificates. To launch eaphammer's certificate wizard, just use the command shown below.

To steal RADIUS credentials by executing an evil twin attack against an EAP network, use the --creds flag as shown below.

The flags shown above are self explanatory. For more granular control over the attack, you can use the --wpa flag to specify WPA vs WPA2 and the --auth flag to specify the eap type. Note that for cred reaping attacks, you should always specify an auth type manually since the the --auth flag defaults to "open" when omitted.

Please refer to the options described in Additional Options section of this document for additional details about these flags.

Eaphammer can perform hostile portal attacks that can force LLMNR/NBT-NS enabled Windows clients into surrendering password hashes. The attack works by forcing associations using an evil twin attack, then forcing associated clients to attempt NetBIOS named resolution using a Redirect To SMB attack. While this occurs, eaphammer runs Responder in the background to perform a nearly instantaneous LLMNR/NBT-NS poisoning attack against the affected wireless clients. The result is an attack that causes affected devices to not only connect to the rogue access point, but send NTLM hashes to the rogue access point as well.

The --hostile-portal flag can be used to execute a hostile portal attack, as shown in the examples below.

The hostile portal attack described in Stealing AD Credentials Using Hostile Portal Attacks can be used to perform an SMB relay attack against the affected devices. An attacker can use hostile portal attack to perform an SMB relay attack that places timed reverse shell on an authorized wireless devices. The attacker can then disengage the attack to allow the authorized device to reconnect to the targetted network. When the attacker receives the reverse shell, he or she will have the same level of authorization as the attacker.

To perform a captive portal attack using eaphammer, use the --captive-portal flag as shown below.

This will cause eaphammer to execute an evil twin attack in which the HTTP(S) traffic of all affected wireless clients are redirected to a website you control. Eaphammer will leverage Apache2 to serve web content out of /var/www/html if used with the default Apache2 configuration. Future iterations of eaphammer will provide an integrated HTTP server and website cloner for attacks against captive portal login pages.|||

eaphammer - Targeted evil twin attacks against WPA2-Enterprise networks. Indirect wireless pivots using hostile portal attacks.