is a property of the AWS::Lambda::Function resource that enables you to specify the source code of an AWS Lambda function. Your source code can be located in either the template or a file in an S3 bucket. For , , , and runtime environments only, you can provide source code as inline text in your template.

When you use the property to specify your function's source code and that function interacts with an AWS CloudFormation custom resource, you can load the module to send responses to those resources. The module contains a method, which sends a response object to a custom resource by way of an Amazon S3 pre-signed URL (the ).

After executing the method, the Lambda function terminates, so anything you write after that method is ignored.

For the or runtime environment, use the function to load the module. For example, the following code example creates a object with the name :

For or environments, use the statement to load the module, as shown in the following example:

You can use the following parameters with the method.

In the following Node.js example, the inline Lambda function takes an input value and multiplies it by 5. Inline functions are especially useful for smaller functions because they allow you to specify the source code directly in the template instead of creating a package and uploading it to an Amazon S3 bucket. The function uses the method to send the result back to the custom resource that invoked it.

As in the preceding example, in the following Python example (the example works in both version 2.7 and 3.6), the inline Lambda function takes an integer value and multiplies it by 5.

The response module source code for the or runtime environment follows. Review it to understand what the module does and for help with implementing your own response functions.

The response module source code for the environment follows:

The response module source code for the environment follows:|||

Specify an AWS Lambda function in AWS CloudFormation by using the Code property to point to a file in an Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) bucket or by specifying your source code as inline text.