So this weekend I went to IKEA with a friend of mine and he suggested we check out the food court. We knew we were getting closer as we smelled the fresh scent of the cinnamon buns and the hunger-inducing aroma of the ever so cheap slices of pizza. So we waited in line among all the newly weds hoping to cope with their first serious shopping experience designed to end marriages faster than Ashely Madison. Finally, we approached the counter and began ordering everything off the menu like it was our Last Supper. Thankfully we were carrying shelves and not the Cross.

This is where things began to get a little weird…

After placing my order, I walked to the side of the food counter patiently waiting for my food. It never came. To my surprise, there actually was no designated person to give you your food after you pay! You just grab how ever much you ordered and leave with it…So I could just leave with an extra slice of pizza and they wouldn’t know? I couldn’t help but try to model the economics of trust….about my IKEA food court experience.

Let’s do some back of the envelope math. According to Glassdoor, a food service worker makes $12.9 /hr at IKEA (this is not specific to CA). I also annoyed a few IKEA workers and got them to tell me that the store’s food court near the checkout line serves, on average, 30–40 customers per hour. A slice of pizza sells for about $1.75 and with food costs accounting for 15–30%, it’d cost $.40 to make one slice. So if all the customers, every hour, were to steal an extra slice of pizza, that’d cost IKEA about $14 losses. They could avoid that by hiring someone for $12.9 /hr but it’s not worth it. They have more to gain by losing money.

IKEA is building trust with the customers. It takes a lot a lot of trust to let someone into your home — that’s what I’m doing by buying their furniture. With the simple exercise of letting me get my own food, it helps me know IKEA trusts me too. This actually makes sense because IKEA isn’t making any significant profit from the food court; I’d argue that they lose money on it. They have more to gain by building trust — you can definitely put a price on that!

P.S. Try the salmon at IKEA and thank me later ;)|||

So this weekend I went to IKEA with a friend of mine and he suggested we check out the food court. We knew we were getting closer as we smelled the fresh scent of the cinnamon buns and the hunger…