There are two key ingredients to a successful trigger or event-based marketing tactic – relevancy and timing.  To be relevant can mean a few things – understanding your consumer, maintaining a pulse on current trends, and anticipating or predicting consumer behaviors.  The right timing can determine a campaign’s success, and in the digital-age we live in, it often means being able to react quickly before the moment has passed; but also, to know when or how long to run a campaign before it is no longer relevant.

There are platforms that exist today that allow for trigger-based marketing campaigns via email.

Let’s face it…how many spam emails do you receive daily and never open.  For those of us that are organized, most of these emails likely get routed to our spam folder, so a 49% open rate is far from the norm.

People are much more likely to not only read the message, but also react and take action if it’s relevant.

The idea of trigger-based marketing isn’t necessarily a new concept.  For instance, during the 2013 Super Bowl, Oreo seized the opportunity when the power went out.  The marketing team immediately tweeted a single Oreo illuminated in the dark with the caption “Power Out? No problem. You can still dunk in the dark.” The message went viral and got nearly 15,000 retweets and more than 20,000 likes on Facebook.  Oreo was able to pull off the successful campaign because they had a marketing team poised to blast social media the moment something exciting happened in the game. In this case, a mid-game power outage.  But with Cloud Campaign, you don’t need a whole team sitting on the sidelines waiting for the perfect opportunity; instead, you set up triggers, sit back, and watch the customers roll in.

The key benefit of social media marketing is the ability to increase exposure and traffic at a relatively low cost.  Social media is becoming the cornerstone platform for companies to drive engagement and ROI. Cloud Campaign is taking social media marketing to the next level by providing the tools for companies and marketers to anticipate trends and target consumers.|||

Engage your audience and increase your followers.