STUFF YOU MAY LIKE

Knowledge is power and obviously one of the most important things in this life.

This is why learning is a continuous process for young entrepreneurs to acquire new skills.

The fact is that entrepreneurship can open a window of opportunity for you not only to network but also to acquire new skills.

As a young entrepreneur, you will have to continue to learn new things and skills to be able to keep your company moving forward.

Also, you will need to equip yourself in order to be at the top of your game.

SEE ALSO: Few Things That Can Change Your Life And Make You A Better Person

With the help of modern technology, learning and acquiring new skills is even easy nowadays. You can now improve yourself and learn new skills from the comfort zone of your living room.

There are quite powerful online learning platforms where young entrepreneurs can master new skills and achieve their goals. You don’t even need to spend a fortune and it won’t affect your business management capability.

So, if you are looking for a place to learn new skills and improve your knowledge, below are some of the best online learning platforms we think you can use.

Udemy.com is a global marketplace for learning and teaching online. The platform has helped more than 14 million students to master new skills and achieve their goals from over 42,000 courses taught by expert instructors.

It offers a super convenient way to take your courses with you and even download to your device. It’s available on a web browser, iPhone, iPad and Android apps.



Coursera.org is a household name offering over 2000 courses from schools like Stanford and Yale, and no application required.

Coursera provides online courses covering dozens of different subjects in a partnership with leading universities in the U.S. and around the world. This online platform can help you build career skills in data science, computer science, business, and more.



iVersity.org is arguably Europe’s biggest online learning platform for higher education and professional development courses.

It offers interactive and entertaining courses designed to enable thousands of participants to learn and acquire new skills. Today, iVersity has over 750,000 registered users from across the globe and over 1 million course enrolments.



Khan Academy is on a mission to provide a free, world-class education to anyone, anywhere. The best thing about this platform is that it’s free and you too can benefit from their services.

Khan Academy is a non-profit online platform providing a completely free library of educational materials. It focuses more on traditional academic subjects with a mix of video and text-based materials in math, science, economics, humanities, and a bit of computer programming.



As the name implies, Codecademy is dedicated to teaching people how to code and it’s available for free. While other online coding courses are a “learn at your own pace” platform, Codecademy motivates learners to keep a fast pace using supportive groups and a gamified points system.

It offers courses on a number of coding languages which includes PHP, Phython and Ruby.



Lynda.com is one of the pioneers of online learning and arguably the most popular platform to learn online. It offers a subscription-based video tutorial library covering almost everything you need to improve and equip yourself.

You can learn software, creative, and business skills to achieve your personal and professional goals. This is a great option for people who are visual learners and its membership costs around $25 per month.



Skillshare is an online community and marketplace for anyone to acquire new skills. It offers an online catalogue of video-based courses covering a broad range of different subjects.

Skillshare charges around $20-$30 each for classes that are available without a membership. Its top classes are taught by industry leaders and they are only available with a Skillshare membership.



Udacity.com is another popular online learning platform on a mission to bring accessible, affordable, engaging, and highly effective higher education to the world.

With a strong focus on technology, Udacity offers a selection of courses to prepare yourself for the jobs of today, tomorrow, and beyond. Udacity’s courses are taught by an impressive roster of tutors from Fortune 500 companies.



edX.org is another great online learning platform you can use to take free classes and courses to improve yourself. The platform offers series of courses that are carefully put together and tons of excellent resources.

edX is an online learning destination and MOOC provider, and it is available on Android and iOS so you can take the learning with you anywhere you go.



Bloc.io is one of the best online learning platforms that focuses majorly on web development. It is a more intensive option for those who want to learn quickly with tuition starting from around $4,000.

This is an online coding bootcamp that incorporates 1-on-1 mentorship to prepare each student for a career as a professional software engineer.|||

Powerful online learning platforms for young entrepreneurs master new skills. Best sites for online education like Udemy, Coursera, Lynda, iversity etc.