Last week The Federalist reported on an illuminating segment from a mid-1990s episode of “Bill Nye the Science Guy” that clashes directly with modern transgender ideology. It appears that someone cut this segment from a re-release of the episode.

In the clip reported on by The Federalist, pulled from the January 19, 1996 episode of the series, a young woman explains that “inside each of our cells are these things called chromosomes, and they control whether we become a boy or a girl.” She goes on to explain how we all receive sex chromosomes from both parents, leading to a fertilized egg’s 50/50 chance of being a boy or a girl.

This clashes directly with Nye’s current feelings on sex: in a recent episode of his new Netflix series, “Bill Nye Saves the World,” Nye claims that the “male and female” binary is “more like a kaleidoscope.” Instead of the simple XX and XY combinations, Nye asserts that “we see more combinations than that in real life.”

“What makes someone male or female,” Nye says, “isn’t so clear-cut.”

Nye’s evolution on the subject of biological sex is roughly in line with that of standard progressive gender ideology, which is hardly surprising—Nye has become something of a progressive spokesman. What is shocking, however, is that Nye or someone else appears to have gone back and censored the episode of “Bill Nye the Science Guy” that featured the original chromosome segment.

On Netflix’s collection of episodes of “Bill Nye,” the 23rd episode, entitled “Probability,” is identical to that which originally aired in 1996—except that the segment on sex and chromosomes has been excised completely. The episode offers no explanation whatsoever. The show simply moves from the segment immediately prior the deleted clip to the segment immediately following it.

It is unclear if any other episodes of “Bill Nye” were edited or changed for distribution on Netflix. In the third episode in the fifth season of the series, entitled “Genes,” Nye claims that “the way you are…[is] determined by your genes.” This remark has not been excised from the episode’s run on Netflix.

Nye recently generated controversy when actress Rachel Bloom appeared on his latest television show and gave a half-rap, half-spoken-word performance about sexuality and identity, which included lines such as “Must I choose between only John or Joyce? / Are my options only hard or moist?” and “Drag queen, drag king, just do what feels right / You’re a tall pansexual flirty wood sprite?”

It is unclear if Bill Nye believes that chromosomes have a genetic effect on one’s desire to be a tall pansexual flirty wood sprite.|||

Someone appears to have retroactively censored an episode of ‘Bill Nye the Science Guy’ that explains how human chromosomes determine our biological sex.