Earlier today, we shared our vision for empowering today’s students and teachers to create the world of tomorrow. This is a vision that resonates deeply with us on the Surface team because it taps directly into why we created Surface – to empower people to bring their ideas to life. To bring hardware and software together to transform the way people learn and create. This is what Surface has always been about. We built Surface Laptop to do two things: refresh the classic laptop form factor that our customers, especially college students, have been asking for; and make a Surface that works seamlessly to showcase the best of Windows 10 S.

The result is the most personal and balanced Surface we’ve ever made. This Surface perfectly blends fabric and function, power and portability, beauty and performance. It does all of this without compromising on the things we know are important to higher education students: battery life, display quality, storage, and portability.

When you look at Surface Laptop you see will see how it brings together the best innovations from across the Surface family. People love the Surface Pro because we removed the need to carry two devices by putting a kickstand on it, to make them even more productive. It’s simple, but it’s also the most versatile and mobile laptop we’ve ever made. With Surface Book, we made a performance beast, with an incredible trackpad and typing experience. We built Surface Studio to remove the barriers to creating, to give people the ability to immerse themselves in their ideas: we engineered a floating sheet of pixels. And with Surface Dial we designed a new tool for creators that with integration across Windows apps, brings new experiences to life.

At 2.76lbs and 14.47mm at its thickest point, no other laptop this light and thin* can match the sleek design, power, performance, and battery life of Surface Laptop.

You can open this Surface with just one finger and see the brilliant 13.5” PixelSense™ Display, made with edge-to-edge Corning® Gorilla® Glass 3. It’s the thinnest LCD touch screen display on any laptop.

This screen has 3.4M pixels with every pixel color calibrated to give you a vibrant and immersive canvas that draws you in and keeps you focused and engaged.

We haven’t compromised on performance to bring you this display quality. Surface Laptop comes with a 7th Generation Intel® Core™ processor and even as light and thin as it is, up to four more hours of battery power than a 13” MacBook Pro**.

You don’t always need to bring a charger with you to class, or discussion, or study group because Surface Laptop has up to 14.5 hours of battery life**. And the Alcantara®-covered keyboard and soft palm rest give you a new level of typing comfort during those long days. When the work is done and it’s time to relax, you can watch 14 episodes of your favorite TV show in one sitting, without ever plugging in.

We’ve also worked across Windows and Surface to optimize battery life when you’re not using your laptop. So you can you can go away for vacation and pick up right where you left off when you return.

We know that in addition to performance and battery life, students want something they are proud to carry. This is why Surface Laptop’s approach to material and color is personal, it reflects you. With Surface Laptop, we created a warm and human experience, moving the technology into the background.

The anodized metal on the outside feels smooth and cool while the inside Alcantara® material feels soft and warm. The appearance of these together creates a harmony of color, showcasing a unique richness and depth. We’ve taken great care to make the materials not only functional but also provide tactile familiarity, and by design, Alcantara resists spills and absorption and is easy to clean.

Surface Laptop is made for and powered by Windows 10 S. The hardware and software are blended so flawlessly you can’t tell where one ends and the other begins. And for a limited time, Surface Laptop comes with an offer for one-year subscription to Office 365 Personal and 1TB of free storage on OneDrive****, giving you full access to Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and OneNote.

All your documents will be protected, secure, and stable. You won’t have to worry about losing a paper again because everything will automatically save to the cloud, and Windows 10 S means your Surface is always up to date providing superior performance and streamlined security.

Every app in the Windows Store is verified for security by Microsoft so you get an experience you can trust. And we’re adding new apps every day. Spotify will come to the store early this summer with new experiences that will light up on Surface including using the Surface Dial***** to run your Spotify playlist.

If you need to use an app that isn’t in the Windows Store, in just a few clicks can go to the Windows Store and switch to Windows 10 Pro. But you shouldn’t. This device, this OS, they’re made for each other, and together they offer so much. It’s everything you love about Windows, Office, and Surface, made pure and elegant in an unbelievably thin and light package.

Customers can pre-order Surface Laptop starting today in the U.S., Australia, New Zealand, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom where available at Microsoft Store, microsoftstore.com and BestBuy.com. Surface Laptop will come to China later this year and we will announce availability in other markets in coming months.

*Lightest and longest battery life in its class. Research by Principled Technologies of 13” devices running Intel U processor with DPI greater than 200, April 2017.

 **Up to 14.5 hours of video playback. Testing conducted by Microsoft in April 2017 using preproduction Intel Core i5, 256GB, 8 GB RAM device. Testing consisted of full battery discharge during video playback. All settings were default except Wi-Fi was associated with a network and Auto-Brightness disabled. Battery life varies significantly with settings, usage, and other factors.

 ***Four colors available in U.S. only on i5-7200U 8GB/256GB model.

 ****Limited-time offer for a one-year subscription to Office 365 Personal with 1TB OneDrive storage; must activate within 180 days. Offer ends 10/15/2017.

 *****Surface Dial and Surface Pen sold separately.|||

Surface Laptop brings the superior performance and security of Windows 10 S to a laptop that college students will love.