What Furniture Shopping Taught Me About Product Management

I’m currently in the process of moving into a new flat. Part of that process involves buying furniture.

I’ll spare you the details (that’s what my autobiography is for) but suffice to say that there are three key things to take into account when buying a sofa.

It needs to look good, be comfortable, and fit inside the room.

When considering these three things, it occurred to me that there are parallels between a sofa purchase, and a product decision.

Bear with me here.

You see, if you group together the look and comfort of the sofa, that kinda sounds a lot like a product strategy.

My sofa strategy was that it needed to be pleasing to the eye and even more pleasing to my behind. That was my strategy.

The data came in the form of dimensions. It needed to fit with the data I had collected — the measurements of the room.

If I focused purely on sofa strategy, then yeah, I’d have a sofa that looked awesome and cushioned my bum perfectly. It would be fantastic. Only, it might not fit inside my flat. And unfortunately, even the best sofa in the world is useless outside. (I mean, I live in Britain — rain central.)

If, on the other hand, I focused purely on the data, then great, I’d have a sofa that perfectly fit inside the space I had allocated for it. Perfect. Only, it might look super ugly and be really uncomfortable.

So what’s worse? An uncomfortable mess or sitting outside and eventually looking like a, well, like an uncomfortable mess?

The solution to this is to take both strategy and data into account. Focusing on one without the other will lead to failure in one or the other.

Your product strategy and the data you collect are both important. You should use both of these to guide your decision making.

Don’t be data-driven, be data-informed. Don’t be strategy-centric, be strategy-aware.

Then, and only then, will you find your perfect sofa.

PS. You’ll be pleased to know I found one.|||

I’m currently in the process of moving into a new flat. Part of that process involves buying furniture. I’ll spare you the details (that’s what my autobiography is for) but suffice to say that there…