Tegan Lawson does not expect to own her own home in Sydney for at least another 10 or 15 years, but investing in a new start-up called BrickX is giving the 33-year-old the sense of entering the property market.

The company buys properties, divides them into 10,000 shares, or bricks, and offers them up to investors for between about $50 and $150, depending on the value of the property.

"That's the beauty of it, that you get to feel like you're in, and you're involved and you're not just sitting on the sidelines thinking I'll never be able to do this," she said.

Ms Lawson has bought around 20 bricks in total over the past six months.

All eight of BrickX's properties in Sydney and Melbourne are tenanted, and investors get a share of the rental returns.

If the value of the property increases, the value of the bricks goes up too.

The number of bricks any one investor can hold in a property is capped at 500, or 5 per cent of the total number, and bricks can be sold again via the BrickX site.

So is it really any different to buying shares in another company?

"We're trying to give property exposure to people who can't get it otherwise," said BrickX chief executive Anthony Millet.

"We've had a lot of interest from millennials, or those under 35 who want to get into the property market, who've seen over the years the market is just racing away from them.

Nerida Conisbee, chief economist at the REA Group and a member of the BrickX advisory board, said the ideas emerging from "proptech" companies like this are "game-changers".

"I think it's a really interesting way to be able to track the housing market as an investor," she said.

"They're buying in locations that are very safe, inner-suburban Melbourne, inner-suburban Sydney.

"They're very safe and they're low risk, which means that they don't necessarily get the greatest rental return — they do get good capital growth though."

Ms Lawson knew she had a long way to go before she could think seriously about having her own place, but she now believed if she kept investing one day she would.

"It makes me look forward to the day where I can say, 'this is my apartment'," she said.

"That would be amazing, and like six months ago that just seemed like it was never going to happen."|||

With buying their own home a distant dream for many Australians, one company is offering investors the chance to get a foot on the property ladder by selling tiny shares in properties.