Do you know what’s the latest trend today? Taking selfies? Nah. Smartphones? Nah. Then what could it be?

It’s FITNESS!! Who doesn’t want to be fit today? Who isn’t health conscious? And, how many of us don’t work out? Yes, we all do or at least most us do. Now, this doesn’t mean that selfies and smartphones aren’t trending. If you consider facts all these somehow go hand in hand. Let me tell you how. You are surely going to be surprised.

People considered staying fit and healthy even in the earlier times. But their way was a little different. Today, we have too many amenities that help us to stay healthy and fit. There is Yoga, Zumba, Weight training, and so on.

Having a bestie is always an add on. I have one too. She’s Britney! A lovely lady indeed. The two of us are office colleagues. So, we both work out at this exercise studio that’s close to our office. This is one place where we click selfies, obviously, we need are smartphones for it and we are also being health conscious. There’s a gossip side to this as well. Certainly, there are times when either Britney can’t make it to the studio or I can’t. That’s when our smartphones come into play. Unlike any other app, we can chat freely on LYK. You know why? LYK is a social network with privacy filters. Where you chat with the other person without the fear of it being read by the third party. So, do you want to know what we chat, which is so personal and needs privacy? Ah, I’m sure you are interested.

So, there’s this guy Steve – instructor in the studio. Britney and I are a little attracted to him. He’s got an amazingly toned body with the perfect six-pack abs and is extremely charming. Britney is already dating someone and, obviously, can’t afford to let her texts be read by anyone other than me. That’s when we use the app LYK.

This is how it goes for the two of us. We’ve learned how to manage our lives well. We take care of our fitness, selfies, and smartphones too. Also, this keeps us amidst the running trends.

So, what are you doing out there? Do you have any secrets that you wish to share? Then, download the LYK app today and live life to the fullest.|||

