For the technically-inclined, coding is the perfect form of procrastination” via a comment on HN

I’ve spend lots of time over computers, web, email, IM, twitter during last 5 years of my life.  When you don’t have enough resources to learn what you want to learn in your surroundings, Internet is one of the biggest source and help  for you.  Internet as a source of information is great, connected, liberal, free, always available, it’s exactly the way information access should be.

Five years back, I used to get internet access for around 3-4 hours a day, I would copy useful information, websites and burn them in CDs, go back home and read them for hours. It was all great. Internet as a source of information is perfect, still it’s same.

The other aspect of Internet is, Internet as a way of communication. Email, forums, IM, twitter, facebook are among them. But, the Internet as a way of communication, is broken.

You know this if you use it for more than 10+ hours a day.  For professional communication, it’s good. But I am talking about the personal communication. The problem with IM, twitter etc is, they are single dimensional, text. Communication between two people can happen only when there are multiple dimensions are involved, your voice, gestures, eye contact, body language.

From my personal experience, I’ve found that, talking a lot over IM has made me arrogant. I would tell people things I would never say them in a face to face conversation, I would talk too much straight forward, I would not answer people for a long, I would get frustrated if people don’t answer me and what not.

In person, I am a different person, over internet, I am bit different, I am arrogant, thanks to Internet.

I’ve got lots of misconception about world, because of Internet, I am connected with people from US, UK etc over internet more than people from India. Because of that, my understanding about society, culture is somewhat screwed, it’s a real disconnect from your surroundings. It’s painful at times.|||

