Deep residual networks took the deep learning world by storm when Microsoft Research released Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. These networks led to 1st-place winning entries in all five main tracks of the ImageNet and COCO 2015 competitions, which covered image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation. The robustness of ResNets has since been proven by various visual recognition tasks and by non-visual tasks involving speech and language.

This post will summarize the three papers below, with simple and clean Keras implementations of the network architectures discussed. You will have a solid understanding of residual networks and their implementation by the end of this post.

Lots of paraphrasing/quotes from these papers throughout this article.

Network depth is of crucial importance in neural network architectures, but deeper networks are more difficult to train. The residual learning framework eases the training of these networks, and enables them to be substantially deeper — leading to improved performance in both visual and non-visual tasks. These residual networks are much deeper than their ‘plain’ counterparts, yet they require a similar number of parameters (weights).

We have reformulated the fundamental building block (figure above) of our network under the assumption that the optimal function a block is trying to model is closer to an identity mapping than to a zero mapping, and that it should be easier to find the perturbations with reference to an identity mapping than to a zero mapping. This simplifies the optimization of our network at almost no cost. Subsequent blocks in our network are thus responsible for fine-tuning the output of a previous block, instead of having to generate the desired output from scratch.

Wide (width refers to the number of channels in a layer) residual networks attempt to address the problem of diminishing feature reuse (few residual blocks learning useful representations or many blocks sharing very little information with small contribution to the final goal) in very deep (thin) residual networks.

We will take this insight and skip over their proposed architecture as the performance improvements they achieve seem to be due to increased model capacity (number of parameters) and adding additional regularization in the form of dropout — not the actual architecture. We will see in the next section (ResNeXt) that there is a much more effective way to increase model capacity than just increasing width. In fact, there is a balance between the depth and width of these networks — if layers are too wide the model will learn extraneous information (added noise), and if layers are too thin subsequent layers will not have much to learn from (i.e. diminishing feature reuse).

It is worth noting that training time is reduced because wider models take advantage of GPUs being more efficient in parallel computations on large tensors even though the number of parameters and floating point operations has increased.

In Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition a residual learning framework was developed with the goal of training deeper neural networks. Wide Residual Networks showed the power of these networks is actually in residual blocks, and that the effect of depth is supplementary at a certain point. Aggregated Residual Transformations for Deep Neural Networks builds on this, and exposes a new dimension called cardinality as an essential network parameter, in addition to depth and width. Cardinality is demonstrated to be more effective than going deeper or wider when increasing model capacity, especially when increasing depth and width leads to diminishing returns.

Residual connections are helpful for simplifying a network’s optimization, whereas aggregated transformations lead to stronger representation power (as shown by the fact that they perform consistently better than their counterparts with or without residual connections).

The result is a homogenous, multi-branch architecture with only a few hyper-parameters to set.

Please comment on Gist if you spot any errors/possible improvements in code. pyt🔥rch implementation.

I’ll be working ResNeXt into my improved Wasserstein GAN code (wGAN implemented on top of keras/tensorflow as described in: Wasserstein GAN with improvements as described in: Improved Training of Wasserstein GANs) and running some experiments (i.e. a pre-trained discriminator). Expect a blog post on this in the near future.

Here is a rough draft of a GAN network architecture where generator and discriminator are ResNeXt. Please comment on Gist if you spot any errors/possible improvements. https://gist.github.com/mjdietzx/600751b780e1ab2b8802f7788f17882e

I’ll be talking about GANs at the Deep Learning in Healthcare Summit in Boston on Friday, May 26th. Feel free to stop by and say 👋!|||

Deep residual networks took the deep learning world by storm when Microsoft Research released Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. These networks led to 1st-place winning entries in all five…