Now to give it a surface to work on! 

 Steel for the table was ordered from speedymetals, everything came out quite excellent, I initially plotted for a table with a swooping bent curves along the front sides to mimic the scara maximum usable area, but alas, bending big tubing was not really as easy as I had plotted.

A 'big ol kalamazoo' bandsaw was ued to cut everything to length, I was surprised how 'good' the steel tubing was, everything was accurate to +/- 1/8 of an inch or better when it arrived. Finally i labeled everything and started to prep for welding.

The mighty birkel flappy-disc'd all the mating surfaces and we started setting up for some quick mig welding, but alas, the welder was out of spool. I went to town with a tig torch and slowly filled in the gaps and melted material together. It took a while, but came out great.

Attempting to bend 2" diameter steel tube.

 The magical Jack had this wonderful contraption, which even had a 2" diameter square tube die. Its from SWAG offload [ link ], and uses a harborfreight pipe thread cutter as the drive mechanism and rolls the tube between two mondo rollers.  From what i can tell, the 2" square die may have been for some kinda soft aluminum alloy, as myself and birkel really had to go at it to get the amount of bend shown (far right). I ended up opting to not go with the extra front supports and roll with it as it is.

After everything was drilled and cleaned up, the table was clamped in place, tapped to level, and then tightened down with grade 7  1/2-13 bolts and some mega-washers to distribute the load. The table was now a part of the frame and rigidly a part of the bot.

Seriously this thing is awesome, probably great for boring holes into steel safes, albiet slowly. All four holes were drilled through the frame and table in under an hour, worked out quite well.

A quick video of using this monstrosity to bore into the table. 

 Can i mention again how excellent this contraption is? The mighty birkel aided in this quest. Shown far right is the table supporting him.

The table was drawn out and traced with a pencil. A dewalt portable circular saw was used for the square cutoffs and the edges were cut out with a jigsaw and trimmed to fit. I opted for a large continuous sheet of 'nice' grade plywood, as this would probably remain the work surface throughout the early use of the robot. After verifying a decent fit, i removed it from the robot base, sanded it with a ryobi vibrating sander, cleaned up the edges and prepped for paint

For a table surface, I didnt want to go for straight white (easy to spot dirt), and I didnt have 'gray' paint handy. Thanks to the ever excellent Sam, gray is actually just a mix of white and black. Somehow i'm building an art robot and I missed this. After some careful mixing of white and black, grey was born and rolled on using an 8" roller. I fortunately made enough paint to do this once. The matte-white and gloss black made a 'not quite matte gray' pretty effectively

I was fortunate to have a 'fine' roller brush on hand, and the surface came out great. About 6 hours later (with a small fan speeding up the dry-time) the table was ready for the robot.

The table was tapped and set for M6 screws to hold it to the steel underbelly. Socket head cap screws with counter-sunk glued-in-place washers were used so that the screws didnt over-compress the wood work surface.

Some table upgrades

 I found about 2 hours of downtime and some leftover RGB led strip from, the mighty kirkby, printed out some little brackets and tapped some M5 holes in the steel frame. Each little 3d printed bracket holds the led strip in place, some hot glue was used to keep everything in place while the brackets were being printed. There's a reasonable amount of RGB, which, eventiually will make its way to the MESA card for control.

With the table installed, its quite the glowing saucer robot.

 Nominally the RGB led strip is about 30W with R,G,B running at 14v, this however is fairly small in comparison to the overhead lighting. If the overhead lighting is off or in a diminished state, it should make a cool effect, especially if RED is e-stop and GREEN is 'currently running a job, or some M-CODE'. Future improvements indeed.

Making some cover panels

 Earlier the previous day, i made a quick sketch-model of the panel openings that were missing from the robot, i found some blue acrylic [link] and lasercut a rough pattern, using a hot air reflow gun I thermoformed the curved parts to match the robot, finally i added blue led strip for effect, because clearly the robots 'vents' should emit 'blue'. The remaining cabling is tied up and kept away from the moving belts inside the arm using some actual tapped-in anchors instead of the original sticky-zip tie mount (CMON GUYS)

Tidying up with more cover panels

 I mistakenly brought the wrong extra blue acrylic with me and made the second cover panel clear-blue, with the same vent patten. I opted for some fairly 'open' tolerances on the mounting holes because the thermal forming is a bit of a curious action and its hard to quick-guess how much offset the curve makes.

Indication

 This was fairly helpful, sometimes its hard to see where / what was going wrong. This indication panel consist of six 24v leds wired to different parts of the robot, both on the power and control side of the bot.  Admittedly i laser-cut this panel before figuring out what I was plotting to put in each spot. Indications that were the most useful were 'do the frigging servo drives have power' and 'wait is it still in e-stop'. The ammeter was also useful for keeping track of the 48v bus current draw|||

