Every React project is a little different. This can make choosing the right testing setup difficult.

Both Jest and Mocha seem to be popular within the React community. There are tons of folks using Jest, though others seem to prefer Mocha (for example, the Enzyme docs and examples use Mocha). So which one should you choose, and does it even matter?



I recently started a large full-stack project using TypeScript, and we put some effort into researching which testing framework to use. In this post, I’ll discuss what we learned and highlight a few scenarios that may lend themselves to one over the other.

Update: my post originally stated that Jest was designed specifically to be used with React. I’ve since updated it based on the below tweet from Christoph Pojer.

I’m glad he responded to my post. My original description of Jest was perhaps overly narrow and didn’t capture the general flexibility that the Jest authors intended.

The Jest docs clarify this by stating

This is something that I wasn’t aware of.

After starting out as open-source, Jest went through a bit of a dormant phase where Facebook did not put much work into it. This created some negative feelings toward it within the development community. To their credit, Facebook has since corrected this issue. They’ve poured a ton of work into Jest over the past year, adding new features and improvements.

The revamping process started with the release of Version 15 late last year. Here’s a peek at their current roadmap.

The biggest advantage of using Jest is that it works out of the box with minimal setup or configuration. Much of this is because it comes with an assertion library and mocking support. The tests are written in BDD style, similar to any other modern testing library. You can literally just put your tests inside of a directory called or name them with a or extension, then run and it works. That is pretty sweet.

Jest also supports snapshot testing, which can be really handy for preventing accidental UI regressions when doing React development. These tests record snapshots of rendered component structure and compare them to future renderings. When they don’t match, your test fails, indicating that something has changed. You can easily tell Jest to update the snapshot if this change is expected (e.g. for a newly added feature).

Jest’s biggest weaknesses stem from being newer and less widely used among JavaScript developers.

It has less tooling and library support available compared to more mature libraries (like Mocha). Sometimes this type of tooling can be really handy, like the ability to run and debug your tests in an IDE like WebStorm. Until recently, WebStorm didn’t even support running Jest tests. This just changed with the latest WebStorm release, but it still doesn’t support interactively stepping through your tests using the debugger.

Due to its young age, it may also be more difficult to use Jest across the board for larger projects that utilize different types of testing. For example, we recently set up Nightmare for integration testing. It is easy to run Nightmare integration tests with Mocha, and the docs have nice examples. We could have probably gotten Nightmare working with Jest without much work, but this is an example of the friction you might experience if you want to integrate Jest across your project stack.

Like Jest, Mocha is also a JavaScript testing framework. It’s an older, more mature, and less opinionated solution. It’s also more widely used—largely because of its age.

Mocha’s greatest strength is its flexibility. It doesn’t come with an assertion library or mocking framework. Instead, you choose to use whatever helper libraries/frameworks that you want. This SO post discusses some of the popular JavaScript assertion libraries. One popular choice is to use Chai for test assertions and Sinon for mocking.

Because of its maturity and widespread adoption, there is a lot of tooling built up around Mocha. To go back to the earlier WebStorm example, it’s been possible to run and debug Mocha tests in WebStorm for some time.

Lastly, the Mocha community is large, and there is a lot of support available in the form of videos, blog posts, and libraries.

Mocha’s main weakness is that it requires more configuration.

You have to explicitly choose and install an assertion library, mocking framework, etc. If you value this flexibility, that can be great, but if you don’t, it can be frustrating.

You can use snapshot testing with Mocha, but it’s not as easy to integrate. Like most things with Mocha, there is a library called chai-jest-snapshot that helps integrate this functionality However, it’s yet another thing to set up.

So which testing framework should you choose? I don’t think there’s a bad choice since you can make either work with some amount of effort. However, given the recent investments that Facebook has been making and the general positive response from the React community, I would recommend giving Jest a shot, unless:

We chose Mocha–largely because we had a lot of interest in being able to use the WebStorm debugger from time to time. However, I think we could have also chosen Jest and been just fine.|||

Comparing the weaknesses and strengths of Mocah and Jest for testing React.js projects. It comes down to flexibility and extensibility vs. ease of use.