-induced warming of 2 C, with 90% confidence that the peak

warming would be in the range 1.3–3.9 C. They note that their

results are consistent with those of M2009, as the A2009 scenarios

that yield 2 C warming have 400–500 GtC emissions during

2000–2049; M2009 find 393 GtC emissions for 2 C warming, but

McKibben [255] uses results of M2009 to infer allowable fossil

fuel emissions up to 2050 if there is to be an 80% chance that

maximum warming in the 21st century will not exceed 2 C above

the pre-industrial level. M2009 conclude that staying under this

2 C limit with 80% probability requires that 2000–2049 emissions

must be limited to 656 GtCO

McKibben [255] used this M2009 result to determine a remaining

carbon budget (at a time not specified exactly) of 565 GtCO

GtC) if warming is to stay under 2 C. Let us update this analysis to

the present: fossil fuel emissions in 2007–2012 were 51 GtC [5], so,

assuming no net emissions from land use in these few years, the

M2009 study implies that the remaining budget at the beginning

Thus, coincidentally, the McKibben [255] approach via M2009

yields almost exactly the same remaining carbon budget (128 GtC)

as our analysis (130 GtC). However, our budget is that required to

limit warming to about 1 C (there is a temporary maximum

during this century at about 1.1–1.2 C, Fig. 9), while McKibben

[255] is allowing global warming to reach 2 C, which we have

concluded would be a disaster scenario! This apparently vast

First, we assumed that reforestation and improved agricultural

and forestry practices can suck up the net land use carbon of the

past. We estimate net land use emissions as 100 GtC, while M2009

have land use emissions almost twice that large ( 180 GtC). We

argue elsewhere (see section 14 in Supporting Information of [54])

that the commonly employed net land use estimates [256] are

about a factor of two larger than the

net land use carbon that is

most consistent with observed CO

history. However, we need not

resolve that long-standing controversy here. The point is that, to

make the M2009 study equivalent to ours, negative land use

emissions must be included in the 21st century equal to earlier

Second, we have assumed that future net change of non-CO

forcings will be zero, while M2009 have included significant non-

about 20% of the increase of total GHG climate forcing.

Third, our calculations are for a single fast-feedback equilibrium

climate sensitivity, 3 C for doubled CO

, which we infer from

paleoclimate data. M2009 use a range of climate sensitivities to

and then McKibben [255] selects the carbon emission limit that

keeps 80% of the probability distribution below 2 C.

The third factor is a matter of methodology, but one to be borne

in mind. Regarding the first two factors, it may be argued that our

scenario is optimistic. That is true, but both goals, extracting 100

GtC from the atmosphere via improved forestry and agricultural

practices (with possibly some assistance from CCS technology) and

forcings to zero, are

feasible and probably much easier than the principal task of

We noted above that reforestation and improving agricultural

and forestry practices that store more carbon in the soil make sense

for other reasons. Also that task is made easier by the excess CO

in the air today, which causes vegetation to take up CO

efficiently. Indeed, this may be the reason that net land use

emissions seem to be less than is often assumed.

As for the non-CO

forcings, it is noteworthy that greenhouse

gases controlled by the Montreal Protocol are now decreasing, and

recent agreement has been achieved to use the Montreal Protocol

to phase out production of some additional greenhouse gases even

though those gases do not affect the ozone layer. The most

forcing is methane, whose increases in turn

cause tropospheric ozone and stratospheric water vapor to

increase. Fossil fuel use is probably the largest source of methane

[1], so if fossil fuel use begins to be phased down, there is good

basis to anticipate that all three of these greenhouse gases could

decrease, because of the approximate 10-year lifetime of methane.

As for fossil fuel CO

fossil fuel infrastructure in place, the science is telling us that policy

should be set to reduce emissions as rapidly as possible. The most

fundamental implication is the need for an across-the-board rising

fee on fossil fuel emissions in order to allow true free market

competition from non-fossil energy sources. We note that

biospheric storage should not be allowed to offset further fossil

fuel emissions. Most fossil fuel carbon will remain in the climate

system more than 100,000 years, so it is essential to limit the

emission of fossil fuel carbon. It will be necessary to have incentives

to restore biospheric carbon, but these must be accompanied by

A crucial point to note is that the three tasks [limiting fossil fuel

interactive and reinforcing. In mathematical terms, the problem

is non-linear. As one of these climate forcings increases, it increases

the others. The good news is that, as one of them decreases, it

tends to decrease the others. In order to bestow upon future

generations a planet like the one we received, we need to win on

all three counts, and by far the most important is rapid phasedown

It is distressing that, despite the clarity and imminence of the

continue to allow and even encourage pursuit of ever more fossil

fuels. Recognition of this reality and perceptions of what is

‘‘politically feasible’’ may partially account for acceptance of

targets for global warming and carbon emissions that are well into

the range of ‘‘dangerous human-made interference’’ with climate.

Although there is merit in simply chronicling what is happening,

there is still opportunity for humanity to exercise free will. Thus

our objective is to define what the science indicates is needed, not

to assess political feasibility. Further, it is not obvious to us that

there are physical or economic limitations that prohibit fossil fuel

emission targets far lower than 1000 GtC, even targets closer to

500 GtC. Indeed, we suggest that rapid transition off fossil fuels

would have numerous near-term and long-term social benefits,

A world summit on climate change will be held at United

Nations Headquarters in September 2014 as a preliminary to

negotiation of a new climate treaty in Paris in late 2015. If this

treaty is analogous to the 1997 Kyoto Protocol [257], based on

The palpable danger that such an approach is conceivable is

suggested by examination of proposed climate policies of even the

most forward-looking of nations. Norway, which along with the

other Scandinavian countries has been among the most ambitious

and successful of all nations in reducing its emissions, nevertheless

approves expanded oil drilling in the Arctic and development of|||

