Teen Adult Romance Can Create More Damage than it is Worth

Although, most people will agree that age is just a number when it comes to matters of the heart. There are very few rational individuals who will disagree with the fact that there is a line that should be drawn when it comes to adults dating teenagers. In general, it is a fair statement to say that most teenagers have crushes on adults. But the problem develops when the adults has mutual feelings for the adolescents and acts on his or her feelings.

Most individuals may find it difficult to comprehend why some men and women lust and seek intimate relationships with teenagers. Unfortunately, those individuals do not see anything wrong with their actions. They are only thinking of their physical desires and not the well-being of the adolescents.

I often wondered about grown men who prefer dating teenagers. I questioned whether or not they have ever stop to think about how the adolescents' fathers would feel and the repercussions that lies ahead for them. Have statutory rape charges, prison time, or having to register as a pedophile ever crossed their minds? We live in a very judgmental world and one has to consider what kind of damage their choices will cause not only to themselves but also to the teenagers who were robbed of their innocence's by the adults who pursue them.

There are not many cases that have been reported where those relationships had a happy ending for everyone involved or associated with the situation. I remember years ago there was a case where a female teacher had an intimate relationship with one of her male students. The student was about twelve or thirteen years old at the time. If I recall correctly she was warned about the accusations against her and she still continued her forbidden relationship with the child. She lost her position as a teacher; she was pregnant with his child. Her husband took the children they had together and left her to face the turmoil that she created. In addition, she served time in prison. He had to grow up a lot sooner than he anticipated and face the struggles of being a single father.

But what was a shocker to most people was when she was released from prison she went back to her teenage lover and had another child with him. Although, they eventually got married, many lives were shattered because of her decision to pursue a relationship with a child. Here is the link to their story http://www.biography.com/news/mary-kay-letourneau-vili-fualaau-wedding-anniversary-scandal.

I would like to note that there are not many teen adult relationships that end up in marriage. There are more disastrous stories than love stories. I am sure their relationship still has its struggles. No one knows what was going on in that young boy's mind at the time. Or the extent of the damage he endured from their relationship at that tender age.

When an adult sees that there is the potential of a brewing relationship with a teenager it is up to the adult to make the right decision to shut it down before things get out of hand.

I remember when I was a teenager there was a woman somewhere in her late 30s she had a relationship with a sixteen year old boy and she got pregnant by him. He denied the child and she faced her struggles as a single parent. Can you imagine the embarrassment she must have felt when the nurses in the hospital asked her about the father of her child? I cannot even envision her trying to take him to court for child support.

In the real world it is unlikely that there are a large number of meaningful relations that can genuinely transpire between teen adult relationships. More than likely it is probably an infatuation of a fantasy romance that was created in the minds of the individuals in the relationship.

I am not saying that there cannot be some form of romantic feelings. I am indicating that because of the intellect in accordance with the level of maturity of rational adults it would be a little difficult for them to be socially and intellectually compatible. Especially since the life experience of an adult will never be the same as a teenager. Because the adolescents have not lived life; so is it really fair for any adult to romance a teenager without taking into account how it will affect the adolescents in the long run.

I am well aware that this topic is a controversial issue because it is difficult to delineate or defend the nature of teen adult relationships. Some people argue that when adults have sexual relationships with teenagers there is nothing to debate; it is statutory rape. While some people argue that if the relationship is consensual and the teenager is an older teen who are we to judge when the act was not forcible. The problem with that is the word teen still exist in their age. There are some cases where some individuals do not perceive the youths as victims because they have either lied about their age or initiated the courtship. Some individuals have even stated that for some people it is part of their culture. But the question will always remain the same at what point should the line be drawn. And at the end of the day the responsibility still lies on the adults to control their own desires and walk away from a bad situation.

Even though, I have always been the type of person to protest that people should follow their hearts and stand firm because sometimes we cannot control who we fall in love with. However, I am a firm believer that teenagers should date teenagers and enjoy the struggles and blessings of being a teenager with someone in their own age group. Because those years that are lost during our teenage stage can never be relived. Once those years are lost it is lost, there is no turning back.

According to several studies "research confirms stereotypes about the risk for teenage girls who engage in statutory relationships tend to have higher risks of pregnancy, single-parenthood, and other psychosocial problems. There is also evidence that adolescent girls who become involved in statutory relationships conform to Problem Behavior Theory. That is, instead of early intercourse disrupting later psychosocial development, early intercourse seems to be associated with a host of psychosocial problems both preceding and following the sexual experiences (Bingham & Crockett, 1996)". The behavior may refer to the psychological and social aspect of the teenager's way of dealing with their situation. It is debatable that some adolescents may go into a depression, experience victim blaming, or resenting the adult with whom he or she had the relationship with when the relationship has gone wrong. Whatever, the case may be as adults we have to be smart about the decisions we make in life because our choices can have a negative impact on the other individuals as well.|||

This article is about the consquences of adults dating teenagers, and the impact it has on the adolescents' lives. The article also discusses the...