Stats & Bots have made a full comprehensive list of business software apps that provide easy access to Stripe analytics.

Baremetrics pricing starts at $50/mo depending on your MRR amount.

Baremetrics tracks Stripe metrics such as monthly recurring revenue, average revenue per user, growth rate, lifetime value, churn rate, net revenues, annual run rate, failed charges, refunds, and more.

Baremetrics also offers forecasts into the future based on your current metrics, cohort analysis, MRR movement tracking, and allows you to compare customers’ plans.

ChartMogul pricing starts at $99/mo depending on the number of paying customers.

This Stripe analytics software shows metrics like MRR, Churn Rate, LTV, ARPA, and Cohort Analysis. Geo mapping feature allows viewing global heat maps of countries with most customers, most revenue generation, lowest churn rates, and highest incidences of fraud.

You can filter and save custom user segments to answer questions like “What’s the LTV per marketing channel?” or “How much MRR is each sales rep contributing?”

Statsbot pricing starts at $49/mo depending on a number of users.

Statsbot sends your key financial metrics such as MRR, ARR, active customers, revenue right into your existing Slack channels. You can get these metrics through their web application or the advanced Slack integration.

If you create #analytics channel in Slack, everyone in the team can then see Statsbot’s reports regarding your company’s goals.

Users can request a summary of these metrics and then save it to Statsbot’s Dashboard in order to keep an eye on revenue. They can also set up a goal for Stripe metrics and get smart predictions to stay on track with cash flow.

First Officer pricing starts at $29/mo depending on a number of customers.

First Officer shows all key SaaS metrics, like MRR, ARPU, Churn Rates, CLTV, Cohort Retention. You can also compare performance between plans or time periods.

This analytics software provides cohort retention charts to see if your customer onboarding is improving. Users also can get weekly reports on their most important metrics.

Control pricing starts at $19/mo depending on a number of API calls to the platform.

Control gives information about MRR, new customers, churn users, ARPU, LTV and other important Stripe metrics as long as previous business software. It also sends real-time transaction alerts in the mobile app.

You can compare your growth over time and identify cohorts, sort and filter customers by different values, and use geo mapping feature. Control also supports PayPal and Square, offering a true omni-channel experience. In addition, Control offers two unique dashboards — Commerce and SaaS — so users can focus on the metrics that matter most to their business.

GetMetrics provides financial metrics like net revenue, refunds, fees, new customers and subscription metrics like MRR, ARR, new and lost subscribers, etc.

GetMetrics also sends out email notifications for Stripe events such as payments, failed payments, subscriptions, and others.

NextMetrics pricing starts at $20/mo depending on a number of customers.

NextMetrics tracks your most critical Stripe metrics and sends notifications of key business activities, as well as daily, weekly or monthly reports (if you wish, of course).

NextMetrics can compare your current values to data from weeks, months, even years ago. With Next Metrics you can predict your future data using regression calculations or other forecasting methods.

For Treasure Data pricing, you will need to request a custom quote for your business.

Treasure Data brings in Stripe data to calculate Monthly Recurring Revenue (MRR) trends, average revenue per user (ARPU), churn trends and more metrics.

With this Stripe analytics tool, you can compare customer plans to find out which plan has the highest rate of growth and the least churn. Get full SQL query access to your raw data, as well as support for a variety of visualization tools. You can also combine your Stripe data with Facebook Ads and CRM data.

Neatly is free for public use. It was built by the development agency to help their clients use their data.

Stripe metrics which are available with Neatly: balance available, balance pending, total new customers, total new subscriptions, total fees, total charges, total refunds, and total invoices.

You can export or schedule your Stripe reports by PDF and get reports delivered to your inbox on a weekly or monthly basis. This business software also lets to provide colleagues access to your Stripe integration.

Woopra pricing starts at $79/mo depending on a number of actions per month, such as page views, downloads, and any other custom events you configure.

Woopra tracks your Stripe events in real time and notifies on important customer activity. You can schedule any kind of analytical report, including retention and funnel reports.

Woopra fills customer profiles and can automatically send the list of customers who fit certain criteria.

A free trial for Pro plan is available.

MRR.io supports all Stripe metrics which business usually tracks, including cohort analysis. It also forecasts the behavior of data and allows to integrate multiple data sources.

ProfitWell shows MRR, LTV, customers, ARPU, revenue retention, MRR churn, and delinquent churn. Cohort reports help to visualize how revenue and customers stay over time.

With ProfitWell, you get a snapshot of monthly and annual subscription breakdowns, and detailed tabular data.

HookFeed pricing starts at $49/mo depending on a number of paying customers.

Now HookFeed tracks a limited number of Stripe metrics: MRR, ARR, LTV, net revenue, churn cohort analysis, and trial conversion cohorts.

This business software filters & sorts customers based on different data points. It also automatically moves customers through your funnel in real-time based on changes in Stripe.

Quintu costs $39 in a one-time purchase; it’s not priced as a subscription.

With Quintu, you can view your Stripe sales data and Stripe subscription metrics. It also offers event notifications when something important happens.

Quintu is a desktop application, which runs in your Windows system tray and in your Mac menu bar, allowing you to see as much information as you want.

A free trial for Premium plan is available.

DataHero supports importing these reports: charges, invoices, customers, balance history, customers and charges, customers and subscriptions, and customers and invoices. These reports include the most critical SaaS metrics.

You can start with a suggested chart or create your own with drag-and-drop chart creation.

Among other visualizations, you can:

 1. Segment and analyze your revenue by subscription plan, against discounts, or another metric

2. Graph your customer growth over time

3. Build a cohort analysis.|||

Stats & Bots have made a full comprehensive list of business software apps that provide easy access to Stripe analytics. Baremetrics tracks Stripe metrics such as monthly recurring revenue, average…