Visit the SpinaliS Canada booth No B-93 at the Ridge Meadows Home Show and SAVE 10% on all of the SpinaliS chairs for active sitting!

Date and Hours

 Friday May 5th: 4pm – 9pm

 Saturday May 6th: 10am – 8pm

 Sunday May 7th: 10am – 4pm

Ridge Meadows Home Show is all about you – your home, your life, your family. With more than 375 exhibitor booths on site, you’ll find everything you need to renovate, decorate and landscape your home. And that’s just the beginning. Look to our Outdoor Lifestyle & Leisure Show to jumpstart your summer with Everything Backyard, plus all the outdoor action you and the kids can handle. Up your skills at our ongoing seminars and demos, let BBQ School heat up your prowess at the grill, then commune with the cosmos at our Psychic Fair. Plus, look for great stage shows, hands-on activities… even a fabulous dog show and Westcoast Amusements… at our totally free Family Fest. Come browse, shop and play at Ridge Meadows Home Show. Parking is free!

FREE Shipping Anywhere in Canada

 Alberta AB, British Columbia BC, Manitoba MN, New Brunswick NB, Newfoundland and Labrador NL, Northwest Territories NT, Nova Scotia NS, Nunavut NU, Ontario ON, Prince Edward Island PEI, Quebec QC, Saskatchewan SK, Yukon YT (Alberta, Colombie-Britannique, Nouveau-Brunswick, Terre-Neuve-et-Labrador, Territoires du Nord-Ouest, Nouvelle-Écosse, Nunavut, Ontario, Île-du-Prince-Édouard, Québec, Saskatchewan, Yukon)

Medical Device

 SpinaliS chairs were developed with a help of doctors and evaluated as a Class I medical device. Clinical evaluation of the medical device was processed by multiple clinics in Europe. However, in Canada, it is not possible to claim SpinaliS chairs to write your taxes off and they are not covered by any kind of medical insurance or health plan, yet.

Abs and Back Workout

 Work out while sitting on any of the SpinaliS chairs and performing your daily tasks at the office or home.

Back Pain Relief

 SpinaliS Chairs will work out your core muscles for you. Just sit, do your thing and leave everything else up to SpinaliS.

Stylish Office Chairs

 Design of the SpinaliS Chairs is an eye candy – your customers will definitely notice them!

Yoga Ball Alternative

 It is recommended not to sit longer than 2 hours on a yoga ball, but on the SpinaliS chairs you can sit all day long.

 

 Standing Desk Alternative

 SpinaliS chairs will actually make your body to work out and get you into a great shape without the hard task of standing or exercising.

Who does use SpinaliS?

 Google, Dubai Airport, SONY, IBM, DELL, Skoda Auto, CSOB Bank, Unicredit Bank, Vodafone and many more.

Our team of experienced and result driven graphic designers and online marketing specialists will design custom tailored promotional banners that will generate hot leads for your business.

Call us now at 778 938 9883 for a FREE CONSULTATION!

 

 Ness Op Media Ltd. offers powerful web marketing and marketing solutions for the medium size businesses and start-ups. We guarantee rapid growth of your company without spending money on expensive Google AdWords and Facebook Newsfeeds. Tell us what you want and see the difference within a month .. guaranteed!

 

 Ness Op Media Ltd.

 ph: 778 938 9883

 http://www.nessopmedia.com

 Your marketing department!|||

Visit the SpinaliS Canada booth No B-93 at the Ridge Meadows Home Show and SAVE 10% on all of the SpinaliS chairs for active sitting!