TextExpander lets you insert snippets of text using shortcuts. I remember using a similar application with the same functionality on Windows 3.11 (which tells you even more about my age), when in the first couple of months after launching Acses, my main job was to write personalized emails, suggesting a link exchange, to as many website owners as possible. Since then, text expanders have become one of my favorite productivity helpers. To give you an idea of how I’m using it, here are a few examples of some of my favorite shortcuts:

I hope you won’t find it rude that if you receive an email from me, not each and every word may be carefully typed in by hand. But there are only 24 hours in the day, and if I didn’t save time this way I could answer fewer emails, which would be worse.

Did you notice the calendly.com link in the first snippet above? Calendly is another favorite of mine. It’s a scheduling tool that can greatly reduce the back-and-forth emails that are so often required to schedule a meeting or call. Here’s how it works:

Compared to solutions like x.ai, which try to solve the problem using AI, Calendly is a rather “dumb” tool. It won’t solve all of your scheduling issues: If, for example, you need to coordinate a meeting with a bigger group of people or if you need to take into account travel times and traffic, Calendly won’t do the job. But my experience is that it works perfectly well for 90% of my Skype/phone calls, so I can highly recommend it.

Initially I was worried if the UX for the person you’re scheduling with was good enough or if people don’t want to click on a link in an email in order to schedule a meeting with me. However, I’ve gotten only good feedback so far, and just in case, I always include the “Alternatively, please feel free to let me know a few options … “ note when I send around the Calendly URL. Another great solution is MixMax’ “instant scheduling” feature, which arguably offers an even better experience for the person on the receiving end.

1Password is one of those apps that, once you’ve used it for a little while, makes you wonder how you ever survived without it. If you’re not using a password manager, chances are that:

1Password creates a unique and safe password for each of your online accounts and takes care of the synchronization across all your devices. You only have to memorize one master password in order to unlock your password vault. Just make sure you don’t lose that password!

Some time ago I made a slightly weird self-observation: I noticed that when I checked my email on my iPhone while I was traveling and e.g. sitting in a cab, I’d often be faster to reply to emails than when I was sitting at my desk. You’d expect the opposite, because typing on a real keyword is obviously much more convenient and much faster. The reason for this behavior is that the “Sent from my iPhone” signature gave me the excuse for writing very brief replies, whereas when I was at my desk I felt obliged to write longer, more well-written answers — which often led to procrastination. When I noticed this behavior I changed my desktop email signature to this:

I can’t claim that this little hack made me a great emailer. I never achieve inbox zero and regularly have to declare email bankruptcy. But it definitely helped to get somewhat better.

About 18 months ago we replaced the “submit” email address on our website by a Typeform. The Typeform lets founders upload a pitch deck and allows us to collect a few bits of information such as the startup’s sector, launch date and funding ask. You can check out the pitch submission Typeform here. We use Zapier to push the data from Typeform to our Zendesk. If you submit the Typeform, here’s what we see:

The impact of this seemingly small hack, which simply ensures that we get all of the information that we need for our initial assessment at a glance , turned out to be staggering. Previously we often felt like we were drowning in incoming inquiries and would often accumulate a large backlog of submissions; thanks to the improved process, we’re usually able to get back to founders within 1–2 weeks.

When we were considering removing the “submit” email address and replacing it by a Typeform, we weren’t sure how people would react. We were somewhat worried that asking founders to complete a form could look unfriendly or unapproachable and were wondering if we’d increase the barrier to submit a pitch too much. Fortunately, we got lots of positive feedback, not least because Typeforms look and feel less like boring web forms and more like a conversational interface. Also, our impression is that the submissions that we’re no longer getting are mostly the ones that we’re happy to miss (like random mass emails about projects that are completely out of our areas of interest).

SizeUp is a Mac app that allows you to quickly resize and position windows with keyboard shortcuts. It’s a simple app, but another one of these handy little tools that I don’t want to miss. I frequently want to see two windows on my screen side-by-side, and with SizeUp it just takes one hotkey to move and resize a window to the left or right half of the screen. Occasionally I want to see more than two windows at once. In that case there’s another set of hotkeys that allows me to arrange the screen into four quadrants. Apple added a “Split View” feature to OS X two years ago or so, but I still prefer SizeUp for its extra features and customizability.

SaneBox was highly recommended to me by Pawel, who’s been swearing by the product’s ability to help him keep his sanity for some years already. After using SaneBox for a little while it has become an essential part of my tool stack as well. SaneBox comes with a whole bunch of features, but for me the key feature is that it moves all emails that don’t look important into a couple of special folders such as “Social”, “News” and “SaneLater”, leaving only a much smaller amount of emails in my main inbox. This way you can check out newsletters, social network notifications and everything else that SaneBox’s algorithm determines to be unimportant in batches, which saves you lots of interruptions.

I also use SaneBox’s ability to detect emails from people, who I haven’t communicated with before, to send them this auto-responder:

I still take a look at all of these emails and try to reply to most of them, but it’s not always possible (and also not always necessary) and in these cases I think this auto-reply is better than no reply at all. What’s great about this setup (which uses SaneBox and Zapier) is that none of my regular contacts get this auto-responder. Once I’ve sent you an email, SaneBox classifies you as “important” and removes you from the “SaneLater” label.|||

Hi there, we’re Point Nine Capital a VC firm focused on SaaS and marketplaces. If you want to be kept informed of our new posts you can subscribe to our content newsletter or follow our Medium…