as always, I am not going to bore you with a useless introduction so here is 8 things you should consider when getting started in milky way photography. Oh by the way here is one of my photos I shot in combination with light painting in the beautiful desert of Qatar.

The number one concern for you should be light pollution which is basically the misdirected or obtrusive artificial light spreading from cities and will be visible as a very bright spot in your shot if you don’t get away enough from its source which is city lights. Looking at this light pollution heat map is a must before you decide where to capture the milky way. In my case, I couldn’t escape light pollution that much as the majority of the country is light polluted and going all the way to the south was my best bet.

Seriously take all you need from food and water and a ton of batteries (with a battery grip) for your camera. Time pass by very quickly when you try to capture the milky way and you might not get it right on the first try so you should be ready to spend some time figuring stuff right. after all, you should be back with something at least after a long drive to your shooting spot.

If you follow me on Soumesto you know that I hate talking much about the ideal gear and the best lens or the best camera because 99.99% of the time it just limits people to get started in photography and they hold themselves back with the illusion that gear is everything. Milky way photography is no exception but the amount of difference you can see with a better lens is noticeable this time more than the touch of extra sharpness most people are wasting countless hours online looking for from a 2 thousand dollars lens.

I am going to suggest a lens for the very first time and it’s going to be the Rokinon 24mm f/1.4 lens, it’s basically the milky way lens it has low chromatic aberration it captures a ton of details in a milky way and you can avoid blurry star trails and get pin sharp points with that wide open aperture. It’s just one of the very few things that make a difference and if you want to check out it’s here and the best thing is it’s way cheaper that it’s Canon or Nikon counterparts that are double its price with way worse results in my tests.

Manual focusing is kinda hard in the dark but you don’t want to miss this because once you get home and open Lightroom I don’t want you to be extremely disappointed that you missed the entire shoot for just extra seconds you should have used to double check your focus. It is pretty simple but you should be 100% sure that you get it right. Find a bright star and slowly turn your lens focus ring until you see the bright star get as small as it could be in your display.

Milky way photography does not mean shooting the milky way alone with no foreground or a main subject because that will be extremely not interesting and a total waste of time. If you are looking for that wow moment in your photos you have to include something else also in your shot even a tree with the proper light painting technique will make a ton of difference.

most people don’t want to go the extra mile and take multiple shots of the same scene. One exposure for the milky way and multiple others light painting your subject from multiple angles to get all that extra details and honestly that is what makes a difference between an okay shot and a fantastic shot.

So here is how you do it. I usually take a shot with higher ISO of the sky to get more details of the milky way and then I stop down the aperture and lower the ISO and take multiple shots of my subject from left, right and bottom to get a ton of details of a specific part and the magic happens when you blend them in post. It is a little extra work that pays off. trust me!

if you are going to take multiple shots and blend them in post you need a sturdy tripod because you will be changing a lot of settings without moving the camera or you will have to deal with cropping and aligning photos in post and all that crap. So a sturdy tripod is a good thing to have if you are going to do the trick of blending multiple shots. I always like to have a carbon fiber tripod as it’s light way to travel with and sturdy and strong you can take a look at the one I use here.

You might hear people getting in the milky way photography say that you should follow the 500 rule which is basically you take the number 500 and you divided it by your focal length to determine your shutter speed.

I THINK THAT IS CRAP! shooting the milky way is a matter of trial and error because that the only thing that will get you the results you are looking for and as the time goes by you will start to build up your own rules and starting points that you can use to tweak your settings from there because there is no silver bullet this why I don’t want to tell people the settings I use but I know some people will still ask so here is my starting point but again don’t take my word for it the best way to know the best settings is to test what works for you. 24mm, f/1.4, 20seconds, ISO 4000 There you go!

It’s Obvious! Shoot in RAW! forget about jpeg it’s just a shame to shoot in jpeg you are losing a lot if you don’t use RAW. This is why I always wear “I Shoot RAW” T-shirt every day, every night! check it out here. it’s one of the coolest things I own!

I don’t care weather it is a milky way photography blog post or portraits photographer or whatever, I always end my blog posts with this: Go practice! it’s the only thing that will make you a better photographer!

I love to be honest and seriously many photography blog writers are not willing to say it because they want to start selling you their courses. I don’t know how the heck those people still believe that information should be charged of. I want to prove this through Soumesto by offering pure valuable content free for ever for everyone so be sure to stick around by joining our mailing list because a ton of value is coming in the next blog posts.|||

milky way photography takes a lot of trial and error to learn but finding a starting point is a must and this blog post is definitely the one!