As more and more developers are upgrading their projects to Angular 4 the initial confusion of this sudden incremented version has settled and has brought with it some handy but hardly groundbreaking changes. I covered this in another post here.

Although there isn’t much reading material specifically for Angular 4 I still recommend having a look at Yakov Fain’s Angular and Typescript book here.

Over a 48 hour period developers were instructed to create an Angular application to be submitted and reviewed with the best receiving a wide range of prizes. There are a lot of impressive entries and some really nice user interfaces were created in that short space of time.

Be sure to check out the entries here and the prizes here.

Claimed to be one of the biggest and original Angular conferences. ngConf took place on the 5th to 7th of April in Salt Lake City Utah.

With plenty of Angular related content and speakers your bound to find something useful for you.

Plenty of topical and insightful information can be found from these talks so be sure to have a look at some of the speakers when you find the time.

Here are all the related live streams that took place over those 3 days. Use this schedule list here to find a talk that you want to listen to from the recorded live streams.

As covered in a previous Angular post, the way animations are imported has been simplified in Angular 4. One of the best videos to come out this month regarding this is Coursetro’s Angular 4 animations video by Gary Simon.

He presents his videos very well and concentrates on the broader scope of the full stack developer, starting from conceptual design all the way to full development in Angular. Be sure to check our more of his content, most of it is free,

Almost unthinkable at this stage right? Surely there can’t be anyone contemplating details of another Angular version? Well there actually has been a few hints from ngConf .

The release window is estimated for Autumn 2017. Not much details are revealed but promises of simpler and smoother Ahead of Time Compilations were hinted at. And although it might seem ridiculous to think about another version already, this is the path Angular will be following form now on.

Every forthcoming version will contain small and efficient refinements to the previous Angular version every 6 months or so. Not much core changes but rather notable improvements to make your development life smoother. We can only hope that not much is broken in the process with each of these incremental versions.

For more information please check it out this post here.

More Angular 4 and Ionic content will be sure to covered here so subscribe to the mailing list if you haven’t already.

As we grow, we hope to implement a job board that will have listings of some open Angular positions. Hopefully, this will connect potential employers with some of the developers from the JSdiaries community.

Still looking to upgrade your AngularJS app to Angular 2? Check out this tutorial by Toptal here.|||

