Mastery is the key to living a fulfilling life.

Greats achieve it. Professionals pursue it. Amateurs dream of it.

Whether we realize it or not, it’s something we all covet.

Mastery can also be elusive.

In my experience, mastery has been a rather tricky thing to tackle. It wasn’t until recently that I realized that I had been looking at it all wrong.

My come from was off.

Most people treat mastery like a destination. Like it’s something we arrive at after said amount of time or after we’ve paid our dues.

I was one of those people.

I would look at those I admired and thought they were either naturally gifted or they got good and now it’s all love.

They made it look easy.

Michael Jordan, Michael Jackson, Jay-Z, Muhammad Ali, Steve Jobs. All world-class talents that were or still are regarded as the greatest at what they do.

They all knew something that the rest of us didn’t know or wasn’t willing to commit to.

The more I studied the greats, the more I realized how misguided I was when it came to mastery. I discovered that mastery is a journey, not a destination. It’s a lifestyle, and a way of being.

It’s the way we approach life itself.

I once read that life is a question and the way we live it is the answer.

That means some people choose to reply “average” and others choose to reply “mastery.”

Once I become aware of this truth, I began to notice the common themes amongst the masters of their craft. I studied their processes, their behind-the-scenes and what makes them tick.

More importantly, I developed an understanding of the mastery mindset. What it takes to adopt and maintain it.

The mastery mindset involves life-long learning. Mastery is something you do or embody, not a place you visit. Life-long learners make it a habit to seek out new information daily.

This is important because it highlights that they’re always growing.

Mastery makes the amateur turn pro. Mastery separates the good from the great. Mastery is the difference between potential and self-actualization.

Mastery helps us evolve, transition and ascend to our highest possibility.

Life-long learning is also important because it helps us growth hack life.

Ok, let me unpack this a bit.

As a life-long learner, you get better at learning things over time. This dramatically improves your ability to level up and stay on top of your game.

Not only will you outlearn most people, but also you’ll also be a more efficient leaner.

The mastery mindset also involves a standard of excellence. Masters know how to do at least one thing extremely well. They don’t get caught up on being perfect because they know that’s not possible. Instead, masters focus on being their best.

Excellence means doing the best you can do based on what you have and know at the time.

The mastery mindset is really about consistency at the end of the day. Developing the right habits. That means doing the right things at the right time, over time.

Consistency is the real secret of all masters.

They’re committed to the process. They aren’t always the most gifted but they’re almost always the most consistent.

They have a routine and they stick to it. Think about Kobe’s legendary workout routine during the 2012 Olympic.|||

Embracing the mastery mindset is the secret to living a fulfilling life. Mastery helps us evolve, transition and ascend to our highest possibility.