There was a certain knot in the city of Gordium. An ancient oracle foretold that the one to loosen it would be destined to rule over all of Asia.

Historian Peter Green tells the story of Alex his acclaimed Alexander of Macedon.

Now, the stuff of legend:

Sometimes, it’s better to cut just the not.

I’m most productive in the morning. This is because I’ve set up a powerful system of habits… My morning ritual — diet, meditation, joint prep, etc. — is set up so that I’m in the best condition to do good work.

As a result, my mornings almost always go well.

Evening, though… Evenings are the opposite. I can’t quite figure them out.

In the evenings, I’m tired. I’m low on willpower, probably hungry and feel like I’ve done “enough.”

Because of this weakness, I get caught by wasteful internet time. If I get pulled by social media or YouTube, it may take 4 hours or more to get out. To be honest, many days I’m too weak to resist.

Yes, I could try to track down all the “triggers” or environmental cues that are making me waste my evenings. Yes, I could try to set up a system of habits that keep me from failing. But…

Do you see the problem?

This is a lot of work. It might take months or years to tackle this project. All the willpower spent to untie this knot means less time elsewhere solving other, more important, problems.

So, we cut the knot instead.

Instead of solving the problem, you can take the problem and remove it from your life.

Recently, I’ve noticed my evenings are much better if:

Instead of surfing the web, I’ll actually go out to events or spend time with friends.

Similarly, I kept myself from overspending in college by freezing my credit card in a block of ice.

By removing the source of the problem, I cut the knot.

Would it be better to directly work on my media addiction? Of course.

But the world is filled with knots to be untied, and we can’t get to all of them. When you don’t have the time — or the means — to sow up a wound, it’s okay to cauterize it.

Sometimes, you gotta cut the knot.|||

There was a certain knot in the city of Gordium. An ancient oracle foretold that the one to loosen it would be destined to rule over all of Asia. I’m most productive in the morning. This is because I…