The Andaman and Nicobar Islands are in the Bay of Bengal, 1,000 kms off the east coast of India. The superb and supremely beautiful beaches are practically deserted and surrounded by pristine waters teeming with gorgeous corals and fascinating marine life. Here are 5 unique experiences you should try in Andaman islands.

Mangrove safari and Lime Stone Caves: Local fishermen will offer boat trips into the many mangroves and into deep water, to get to the limestone caves. The trips take around an hour and these types of mini-wildlife safaris are among the most thrilling attractions of the Andaman Islands to spot the saltwater crocodiles. The limestone caves are a great natural wonder that draws many visitors to Baratang. These caves are located 50 minutes away by sea from the Jetty. It is one of the few select places on the Earth where limestone caves can still be found and definitely worth the trip for its awe factor.

Dive with Rajan the elephant: Rajan – Barefoot’s 63 year old retired Asian elephant is the last of the famous ocean swimming elephants of the Andaman Islands. Like most elephants, Rajan loves the water and enjoys his swims. You could dive or snorkel alongside this beautiful tusker and add that extra zing to your Andaman experience. Diving or snorkelling with Rajan is a unique and enriching experience. It’s a once in a lifetime opportunity and is truly a magical experience. Every season snorkelers and divers from all over the globe are amazed and mesmerised by his grace and relative weightlessness underwater.If you thought diving with a great white shark is the most special you could do, think again!

Walk on water at the Ross & Smith Islands: 2 secluded islands far away from the hustle bustle of the city are connected to each other by a thin bar of sand. When the tide is right you can cross from one island to the other and the feeling is pretty similar to walking on water. Bothe the beaches are pristine and beautiful, one can make a complete day trip to this place. The island pair stands as a silent reminder of ‘Beauty lies in Connecting’. The twin islands can be reached from Diglipur with prior permission from the Forest Office located there. This island should not be missed while travelling here.

Turtle Nesting Grounds: Andaman and Nicobar Islands are also home to thousands of turtles during their nesting period. During the winter months of Dec/Jan, turtle nesting takes place in Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Turtle Nesting mainly takes place at Kalipur beach, Diglipur, Ramanagar Beach at Diglipur and also at Karmatang beach at Mayabunder. Apart from these, turtle nesting also takes place at many other beaches in Andamans.  Be there in the right place and at the right time and you may just spot a turtle nesting!

Also check: 7 Reasons why Iceland is awesome in winter

Scuba Dive at The Foot of an Active Volcano: Barren Island is an exciting scuba dive site where visibility can be exceptional. This active volcano features black sand slopes, vertical walls, and ridges. Also be prepared to experience a possible eruption, which occurs regularly and blankets everything above and beneath the water in black sand. Sharks that include hammerheads, gray reef sharks, silver tips, and white tip reef sharks are seen by experienced divers during deep dives here.Tuna and large barracuda also make their home here, though you will not see many colorful corals as a result of the damage by the volcanic eruptions.

If you’d like to experience any of the above on a personalised getaway to the Andaman Islands. Write to us at This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it. or call us at +91 8080 122 441 for further information.|||

The Andaman and Nicobar Islands are in the Bay of Bengal, 1,000 kms off the east coast of India. The superb and supremely beautiful beaches are practically deserted and surrounded by pristine waters teeming with gorgeous corals and fascinating marine