That's the question Infosys is asking as the company considers where to bring 2,000 new tech jobs with annual salaries averaging $80,000. Infosys (INFY), an Indian-based information technology company that provides consulting and outsourcing services globally, will choose between the cities to lease a 60,000- to 80,000-square-foot headquarters.

Infosys plans to spend $8.7 million to lease and equip the space, which could be in an existing office park or a new building. The Indiana Economic Development Corporation has offered the company a  $31 million incentive package. Now, Carmel and Indianapolis will try to lure the company with incentives of their own.

Indianapolis Mayor Joe Hogsett and Carmel Mayor Jim Brainard sat side by side when Gov. Eric Holcomb and company officials made the announcement Tuesday morning at the Statehouse. They offered platitudes that the entire region will win whatever the decision, but it's clear they'll be competing for the favor of Infosys.

What the deal's worth:Indiana gives Infosys the largest state incentive package — ever

The winner ultimately may come down to quality of life. Carmel and Indianapolis can offer similar financial incentives, under state law, in property tax abatements and tax-increment financing.

So it's Indianapolis's vibrant cultural and sports scene set against Carmel's highly touted schools. Indianapolis's emerging transit options versus roundabouts. Carmel's new downtown balanced against Indianapolis' established urban core. The city versus the 'burbs.

Indiana Commerce Secretary Jim Schellinger said Infosys is looking at six potential sites and a few clues have emerged.

Hogsett said the former RCA plant on the city's east side or the former GM stamping plant near the White River are options. Infosys CEO Vishal Sikka directly mentioned Salesforce Tower, freshly minted with its new sign, as a possibility.

“Today’s transformative agreement has the potential to fundamentally change the landscape of our local economy, and I want to applaud the work of Governor Eric Holcomb and the Infosys corporate leadership for bringing this historic partnership to our state," Hogsett said. "This announcement also highlights the national and international attention that the Indianapolis area is attracting as a growing technology hub, and I look forward to continued conversations with Infosys and our local team at Develop Indy to find new and exciting ways to grow their footprint in our city over the coming years."

Brainard said Carmel has space available along the U.S. 31 corridor and within the city's emerging downtown. He also says Carmel has a sizable Indian population, which could attract the company. Pegged at 3 percent in the 2010 Census, Brainard thinks the percentage has grown substantially, perhaps as high as 10 percent.

"There will be some friendly competition for Infosys, but the entire region will benefit no matter where they choose to go," Brainard said. "We have several locations that have already been identified to company officials, and we will be pursuing them."

Happy hour:Marsh is selling all of its liquor

Rating firms merge:Angie's List to be acquired by HomeAdvisor parent company IAC

Ball State economist Dagney Faulk said regardless of where the company chooses to grow, workers will pick their own communities in which to live. She said families may be drawn to Carmel, or other suburbs, for the schools. Single workers may decide they like Downtown.

"Given it's the same labor market," she said, "I think either place would be beneficial for the area."

Hogsett said the company would likely need a short-term location for the 100 new employees it plans to add this year, then a much larger campus with "some acreage" to accommodate the 2,000 employees it plans to add by the end of 2021.

The tech center is expected to open in August of this year. It will be fully staffed by 2021 and its workers will become part of Infosys’ global integrated workforce, Sikka said. Workers will mainly be computer scientists, engineers and programmers,Sikka told USA TODAY.

Infosys headquarters is in India but it has a U.S. office in Palo Alto, Calif., where Sikka is based. It is one of the largest employers of H-1B visa holders in the United States, drawing unwanted attention for its business model of hiring Indian engineers on H-1B visas and outsourcing their lower cost labor to U.S firms.

Under a new strategy, Infosys said it planned to open an additional three hubs around the United States, focused on technology and innovation. Each will employ 2,000 workers and serve clients in industries including financial services, manufacturing, healthcare, retail and energy and more. The company did not say where they planned to locate them or the time frame in which they will be hired.

News alerts delivered to your phone: Download IndyStar app for breaking news, sports.

USA Today technology reporter Elizabeth Weise contributed to this story from San Francisco. Call IndyStar reporter Tony Cook at (317) 444-6081. Follow him on Twitter and Facebook. Call IndyStar reporter Chris Sikich at (317) 444-6036. Follow him on Twitter: @ChrisSikich and at facebook/chris.sikich.|||

Infosys says location of tech center has not been determined