The moons orbiting Jupiter and Saturn lie far from the sun’s warmth. Most have no atmosphere, and many are covered in an icy sheath miles thick. They're also our best bet for finding life in our own solar system. Beneath the frozen crusts lie vast oceans, and space agencies in the United States and beyond are hard at work on the robots that will one day visit them.

“In the past we assumed there was this Goldilocks zone between Venus and Mars where you’d find liquid water, and…this was the only place in the solar system where you’d find life,” says Hari Nayar, leader of a robotics group focused on ocean worlds at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Yet Jupiter’s Europa and the Saturnian moon Enceladus appear to have the key ingredients for life—plenty of liquid water, food, and energy from deep-sea vents.

This life, if it exists, won’t be easy to reach. It’s most likely to be found swimming deep below the surface of frigid alien oceans. But once a spacecraft journeys to the outer solar system and manages to land on Europa or Enceladus, it will still be far above these waters. Robotic probes will have to delve into the ice, burrowing through an environment that is almost as fearsomely cold as liquid nitrogen.

There are a few different ways to breach this icy fortress. NASA recently announced that it is testing out new prototypes for robots that will explore frosty worlds, including a probe that will chop the ice up and heat the shavings in its toasty innards. Researchers in Germany have been developing a robot that will melt any ice in its path. And those are not the only ideas.

The engineers behind these robots won’t be satisfied with a probe that just digs straight down, either. Their creations will have to navigate and fire samples back up to the surface, on top of tunneling for months or more. Here’s how these intrepid probes will tackle ice worlds and search for life.

If there is life on Europa or Enceladus, it will be microscopic. “There probably are not whales or giant squid or even little tubeworms or anything like that down there,” says Cynthia Phillips, a planetary geologist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. “We think there is not enough energy really to drive multicellular life.”

But vents on the seafloor would be a promising home for alien microbes (and are the same kind of ecosystem where life on Earth might have kicked off). And no matter where these vents are, if they harbor life, then traces of that life will have traveled far afield.

“In the Earth’s ocean, if you take any cubic meter of water in the ocean, it [probably] has genetic material from most of the organisms on Earth,” says Brian Wilcox, an aerospace engineer at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The same should hold true for the seas of Europa or Enceladus. So when our probes finally reach the sea, any drops of water they capture should be enlightening.

“If you have good enough instruments that can find things at very low concentrations, then you’re pretty much guaranteed of finding biological molecules if they exist,” Wilcox says.

However, this does put some limits on the probes we can send. Since the robot will by definition be looking for life, it must follow strict rules to avoid bringing Earth microbes along for the ride. Before touching down, it will be sterilized at such searing temperatures that nothing could survive—not even modern electronics. NASA is considering probes that rely on simple graphite and copper motors like those invented in the 19th Century. “You can make a motor of the type that was used 120 years ago, all out of stuff today that will survive this bake-out,” Wilcox says.

A lander can be spared this harshest cleansing, as it will never touch the ocean. So that’s where the electronics that actually control the probe and analyze the water it collects will likely reside. “The probe is kind of its like a marionette on the end of a string and it has no smarts of its own,” Wilcox says. “We have to put planetary protection front and center, because that’s really the hardest of all the problems.”

On Earth, we delve into the thick ice in places like Antarctica and Greenland using drills or probes that sink ever deeper by heating the ice around them until it melts.

That won’t work on the moons of Jupiter and Saturn. “It’s almost impossible [to think] we could deliver drilling equipment to an icy moon,” says Bernd Dachwald, a professor of astronautical engineering at the Aachen University of Applied Sciences in Germany.

And the ice is hundreds of degrees below freezing. “It would essentially wick away all that heat,” Nayar says. The probe he, Wilcox, and their colleagues have in mind keeps its heat all on the inside, where it can’t leak away.

The probe uses a spinning buzzsaw to slice through the ice, and a pile driver to hammer itself deeper into the hole. The probe can steer by cutting deeper into the ice on one side than the other. The ice chips, meanwhile, are tossed into the probe’s insulated body to be melted. “The whole body of the probe is essentially a vacuum bottle, just like a thermos bottle that would keep your drink warm all day,” Wilcox says.

The heat will come from plutonium (the type that powers the Curiosity Rover and other spacecraft, not the type used to make nuclear weapons). Most of the water it melts will be pumped out the back. But the probe can also collect water samples in tiny canisters, and shoot them back to the surface through an aluminum tube inside its tether.

Once the melted water freezes back into ice, it will lock this tether in place. That means the probe will have to carry its own cable instead of tugging it from the surface. It also means that the probe can’t be dragged back up to the surface. “That’s another reason why it has to be absolutely sterilized beyond any shadow of a doubt, because it’s going to be down there forever,” Wilcox says.|||

One day, probes will delve through the ice on distant moons in search of alien life. Find out how.