Kodi provide you a chance to puts your smart TV to shame. Good news, Kodi 17 is coming. Most Kodi fans start to upgrade Kodi 14/15 to Kodi 17 for better playback. Kodi works good and plays a few pieces from films and similar in AVI, all working well, until user tried to play an MP4 video: Kodi 17 won’t play MP4 well, for example: When user play MP4 in Kodi 17, Kodi 17 can’t recognize this file, some user is watching MP4 in Kodi 17, about 5 min into a movie the audio would start to stutter and lose sync, after that the video would start to show what looked like really bad compression artifacts and finally the playback would start skipping forward through the movie like fast forwarding. So terrible.

Why Kodi 17 won’t play MP4 well? Even though MP4 is the most popular video format that can be supported by many media players, at the same time, it also cause many troubles. MP4 is a video contaniner which holds different video and audio codec, at the same time, some other vidoe parameters are different too, such as: Video bit rate, video frame, video resolution, audio codec, audio sample rate, and so on, This factors also can affect user to enjoy MP4 on Kodi 17 happily. Whatever you are a video expert or a beginner, the best way to play MP4 on Kodi is to convert MP4 to other Kodi supported video formats, of course, you can edit the MP4 coedc and other video factors to Kodi 17 best supported parameters.

From the constant software test and verify, Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate for Windows is worthy having a try, which is clean and safe, to PC and software beginner, learn this video converter just need 2 minutes. What’s more, this software can supprt Windows and Mac operating system.

First, user can convert MP4 to Kodi 17 supported video format, like: WMV, MPEG, AVI, FLV, etc. If just can provide the simple MP4 video conversion, it’s hard to say this vidoe converter is your best assistant. user can upscale video to 4K resolution and play 4K video in Kodi. In addition, Kodi 17 can support 3D SBS, TAB, anaglyph, do you want to change 2D to 3D video and play 3D video on Kodi? Here, you can convert common vidoe to 3D easily.

Except the powerful video conversion, video setting and editing features are excellent too, the video setting feature can help user to solve most video incompatibility issue, take MP4 as the example, user can change the MMP4 video and audio codec to KOdi 17 best supported codec, about the video out-sync condition, user can adjust the frame and bit rate. More information, this review can tell you.

User can have a try, download the Trial version which is free. Launch the application on your computer, click “File” > “Load Video/Audio” or “Load from Folder” to import MP4 files to this MP4 video converter. By the way, this software can support DVD and Blu-ray import and conversion.

MP4 is a good video format, when you meet the MP4 trouble in Kodi 17, you can drop this video and choose another video format that is supported by Kodi 17. such as: WMV . Click “Format” bar, from its drop-down option, select to output Kodi best playable video formats by following “HD Video” > ” WMV HD Video(*.wmv)”.

To some video expert whi know the Kodi and MP4 video well, this option is easy to do, user can click "Setting", in this window, user can adjust the video and audio codec, video size, frame, resolution, bit rate, etc. If user don’t know the right data, the best way is to keep the original setting.

After all the setting is done, go back to the main interface, then click "Browse" to choose output video save location, the hit "Convert" to begin the magic vidoe conversion. When you are waiting the result, you can watch the video at the preview window.

Is it easy? When user meet any video trouble in Kodi, this video converter is your video doctor and help you to play video in Kodi without any worry. Hope this article can solve your MP4 in Kodi issue.|||

Can you play MP4 on Kodi well? Have you found the best way to watch MP4 on Kodi? This article will provide you the best way to do.