In the last few years there has been a shift from classical software development methodologies to interface segregation principles (ISP), what has facilitated servers’ communication not only for web browsers, but also for mobile devices and without a single change in code. Nowadays one of the most popular approaches in software development is MEAN, JavaScript stack for building web and mobile applications, along with websites and portals.

If you are working on Node app, most probably you’ll need a RESTful API for your front-end or for your data to be distributed. There are lots of tools and approaches, while the main problem is to choose the right one.

LoopBack is a highly-scalable opensource framework for creating APIs with little or no coding and linking them with backend data sources. In a nutshell, it is built on top of Express and comes with a set of Node.js modules that can be used both independently and together to build REST APIs for client applications (anything like mobile, browser, etc.) in the easiest way.

There are lots of advantages that make it a powerful tool. For instance, it is a mature enterprise-ready framework that facilitates adoption of API design best practices; it generates API code automatically, makes design and testing easier and, as a result, allows developers to focus on UX (user experience) and business logic; what is more, it simplifies connecting to Oracle/MongoDB/SQL Server/MySQL legacy and new data.

Node.js is a perfect solution for getting projects done quickly that’s why it is widely applied by startups, mid-sized companies and even large enterprises like PayPal, Walmart, eBay, LinkedIn, Uber and other industry giants. For its part, LoopBack allows developers to focus on solution architecture, business strategy and user experience by making it easier to generate APIs, design them, connect to databases, test, and so on.

Choosing the right framework for your RESTful API consider flexibility, further maintainability, along with cost and available features. While performance and functionality are important, requirements, goals and business logic of a particular project are in the spotlight.|||

In the last few years there has been a shift from classical software development methodologies to interface segregation principles (ISP), what has facilitat