The iPad Mini 4 is a tinier, slightly less powerful iPad Air 2. That’s basically all you need to know about this tablet, the 7.9-inch screen model which has been available since October 2015. I started sitting down the Mini 4 again, carrying it around every day in my bag, reading books — even using it to do work.. With it’s height resolution, you can get better visual experience. It’s a pity, no tablet is equipped with a DVD drive. But it is still possible to watch DVD movies on an iPad Mini 4 which can drive you feel the vivid and fluent color with its Retina display.

With a DVD to iPad Ripper software, , you can rip and convert DVD to iPad effortlessly. And you will find that it is so convenient to play and watch converted DVD movie upon your iPad Mini 4. If you are not satisfied with the quality, you could even tweak the video, audio settings. If you are a Windows user, you can use the DVD Ripper for to reformat on Windows PC (Windows 10 included).

Rip DVD to iPad Mini 4, iPad Pro, iPad Air etc supported video; 

 Rip Blu-ray to iPad Mini 4, iPad Pro, iPad Air etc supported video; 

 Two ways to copy DVD, Blu-ray: entire copy, directly copy; 

 Convert DVD/Blu-ray to iPhone, iPad, iPod, iTunes, QuickTime, Apple TV, iMovie, Premiere Pro, Avid Media Composer etc supported video formats. 

 Supports lossless DVD conversion, making you get a high output file without losing the original video quality. 

 Edit your video files by trimming, croppng, adding effects or watermark. 

 Allow you to complete the conversion process with three simple clicks. 

 It has a perfect compatibility with macOS Sierra, Mac OS X 10.11 El Capitan, 10.10 Yosemite, 10.9 Mavericks, 10.8, 10.7, 10.6, 10.5.

1. After successful installation, click the “Load file(s)” to browse disc drive and import your DVD into this app. Or add DVD folder, or ISO file into it.

2. In the format column, choose iPad HD video from “iPad” for iPad Mini 4.

3. Click the “Convert” button on the main interface and the software will start to convert DVD to iPad Mini 4 immediately. When the conversion finishes, click “Open” to find the converted video files. Then you can effortless transfer the video files to iPad Mini 4 for playback on the go.|||

Have you imagine that watch Blu-ray movie on iPad Mini 4? With a DVD to iPad Ripper software, Pavtube BDMagic, you can rip and convert DVD to iPad Mini 4