The best day of Starr Mirza's life was the day she went into cardiac arrest. To understand why a then 23-year-old would be overjoyed at a life-threatening condition, one that would require a device to be implanted permanently in her chest, we have to start at the beginning of her medical history.

As a teenager growing up in Lake Los Angeles, a small town an hour outside of L.A., Mirza loved softball, even though she wasn't any good. The running joke among her teammates was that she couldn't make it from first base to second base without falling. "I don't know why they kept me on the team," she says. "I think it was more my spirit than my skill." She didn't know what was wrong with her body, only that she would frequently see stars, hear a ringing sound, feel tingly, and then pass out. When she was a preteen, she went to see a doctor. "I remember it like it was yesterday—I walked in, and right away, I got the eye-rolling," Mirza recalls. "They asked me what I had eaten, if I had issues with my weight, if I had a problem with my brother getting better grades in school than I did. They were trying to say, 'Look, she's doing this for attention.'"

The doctor checked her vitals and sent her home. Her parents took her to get a second opinion, and a third. "By the time we got to the fourth doctor," Mirza, now 37, says, "they were repeatedly saying, 'This is not our problem. You can take her to a psychiatrist and they will deal with her.'"

She saw three psychiatrists, all of whom said there was nothing wrong with her mental health. Even her parents had started to doubt her ("They thought I was being a drama queen," Mirza says), so she did her best to live with the mysterious condition, dropping sports, avoiding stairs, and sleeping constantly. Still, she was fainting twice a week, on average, and was in and out of the emergency room up to six times a year. "I wish that just one person would have held my hand and said, 'I believe you—I know you're sick, and we're going to figure this out,'" she says.

After high school, Mirza "avoided doctors like the plague" until that day in 2002 when she went into cardiac arrest. By then, she was 23 and a bank teller in Cape Canaveral, Florida. She was at work when she passed out. When she awoke in a hospital two days later, the doctors told her that her heart had stopped beating and they had placed a cardioverter-defibrillator (a pacemaker and a defibrillator in one) in her chest. Eventually, Mirza was diagnosed with long QT syndrome, a rare heart condition that causes chaotic heartbeats triggering fainting spells and even sudden death. "I started laughing," she says, "because, for 10 years, I knew something was wrong, and finally I was validated."

As Mirza discovered, it can be hard to obtain quality medical treatment as a woman. Studies have shown that female patients' symptoms are less likely to be taken seriously by doctors, and women are more likely to be misdiagnosed, have their symptoms go unrecognized, or be told what they're experiencing is psychosomatic. "It happens all the time," says Dr. Martha Gulati, head of cardiology at the University of Arizona College of Medicine, after hearing the details of Mirza's case. "If you're in health care and take care of a lot of women, you certainly hear these stories and shake your head, because you know what they're going to say, because you see it far too often, unfortunately. The bottom line is, we don't do as good of a job taking care of women as we do men." In the decade Mirza spent waiting for a proper diagnosis, her heart sustained damage that can never be undone. She has had a dozen heart surgeries, went into heart failure in 2013, and will almost assuredly need a transplant one day. "There is inherent bias that makes us undervalue women's symptoms," Gulati adds. "What [Mirza] experienced is a great example of the problem with us not recognizing women at risk—by the time we make a diagnosis, they are living with the consequences of the lack of care."|||

When physicians don't take women into account during research it can lead to misdiagnosis, poor treatment, and dangerous side effects.