The Smart Cincy Summit in Cincinnati last week focused on how the city is working toward becoming a smarter city.

The event, held at tech savvy maker space Union Hall in the trendy Over-the-Rhine district of Cincinnati, was the focus of brainstorming sessions on what it takes to become a truly smart city, with attention on security, big data, connectivity, sustainability and transportation.

TechRepublic spoke to 11 smart city experts at the one-day event, ranging from Cincinnati city officials, to executives at Cintrifuse, Nexigen, Cincinnati Bell, TransitX and ET3 and more. Here are the videos with their thoughts on what it takes to become a smart city:

Find out how the city has changed its focus from internal to external in order to work with businesses to add smart city tech to Cincinnati.

SEE: Video: Cincinnati's smart plan to become a smarter city

Cincinnati is focused on building a structural backbone for its data analytics infrastructure. Find out how the city is using the data to assess problems and measure progress.

Cintrifuse is a network connecting entrepreneurs, enterprises and investors in Cincinnati. Learn how the city has positioned itself in the smart city space and learn more about Union Hall and its role.

SEE: Video: How Cincinnati businesses are working together to turn their city into a smart city

Cincinnati has an open data portal. Here are the data types that can be downloaded and used for deep dives into smart city analytics.

SEE: Video: How open source data is helping Cincinnati

Cincinnati Bell has worked to help provide broadband to homes to help low-income families acquire internet access.

SEE: Video: Bridging the digital divide with Cincinnati Bell

Find out about real-world examples of successes and failures, when it comes to revenue generation in a smart city.

SEE: Video: How smart cities can make money for their communities

Energy, agricultural, economic and environmental solutions are essential components of a smart city. There is a need for smart cities to be able to build solutions on top of each other.

SEE: Video: Sustainability is key in the creation of a smart city

TransitX CEO talked about his vision for the future of mass transit, and the role of infrastructure development in smart transportation.

SEE: Video: How tech will fundamentally change the future of transportation

Tube transport company ET3, similar to Elon Musk's Hyperloop, could reshape how people travel, offering a "freeway" that could reduce labor and fuel costs.

SEE: Video: How tech could enable 'space travel on earth'

The Smart Cincy Summit will help Cincinnati build on its foundation of four pillars essential to any smart city.

SEE: Video: Understanding the four pillars of a smart city

Wyzerr creates surveys designed as games to encourage responses. Wyzerr works with city governments to use survey data to improve services for a smarter city.

SEE: Video: Wyzerr gets creative with smart city analytics|||

In Ohio, Cincinnati officials are focusing on data and analytics to become a connected city. Here are 11 video interviews with public and private sector leaders who are helping to make this happen.