Theranos Inc. settled a lawsuit alleging the company and its founder, Elizabeth Holmes, defrauded a San Francisco hedge fund into making a $96.1 million investment through “a series of lies,” the company said Monday.

Neither Theranos nor the hedge fund that filed the suit, Partner Fund Management LP, disclosed the terms of the settlement. Partner Fund had said it sought to recoup its entire investment as well as damages.

A significant settlement could have a big impact on Theranos, which has told investors it had $200 million in cash at the end of 2016. It also faces continuing suits by consumers, other investors and its former retail partner, the giant pharmacy Walgreens .

Theranos spent about $5 million on separate settlements in recent weeks.

When it introduced its blood-testing service in 2013, Theranos said it would reshape the industry by allowing dozens of tests to be run using only a few drops of blood. But the company did most of its tests on traditional devices made by companies like Siemens AG, according to former employees. Regulators found Theranos had accuracy problems with tests it performed on such commercial devices, as well as the few for which it used its own platform.

In a suit filed in the Delaware Court of Chancery, Partner Fund alleged Theranos had said—at the time it was soliciting its February 2014 investment—that it could do 98% of the tests it offered using its proprietary technology on finger-stick samples, among other things. In recent court filings, Partner Fund quoted from depositions it had taken of former Theranos employees it said showed otherwise.

For instance, a former lab director said 90% of samples were tested using more conventional methods in late 2013, according to the court filing.

The Wall Street Journal first reported on concerns about Theranos’s testing practices and technology in October 2015.

The company closed it medical lab operations in October 2016 after facing regulatory scrutiny and said it would refocus its resources on developing a miniaturized blood-testing device to sell to third parties.

In a statement Monday, Theranos said the settlement with Partner Fund “brings to a close the burden and expense of litigation and preserves resources to bring the miniLab platform to market.”

Lawyers for Partner Fund didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment on Monday.

Last month, Partner Fund filed a separate suit seeking to block a deal Theranos sought to strike with its late-stage investors. The judge issued a temporary halt to the deal, and had scheduled a hearing for next week. That case ends as a result of the pact announced Monday.

The deal with late-stage investors, which would reward those who promise not to sue the company with additional Theranos stock, can now proceed: Theranos said in its announcement the deal is now scheduled to close on May 15. Theranos said shareholders owning 99% of the affected shares had said they would participate in the deal.

Besides the Partner Fund case, Theranos had settled two regulatory matters in the past couple of weeks.

But its challenges are far from over.

Theranos faces federal investigations by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Justice Department. Investigators have interviewed people connected with the probe within the past couple of months, people familiar with the matter said.

Federal investigators have obtained depositions taken in the Partner Fund litigation, including those of former Theranos employees and directors, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Portions of those depositions were filed in the Delaware court last month under seal. After heavily redacted versions were filed last week, The Wall Street Journal asked the court to unseal them Monday.

Under the rules of the Delaware court, the Journal can still seek to have the records made public even after a case is closed.

Appeared in the May. 02, 2017, print edition as 'Theranos Settles With Hedge Fund.'|||

Theranos settled a lawsuit alleging the company and its founder, Elizabeth Holmes, defrauded a San Francisco hedge fund into making a $96.1 million investment through “a series of lies.”