Sky Windows Ltd. will replace the window glass or whole window of your single family home at a reasonable price. Their team of glazing professionals has worked on hundreds of homes, which ensures that you will get the highest quality of craftsmanship.

Call Sky Windows Ltd. now at 604 657 0381 anytime 7 days a week!

There is a large variety of homes in the Sky Windows Ltd. portfolio we have taken care of. Here are just a few:

A-frame type homes

 so-called because the steep roofline, reaching to or near the ground, makes the gable ends resemble a large A.

American Colonial type homes

 a traditional style of house that originated in the East Coast of the United States.

Barndominium type homes

 a type of house that includes living space attached to either a workshop or a barn, typically for horses, or a large vehicle such as a recreational vehicle or a large recreational boat.

Bay-and-gable type homes

 a type of house typically found in the older areas of the Greater Vancouver Area

Bungalow type homes

 any simple, single-storey house without any basement

Chalet bungalow type homes

 popular in the Lower Mainland, a combination of a house and a bungalow.

Converted barn type homes

 an old barn converted into a house or other use.

Cottage type homes

 usually a small country dwelling, although weavers’ cottages are three-storied townhouses with the top floor reserved for the working quarters.

Dogtrot type homes

 divided house with an open, roofed breezeway between the two sections.

Farmhouse type homes

 the main residence house on a farm, or a house built with the same type of styling and located anywhere.

Kit type homes

 a type of pre-fabricated house made of pre-cut, numbered pieces of lumber.

Link-detached type homes

 adjacent detached properties that do not have a party wall, but which are linked by their garages – and so presenting a single frontage to their street or avenue.

Linked type homes

 “row-houses” or “semi-detached houses” that are linked structurally only in their foundations. Above ground, these houses appear to be detached houses. Linking up their foundations cuts the cost of constructing them.

Log type homes and log cabins

 a house built of solid, unsquared wooden logs and later as a well crafted style of dwelling.

Mansion type homes

 a quite large and usually luxurious detached house.

Manufactured type homes

 a prefabricated house that is assembled on the permanent site on which it will sit.

Microhouse type homes

 a dwelling that fulfills all the requirements of habitation (shelter, sleep, cooking, heating, toilet) in a very compact space.

Ontario Cottage type homes

 a one- or one-and-a-half-storey house with a symmetrical rectangular floor plan and a gable centred over the door, popular in small-town Ontario during the 19th century.

Prefabricated type homes

 a house whose main structural sections were manufactured in a factory, and then transported to their final building site to be assembled upon a concrete foundation, which had to be poured locally.

Ranch type homes

 a rambling single-storey house, often containing a garage and sometimes constructed over a basement.

Split-level type homes

 a design of house that was commonly built during the 1950s and 1960s. It has two nearly equal sections that are located on two different levels, with a short stairway in the corridor connecting them. This kind of house is quite suitable for building on slanted or hilly land.

Tree house type homes

 a house built among the branches or around the trunk of one or more mature trees and does not rest on the ground.

WINDOW AND DOOR INSTALLATION AND REPLACEMENT

 RESIDENTIAL VINYL, WOOD AND ALUMINUM PROJECTS

 COMMERCIAL ALUMINUM, STOREFRONT, WINDOW WALL AND UNITIZED PANEL PROJECTS

 CUSTOM GLASS AND GLASS REPAIRS

 24 HOUR GLASS SERVICE FOR WINDOWS AND DOORS

 FREE ESTIMATES

 FLEXIBLE FINANCING

 LIFETIME WARRANTY ON LABOR AND PRODUCTS

 REFERRAL PROGRAM – EARN $100 PER CUSTOMER YOU SEND US

 ANYWHERE IN GREATER VANCOUVER – Anmore, Belcarra, Bowen Island, Burnaby, Coquitlam, Delta, Langley City, Langley Township, Lions Bay, Maple Ridge, Abbotsford, New Westminster, North Vancouver City, North Vancouver District, Pitt Meadows, Port Coquitlam, Port Moody, Richmond, Surrey, Tsawwassen, Vancouver, West Vancouver, White Rock, UBC, Mission, Chilliwack, Maple Ridge, Whistler and more.

Ness Op Media Ltd. offers powerful web marketing and marketing solutions for the medium size businesses and start-ups. We guarantee rapid growth of your company without spending money on expensive Google AdWords and Facebook Newsfeeds. Tell us what you want and see the difference within a month .. guaranteed!

Call us now at 778 938 9883 for a FREE CONSULTATION!|||

Sky Windows Ltd. will replace the window glass or whole window of your single family home at a reasonable price.