Out of the huge number of Android phones out there - 32% are running Lollipop and 31.2% run Marshmallow, 20% run Kitkat and 9.2% run Jelly Bean. Plus - 4.9% is Nougat.

Every day you wake up - an average of 3.1 new android phones are launched i.e. around 1137 phones from 95 manufacturers in the market today. And the world expects app developers to handle app performance across all those.

Of course they acquired and funded companies in the app testing space to integrate them with Firebase to make Firebase Test Lab but we don't see app developers from Warsaw to Vandavasi who signed up with App Achhi deriving the test value from Test Lab. As a matter of fact - we do have sign ups from people who are using Test Lab and see this is the missing value in Firebase Test Lab.

Providing 15 tests per day free is not what Google should have done. Tell the developers - here is the issue - get them back to code.

Like this one.

Everytime developers want to push a version of app to Google Play - if such reports are a part of the instant feedback they get - developers and decision makers know what to do next.

Here is the performance of Dropbox of V42.2.2 (Latest version):

This is how dropbox performed in the previous version: V40.2.2

And this one for the previous version to the above : V38.2.2

You definitely see the trend like this for Dropbox across their builds

Bang on! We spotted it. App Achhi has been giving their app Low CPU scores. Those scores indicate that their app eats battery.

We want to help app developers irrespective of their budget to test, to fix and prevent such performance risks.

Not intentionally. Not because they knew they were putting a bad performing build out. Not just Dropbox but you would discover a lot of apps go through similar releases. The developers need help. Some recognize it and others are oblivious to this problem.

We wanted to deep dive into app performance and understand in parallel the testing challenges and how it can be resolved.

Android performance handling has evolved over a period and it has become better. However, some problems are persistent. They remain unsolved across various Android releases due to the sheer size of combinations to handle.

This needs to be addressed. This is how it can be.

Shouldn't be a complex post development activity. App Achhi scans the app for Memory utilization across various scenarios and screens and provide the below report in less than 20 minutes. This acts as a good quick feedback system to the developer. Without having to add an SDK or without having to toy around tools.

App PSS is an amount of memory shared between the app and shared processes. This is a good measure of memory of actual weight of RAM usage. An app is likely to be killed when App PSS exceeds to some point and it is important that the app PSS is not of the app's contribution to the RAM. Like the graph above, the red line is based on the Dalvik Limit allocated by the OEMs software and it signifies a risk of exceeding Dalvik Limit (Out of memory!)

The key aspects of Memory that App Achhi discovers per test is Max Dalvik Limit, App PSS, App Dalvik, App Total and App Native.

Many app developers have looked at this data and have jumped at the right section of code to fix. One of App Achhi customer has moved their App from a High Risk Memory Score to Good Performing Memory Score.

CPU & GPU contributes to most of Battery, Radio and Wake Lock issues. Threads are important and it is created when any app is initiated. The thread (Main) is responsible for dispatching events like drawings, rendering and other UI threads. With such loading when events not handled results in ANRs (Application not responding).

What we do is to monitor the CPU threads for every activity of the app and highlight the areas that are responsible for UI thread being not responsive. This is of great help to developers. To identify the thread and activity to tackle. What went wrong in Dropbox is precisely this.

No. The human tester cannot be replicated but the human would document and highlight the insights. That is what App Achhi platform does based on the performance data of the app to aid the developer to understand what has changed and what needs to change.

The key valuable info for any app developer is : what changed after new code. The insights provide that.

How should an overview be? Something like this. In our opinion. Tell a story of the trend. Tell a story that draws attention to things that matter. Tell a story of what is appearing to go out of control.

While building App Achhi - we took feedback from VP Products of an App that is used by over 200 M users. He mentioned that it is during the evening time their app usage peaks and evening time is a time that has Low Battery, Low RAM and varying network conditions.

Most of the testing does not happen around those conditions. Our hope is that the world will start testing in a condition closer to the real world.

Here is the way tools work - you can do app performance testing with Android Studio. Plug your phone to your computer through USB - run Android Studio - and start monitoring app performance as you run through use cases.

We did a study with an app testing services company. We gave them a link to a report from App Achhi platform that tests an app across devices and conditions for app performance in less than 20 minutes and asked the company how long would it take with all the tools they were using. The 20 minute report we generated - would take 10 days of a effort with tools.

There are platforms emerging similar to App Achhi - however - most of them are built not putting the human in the center of the problem but the technical details alone.

A report has to be human understandable and human decision making friendly. What we see around is - it looks like super fundoo technical skills to make sense of the report but no influence over the decisions to be made. At App Achhi we give equal priority to Technical Details and Decision Making for humans.

Our mission in App Achhi is to help the developer get back to code as quickly as possible. Test should help you move faster, in the right direction.|||

