You know that Marketo offers a wealth of information about your marketing efforts — but how do you get the most out of this data so you can make decisions to drive your marketing forward?

DataHero’s connection with Marketo allows you to pull in analytics on your lead activity reports from Marketo to identify the sources, campaigns, and leads that add the most to your bottom line.

You can also combine Marketo reports withl files from your other cloud services, to dig deeper into aspects of your business that span different departments.

To start analyzing your marketing automation data, create a free DataHero account, and import your reports from Marketo in a few clicks. DataHero will create suggested charts for you based on your data, or you can create your own customized charts.

But which metrics should you focus on? Here are three areas you might be able to address once you plug Marketo into DataHero:

Easily filter, segment and sort your variables, plus change time groupings for any chart you create of your Marketo analytics. Need to see when engagement is highest with your drip campaigns? Just drag on the metric you’d like to see for engagement (in this case opens) then date and time and select hour of day and DataHero will do the rest for you.

The chart above is an aggregate of all campaigns and their engagement rate by hour of the day. It looks like opens are higher in the evening, so you can set up future campaigns to take advantage of this. You can easily filter to see a specific campaign by dragging campaign onto the chart canvas and selecting the particular campaign you’d like to see.

By importing the lead Activity report from Marketo, you can also see the most successful campaigns over time. Of course you must decide how you measure success, but you can drag any metric you use to gauge success onto the chart and compare across various campaigns — as in the example below.

Need to know where to focus your marketing efforts? Combine your Marketo data with Salesforce by picking an attribute they’ll have in common (in this case lead name). To learn more about combines, check out this post — it’s as simple as a drag-and-drop motion.

Next, chart lead source by revenue. Merging the two datasets from Marketo and Salesforce allows you to get a full picture of your funnel, and determine which lead sources contribute the most revenue. In the chart below, for instance, referrals bring in the most revenue followed by sponsored content.

You can even drag on the date and see how these lead sources bring in different revenue over time.



 Now we can see how referral revenue has changed over time and see that advertising brought in more revenue in November and December, for example.

With this information from your Marketo data, you can know where to focus marketing efforts and where you have potential to expand leads.

What else can you do with the Marketo connection in DataHero? Filter based on lead score, identify exactly where your best leads come from and monitor your marketing funnel from start to finish. DataHero automatically categorizes your data, analyzes it for patterns, and suggests the most relevant charts to you.

You’re also able to merge your Marketo data with Excel files or customer support data, create analytics dashboards, and keep all that data up to date with DataHero. Check out this example of how to get insights from your Marketo data.

DataHero is flexible enough for all your custom analytics needs and will stay automatically updated as the data within Marketo changes. Give DataHero a try today and create custom charts and dashboards to be the revenue rockstar in your company — please click here to get started.|||

Pull analytics on your lead activity reports from Marketo into DataHero to identify the sources, campaigns, and leads that add the most to your bottom line.