The word "shadowban" may sound a little ridiculous, but it's serious news for brands using Instagram to promote business and draw in more conversions. A shadowban occurs when an account or specific content is banned without any notification. On your end, you don't see anything that's different, but viewers won't be able to see content from their end, which can make posts – to a certain extent – useless.

Not cool! Here's what we know about Instagram's shadowbans so far.

There are two types of shadowbanning that Instagram could do. The first is when an entire account is banned so that no viewers can see any content. Instagram does not appear to be doing this, or at least not often.

The second type of banning occurs when Instagram shadowbans the tags that you use. You can still post content and tag it, and it will probably still show up in your Instagram feed, but the tags will have no effect. People who search Instagram for specific images or accounts using tags but will not find any of your content. This, of course, makes it much more difficult to gain new Instagram followers or use your tags for any sort of growth on the platform.

Please note that Instagram has not raised its hand and announced, "Yep, we're totally shadowbanning!" That's not good publicity...plus, the ironclad evidence is a little thin. This could be a case of people adding 2 + 2 and getting 5: However, experts in industries with a stake in Instagram (like photographers) are convinced something really is going on.

Instagram's response thus far has been confusing: Their official statement on questions about tagging problems are basically summed up: "We aren't going to talk about shadowbanning, but don't put so much focus on hashtags, okay?" They also tweeted that they, "Don't have the available resources to fix the hashtag search issue," which goes against the longer statement by indicating it may be a bug instead of a quality control issue.

So we can only guess at this stage, but the bans appear to be associated with spamming hashtags and cynical hashtag use designed to game the system and get as many eyeballs on content as possible, no matter what.

That is a big issue for people trying out hashtag tactics on Instagram, especially since Instagram is especially hashtag-friendly, and brands generally have no problem posting a dozen or so hashtags on a photo to help push it into the right channels. Now there seems to be a line in the sand, except no one knows where it is, and Instagram isn't offering much information on the subject.

One of the worst parts of shadowbanning is that no one tells you about it. Of course, if you're looking at Instagram metrics you will probably notice that something is wrong – a lack of new traffic, or falling engagement, or weirdly low growth numbers. But by that time damage has already been done, and you're still left with a lot of questions.

Instead, we suggest using the new Instagram Shadowban Tester tool. This pulls up a simple web page that gives you two different options. Either enter your username or a specific URL for one post, and test it. The tool pulls and compare social signals and will quickly tell you if looks like there's a problem. Full account bans still appear unlikely, so we suggest looking for specific content bans if it looks like a piece is doing poorly, or if you can't find something via searching by hashtag.

Note: There have been questions about how accurate the tool is. Since no one knows the details of the Instagram algorithm, there is a certain amount of guesswork about banning involved here. But the methodology seems sound enough for a simple checkup.

What happens if you find content that appears to be shadowbanned? Since Instagram isn't even admitting there's a problem yet, that content is probably a lost cause. Your best bet is prevention, so stay away from shady practices, such as buying followers, repeating the same hashtags or hashtag variants on the same post or every single post, and using "naughty" hashtags that are primarily used with banned content like porn. These practices seem to make it more likely that you will be banned, so focus first on image quality, and don't put tags as your top priority.

We have also found that if you are a business you will want to connect your business IG account to your Facebook business page, thus building credibility that you are a legit brand using Instagram.

Has your account been victim to the shadowban? Drop us a line, we would love to hear about your experience.|||

Instagram shadowban occurs when an account or specific content is banned without notification. Here is what to do if you suspect you have been shadowbanned.