|||

Airbnb and HomeAway settled a lawsuit against San Francisco on Monday by agreeing to help the city ensure that all local hosts are registered.  The agreement caps a multiyear struggle by Airbnb’s hometown to rein in burgeoning vacation rentals, which critics say divert precious housing stock into the lucrative travel market.  “The two largest (vacation-rental services) will only include legal listings, and the city has the tools for quick, effective enforcement,” City Attorney Dennis Herrera said at a crowded news conference in City Hall.  San Francisco wants properties registered so it can ensure that they meet city rules that aim to prevent illegal hotels in homes, such as requiring vacation-rental hosts to be permanent residents and capping whole-home rentals at 90 days.  Airbnb, later joined by rival HomeAway, sued San Francisco in federal court in June after supervisors unanimously passed legislation holding companies liable for steep fines and criminal penalties if they arrange guest stays at unregistered properties.  Airbnb and HomeAway said the law violated their rights under the Communications Decency Act, a federal law that largely shields Internet service providers from legal responsibility for the content of postings on their sites, and the First Amendment.  The agreement will allow hosts to comply with San Francisco laws “with simplicity, certainty, visibility,” said Chris Lehane, Airbnb’s head of global public policy, in a conference call with reporters.  Airbnb is among the world’s most-valuable startups, but ongoing regulatory disputes could threaten the $31 billion value investors have placed on it in private fundraising.  “This is a decisive victory for San Francisco,” said Supervisor Aaron Peskin, describing Airbnb as being dragged “kicking and screaming” to the negotiating table.  [...] Airbnb hosts said they welcomed “a new era of cooperation” that would allow them to continue earning extra income by renting to travelers.  “The issue of home sharing has been fraught and often used as a political hot potato, with the relationship between City Hall, prominent platforms like Airbnb and HomeAway, hosts and housing advocates often boiling over into unpleasant conflict,” wrote Peter Kwan and Laura Thompson, co-chairs of the Home Sharers Democratic Club, in a Medium post.  [...] Airbnb and HomeAway will use a pass-through system to send hosts’ registration applications directly to the city, which will verify that the application information is correct.  Hosts must submit supporting documents, such as utility bills and voter registration cards, to prove that they comply with city rules.  [...] those sites will be on the hook for fines of up to $1,000 a day per listing and criminal penalties if they help arrange bookings of unregistered listings, city officials said.