The Emerging Markets Payment Index is intended to be used by digital media companies, web and game developers for benchmarking their revenue in markets with high smartphone growth and low credit card penetration. 

The Emerging Markets Payment Index focuses on countries highlighted by GfK in its global forecast as the largest tech device growth markets of 2015. These countries are India, Nigeria, Pakistan, Vietnam, Bangladesh, Brazil, Egypt, Indonesia and Philippines. 

Growth in these markets is beginning to ramp up because people’s income is low and smartphones have been expensive. However, cheap smartphones are changing this. Globally, the price of an iPhone is around $700 while the price of an Android phone is around $200. There are even cheaper phones available at sub $100 prices and these will be driving growth of the mobile ecosystem in the few next years. 

Still, payment collection in these markets remains a challenge for digital content merchants. Credit card ownership is in the low double digits or single digits. At the same time, these markets are not “mobile first”, but “mobile only”: for most people, their smartphone is the only way to connect to the internet. This makes carrier billing the ideal solution for collecting payments from them, as traditional payment access is limited and carrier billing provides the best purchasing experience out of all payment methods on mobile devices. 

The payment index aggregates carrier billing data from various platforms (web, mobile web, feature phones, smartphones) and app stores using Fortumo carrier billing. 

 

Fortumo is a mobile payments company that enables direct carrier billing with more than 350 mobile operators in 90+ countries. Fortumo's payment products work across a wide range of platforms including desktop devices, smartphones, feature phones, tablets and smart TV-s. These products give consumers a simple, 1-click payment method to charge online purchases to their phone bill. For app stores, digital media companies and game developers, Fortumo provides one integration with 350 mobile operators as well as a single point of contact for settlements, reporting, support and infrastructure upgrades. Founded in 2007, Fortumo has offices in Estonia, San Francisco, Beijing, Delhi, Singapore & Hanoi and is backed by Intel Capital and Greycroft Partners.|||

The Emerging Markets Payment Index is intended to be used by digital media companies, web and game developers for benchmarking their revenue in markets with hi…