In my last blog post, I discussed how computers could understand natural language by simulating our world. Such an understanding would enable us to build a bot that could be our lifelong teacher, guide, and advocate. Simulating our world is a huge task, so I propose that we start by building the bot for young children, since their experience is a small but complete sliver of our own. The proposed bot could interact with children using voice and vision. The bot would initially live in the cell phone of the child’s parents, much like Siri does.

The bot would get to know the child individually, and they would both develop together. This bot would stay with the child for her whole life. As the child grew in sophistication, the bot developers would keep up, making the bot increasingly sophisticated. When the child was young, the bot would teach her about the world. As she grew older, the bot would live inside all of her devices and become her operating system and user interface to the world. If she experienced cognitive decline in old age, this same bot would guide her through daily living and help her stay independent longer.

The initial purpose of the bot would be to entertain and teach children. It would integrate learning into daily conversation, and it would have an animated cartoon face and would see using a phone’s camera, so the child could show it her world. The bot would learn about the child and get to know her favorite toys.

The bot would be an effective teacher because it would know which concepts the child had already mastered, allowing it to explain new concepts to her in terms that she already understood. The bot would also know what topics the child was interested in, so it could teach new concepts in an engaging way. Instead of just asking the child to figure out the answer to 7+3, the bot could ask how many giraffes she would have if she had seven in her backyard and bought three more.

In addition to systematically introducing concepts, the bot could teach organically and expand the child’s curiosity through conversations [1]. It could say things like, “Yeah, fire trucks are red and shiny. Did you know that they go by burning dead dinosaurs?” The bot could teach estimation and the meaning of large numbers with conversations such as, “I like ducks too. How many ducks do you think there are in the world?” Through these interactions, the bot would also gently expand the vocabulary of the child.

The bot would teach critical thinking using fun brain teasers, such as this one described in Kahneman [2], “A bat and ball together cost $1.10. The bat costs $1.00 more than the ball. How much does the ball cost?” (It’s not $0.10.) The bot could also point out biases in thinking and logical errors. It could nudge and teach the child about opportunity costs and delayed gratification. “If you eat your chocolate bear today, how are you going to feel tomorrow when you no longer have it?” The bot could also teach the child to see things from another’s point of view. For instance, a conversation fragment might be, “You told me you only had one chocolate bear, how could I know that you also had a chocolate turtle?”

The value of this kind of teaching would be even greater for children who lack access to good educational opportunities. The bot could be provided at a subsidized cost to these children because although building the bot would be expensive, once it was built the marginal cost of giving it to another child would be small.

The bot would initially live on the parent’s smartphone, but the intelligence and memory of the bot could live in the cloud, so the child could take it with her to other domains and devices and even into virtual reality.

As the child grew older, the bot would become her operating system and interface to the world. In addition to handling normal things like scheduling and playing music, the bot would provide a seamless voice interface into internet-connected devices. The bot would also continue to teach us, even as adults, although the learning would be more directed by the user. We’ve probably all had the experience of looking up a concept outside of our area of expertise on Wikipedia and not understanding the first sentence. The bot would know what we know, and so it could explain new concepts in a way that we could understand.

The bot could also migrate to a Google Glass-like wearable device and help us do things we didn’t know how to do, like fix a washing machine or restore an old car. For me, it would know that my mechanical knowledge was limited to loosening and tightening bolts using the mnemonic “lefty loosey righty tighty,” and so its instructions would describe actions at that level.

Having a bot that knows us would also alleviate one of the most dreaded tasks of life — filling out forms. I hate filling out forms. If the bot had our permission, it could fill in the fields automatically with less hassle than current existing browser extensions. The concept of filling out forms extends to complicated domains such as medical diagnosis and law. It’s difficult to find what we need online in these domains because one must wade through a sea of irrelevant information. For this reason, any current automated algorithm either gets bogged down asking irrelevant questions or gives generic answers based on prior probabilities. A bot that knew us could guide us through.

After the bot had taught us as children and guided us as adults, it could help us with daily living if we faced cognitive decline in old age. It could advocate for us as it guided us through the government and healthcare bureaucracies. The bot could even help us do things we once did with ease. Imagine that your bot could watch you with cameras in your house. If one morning it saw you standing in the kitchen looking confused, it could know that you make coffee at that time and could talk you through the steps. The bot would help us live independently longer.

Building this bot entails technical, business, and social challenges. The most obvious technical challenge is natural language understanding. My last blog post discussed a method for understanding natural language using 3D physics simulations, but this set of ideas needs to be implemented, and challenges will surely creep up. For example, pragmatics will have to be accounted for because what people say and what people mean are often two different things. These difficulties will be compounded by errors converting speech to text.

The next looming technical challenge is the large amount of world knowledge that needs to be built in to create effective simulations. This difficulty is the primary motivation for beginning with young children, who live in worlds that are less complicated than ours.

The bot also needs to know how to teach. There exist automated teaching tools that tailor lessons to individual progress, and these ideas have to be integrated into the bot along with the different concepts it will teach. The bot also must be able to represent the concepts that the user knows so that it can teach new concepts using those known ones.

In addition to teaching, the bot needs to keep track of the lifelong conversation. It needs to understand when a user doesn’t respond to the question asked, but instead wants to talk about something else. And the bot needs to be able to understand what that something else is. This burden of holding a logical conversation is also partially alleviated by initially starting with young children. Children are more forgiving of weird transitions between topics.

The challenge for the bot developers will be to build sophistication into the bot as fast as their initial customers progress through childhood. Once the children reach adulthood, it gets harder because the bot will need to know complicated stuff, like how to actually restore an old car. The bot will at least need to be able to find appropriate instructions on the internet and translate them into the owner’s level of competence. And, of course, the bot will know everything about an individual, so all of this will need to be done while preserving personal information. It will be hard. Whole areas of research are dedicated to addressing many of these issues, so the bot developers will need to make pragmatic tradeoffs.

The business challenges relate to funding a project of such technical complexity. This project is a good fit for a startup because it starts small, focusing on children, but appealing to children presents its own challenges. Parents can be reluctant to pay for apps, and it doesn’t seem feasible or desirable to monetize via advertising. In general, the bot needs to always have the best interest of the owner as its primary goal, and advertising can be antithetical to that. This bot would undoubtedly create a lot of value. The business challenge is how to capture enough value along the way so that the full bot can be built.

The social challenges stem from the fact that the human brain was wired through evolution to have relationships with living beings. Social processing makes up a disproportionally large part of our intelligence relative to other animals, and a lifelong relationship with a bot would be a new kind of experience in a significant aspect of our lives, which could have unpredictable consequences. For example, would children still create imaginary friends? Or, what would happen if the bot maker went out of business and the bot went away? The social challenge is to design the bot to minimize the probability of unforeseen adverse consequences.

Given the social challenges, one could ask whether such a bot should be built. Creating something new that reaches so deeply into our psyche seems risky, but we would miss out on the benefits if we didn’t build it. When it comes to potential dangers of technology, I lean toward cautious advancement. Fire is dangerous, but we certainly wouldn’t go back and tell our ancestors not to master it. This endeavor is of course more modest, but as the virtual world becomes increasingly integrated with our physical one, such an interface, teacher, guide, and advocate could bring substantial benefit.

Imagine how cool it would be to have Bing Bong from your childhood serve as your OS. As a child, the bot would be like an engaging and extra-personalized Khan Academy. In adulthood, the bot would give us turn-by-turn directions through many of the tedious and complicated parts of our lives, and in late adulthood, the bot could help us maintain our independence. All the while, the bot would provide an external memory of your life with the fidelity of a computer, because it would be there with you the whole way.

I’m speaking at O’Reilly Artificial Intelligence in New York on June 29, so come check it out!|||

In my last blog post, I discussed how computers could understand natural language by simulating our world. Such an understanding would enable us to build a bot that could be our lifelong teacher…