Melbourne business leaders hope the city's concrete jungle will be transformed into a green oasis, after unveiling the winner of a unique rooftop-garden competition.

The $300,000 garden was built on top of an old 10-storey office block.

It includes drought-tolerant plants, permeable glass paving to collect rainwater, recycled timber and a lightweight polystyrene hill covered in soil.

Tiffany Crawford from the Committee for Melbourne's Growing Up project says around 20 per cent of the city's available space is wasted on unused rooftops.

"This is the first green roof design competition that we've seen in Australia," she said.

"Green roofs haven't been popular in terms of retro-fitting and so we think this is a real first for Melbourne."

She said Origin Energy was the only other company to have a retro-fitted "green roof" on an existing Melbourne building, but it was more of a recreational space with some plants rather than a fully-integrated garden.

"We are asking Melbourne to follow our lead, to take up the challenge and make Melbourne the first Australian city of green roofs," Ms Crawford said.

They say the competition proves that creating gardens on existing buildings is easier than most people think.

And Ms Crawford said it would dramatically reduce the building's heating and cooling bills, as well as having other environmental benefits.

"If we see an increase in the number of green roofs in Melbourne, we could see a reduction in the urban heat island effect of up to 2 degrees Celcius, she said.

"We can also improve biodiversity, air quality, and they really are a fantastic aesthetic addition to Melbourne's space."

A small section of the roof will also be used by the University of Melbourne to test what combinations of plants and soils work best in the city's climate.

John Rayner, a lecturer in urban horticulture from the University of Melbourne, agrees the environmental and economic advantages are immense.

He says an experimental rooftop garden at the University's Burnley campus has already shown that building owners can get energy savings of up to 40 per cent over summer in terms of cooling costs.

"One of the other big benefits is managing water better, as these gardens can effectively treat water as it passes off the roof," he said.

"The soil acts like a filter for nutrient-rich run off. It also reduces stormwater flow which means that we're not getting as much water in our drains and adding to the bay."

The competition attracted entries from around 70 landscape architects and students.

The winner, Bent Architecture's Merran Porjazoski, says there were logistical challenges dealing with an existing building, including weight loads and transporting materials up to the rooftop.

The architects said they used a crane to haul large materials to the rooftop because of limitations with a tight internal staircase and they also put a waterproof membrane down to protect the roof.

They had to change their original design, which included a tree on top of their hill.

"We realised that we couldn't actually afford the load of a tree and the root system and the soil that that would involve, so we have a sculpture and we've grown a wisteria up over it," she said.

"The hill is actually made of recycled expanded polystyrene with a layer of dirt on top of it. So we were able to create the shape because spatially we really wanted this central hill, but we're also able to have the soil for the plants to grow - even though the soil itself is only 200 millimetres thick."

Ms Porjazoski says the garden terrace can be used as an outdoor classroom by the language school which operates within the building and there is also a barbecue area with a small shelter over it.

"We really wanted to create a rooftop oasis in the city, a garden that was connected to but also quite secluded from the city, she said.

One of the building's owners, Amanda Black says before the transformation the rooftop was "a desolate space" and she was stunned by the improvement.

"The finished product, the woodwork and the greenery, it will provide an amazing space for our tenants to enjoy social interaction, as well as time out in a busy day," she said.

"It's a wonderful unique place and we've already got something planned for New Years Eve."|||

Melbourne business leaders hope the city's concrete jungle will be transformed into a green oasis, after unveiling the winner of a unique rooftop-garden competition.