I had a friend from grade school who was a locksmith. He was having trouble getting calls to his business after he lost his AAA contract. He tried out Adwords Express and when you dig into the whole funnel between impressions to clicks to calls, it was around 40–80$ per call. Some of them were hangups, people outside a reasonable distance away, and a decent amount were telemarketer robo calls too.

It’s pretty terrible out there for small to midsize businesses. I knew there had to be something better. I wanted to make advertising risk free. If a real customer called, filled out a lead form, or talked to a chat bot, then the business would pay just for that real customer. Telemarketers would not be a worry as they’d be blocked and if they do get by, the calls are recorded (with informing the caller beforehand of course).

There’s companies like Yext which will put up businesses on sites like Google My Business and many others, but most of those can be done by hand by a thirteen year old kid with no allowance. They also hold you hostage for 500$ a year and if you don’t pay, the listings go. There’s also YP and Elocal to buy calls from, but its certainly not cheap and there’s still the telemarketer problem. They also cater to a very small number of niches. You can also search out Google Partners, for Adwords spending, but the majority of them have prohibitively high minimum spends or charge large fees.

Sure, I could get a whole system built out and toss it out to the public, only to find out after all that work its something nobody wants. So an MVP is the way to go. I made a minimal version of the call forwarding complete with some cheap, mobile friendly, easy converting landing pages. Unfortunately, the locksmith friend wanted to grow weed a lot more than he wanted to be a locksmith so I had to find another avenue to test this.|||

It wasn’t the first time that it’s happened but thats a story for another medium post. The gun looked the same as in the picture above but the robber wasn’t Tim Roth and I certainly wasn’t Samuel L…