I have a full time job as full stack developer, wife and 2 kids. I commute every day 1 hour in each direction. On a work day I woke up at 5:30 am, wash, dress and jump in a car at 6:00 am, so that I can be at work at 7:00 am. I usually go home at 3:00 pm and if there is no traffic jam I am at home at 4:00 pm. I eat something, change clothes, clock says 5 pm and I try to spend some quality time with my wife and kids. Kids go to bed at 8 pm and at 9 pm I am exhausted as hell, and I fell to bed. And this repeats every work week.

As we all know, programming scene ( especially javascript) is brutal and If you want to keep up, you have to read blogs, books or watch courses. At least I did that before I had a family. I discovered similar pattern from my colleagues and two of them are looking for a job that is family friendly. They don’t search for a higher paycheck, but  for a job that offers them a chance to study at  work, flexible time that they can take kids from kindergarten, offer remote work and parental  leave. I did a quick search through famous job boards and didn’t find any family friendly specific. So I decided to make one. You can access it here: FamilyOkJobs

What bothered me is that content of majority of job ads are like this:

And then I asked myself: “Who on this planet writes those job ads!?” If you are a family man, how can you be excellent and exceptional? How can you even compete with single and younger engineers? I guess there would be much more simple if they wrote: “We’re looking for a single male, with 10+ years experience in this engineering field”. But this would be discrimination. And those ads like the example above are not?

I guess they don’t care if you’re working 10 hours per day. I guess they don’t care if you have a family or not. I guess they don’t care if a child is seeing his father or mother 4 hours per week… This went through my mind when I read those ads.

I hope that FamilyOKJobs will help someone, or at least put some family note to existing job boards.|||

I have a full time job as full stack developer, wife and 2 kids. I commute every day 1 hour in each direction. On a work day I woke up at 5:30 am, wash, dress and jump in a car at 6:00 am, so that I can be at work at 7:00 am. I usually…