Here’s what hardware you need to have our voice-activated speaker ready to work in your home. We’ve put links to find it at good prices. If the links are not valid anymore please send us an email we’ll help find replacements.

These part are not mandatory, but they make your voice-activated speaker stand out! 😎

To make it easier for you to assemble those parts we made a 3D printable case.

The Plans are here.

If you don’t have a 3D printer, that’s fine, we don’t either! We used 3D Hubs services to print our version (it was fast and the price made sense). The price will depend on the material you use. It cost us 95EUR (100$) to print at our hub in Paris.

To enable streaming music from Spotify, you need a premium account that has e-mail authentication. If you created your account with Facebook, there is an option to add an e-mail password authentication.

To power the speaker and to improve the sound quality (the default sound quality on the raspberry Pi is … not the best) we are using a Hifiberry AMP+. There are many sound cards that you can use. Some are made specifically for the Raspberry Pi, although most sound cards ought to work. We decided to go with the HiFiBerry because it seemed like the easiest option to get started with at the time, and we’re happy with the result.

The HiFiBerry sits on top of the Raspberry Pi, as a shield. It requires a 12V power source to power itself and the Pi, and has a connector for hooking up speakers. In order to be recognized by the system, some minor modifications must be made to the ALSA config file, but the HiFiBerry tutorials make the process fairly straightforward.

From the /boot/config.txt file, remove the line:

And add the following line (this varies depending on the model of card you are using, here we are using a HiFiBerry AMP+)|||

The speaker concentrates on music playback, and makes it easy to control the music you are listening to just by saying what you’d like to happen out loud. It’s purely a demo project, but we’ve grown…