In 2003, Oaktree had no office and no budget. Run by a small team of people, they met in living rooms, cafes and school classrooms, to pursue an audacious goal: young people working to end extreme poverty in our lifetime. Today, Oaktree is one of Australia’s largest youth-run organisations, with more than 100 volunteers and over 200,000 members.

We have always valued the importance of partnership, entering into our first overseas partnership in 2006 with an organisation called Sethani, In Kwa Zulu Natal, South Africa. Between 2006 and 2008 we worked with Sethani to fund the establishment of a community and education centre for 750 young people. Since then, Oaktree has partnered with other organisations in South Africa, as well as organisations in Ghana, Timor-Leste, Cambodia, Papua New Guinea and the Philippines. In 2011, we shifted our entire focus to the Asia Pacific. We’ve been lucky to work with over 10 local partners on projects in the region.

Oaktree is largely remembered for the 2006 MAKEPOVERTYHISTORY concert. It was timed to coincide with the G20 meeting in Melbourne, and we (somehow) managed to secure bands like U2 and Pearl Jam. 15,000 people attended the concert, and over 3 million watched on TV. As a result, over 50,000 Australians signed up as MAKEPOVERTYHISTORY supporters. From there came the MAKEPOVERTYHISTORY ZEROSEVEN Roadtrip, and the End Child Slavery campaign. Oaktree has continued to mobilise young people, running two more Roadtrips, a Stakeout, a Traffik Free Easter campaign in addition to the Collective Future campaign.

Oaktree recognises the unique role young people have to play. They are able to build and lead a movement to grow the community of Australians who are informed and care about global poverty. We believe in the importance of investing in young Australian to become leaders and changemakers in their communities.

A world free from poverty. We envision a world of justice and equality, where all people have the opportunity to realise their capabilities, rights, and freedoms, regardless of their social, political and cultural circumstances.

To learn more about Oaktree's work click here.|||

