Although held in the middle of the Easter holiday season, over 360 founders, startup enthusiasts, investors, media people and corporates joined us at this year’s EU-Startups Conference in Berlin. One of the highlights during the event was clearly our big pitch competition. Overall, more than 140 startups applied to participate. 15 of them made it to the finals and pitched in front of an expert jury. In the end it was B2B Pay founder Neil Ambikar who took home the prize package worth €17,500. Below you’ll find 64 pictures from this year’s EU-Startups Conference. To all attendees: It was super awesome to meet you in Berlin last month. We hope to see as many of you as possible at next year’s edition of the EU-Startups Conference, which will probably be held on March 23, 2018.



 A big “Thank You” goes out to this year’s Event Sponsors:

Teamleader helps you and your team work smarter so your small business prospers. Bringing CRM, project management and invoicing together with an intuitive software solution, Teamleader enables your team to collaborate, organize and build your business.

Hiscox is a leading specialist insurer and offers tailored insurance cover for sole traders, freelancers or contractors, as well as small business owners. This includes professional indemnity for the specific business needs in IT, marketing and advertising, recruitment and management consultancy. Often, self-employed freelancers and startups are not sure what kind of risks they might face, and what cover they need. Hiscox does its best to explain what the different insurance policies can cover and provides excellent service to its clients.

PwC NextLevel unifies the products and services PwC offers to startups and scale-ups. PwC Europe’s startup initiative has access to the global PwC Network (220,000+ people in 157 countries) and is able to help in every single facet of your business. PwC provides industry focused assurance, tax and advisory services to enhance value for its clients and their stakeholders.

OpenUp is the BNP Paribas Group initiative to foster collaboration with startups. It is a program and a digital platform connecting BNP Paribas employees working on innovation or business topics with startups worldwide. Our ambition is to co-create innovation together with fintech startups and build up the future of banking with innovative companies.

Tata group is a multi-sectoral global enterprise headquartered in India, comprising over 100 independent companies operating in over 100 countries. Tata has always been committed to innovation and helping the next generation of entrepreneurs, wherever it operates, through its various initiatives across Europe. Tata partners with NACUE to deliver the Varsity Pitch Competition, which is one of the UK’s leading graduate entrepreneur pitching competitions, while in the Netherlands Tata recently partnered with Team Academy to support EU-based student entrepreneurs.

Aruba Cloud, part of the Aruba Group and one of cloud computing leaders in Europe, offers startups the best Cloud technology and a three-year program to support them as they develop their business plans. By taking part in We START you UP, startups will have up to €9,000 of free Cloud credit, complimentary technical support, an European network of Data Center and many more exclusive benefits to help them in the market.

Wirecard is a global technology group that supports companies in accepting electronic payments from all sales channels. Using the Wirecard Checkout Portal, merchants can easily, quickly and cost-effectively select the individual payment methods they need and integrate them in their online shop. With the Checkout Portal, merchants benefit from secure payments with an integrated fraud prevention, a multilingual support, partner models and a transparent pricing.|||

