A green roof is a vegetated roof cover or a permanent rooftop planting system that covers a significant portion of a building’s roof. There are two main types: extensive and intensive.

Green roofs have substrate (or soil) covering the majority of the roof, whereas rooftop gardens have fewer planted areas.

Rooftop gardens provide amenity and some potential biodiversity benefits to urban areas but do not have high stormwater retention potential.

A green wall is vegetation that is vertically planted on the external side of a building. Most green walls are vertical hydroponic systems, with plant roots connected to the vertical plane.

A green facade typically features climbing vegetation planted on the ground or in raised planters growing up a trellis structure. Facade greening usually costs less than a green wall.

Wall or facade greening – as seen on the northern side of City of Melbourne’s Council House 2 building – is a way of lowering a building’s temperature by shading it to cool the surrounding area. This provides a tangible benefit for buildings that wish to shade their facades from the sun, particularly from the north and west.

A planning or building permit may be needed to construct a green roof or wall.

Early in the design process, check whether a permit is required. Contact the City of Melbourne to arrange a pre-application meeting. Our planning officers can provide preliminary advice on the proposal and the type of information needed with the application.

For more information about planning permits and requirements, see Melbourne Planning Scheme.

Some of the issues that a building surveyor would consider before issuing a permit include:

Canopy is a quarterly discussion forum that brings people together to share information and ideas for greening our cities. The topics that have been covered in past forums include green roofs, walls and other green urban infrastructure. Email your queries to canopy@melbourne.vic.gov.au.|||

Green roofs, walls and facades help cool hot cities, reduce storm water drainage, and insulate buildings all year round.