Ajit Pai warned the American people that net neutrality had a “longstanding goal of forcing the Internet under the federal government’s control.” He also said that “Nothing about the Internet was broken in 2015. Nothing about the law had changed, and there was not a rash of ISPs blocking consumers from accessing the content, applications, or services of their choice.”

These claims have been widely disputed. Let’s break down Pai’s major points and the responses to each one.

We covered Pai’s previous comments about his Net Neutrality plan, which most people assumed spelled doom for the Internet’s Title II designation and the Open Internet Order.

Now that his plan has been fleshed out, let’s address the most important claims:

As we noted before, there had been several complaints of paid prioritization against large ISPs prior to the 2015 Open Internet Order, including:

Ajit Pai argues that returning ISPs to common carrier status, which falls under the FTC regulatory jurisdiction, will allow American’s better privacy guarantees, as the FTC is “the nation’s most expert and experienced privacy regulator.”

Critics argue that Pai’s claims are false. Here are a couple of reasons why:

Pai cited a study from the Free State Foundation, which claimed that the Open Internet Order cost $5 billion USD in broadband investment. This foundation has ties to the dubious American Legislative Exchange Council, which has been accused of lobbying for prepackaged bills in state and federal congresses even outside the realm of specific issues.

According to the Center for Public Integrity’s Nonprofit Network tool, the two biggest telecom lobbying groups, the Internet and Television Association and the Wireless Association, which represent companies like Comcast and AT&T, contributed over $600,000 USD to the Free State Foundation. In short, the Free State Foundation is directly influenced by the biggest opponents to net neutrality.

Contrary to Pai’s claim, Free Press found that major ISPs’ investments actually increased after net neutrality rules passed. As Gizmodo mentions, business for ISPs has been good enough for AT&T to drop $2 million USD on the Trump inauguration, who was the candidate most opposed to net neutrality in practice.

Comcast even recently boasted about their “consistent investment and innovation.”

Despite the facts, Ajit Pai took this imagined lack of investment even further, asserting that the lack of investment would dissuade ISPs from building Internet infrastructure in poorer communities. There is evidence that ISPs neglect building infrastructure in poorer communities, but there is zero evidence that it is due to net neutrality.

Critics of Ajit Pai and his policies like to point out that he was a lawyer for Verizon and is likely influenced by telecom giant interests. To the most outspoken opponents of the FCC’s current direction, it seems to be that corporate interests are outweighing consumer preference.

But there is a large contingent of influential entities arguing against Pai’s plan.

Netflix and Facebook are proponents of net neutrality, and so are almost 800 other startups that want to make sure there is a level playing field within the Internet. Engine, Y Combinator, and TechStars sent a letter to Ajit Pai, arguing that “Our companies should be able to compete with incumbents on the quality of our products and services, not our capacity to pay tolls to Internet access providers.”

Here at Edgy, we argue that leaving the Internet open to manipulation by ISPs actually stifles innovation. When people are forced to pay excessive fees and surrender their personal information for the profit of large corporations, illegal behaviors are effectively encouraged. We feel strongly that a compromise between corporate interests and consumer rights must arrive and a free and open Internet.

What do you think? Which of Ajit Pai’s points did you agree with/disagree with?|||

Net neutrality, outlined by the Open Internet Order, is slated for repeal by FCC chair Ajit Pai, who spoke about the inadequacies of Title II designation.