This is the fifth interview of a series of interviews I’m doing with 10 experts of the worldwide bot scene. These interviews are part of my research which aims to find guidelines for designing messenger bots. If you want to read more about what I do and why you can do it in my first article and also join the survey . You can also read the previous interviews with:

Barbara is Project Manager at Swell Heroes and Influencer Manager at Swell . Swell started as a decision making app for iOS and Android and got really successful when they shifted into a bot. The bot is called Swelly and is available on Messenger , Viber , KiK , Telegram and Line .

Just some weeks ago they launched the newest feature called “Swell Pod” where you vote together with a friend 10 Swells to find out how you fit together.

Swelly has all the features the original app, including user profiles and following friends. You basically open up Swelly on your phone to get fast decisions from your friends, the Swell community or to help others out. It makes so much fun browsing through the different categories like fashion, food or sports. Swell users and Swell heroes are comparing existing products with new ones. That’s why Swell has become an info & trend platform with over 3 million users.

Besides that Swell is making so called “Swell Heroes Influencer bots” which are personal bots for influencers and brand ambassadors like Runtastic or Giovanna Engelbert.

Swelly is used 40% in North America. 25% of the users come from Europe and, 20% from Asia and 15% from the rest of the world. It grew from August 2016 from 0 to 1.6 million users until the end of 2016 and has now more than 3 million users. The technology behind Swelly is node.js.

Which problems did you face while developing bots?

We didn’t really run into serious problems because Philipp Holly and the whole team are amazing developers and master every challenge.

What have you improved on your bots since the release?

Since the release we basically added features and adapted general things.

How do you see the future of bots?

I believe that some bots will replace apps. The usage gets easier and easier and companies like Facebook keep adding features, designs and templates which makes building bots easier and enhances the experience for users.

What has to be improved so bots can work better?

In my opinion bots need a better user interface. The flow is often that intuitive than it should be. I also see a need for accessibility like for people that can’t hear. So generally I think there is a strong need for customised templates to be able to cover more personal use cases.

What do you think about this statement?|||

This is the fifth interview of a series of interviews I’m doing with 10 experts of the worldwide bot scene. These interviews are part of my research which aims to find guidelines for designing…