In the years from 1950 on, Japanese leaders in the bureaucracy and ruling political party, working in tandem with corporate executives, actively sought to manage and develop the economy. Over the 23 years from 1950 to 1973, Japan's gross national product (GNP; the total value of goods and services produced in a year) expanded by an average annual rate of more than 10 per cent with only a few minor downturns.  There was also a high rate of investment in technology. (Gordon, 246) Japan developed an export-oriented economy: much of what it manufactured would be sold abroad and the foreign currency they made would be invested in the purchase of technology, management, raw materials and energy sources for its further industrial development.  Japan is a country with few raw materials for industrial development and non known oil reserves except for recent limited offshore discoveries.  Today over 70 percent of manufactured goods from Japan are exported abroad.  When this export driven economy first started in the 1950s, Japan had a favorable international environment: The United States led in negotiating a more open trading system through treaties such as the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT, predecessor to today's WTO, World Trade Organization).  Cheap and reliable energy supplies in the form of oil from the Middle East and elsewhere fueled industrial expansion at relatively low costs.  Relatively affordable licensing agreements also gave Japanese companies open access to a host of new technologies from transistors to steel furnaces.  A. Government regulation in the form of loans: Private banks, as well as public institutions such as the  Industrial Development Bank, drew on individual savings to channel capital to businesses.  In the early years of Japanese economic development from the 1950s to 1960s,  1/3 of the bank loans came from private savings.  The average household saved under 10 per cent of its income in the early 1950s, but savings rate soared steadily as the economy grew and reached 15 percent by 1960 and topped 20 percent by 1970.  Households have continued to save in excess of 20 percent since then.  These funds, deposited in savings accounts of commercial banks or in the government run postal savings system, made up a vast pool of capital available for investment in industry. (Gordon, 246) There has been such extensive government regulation of Japanese industry that Japanese capitalism is sometimes called "brokered capitalism" to refer to the extensive role the state plays in it.  Of all government ministries, perhaps MITI has been the most instrumental.  MITI and the Ministry of Finance encouraged the rationalization of firms and industries and guided the structural transformation of the economy.  MITI stimulated the movement of capital and labor out of declining industries such as coal and textiles and into promising new industries with high growth potential--first into electronics, steel, petrochemicals, and automobiles, and later into computers, semiconductors, and biotechnology. (Pyle, 247) Since MITI achieved most of its goals with the distribution of loans, where did the money come from? As mentioned above, a sizable amount of money came from personal savings, which was then channeled to economic development. The Ministry of Finance and MITI established the Japan Development Bank in 1951 with access to a huge investment pool known as the Fiscal Investment and Loan Plan (FLIP), which comprised the nation's savings in the postal savings system, a favorite place for individuals to put their money in because their accounts were tax exempt.  FLIP thus amassed the savings four times the size of the world's largest commercial bank.  It became a powerful policy tool which MITI used to provide low-cost capital to industries it favored for long term growth.  The Ministry of Finance was ensuring the availability of capital.  It put restrictions on the inflow or outflow of capital.  It could ration and guide the flow of capital to large firms in industries such as steel, shipbuilding, automobiles, electronics and chemicals that were adopting new technology and were central to increasing productivity and exports.  They also used tariffs, direct and indirect subsidies to key industries, for development. (Pyle, 247-48) Where else does the money come from for MITI and the Ministry of Finance? Another important reason to explain the money for economic growth, besides the small percentage of Japan's GDP on military spending (1%), has been the minimum the government spent on welfare.  Instead of building a welfare state, the government has encouraged the Japanese to become a welfare society--through total employment, in order to reduce or eliminate the need for the state to spend on unemployment benefits.  Although retirement pension did exist for some workers in large companies, it was primarily the result of contributions of the company and the workers, and state contribution was minimal.  Again, like unemployment benefits, pensions were paid out by individual employees and their companies on a 50/50 matching basis. Unlike the U.S. social security system, the Japanese state was involved in the process only in entrusting the money from both sides to a designated company for investment and payment upon the employees' retirement based on an agreed upon sum of annuity at the beginning of the employees' employment. This system also encouraged employees to stay in the same company for life in order to get the amount of pension promised at the beginning. The money the Japanese state saved from public spending was invested in the economy in the form of liberal bank loans from the Bank of Japan to the citibanks and other regional banks that boosted competition and technological innovations. (Gao, 2001) According to John Dower, the Japanese bureaucratic control of economy through the many banks could trace its origin again to the war.  Before 1927, there were about 1,400 ordinary commercial banks in Japan.  That number steadily dropped so that by 1945, by mergers and absorptions, it was 61.  And there has been little change since.  The so called "city banks" which are really national banks, that stand at the hub of the postwar enterprise groups were in most instances greatly strengthened by critical legislation introduced between 1942 and 1944, which designated a certain number of "authorized financial institutions" to receive special support from the government and Bank of Japan in providing the great bulk of loans to over 600 major producers of strategic war materials.  Thus, in 1931 the ratio of direct (equity, meaning stocks issued to the public or to some other private companies) to indirect (bank loan) financing of industry was roughly 9:1.  By 1935, it was 7:3, and by 1945, as in the mid 1960s, it was 1:9 (meaning for every dollar a company got from issuing tocks, it got nine dollars from bank loans). (Dower,1992, pp.57-58) After the war, because of indirect U.S. rule during the American occupation, the Japanese bureaucratic structure remained largely intact, and the Japanese government used some major banks to issue loans and direct economic development. B. Steps to avoid competition: monopolies (zaibatsu) and the Keiretsu During the American occupation, one of the decisions MacArthur made to liberalize Japan was to abolish the monopolies (zaibatsu).  Because of the onset of the Cold War and the Korean War, the anti-monopoly stance was not upheld by the Americans to give the Japanese businesses a chance to compete more aggressively internationally.  This opportunity was seized upon by the Japanese government.  On Sept.1, 1953, the Diet amended the Anti-Monopoly Law so as to relax the Occupation-imposed restrictions on cartels, interlocking directorates, and mergers.  To maximize the efficient use of resources, MITI preferred to have competition limited to a small number of very large corporations.  The Fair Trade Commission's authority to prevent restraint of trade was constantly under attack from MITI.  In one of the better documented cases of collusive behavior that resulted from the changed rules, six Japanese firms manufacturing televisions joined forces, forming a market stabilization group in 1956 to control the domestic price of televisions. They maintained a high price level in the domestic market while government tariff policy kept the market closed to foreign producers.  With high profit margins and an ensured market at home, the industry turned to exports, especially to the US market.  Through below-cost exports to the US market, the Japanese firms were able to drive most of their US competitors out of business.  The Japanese government spurred and shaped the development of the television industry through preferential credit allocation via large banks, lax antitrust enforcement, condoning of de facto recession cartels, MITI guided investment coordination, and various forms of non-tariff barriers. (Pyle, 248) Besides sustaining monopolies to some extent, the Japanese government also condoned the building of a more flexible business alliance of different companies, either horizontally or vertically, called the keiretsu.  Six great enterprise groups--Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Sumitomo, Fuyo, Dai-ichi Kangyo, and Sanwa--were organized horizontally.  That is, each "horizontal keiretsu" comprised several dozen members including a main bank, large financial institutions, the largest manufacturing firms, and a large general trading company.  Within each group, members held each other's shares.  They had interlocking directorates and engaged in intragroup financing and joint R&D ventures.  These horizontal keiretsu helped to provide long-term stability, efficiency, reduced risk, and mutual support.  There were also giant vertical keiretsu organized in the automobile, electronic, and other industries (Nissan, Toyota, Hitachi, Matsushita, Sony, etc.).  They served to organize huge numbers of subcontractors and suppliers of services.  The vertical keiretsu provided efficient, long term reciprocal benefits for a parent company and its suppliers, including coordination of planning and investment, sharing of technology and information, control of quality and delivery, and flexibility throughout the business cycles. Finally, the distribution keiretsu allowed manufacturers to control the mass marketing of products.  These networks allowed manufacturers to prevent price competition among retailers, to maintain high profit margins in the domestic market, and so to permit cutthroat competition in the international market.  In other words, they become an effective means to force Japanese consumers to subsidize the international competitiveness of large manufacturing firms.(Pyle, 250) The following is an example of a keiretsu: Top ten companies owned by Mitsubishi Bank                                                                        per cent of shares Source: Hiroshi Okumura.  1975.  Hojin Shibonshugi no kozo (The structure of cooperative capitalism.)  Tokyo: Nihon Hyoronsha.  From Bai Gao, Japan's Economic Dilemma: The Institutional Origins of Prosperity and Stagnation.  New York & Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001, p.94.|||

