The best science fiction books for April aren’t messing around. If you’re a reader who hopes for truly otherworldly aesthetics in science fiction books, the selected titles this month won’t disappoint because these books aren’t doing anything half-way. There’s a throwback pulpy sci-fi title that goes full-pulp, a dystopian novel from a popular author that turns that genre on its head, the backstory of a popular Star Wars character revealed, and witches battling tech start-ups. In addition to all of this, there are also steampunk tales from alternate worlds and a doomsday scenario that sounds a little too terrifying to be fiction. Very few books on this month’s list are part of a series, so readers normally intimidated by jumping into an ongoing world have nothing to fear. On to the list!

An intentionally pulpy throwback title, hard SF author Allen Steele brings back a “gee-wiz quality” to contemporary space fiction. Are you missing novels with characters named “Captain Future?” Here’s the book for you.

Ever since the animated series Star Wars Rebels brought the beloved blue-skinned baddie — Grand Admiral Thrawn — back into the official Star Wars canon, fans have been trying to reconcile his old backstory from Heir to the Empire with his new one. This month, the author who created Thrawn will do just that.

The paperback release of the debut novel from one of the most powerful voices in contemporary science fiction is a cause for celebration. Charlie Jane Anders may have made her mark as a blogger and editor at io9, but her short fiction made her a sci-fi visionary. Her debut novel — all about witches and tech start-ups of the future — signals her permanent arrival as a serious master of the genre.

Editor of Lightspeed and brilliant anthologist John Joseph Adams offers his latest themed collection of stories. This time, he recruited various sci-fi writers to give original spins on short stories set in faraway galaxies. If the Chris Foss-esque cover art reminds you of Guardians of the Galaxy, it should.

A contemporary Noah’s Ark will save survivors of a destroyed future version of London. But who will get on the ship and who won’t? This powerful debut dark future by novelist and historian Antonia Honeywell tackles sci-fi in the tradition of Atwood and Jose Saramago.

The celebrated co-editor of Boing Boing has called his first adult novel in nearly eight years an “optimistic dystopia.” In the future, not every single person will become a selfish monster, and some of them might be able to walk away from the terribleness of a capitalist system. The novel is also hilarious.

This steampunk alternate history novella offers a version of an ascendant Jamaica in another dimension. Follow the adventures of heroic secret agent Desmond Coke in a world that might have been.|||

The best sci-fi books in April include a popular 'Star Wars' character, someone named "Captain Future," and great work from Cory Doctorow and Charlie ...