In order to keep a ‘TrackUp’ and maintain up with the seller credibility – ‘Partner Performance Expectations’ are methodologies of ensuring an excellent customer experience and exuberance. Thus it is advisable for the Sellers to adhere with the performance targets established by Walmart Marketplace.

 Further, In certain scenarios, if a particular Sellers fail to meet these targets, they risk losing selling privileges and account suspension.

The Service Level Agreements (SLAs) as outlined by Walmart Marketplace Retailer Agreement. These Performance Metrics have to include:

⦁ Assisting and rendering quality post-transaction support to customer (that includes customer questions, refunds,  cancellations request, email and other query) thus delivering the best customer experience.

Walmart incorporates and brings into practice, various methods to review post-transaction such as Partner feedback from Walmart customers.

Now, in order to check up with performance of seller, ‘Walmart’s Partner Performance team’ regularly reviews and monitors the performance of all Sellers and notifies them when they are off-target.

Note: As a Seller, its your sole responsibility for maintaining the correct contact information with Walmart. Please make sure the Customer Service email and phone number listed in your Partner Profile Settings in Seller Center are correct. If any business contacts have changed, please file a case with Partner Support with the new contact’s name, phone number and email address.

⦁ Ship and deliver orders on time by making sure all the customer orders are shipped by the ESD (Expected Ship  Date) and delivered by the EDD ( Expected Deliver Date)

⦁ Monitor your performance on your Seller Scorecard ( on Walmart Seller Pannel)

Seller Scorecard help you to track record your performance on (Walmart.com) relating to both aspects i.e. (‘Fulfilment’ and ‘Delivery’ metrics) as well as on (‘Ratings’ and ‘Reviews’). Follow the procedure to access your Seller Scorecard:

⦁ Under the INSIGHTS & ANALYTICS section in the left menu, click Seller Scorecard.

⦁ Scroll through the page to view different metrics and download details on:

This is the example of summary score calculated on monthly overview and color-codes are also highlighted on performance so one can easily see if its meeting the targets. Ideally, all three metrics should be green. One can choose to see previous months by selecting a recent month next to Viewing at the top.

A time to time continuous monitoring from ‘Walmart’s Partner Performance team’ also offers an equal opportunity to seller on their score improvement. As already quoted the best means to enhance and credit with good score is by offering excellent services, such as by avoiding delay in shipping, considering and maintaining appropriate delivery standards and time.

Further, its also advisable that you should not approach ‘Walmart’s Partner Performance team’ who keeps on monitoring your performance on score improvement or any sort of adjustments although you might be performing as expected. Also neither you should communicate if you failed to meet your Performance Expectations.

But, in certain case if the performance drop has been significant due to massive problem and also that was not because of your fault 9such as in case of API’s update, mass cancellation due to pricing issue, inability to deliver at EDD etc..) the Walmart Performance Team can be approached via filing a case under ‘Partner Support ‘ option, mentioning one of the following reason:

⦁ Proof of your claim that you are not at fault (e.g., a case number regarding an API failure where it was validated that you were not at fault, a list of the warehouse addresses that have been impacted by a storm)

Post verification of the claim, no further action will be taken regarding your Seller Score Card.

 Kindly note, your Seller Scorecard will still display the lower performance rates, until they improve over time.

Further, If you still experience this type of problem but your performance is still within the targets, you do not need to contact Partner Support rather need to open a case under ‘Partner Support’.

Finally, if still you do not receive a response within 3 business days, please send an email to mponboard@walmart.com with the case number in the subject line.|||

