Neural Style Transfer is the process in which content of an image and style of another image are combined together to create a new image. Prisma uses style transfer to transform your photos into works of art using style of famous artists.

In this blog post, we will learn how to implement it and reproduce these amazing results. We will use Keras with Tensorflow backend to achieve this.

Before we do style transfer, we need to recreate the content image from a random image.

We will use the VGG16 model(pre-trained on Imagenet) to get the activations necessary to calculate the target activations. In the VGG16 model, the authors subtracted the mean of each channel(R, G, B) from the image and the channel format used was BGR instead of RGB. The mean of each channel has been provided by the authors of the VGG16 model.

Hence, we need to do the necessary preprocessing of the image before we use the model.

To plot the image again, we need to deprocess it.

Let’s convert the image into (batch_size, height, width, channels) so we can feed it to the CNN.

Now, we will grab the activation from block2_conv2 by following Johnson et al.

After creating the model, we need to predict the target activations.

We will define an Evaluator class to access the loss function and gradients of a function because that is what scikit-learn’s optimizers require.

Let’s calculate the mean squared error of the layer activation and the target activation. This will be our loss function which the optimizer will optimize so that our random image looks more like the content image.

L-BFGS is the optimizer that we will use, since it optimizes much faster than gradient descent. You can read about it here. We will save the image after each iteration, so we can see how the random image optimizes to the original image.

Its time to train the random image.

This is how the image changes per iteration to approach the content image.

Let’s initialize the style image and do the necessary preprocessing.

We will follow all the steps exactly as we did in the content step but with a slight change. We will use the activation of 5 layers to recreate the style. We will grab the activations from block1_conv2, block2_conv2, block3_conv3, block4_conv3, block5_conv3 by following Johnson et al.

After initializing the model, we will get the activations of all the layers.

Instead of using mse like we did in recreating the content, we will use gram matrix(product of the matrix and its transpose) of their channels before we apply mse. Gram matrix shows how the convolutional layers correlate and completely removes all the location information. Hence, matching the gram matrix of the channels can only match some of the texture information and not the location information.

Let’s fit the random image to recreate our style.

This is how the style is recreated after each iteration.

Now to the most exciting part, let’s merge both the processes and create the prisma like photo. For this, we just need to merge the content loss and the style loss. We will also assign weights so as to decide how much content and loss we want in the combined image. You can play around with how much content or style you want. You might get more aesthetically pleasing images.

Fitting the random image to get our final image.

This is the result of the style transfer. The results are pretty good. 

 



I highly encourage you to experiment with the changing the layers used to recreate the content and the style and the amount of content and style you want. For example, I used block4_conv2 and included 1/5th of the original content. I also changed the style weights to [0.05,0.15,0.2,0.3,0.3]. The result I got after doing this is much more awesome according to me.



 The code for the style transfer lives here.

If you have any questions, you can ask them in the comments and I will try my best to answer them.|||

Neural Style Transfer is the process in which content of an image and style of another image are combined together to create a new image. Prisma uses style transfer to transform your photos into works of art using style of famous artists.