As technology moves forward, finding the right telecom field engineer is harder than ever, however, the gig economy can help in a way that many companies haven’t considered; finding the right Telecom specialists to get all that the new technology has to offer flowing freely.

The Internet of Things is not just a new catch phrase. Data is being collected at a pace, unlike anything the world has seen yet. As it becomes cheaper to have “things” collecting data on just about everything people do, data mining and analytics is becoming big business. Many are making huge strides to get fluent in this technology. Web developers, database architects and all sorts of programming specializations are becoming popular fields of study. However, before all this data can be utilized, the infrastructure underneath it needs to be properly created.

This is where a huge gap lies in the path to the future. Many telecom companies find themselves trapped in a strange place of having lots of back end developers and site designers, yet having no one who knows or wants to hook it all up. The days of engineers who want to install equipment and climb poles are gone, but there is still a need for these kinds of infrastructure jobs.

Full-time Network engineers are a dying breed. Many companies find that things are moving far too fast for someone to just “rely” on a degree they earned many years ago. Additionally, stagnation of skillset eventually sets in among those who grow comfortable and complacent in a full-time position. Many companies are discovering their once dynamic workforce has been depleted to a group of “button pushers” who can’t deploy the latest cutting edge solutions.

Even new graduates find that the aspects of their college education that were meant to provide hands-on training are already obsolete or never actually worked in the real world. The desire to learn and keep growing is what drives anyone on in the IT field. The online freelancing economy lends itself to this type of attitude. In the end, both the workers and the clients win by keeping each other viable.

Telecom companies should think dynamically as many are discovering that they do not have the right in-house skillset to address evolving industry developments. The on-demand marketplace for telecom field engineers can help resolve this issue.

Getting experienced professionals is paramount. So, it is getting the right person for the job. There are many on-demand portals out there specifically designed for programmers, graphic designers and other software-based skills. However, FieldEngineer.com found in 2015 takes this type of economy into the world of talented telecom field engineers.

While telecom field engineer works can be found on other general freelancers websites, the possibility of getting an underqualified person based on exaggerated reviews or even being taken advantage of are much higher.

FieldEngineer.com employs a rigorous screening process including live interviews, background checks, and even test projects before someone can even apply for jobs on the site. It may seem like a lot of work, but this guarantees companies will get the right person for the job. The void that currently exists for finding telecom professionals can be filled thanks to the on-demand sites like FieldEngineer.com.

What do you think about the flexibility and variety of the “gig economy” and how telecom companies can benefit from the global supply of talent? Let me know in the comments below.|||

