The image above is a choropleth detailing the distribution of incubators, coworking spaces, and other tech hubs across the African continent as submitted in a GSMA report recently. The image indicates there are 16 incubators in Ghana. So far, we have found 18 of them, and outlined them on the map viewer inserted below. Out of the 18, 1is based in Ho, 3 in Kumasi, and the rest in Accra.

Here are some of the incubators and coworking spaces in the country.

ImpactHub Accra is part of the ImpactHub  global network. The hub, with its mission to support growth in the country through an innovative ecosystem has cemented its place as one of the core arms of the local tech community. Since joining the ImpactHub Global Network through the Africa Seed Program, the hub has received a good boost and grown from a coworking space to among other things, provide entrepreneurs access to capital as well as organising capacity building programs for them.’

iSpace was created by some of the people involved with the local tech community. Primarily an incubator, they provide a variety of programs to target specific areas of the local tech ecosystem. Example: Unlocking Women and Technology is a program designed to equip women with the power of technology to innovate in their fields of interest.

Find out more here.

Kumasi Hive is a hardware and IoT centric hub focused on providing solutions to local challenges but that does not mean there is no room for software, far from it. The hub runs a variety of programs such as Rapid Prototyping of Ideas, where makers (as they so fondly call themselves) are taken through ideation processes and prototyping techniques.

Mobile Web Ghana was created in 2010 as part of the World Wide Web Foundation’s Mobile Entrepreneurs in Africa program. Their mandate is to improve the overall mobile experience of users by grooming a new breed of entrepreneurs, ones who are able to not only find innovative ways to solve problem but also make those solutions accessible via mobile devices.

Goba Hub describes itself as a professional workspace for innovative individuals to network and share ideas.

Located in Adum, a buzzing part of the capital city in the Ashanti Region, hapaSpace provides a conducive environment to support entrepreneurs, startups, and freelancers within Kumasi. They have fully furnished workspaces with options to suit your business needs and just like any other tech space, there is always to opportunity to network and meet some great people.

“Workshed was created startup for entrepreneurs, freelancers and independent professionals because we believe startup entrepreneurs and small teams should have the opportunity to work in a decent environment that promotes efficiency” – Richard Bempong, Co-founder at Workshed.

Workshed describes itself as a dynamic coworking community of startup founders, freelancers, entrepreneurs, and small teams who are working to build dreams.

Servled is a Y Combinator style company in that they provide early stage investment for businesses and startups. They also provide training in a variety of fields with the aim of equipping businesses with a rounded and robust human resource in terms of skill.

Meltwater Entrepreneurial School of Technology is perhaps a household name in the Ghanaian tech community and deservedly so. Founded in 2008, The nonprofit arm of The Meltwater Organization offers a fully sponsored twelve month program for a limited number of Entrepreneurs In Training (EiTs as they are so commonly called) who go through a rigorous selection process before being admitted into the school.

Regus is a more full featured professional office environment. Although they provide co-working spaces for individuals and companies alike, that is just one of the services they provide. There is a suite of options tailored to cater for the needs of the everyday professional.

Want an physical address for your business? They have got you covered. Perhaps you just a location for your team to meet a few times a week, you are still covered. Like the excitement and thrill created by all the activity in a co-working environment? Or maybe not. Either way, they have still got you covered.

Regus also offers its network of physical addresses to serve as branch locations for your company.

Outpost is a professional shared office space for entrepreneurs, freelancers, innovative individuals and small teams. Their services include private offices, shared office spaces, and virtual offices.

CitySpace Ghana describes itself as a real estate firm with a portfolio of properties but they also offer serviced spaces to individuals and small businesses alike.

Their suite of services give prospective customers a host of options. From virtual offices to dedicated spaces, they have got you covered.

Located in Ho, the capital city of the Volta Region, KK Hub is creating a budding community of innovators, entrepreneurs, and tech enthusiasts, and is the newest addition to coworking space family.

Their main targets are on businesses and individuals interested in the development and advancement of the Volta Region. Focus areas include but not limited to Tourism, Health & Sciences, Agribusinesses, Renewables & Climate, and Arts & Culture.

Does any of the above interest you? Then hop on the next available vehicle and head on to this beautiful capital city.

This article was co-authored with Claude Ayitey.|||

This post outlines all the active coworking spaces in Ghana. It covers both private and public, and startup and highly customized spaces.