So we have all heard the likes of ‘skipping breakfast is bad for you’ or breakfast is the most important meal of the day’.

Well it turns out that breakfast is a big player in how your day goes, how you feel, and the decisions you make.

Your body is a finely tuned machine that needs energy to get started at the beginning of your day. Press the start button and get your body functioning how it should be.

There are many benefits of eating the right breakfast and here are a few.

People think that skipping meals is a good way to lose weight. They find that skipping breakfast is the easiest as they just grab a coffee, get ready for work, and run out of the house.

If you eat breakfast then you are more likely to be able to control your weight. Skipping breakfast may seem like a good idea, but when you skip a meal, your body will feel extreme hunger at lunch time, encouraging you to eat more than you normally would.

As your hunger cues are high, you will more than likely make the wrong decision on what to have for lunch.

It keeps you healthy

Most breakfasts are full of nutrients, low in cholesterol, and high in vitamins. These are all important in keeping your body healthy.  Eating a healthy breakfast including various fruits, also keeps your body fighting disease.

If you consume a nutritious breakfast, it will keep your blood sugar levels stable meaning you are less prone to being diagnosed with diabetes or heart disease.

Breakfast literally means ‘Break the fast’. Your blood sugar levels drop while you are sleeping, your last meal was approximately 10-12 hours ago. To kickstart your metabolism, you need to make sure that you are consuming a healthy breakfast when you wake up.

Eating breakfast will get your body working properly, which can only be a good thing. Along with this your metabolism will be boosted, so you are less likely to gain weight.

If you skip breakfast, your energy stores will be even more depleted. It is time to stock these energy stores back up to enable you to complete your daily activities. Your muscles need more glycogen, to work properly. Without this you will feel week and tired.

Our lives are more hectic than ever, and you need to make sure that you can complete your days activities properly. Without good energy levels, how are you supposed to do this?

You will have better concentration

Concentration is key for me. If you lack concentration, you could make bad decisions and bump your car in the morning traffic, forget your kids lunches, or make the wrong decision at work.

Breakfast helps improve your concentration levels in the morning, this can only be a good thing as you don’t want to be walking round like a zombie all morning. Hunger also affects your mood. Surely you have heard of ‘Hangry’, a term used when you are bad tempered or irritable, as a result of hunger.

Overall, breakfast is not a meal you want to be skipping. In fact, you shouldn’t be skipping any meals at all. It is not a good way to lose weight, in fact it is the opposite.

Taking 10 minutes out of your morning routine is possible for us all. You will be grateful that you planned those 10 minutes in to your routine, as you will be more alert, be able to concentrate properly, have lots of energy, and you will also be able to control your weight better.

What can go wrong with eating breakfast?

If you skipped breakfast today, then make sure it is the last time and factor it in to your day!|||

Find out why you shouldn't skip breakfast. A healthy life is down to eating breakfast. It helps you lose weight, have energy, and be fuelled for your gym sessions.