What can I build? 

Anything! That is, anything travel focused. Build a site, mobile app, use hardware, anything your mind can think of. Your goal is to build something that has the potential to reinvent travel, you decide what form that takes.

How large can the teams be? 

 Teams can be as small as 1 individual or as large as 5 members.

What if I don’t have a team? 

 No problem. There will be many others who don’t either. We’ll help you guys form teams.

Who owns my project and IP? 

You do. You develop it, you own it.

I’m going solo. Can I connect with others to form a team before the event starts? 

Of course! You can either connect with others on our DevPost online forum or you can mingle during our happy hour/registration event.

What if I want to take my project further and launch it in the market? 

Awesome. We love it. We will support you in any way we can.

Where can I find information on Sabre Red Workspace, Widgets and The Decision Support Bar?

You can find more information about Sabre Red Workspace on the Innovation Hub and obtain information about the Decision Support Bar from Dev Studio.

Where can I find information on the Sabre Red Workspace SDK? 

Download the newest SDK here.

Where can I find more info on Sabre’s developer tools and resources?

Visit Sabre Dev Studio now and take a look at our API keys via Sabre Dev Studio now and take a look at our APIs, SDKs, Demo Gallery and sample code in advance.

Can I start developing my app beforehand? 

The actual coding has to be done during the 24 hours. You can start brainstorming, designing, creating wireframes – but you have to start the coding at the beginning of the hackathon. We want to make sure it’s fair for everyone.

Do you supply computers or do we need to bring our own? 

You need to bring your own computer, we will not provide computers or monitors.

Can I attend just to watch the event? 

No, you need to join or be part of a team who is building something during the hackathon. Unfortunately, we do not have enough space for attendees outside of those who are directly participating in the event. If you are interested in coming onboard as a sponsor, contact us to learn more.

Does my registration for HackTTX work for TTX? 

No, TTX is a separate event. You will need to register separately to attend TTX.

Have other questions? 

Contact us at chris.apaliski@sabre.com.|||

