Why Data Analysis and Interactivity Belong Together

From the beginning, the developers of bqplot put a priority on interactivity. As Srinivas puts it: ”Some plotting libraries try to optimize on the number of points to be displayed. We optimize on the interactivity of each point.”

Each attribute in a chart made with bqplot is actually an interactive widget that can be bound to a Python function. That means that users who are playing with the plots can use changes in those elements to trigger other functions, which can adjust the plot in a myriad of ways. The widgets also enable the creation of full-scale web apps using bqplot.

As data visualization becomes a more significant element of data analysis, being able to easily interact with large quantities of data becomes more important. Using bqplot, someone working with multiple variables can plot their data easily, and then click on the outliers to get more information. While the basic plotting in the electoral vote map above provided simple tooltips that only display vote counts, bqplot’s functionality can be used to provide more in-depth information about a particular point, such as a radar chart of all the inputs behind it.

Researchers can also use bqplot to select certain variables visually, and understand the effect of including and excluding them. “We have a lot more data now,” says Sunkara. ”You want to understand your data a little better before you throw it into a black box and expect an algorithm to work.”

Bloomberg published the first version of bqplot in October 2015, and the plotting library already has its share of fans. Among them are Bloomberg researchers who use it to prototype new functions; biologists and physicists working with complicated data sets; and, because bqplot makes it uniquely easy to understand how a function responds to a change in input, university professors who use it as an interactive tool for teaching.

”It lowers a barrier of entry,” shares Dhruv, “because the plotting is easy to do. You can be mainly concerned with the particular scientific function you’re trying to explore and understand.” To most researchers and data scientists, that sounds like a lot more fun than learning JavaScript.|||

bqplot is a Python plotting library in which every plot attribute is an interactive widget. Create complex and feature rich GUIs with a few lines of code.