Push notification content is challenging to write — like really, really challenging. A few reasons:

And even if your audience does open the push notification, how many will actually take the desired action? How many of them will uninstall? The pressure is enough to make you crumble.

That the amount of messaging advice out there is overwhelming doesn’t help. A quick search for “push notification best practices” yields 915,000 results. Talk about overkill.

We decided to make things a little easier for you. We analyzed more than 2.6 billion push notifications to unearth the definitive list of push notification power words, the most comprehensive text analysis ever performed for mobile apps.

If you want to skip right to the juicy data, you can download the push notification text report here.

Before we get started, here’s a cheat sheet for other helpful resources related to push notification engagement. Go ahead and bookmark these for later reference.

We analyzed the 50 most-used words inside push notifications. Behold these takeaways.

What is a push notification power word? A word that consistently results in high open rates, regardless of other push notification content. Not only will power words help improve your creativity and amplify your app engagement, but they will also increase your open rates, retention, and revenue.

That said, every vertical, e.g, retail or transportation, has a unique set of power words best suited to user engagement. Below, we detail our learnings and the words each vertical uses to achieve high push notification open rates.

Now that you have all these great learnings under your belt, you need a handy visual to inspire your next messaging campaign. Here are 120 words that will give your push notification content — and engagement — a big boost.

For more insights that will increase your push notification engagement, download the full report, Push Notification Power Words.|||

Push notification content is challenging to write — like really, really challenging. Read our report to find the best performing push notification words.