This week marks the last week of work in the IT field for visionary and founder, Bill Gates. I’m sure many of you are reading stories all over the Internet about Bill, I thought I’d share a story about Bill as well. I joined Microsoft because I was a huge fan of their products, even back to when I was in finishing up my degree in 1999. I was fortunate enough to finish my MCSE certification while in college , as I figured it’d help me be a better IT Pro. While working for a small computer firm in tiny little Franksville, WI….I had the opportunity to attend the Spring COMDEX in Chicago in 1998. Bill Gates was keynoting and I arrived nearly 2 hours before the doors open to be sure I got a front row seat. I mean, this is Bill Gates….the self-made billionaire who not only revolutionized our industry, but also proved the beauty of the American free enterprise system! As I sat in the front row, I thought, “I should have brought a resume to slide up to him on the stage.” That would have probably either got me an interview, or dragged out by my hair.

After working here at Microsoft (how I got here is another story)…for a few years…I was able to attend our Annual Company Meeting held at Safeco Field. After the meeting, we all walked over to the Product Fair, where the Product Groups show off all of their cool beta technology along with tons of food. I was walking by the “Windows 2000 Debugger Tools” booth (snooze…), when I bumped into a guy who was visiting the booth. It was Bill. Thank goodness I didn’t have a plate full of cheese, as I often do at these things. How many CEOs of multi-billion dollar companies care about Symbols and Kernel Debuggers? That’s right, we got the only one.

You may or may not know that Bill has long been a champion for getting things right at Microsoft and he has one of the most critical eyes when it comes to really communicating his (and often your) frustrations to the all-powerful Microsoft Vice Presidents. Here’s an excerpt from an email in 2003 that Bill sent to Jim Allchin, in which he passes on the pain that all of us have felt with regard to the Microsoft download experience. We feel your pain! (BTW, this is generally the kind of letter you like to receive from your CEO, concerning your project):

From: Bill Gates 

Sent: Wednesday, January 15, 2003 10:05 AM 

To: Jim Allchin 

Cc: Chris Jones (WINDOWS); Bharat Shah (NT); Joe Peterson; Will Poole; Brian Valentine; Anoop Gupta (RESEARCH) 

Subject: Windows Usability Systematic degradation flame I am quite disappointed at how Windows Usability has been going backwards and the program management groups don’t drive usability issues. Let me give you my experience from yesterday. I decided to download (Moviemaker) and buy the Digital Plus pack … so I went to Microsoft.com. They have a download place so I went there. The first 5 times I used the site it timed out while trying to bring up the download page. Then after an 8 second delay I got it to come up. This site is so slow it is unusable. It wasn’t in the top 5 so I expanded the other 45. These 45 names are totally confusing. These names make stuff like: C:\Documents and Settings\billg\My Documents\My Pictures seem clear. They are not filtered by the system … and so many of the things are strange. I tried scoping to Media stuff. Still no moviemaker. I typed in movie. Nothing. I typed in movie maker. Nothing. So I gave up and sent mail to Amir saying – where is this Moviemaker download? Does it exist? So they told me that using the download page to download something was not something they anticipated. They told me to go to the main page search button and type movie maker (not moviemaker!). I tried that. The site was pathetically slow but after 6 seconds of waiting up it came. I thought for sure now I would see a button to just go do the download. In fact it is more like a puzzle that you get to solve. It told me to go to Windows Update and do a bunch of incantations. This struck me as completely odd. Why should I have to go somewhere else and do a scan to download moviemaker? So I went to Windows update. Windows Update decides I need to download a bunch of controls. (Not) just once but multiple times where I get to see weird dialog boxes. Doesn’t Windows update know some key to talk to Windows? Then I did the scan. This took quite some time and I was told it was critical for me to download 17megs of stuff. This is after I was told we were doing delta patches to things but instead just to get 6 things that are labeled in the SCARIEST possible way I had to download 17meg. So I did the download. That part was fast. Then it wanted to do an install. This took 6 minutes and the machine was so slow I couldn’t use it for anything else during this time. What the heck is going on during those 6 minutes? That is crazy. This is after the download was finished. Then it told me to reboot my machine. Why should I do that? I reboot every night — why should I reboot at that time? So I did the reboot because it INSISTED on it. Of course that meant completely getting rid of all my Outlook state. So I got back up and running and went to Windows Update again. I forgot why I was in Windows Update at all since all I wanted was to get Moviemaker. So I went back to Microsoft.com and looked at the instructions. I have to click on a folder called WindowsXP. Why should I do that? Windows Update knows I am on Windows XP. What does it mean to have to click on that folder? So I get a bunch of confusing stuff but sure enough one of them is Moviemaker. So I do the download. The download is fast but the Install takes many minutes. Amazing how slow this thing is. At some point I get told I need to go get Windows Media Series 9 to download. So I decide I will go do that. This time I get dialogs saying things like "Open" or "Save". No guidance in the instructions which to do. I have no clue which to do. The download is fast and the install takes 7 minutes for this thing. So now I think I am going to have Moviemaker. I go to my add/remove programs place to make sure it is there. What is there? The following garbage is there. Microsoft Autoupdate Exclusive test package, Microsoft Autoupdate Reboot test package, Microsoft Autoupdate testpackage1. Microsoft AUtoupdate testpackage2, Microsoft Autoupdate Test package3. Someone decided to trash the one part of Windows that was usable? The file system is no longer usable. The registry is not usable. This program listing was one sane place but now it is all crapped up. But that is just the start of the crap. Later I have listed things like Windows XP Hotfix see Q329048 for more information. What is Q329048? Why are these series of patches listed here? Some of the patches just things like Q810655 instead of saying see Q329048 for more information. Moviemaker is just not there at all. So I give up on Moviemaker and decide to download the Digital Plus Package. I get told I need to go enter a bunch of information about myself. I enter it all in and because it decides I have mistyped something I have to try again. Of course it has cleared out most of what I typed. I try (typing) the right stuff in 5 times and it just keeps clearing things out for me to type them in again. So after more than an hour of craziness and making my programs list garbage and being scared and seeing that Microsoft.com is a terrible website I haven’t run Moviemaker and I haven’t got the plus package. The lack of attention to usability represented by these experiences blows my mind. I thought we had reached a low with Windows Network places or the messages I get when I try to use 802.11. (don’t you just love that root certificate message?) When I really get to use the stuff I am sure I will have more feedback.

Thanks for being the #1 Champion of our customer’s concerns and for being the man who pushes all of us to excel.

Thanks for taking a chance on a former Airborne Ranger who had only limited technical depth.

We’ll miss you immensely and wish you success as you continue in your efforts with the Gates Foundation.|||

