Shopping for whey protein powders can be overwhelming, since the market is saturated with a bunch of different options, each one claiming to be the "best" supplement in the market. At FastFit we decided to help you on what to look for when shopping for the best possible choice.

What is whey protein good for?

Whey protein has one of the highest sources of Branched Chain Amino Acids (BCAA) which consists of three amino acids leucine, isoleucine and valine. BCAAs are great for reducing fatigue, minimizing muscle soreness, accelerating recovery time, and they improve the use of fat for energy.

Whey protein is also highly used do the fact that the digestion rate is one of the highest compared to other sources of protein. Whey can be digested within 30 minutes of taking it, giving your muscles and body the nutrients it needs.

What to look for

﻿Before you go off and purchase a whey protein product based on a friend's recommendation or from a Facebook ad you saw, there are a few things you need to look out for. There are way too many brands out there that cut corners when it comes to their powder which usually means there is a lot more fat and carbohydrates versus protein content.

Take a look at the nutrition facts label and read the ingredients list. The top whey protein powders out there always contain either whey protein isolate or whey protein hydrolysate (hydrolyzed whey protein).

Whey protein isolate is the purest form of protein that you can get, with some products being 90% protein!

Whey protein hydrolysate means that high quality whey protein has been predigested into smaller fragments, which results in much faster digestion rates than whey protein isolate.

There are many brands out there that use whey protein concentrate, which is a less filtered version of whey protein. While this option may be cheaper, it isn't the best route to take when it comes to recovering your muscles and body to reach your goals.

You have found a possible choice, great! Now it's time to calculate the percent of protein per serving. If you are looking for a high quality product, then you should look for one that has 80% or more protein content. Calculating is fairly straight forward:

grams of protein ÷ serving size in grams = % of protein content per scoop

We hope this has helped you in finding the very best whey protein product for your fitness needs. ﻿We understand that protein can be expensive, so before you throw your hard earned money at a random product, make sure to look at the ingredients, and protein content.

Check us out on Instagram and Facebook!|||

Shopping for whey protein powders can be overwhelming, since the market is saturated with a bunch of different options, each one claiming to be the "best" suppl