Fancy being a heavy worker but don’t like getting your hands dirty? Nordstrom’s Barracuda Straight Leg Jeans is just the thing you need. This ‘unique piece of fashion’ will make you look like someone straight from the construction area, but only if you don’t mind spending $425 on a pair of muddied jeans.

Yes! You heard that right, you don’t even have to do the inconvenient “work” part, Nordstrom is determined to turn you into a heavy worker for $425 and free shipping. Who knew dirty jeans can be worth a fortune!

Here goes the original product description on Nordstrom’s website:

“Heavily distressed medium-blue denim jeans in a comfortable straight-leg fit embody rugged, Americana workwear that’s seen some hard-working action with a crackled, caked-on muddy coating that shows you’re not afraid to get down and dirty.”

Nordstrom was heavily criticized by users on social media sites like Twitter, to the extent of calling this a proof of America’s war on work. It’s ironic that the jeans make the wearer look like a person with a heavy-duty physical job which seems unlikely with that heavy price tag.

Also, considering this is straight-fit jeans which is an artifact from the 90s and long gone from the streets, Nordstrom shouldn’t have retrieved it from the coffin it was locked in by the designers. Tapered and skinny fit are the choice of most buyers now, which makes it even harder to sell the mud-stained jeans. However, it’s too soon to predict if this product will actually take off considering the unpredictable nature of fashion world.

We dug deep into the product catalogs to get some insights about the inventory of Nordstrom and here are the findings.

The inventory for jeans comes to 2341 products which is on the lower side compared to the other products in their catalog.

The average price of a pair of jeans on Nordstrom is $170.6 and this is excluding the infamous fake mud jeans. You can check out the data visualization that we recently did on some of the most popular fashion retailers like GAP, Old Navy and H&M, including Nordstrom which has some interesting insights from the world of fashion.

It is fascinating that a pair of jeans that look dirty is priced double that of perfectly functional and normal jeans. Irrespective of whether the fake muddy jeans sell and turn into a fashion statement in the coming days, Nordstrom has garnered some publicity. If ‘any publicity is good publicity’ is to be believed, they are doing it right. However, would you buy the fake mud jeans?|||

Fashion retailer Nordstrom was recently in a controversy after they listed fake muddy jeans on their website which had a heavy price tag of $425.