

 Hi Fans!

 E-waste is the fastest growing waste stream on the planet. With the proliferation of devices and billions more expected to be generated by mobility/cloud/Internet-of-Things trends, it is clear this is a challenge that will continue for many years to come.

 

 In our commitment to ensure a greener tomorrow, Mi is offering an e-waste take-back & recycling service that adheres to the E-waste (Management) Rules, 2016 issued by the Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of India. To act responsibly towards the environment, we have pledged to recycle electronic items, such as mobiles, power banks, speakers, headphones, etc. that are intended to be discarded as waste by the consumer. When an electronic product reaches the end of its life, we take it back and recycle it. For this program, e-waste management solutions are currently offered by India.

 

 Kindly note that this program is only for which are no longer operational. This program doesn't promise any support for damaged/faulty products whether it is repairs or exchanges. 

 

 1. How does the take back program work? 

 Simply fill out this e-waste recycling form - after logging into your Mi Account. Our Authorised e-waste recycler will contact you to pick up e-waste from your location, or you can also drop e-waste at any of our service centers. Please connect with our customer care for any queries.

 

 

 Under E-Waste Management & Handling Rules 2016, we will accept and recycle all mobile phones, power banks, chargers, speakers, headphones, and other electronic products sold in India, irrespective of their brand. It is advisable that you secure and erase all the data in your electronic devices before depositing them with us. 

 

 You can go through this video to know more about how recycling takes place. 

 

 

 4. Do I have to pay to get my electronics recycled? 

 Consumers do not have to pay any fee to recycle products sold in India. 

 

 5. Can I get my damaged/faulty goods replaced under this program? 

 No. This program is only for End of life products which are no longer functional. This program doesn't support any exchanges or repairs. 

 

 6. Will I get any monetary benefit/discount by giving back the unused products in this takeback and recycling program? 

 A discount coupon worth for every pickup request will be added to your registered Mi account once your phone(s) is successfully picked up. Coupon will be applicable on minimum purchase value of ₹ 1000 only on accessories. Please note that coupons will only be given to customers who provide complete phone units only, not spare parts or other products. Customers will get coupons within 14 days of the pickup date. Mi India shall reserve the right to issue or reject the coupons at its sole discretion.

 

 7. How long does it take to collect my products? 

 Mi India’s authorized recycler will contact you within 7 days. Products will be collected within 15 days of raising the pickup request. Collection time will vary depending on your Area. If products are not collected within 15 days, please contact our Authorized e-waste recycler on email at 

 

 Join us as we venture to save the environment! 

 

 

|||

Participate in Mi India End of Life Product Take back and Recycling Program ,Mi Community - Xiaomi