My days in Orgzit have been more organized than the ones without it. So it didn’t come to me as a surprise when Nitin, co-founder of Orgzit, told me to follow a process to go ahead with the video. I had seen it work, and I knew it would work just the same this time too.

#Step 1 — Create a Storyboard which answers these two primary questions:

Orgzit is a horizontal product. It can be used for a number of use cases. So wrapping your head around a target audience of 20+ million and weaving a storyboard for the same was quite unnerving. So Nitin and I started brainstorming ideas as to how can we show Orgzit’s usefulness and flexibility in a timed video. After 2 hours, we picked up two use cases — Project Management & Asset Tracking as Orgzit’s base ideas to ‘share & show’ in the video.

To sum it up, here’s how you can look at it:

· Talk about existing methods to solve it

· Talk about how does your product do it better

· Talk about your existing customers (if any)

And your story board is ready!

Key Takeaway: Your storyboard is like the outline that lays the foundation and becomes your guide for the video script. Essentially, it is the raw version of your Video Script.

Your video script is a word-to-word breakdown of the storyboard that you have created. It is more refined than the storyboard and contains the pitch for your voice over.

At first, I started scribbling and pondering over which words will have more impact and relate to the viewer. Yet again, I realized that it was not about the words. The crux was in showing the content, not reading it. So I laid some thumb rules to be followed while writing the script:

And then began the real task — refining the plotted curve; Trimming the jagged edges and smoothing the curves.

Since Orgzit aimed towards engaging small and medium business owners refine their business processes and help them conserve time and increase productivity, I sort of high-fived myself when I completed the video scripting task in a self-budgeted time i.e. 15 hours.

Key Takeaway: Video Script will need multiple revisions. Take a deep breath every time you send that paper ball rolling into the dustbin.

The very first REAL hurdle you will face is while choosing an efficient audio recording tool capable of removing the background noise and amplifying the audio to soothing audible levels.

Note: If you don’t want to burn a hole in your pockets by going to a recording studio or getting a professional voice over done, I will suggest that you use this software called Audacity. Nitin, a DIY fan, found his nephew fiddling with this software while trying to merge two songs for a birthday party. It was a lucky catch. And it has an amazingly simple user interface and functions which work great for non tech-savvy people.

Here’s the only thing you need to do once you have recorded your audio using Audacity to remove the background noise:

You can save this file in MP3 or any other format of your choice to make things easier. Wasn’t that easy?

I asked Pavan, CTO and co-founder of Orgzit, for any changes and got a high five instead. Like I said, it’s not a one man job.

Key Takeaway: You will need to collaborate with your team members at each step and share notes to refine the quality of the script and audio.

Now that I had the script handy (the final curve), the audio file loaded in deck (the labeling done), the only thing that remained was to create the video. Like any other marketer, I started with a Google search and came up with two options:

I suggest that Powtoons gives you value for money and has a number of business icons and funky characters which will cover your video making needs — right from showing a tattooed girl to a businessman.

So Nitin and I started with the actual video making process. After spending countless hours in front of the desktop, old school John Meyer and an incessant refilling of tea cups, we were finally done with the video in less than 2 days. It looks something like this:

The main challenge while compiling the video was that the characters and icons in the video needed to be in sync with the recorded voice. You’ll need to go a tad bit slower while putting animation and moving the characters around the slides to get perfect synchronization.

A few other things to keep in mind before you start with the video:

I have to confess that video took longer that I liked, but I think it was worth the DIY approach and effort.

Key Takeaway: Your video is the window that you product needs to reach the extended market space. You better make it worth the watch.|||

This post will guide you through the entire process of making a product video at an affordable budget and help you get more organized in your approach, just like Orgzit.