→ jump down to the Travel Checklist

"What do I say to the customs officer?"

"Can I bring my work laptop with me?"

If you travel out of the country for business purposes—to a company meetup or a professional conference—or even on a family vacation with your work laptop, you're facing up to questions about business visitor visas, customs, and border security.

We'll focus on traveling to the US since attending company meetups is our primary reason for international business travel.

Here's what you need:

You need a visa (or a waiver!) to authorize travel to the US.

Canadian passport holders don't need a visa to enter the US for non-paid business events. Passport and government ID are all that's required.

If your country participates in the Visa Waiver Program (VWP), then you can apply for an ESTA (Electronic System for Travel Authorization) within 3 days of travel. The ESTA is valid for 2 years.

Apply for an ESTA here.

If your country does not participate in the Visa Waiver Program or you are not eligible for an ESTA, you'll need to apply for a B-1 business visitor visa… the long way.

We'll work with you through this process. Start early, as soon as we have dates for a meetup or conference. Visa appointments and processing can take weeks to months. Ping Andrea as soon as you know that you'll need a visa.

Border screening is slow and stressful every time. "Trusted traveler" programs expedite and bypass some screening. Citizens of some countries are eligible for Global Entry and Canadians are eligible for NEXUS. These programs are completely optional but may make life a little easier, at the cost of onerous biometric scans like fingerprinting (for Global Entry and NEXUS) and iris scanning (for NEXUS).

Note: An ESTA is still required for travel; these programs just speed up entry.

To substantiate the purpose of your travel, we provide an invitation letter that states that you're traveling to the US for a business meeting and not to do work.

"Doing business"—e.g. attending a business meeting or conference—is allowed under the business visitor visa (and visa waiver), but "doing work" is not. That'd require a temporary work visa.

You'll need a new letter each time you travel. Contact Andrea to get one drafted.

When you enter the US, you may be asked to unlock your phone or laptop for search, possibly exposing sensitive company data like source code, passwords, and customer account data. Yikes! We need to take some precautionary measures to safeguard our data.

Hitting a snag or have any questions? Ping Jeremy or Andrea and we can help.

You're welcome to edit and improve this document yourself, too. Please do!|||

handbook - Basecamp Employee Handbook