If you are a designer without experience in developing, the first thing you should know, in general, is to read the documentation. As I said before, none of this would be possible without the incredible efforts of Airbnb team, so I highly recommend to review the official GitHub repository here.

Besides, the information you can find there is important to understand how this works. This is not a plugin for Sketch. The idea is simple. With this tool, we use React to generate the design in Sketch. By doing that, Sketch turns into just a way to render what React has coded. I know what you’re wondering. Why is this necessary? We will get to that in a bit.

Let’s get started! First, we need to install it. The repository has the necessary instructions to download the examples they have there, but if you want to start a new project from scratch, here are the instructions:

4. With all the Node dependencies installed. Open the file “styleguide.sketchplugin”. This file will install the necessary connections in Sketch to tie with your React code.

5. Open the Sketch file you’ve created at the beginning, then go to your plugins tab and select the new one that should appear there. By doing that, an option should appear to run it:

Although, you can also run the render from the console using the following command:

You will see how your Sketch file has been updated with the Styleguide elements of the example, all that you’re seeing has been generated by the React code. If you don’t have too much experience with Javascript and/or React, the generation of this content can be a little overwhelming if you check the code, but don’t worry about that for now.

NOTE: If you still don’t have a code editor, Atom is a really good and nice option, it has a pretty decent UX.

6. All the work we are going to do will be performed in the “src” folder only. So go there and delete:

There are 2 files that are really important and you should know their function:

This file will contain all the reusable properties. Mainly Colors and Typography styles. For example, if in the future you would want to update a color, this is the place to do it (and it will be changed in all of your components!).

This file is the main connection with Sketch, so everything will be exported from here. To start from scratch go there and delete all the code.|||

The design field is moving forward, and it’s moving really fast. Some months ago Sketch had changed a lot of things with the implementation of Symbols. This simple but powerful feature allowed us to…