A very common question I get from entrepreneurs and startup founders is “If I want to expand my business to another country, how much money do I need for that?” Well, to open up an office you need 4 dollars. You might need more for advertising or logistics, but that depends on your business model and acquisition strategy. Aside from that, existing technologies allow us to get a virtual presence all around the world for a few dollars a month.

Let’s assume you live in Portland and work as a professional cat photographer. You plan a long trip to Europe and want to sell your services to cat lovers in Netherlands. Here is what you need to do.

Localize your website. If you don’t speak Dutch, use English, but keep in mind cultural differences between US & UK. For example, people in EU use DD/MM/YYYY date and 24 hours time formats instead of MM/DD/YYYY and 12 AM / PM. If you want to go further and speak Dutch crazy cat ladies language, try professional localizations services like Gengo or Localize

Now use visitor’s IP or language settings to drive them to a local version of your website. You can either code it into your website (FREE) or use services like GeoLify (from $5 for 1000 pageviews).

You can buy it from tons of VoIP providers. My favorite one is Zadarma - they have a decent call quality, cheap prices & free PBX that helps your business look professionally. So, you buy a virtual phone number in Amsterdam from Zadarma for $2, turn on their free PBX to record welcome message with Dutch accent and set up call forwarding (FREE) to another virtual phone number in Portland ($2). Use Amsterdam phone number for the Dutch version of your website - now your clients can call you for free.

Note - for more complex businesses you might need to think about setting up a call center with multilingual support (also can be done with Zadarma).

Use advertising platforms that have geo targeting settings, like Google AdWords or Facebook Ads, to drive traffic to your local website. Optimize your local SEO. Look into partnerships - contact local businesses that have complementary products and come up with co-promotion ideas. Think about local viral marketing for your brand.

PayPal or credit cards will work just fine if you work in retail.

For freelancers or independent contractors online hiring platforms like UpWork or Project4hire might be a good choice. Most of them charge commission, but also make it extremely easy for your potential customers to hire you and pay for your job - no contract needed, accounting is simple and easy.

My favorite option for international transactions are Bitcoins. Here is a quick guide on how to pay Bitcoin invoice in 15 minutes or less. After you get paid, you can spend your money easily with a Bitcoins visa card.

That’s it - you now have a virtual office in Amsterdam. Congratulations - your business just became international.|||

A very common question I get from entrepreneurs and startup founders is “If I want to expand my business to another country, how much money do I need for that?”  Well, to open up an office you need 4 dollars. You might need more for advertising or logistics, but that depends on your business model and acquisition strategy.  Aside from that, existing technologies allow us to get a virtual presence all around the world for a few dollars a month.