A South Asian berry (Syzygium cumini)  may make solar panels far less expensive and even provide a lasting solution to India’s chronic power shortage.

 Researchers at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) discovered that a pigment found in jamun absorbs large amounts of sunlight. The IIT scientists have been experimenting with the pigment, called anthocyanin, and believe that using it for mass production could bring down solar panel costs.

 “We were looking at why the jamuns are black,” said Soumitra Satapathi, assistant professor at IIT-Roorkee. “We extracted the pigment using ethanol and found that anthocyanin was a great absorber of sunlight.” Anthocyanin is also found in fruits such as blueberries, cranberries, raspberries, and cherries.

 Jamun trees grow upto 30 metres and can live for more than 100 years. Across large swathes of India, the fruit—long known for its nutritional and medicinal value—is often sold at a low price on side walk and at stop lights.

 Most solar cells today are made of either single crystal silicon or the more efficient but expensive polycrystalline silicon. The researcher are using the jamun pigment for a new kind: dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs). The results of the study were published in the Journal of Photovoltaics.

 For the uninitiated, here is a two liner on how solar cells work. Photons from the sun strike a solar cell, which contains electron-rich silicon or dye, and knock out the electrons to create electricity. The more efficiently a solar cell can absorb the many photons striking it, the more electricity it can produce.

 India is looking to increase its solar-power generation capacity from 10 gigawatts to 100 gigawatts by 2022—with a target of attracting a staggering $100 billion into the sector during that time.

 Though silicon is abundant, manufacturing silicon cells is expensive. The researchers hope to use naturally occurring dyes to make their dye-sensitised solar cell more efficient bringing down the cost of a solar panel by 40%.

 There’s a long way to go. Satapathi’s cell current efficiency is only 0.5% compared to commercial solar cells that provide more than 15% efficiency. Though dye-sensitised cells were invented in 1988, there are no large commercial suppliers of solar panels that use this technology today because of the poor efficiency of the cells.|||

A South Asian berry (Syzygium cumini)  may make solar panels far less expensive and even provide a lasting solution to India’s chronic power shortage. Researchers at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) discovered that a pigment found in jamun absorbs large amounts of sunlight. The IIT scientists have been experimenting with the pigment, called anthocyanin, and…