The Tor Project, Inc., a 501©(3) nonprofit organization that provides technical infrastructure for privacy protection over the Internet, is seeking a Communications Director to help us tell the world about our important work. The ideal candidate will have at least five years of experience talking with the press and leading social media campaigns. The ability to explain technical concepts to non-technical audiences is essential.

This senior level position will report directly to the Executive Director and will be part of the organization’s leadership team. The Communications Director will set and guide the strategy for all communications and public relations messages to consistently articulate the Tor Project’s mission. Tor software is built by a mix of paid staff and volunteers. This job includes working closely with this diverse, international community of people who make Tor and related software products. This is a hands-on position for a highly skilled communications professional with a fierce passion for technology and social media.

The successful candidate will probably hold a Bachelor’s degree in journalism, communications, marketing, public relations or a closely related field. The ideal candidate will be energetic, unflappable and flexible, and will thrive in a highly-technical collaborative environment.

The Tor Project’s workforce is smart and committed. Experience working with open source communities and/or a dedication to Internet civil liberties are added pluses. The Tor Project currently has a paid and contract staff of around 25 developers and operational support staff, plus many thousands of volunteers who contribute to our work. The Tor Project is funded in part by government research and development grants, and in part by individual, foundation and corporate donations.

Flexible salary, depending on experience. The Tor Project has a competitive benefits package, including a generous PTO policy; 13 paid holidays per year (including the week between Christmas and New Year’s, when the office is closed); health, vision, dental, disability, and life insurance paid in full for employee; flexible work schedule; and occasional travel opportunities.

This is a full-time position. The Tor Project’s main office is in Seattle, and we’d be delighted to supply a desk for the Communications Director there, however, this job can be done remotely. Knowledge of media and press contacts within the United States is essential.

To apply, send a cover letter and your resume to hr@torproject.org with the subject “Communications Director.” Tell us why you think you’re the right person for this job, and please include links to writing samples. No phone calls please!

The Tor Project, Inc., is an equal opportunity, affirmative action employer.|||

