I have been working at Wizbii for two years now. Since it is a startup that is continuously growing, things move fast. This means that you have to learn and adapt quickly. So I had my lessons. Here is a non-exhaustive list of what can stop you from being a good growth marketing professional (note: even if you do not work in this field, these lessons can definitely be useful for you).

Ideas are like babies. We feel responsible for them, they grew on our watch and it is difficult to see their bad side. If you work in a growth team, you have to understand that your idea (a new email, a minor change concerning the interface etc.) is not equal with you. So if it is not a good one, your ego should not be hurt. Putting your ego aside is an absolute necessity if you want to stay result-driven and thus efficient. Pushing your idea forward no matter what, can stop you from identifying other ideas, that can be better. The aim is not to succeed thanks to your idea (this concept should actually not exist). The real success is to generate enough ideas so that the most accurate one can be put in place.

2. Being influenced by a small group of users

Customers talk. You should listen. But the tricky thing is: should you act on it?

When you were a teenager, have you abandoned the girl/boy just because a few people said that she/he will break your heart? If yes, you might have missed a true teenage love.

Scarcity is present in every company, small, medium or big. Thus prioritization is the key of growth. Imagine that you call some users in order to collect feedback. Two of them will explain to you in details why a new feature is absolutely necessary for them to really appreciate your product/services. Now, especially if the discussion goes well, your marketing mind will push the “satisfy the customer” button.

However, satisfying two of your customers does not necessarily mean that you have achieved a general improvement. The problem is that focusing on the opinion of a small number of users can drive away your focus from other ideas that can lead to far more impacting results. So should you ignore it ? Not at all ! But you should pay attention on the following questions: are these users my real target market? Did they actually understand how to use the product? Is the lack of feature the problem or there is something else behind? What percentage of my customers are facing these problems? If not, you might waste your scarce resources. Don’t!

“If you do not try, you will never know”. Well, if you do not test before putting a lot of effort in an idea, it might go well, but you might as well waste your time.

The growth team is a really transversal one (if it is not, it has to become one). This means that the decisions taken might alter the to-do list of other teams. If you are wishing to change the emailing strategy, you better be damn sure the technical and design team will not waste their time on something that will be changed in one week. Does this mean that the decision making process should be long and painful? Not at all: testing landing pages for exemple should not involve a pixel precise design and a beautiful code (yes, code can be beautiful). A/B testing will help you to take good decisions. A/B/C/D testing will prevent wasting time. This does not mean that you are not allowed to fail. But if you do, there will be a valuable lesson behind your failure and no unnecessary effort made. Testing has no limits!

4. Asking “why”, but not “why not”

Children often ask “why”. There are a lot of articles explaining how this can help them grow. But we mention less often that they also ask: “why not?”

If you ask “why?” often enough, you will save your own and your team’s time and you will not fail without learning something (the engine of growth). However, if you ask “why not?” in the right moments (basically every time that you are surprised by or not satisfied with the results), you will slowly build up your competitive advantage.

For example, when you put in place your brand new onboarding process, it is not enough to say: I am asking the user to fill in this specific piece of information because it is important for the business, or the user is willing to give his/her number because he/she wished to be contacted. By asking “why the users are not filling in this section?” can show you what part of your business is not appreciated or understood (very important to differentiate these two!). And I can ensure you that by doing this, you can identify the points where you can add more value than your competitor. Why not differentiate yourself?

Today all the businesses consider themselves “customer-focused”. But is that enough? Is being focused on them lead to loyalty? Is that enough to convince them to visit your website more often? The truth is that they do not give damn where your focus is: all they want is CARE.

When working on the emailing strategy, my biggest concern was to enhance our retention and decrease the number of emails sent in the same time. I was afraid of spamming. However, after conducting several interviews, I have found out that the number of emails sent is not really an issue.

Through optimizing the object and content of some emails, we managed to significantly improve the open and click rates, but something was still missing. And then we have found it.

Since the startup where I work at is social professional network for students and graduates, our users’ main activity is to apply for jobs and internships on our platform. We had the simple idea of asking them if they have received an answer to their application. No special design required. No technical difficulties. The numbers spoke for themselves. Many of the users answered to us, so we had a real discussion and they have visited much more often our website after. Yes, human workforce was required. But we had the key of retention: care. That is one of the most beautiful thing regarding growth marketing: the simplest ideas can lead to amazing results. In plus care is the first step to go viral as well.

6. Getting stuck because you think you “could do better”

Yes, we all want to do our best, but the most important is to actually DO things.

When striving to achieve growth, it is important to understand that you can only get close to perfection through iteration. And for that you need to start. As soon as possible. I figured out that this is a real issue when I have checked my personal to-do list and I saw the high number of ideas that were not turned into projects. Growth is rarely achieved by “magic”. This is why I avoid using the “growth hacking” expression. Yes, there are hacks that work, but what is more important, there is a process that will lead you to success. This process will be the key to achieve your key performance indicators set (and yes, choosing the right KPIs is also part of the process). The basis of this process is iteration. Believe me, you will learn way more by putting a place a landing page that is not amazing (you should try your best of course) and improve it through A/B tests than to wait for weeks for a perfect design and an impeccable code.

It is also important not be afraid of failing during the process, but NEVER fail without learning something. Going back to the example of the landing page, it should be good enough to provide you with a viable test. If due to a bad design the user will not see the call to action, you will not be able to enhance the conversion rate.

So do not wait for the perfect idea! Start testing, fail & learn & improve until your customers are happy. REPEAT!

7. Do not let the lack of data make you less data-driven

I love food. Can we say that not having food makes me less hungry? No way. The same applies to data.

I think I say nothing new by telling that every decision should be taken based on data. What if you do not have the data? Look for another relevant data that can help. Not possible? Test and create data! And when you test, it is not enough to make sure that everything is tracked: you should have a hypothesis, follow-up closely and do not stop unless your hypothesis is proven right OR wrong. I cannot emphasize enough: you do not have to be right! But if you are wrong and you are not aware of it or you do not know why, I am afraid that you just wasted your time (I hope you had fun at least!).

Intuition is important, but it should be mainly used to decide where, why and when to look for data.

In today’s world it is a cliché to say that one is data-driven. However, there is a reason why it became one.

So you have your product/service, you know it inside out. If you keep your eyes opened, you probably have a long list of things that could and should be improved. However, there are always one or two points that are so called “hurting points”. You are convinced that acting on these will revolutionize the company. It is important to mention here that you are convinced, it is not something that has actually been proven. In order to convince your team to act on these, you need to find some data.

The problem is that since you do not act objectively, you can always come up with data that will strengthen your point of view. This does not meant that it is a lie. A very easy example to give is when you interview users. Without observing, the way you ask a question can alter the answer. Even when you have clear graphs and sheets in front of you, it is possible to focus on specific parts or look at some combinations that result in arguments that will convince the team to act on your hurting points. What a coincidence!

Being subjective is natural. However, in order to take good decisions, data should never be used to convince someone that YOU are right. Data has to be used to present things objectively and do what is best for the users, the company, etc.

As I have mentioned before, this list is not an exhaustive one. When it comes to growth, the number of potential tests is unlimited and so is the possibility to fail. However, our time is a scarce resource, so fail smartly!|||

I have been working at Wizbii for two years now. Since it is a startup that is continuously growing, things move fast. This means that you have to learn and adapt quickly. So I had my lessons. Here…