The other day I ordered some bin liners online. Almost instantly I got an email asking me to rate my “shopping experience”. But I hadn’t had a shopping experience – I’d only bought some bin liners.

Within a couple of days I received similar requests: after a concert and a play, immediately after renewing my passport, the second I exited a cab, and a couple of hours after phoning the bank.

I thought I might emerge unscathed from the supermarket until the cashier handed me a “How did we do today?” card. I’ve now come to dread the “How was your visit?” email, with its fake intimacy (“Dear Anne”) and gush (“We’d love to know”), remaking the corporate world into a cosy “we”. It makes me turn very 1950s (“It’s madam, to you”).

So many organisations now want our feedback that if we acceded to them all, it would turn into a full-time job – unpaid, of course, so that we could no longer afford to buy anything or go anywhere (maybe it’s all a clever green ploy). The result is that I’m suffering from feedback fatigue and have decided to go on a feedback strike.

When did corporations become so needy, like insecure children (or their parents) constantly checking how much we love them? Customer service people say that feedback surveys are designed to improve the consumer experience, so presumably their proliferation has hugely raised standards; I must have missed that. In fact, it sometimes seems there’s an inverse relationship between feedback and quality: a company pestering you for feedback has less time to devote to actual service.

But this doesn’t matter to them: it’s your time they’re after – hence those customer surveys that say they’ll take only 15 minutes. Only? If I had a spare 15 minutes, I’d rather spend it talking to my kids, flossing my teeth or just standing and staring. In the words of one US blogger: “Infant who begins Babies R Us customer satisfaction survey dies of old age.”

Most feedback forms suffer from the same flaws as any standardised survey. They often ask you to rate your “experience” on a scale of one to 10. Trouble is, I don’t think on a scale of one to 10 – I’m more of a four-and-a-halfer. They also don’t permit you to say three and eight at the same time, or all and none of the above. But probably a design fault with humans rather than surveys.

Welcome to the world of metrics. Software has now facilitated the bureaucratisation of emotion, and has automated concern. Or if it takes place at the end of a phone inquiry, it’s read from a script by some poor, benighted zero-hours worker. Feedback has now been professionalised, placed into the hands of specialist companies.

There are dozens of books on the subject, with titles like A Complaint is a Gift (good luck trying that one on your Uber driver). Most customers, I’d guess, believe that their responses go into some self-referential loop, or a giant feedback cloud in the sky which will eventually obscure the sun. Of course feedback can produce real change – when organisations act on satisfaction surveys to restore a popular product, say, or adjust their services to make them more in line with user needs or customer demands. Yet when this occurs all too often it turns into an exercise in self-preening (“Eight out of 10 of you told us blah blah blah, so we’ve responded”).

Feedback like this was first gathered by the German military to evaluate performance in the second world war. But it was Rensis Likert and Floyd Mann at the Institute of Social Research at the University of Michigan who properly pioneered organisational feedback methods in the late 1940s and 1950s. Likert was interested in how organisations could make use of survey results in particular to help create less authoritarian styles of leadership. Not comparable to the Amazon feedback form, then.

While the mushrooming of customer surveys appears to have developed out of 1960s and 70s ideas of participation, in reality they’ve been appropriated by audit culture, the neoliberal managerial project whereby all of us are subjected to constant monitoring and self-surveillance.

In public services such as the NHS and universities, they make extra demands of frontline staff and, at a time of cuts, raise unrealistic public expectations: not serving but branding. When members of the public make real and urgent complaints, as they did in the case of the Mid Staffordshire NHS trust, for example, these got “lost” in trust reports in generic categories such as “communication” or “quality of care”.

So if I do have a transcendental experience with a bin liner, my supplier will be the first to know. But otherwise, forget it: I’m freeing myself from the tyranny of feedback. As for you, I sincerely hope that you had a fulfilling experience reading this column. But if you didn’t – or even if you did – you don’t need to give me feedback. Really.|||

Out shopping, online or at the theatre, everyone wants a free evaluation. Sorry but life’s too short