In early 2014, Progressive insurance held a contest to choose the best cellphone app to play Big Brother to its policyholders. The nation's fourth-largest auto insurer wanted to track drivers' mileage, time of day on the road and whether they were slamming on the brakes. Elev en companies entered. One was TrueMotion, a Boston-based startup cofounded by Brad Cordova, now 27, an MIT graduate school dropout who had taught himself to code at age 7. He had $3 million in seed funding but no paying customers.

Before the contest kicked off, Cordova thought his team had perfected their app--only to realize it was draining too much battery power, which meant they had to reengineer it from scratch. "It was like climbing a mountain with a gun to your head," he says. They worked 18-hour days feeding data into machine-learning algorithms, then testing multiple versions on thousands of drivers they recruited through Applause, a Boston user-testing outfit. That September, Cordova learned that TrueMotion was one of three finalists, but Progressive wanted further refinements, like the ability to track whether users were texting while driving.

Cordova's ten-person team got little sleep for the next four months as they ground through thousands more data tests. In April 2015, TrueMotion triumphed, signing an eight-figure deal with Progressive that has helped it land eight new customers and another $10 million in venture funding. Forbes estimates TrueMotion's 2017 revenue will exceed $15 million.

TrueMotion is hoping to pull ahead of a pack of startups capitalizing on a tectonic shift among auto insurers. For decades, insurance companies relied on actuarial categories like gender, age, address and past accidents to size up policyholders' risks. Now they're realizing that "usage-based" data on individual driving habits are more reliable. Safe driving scores, says Progressive manager Dave Pratt, "are the best predictor we have of who will get into an accident." A high score can earn a 20% premium discount from Progressive while bad drivers can see hikes of 10%.

Progressive pioneered the field when it started collecting driver data in 1998 with a gadget installed under the hood, then switched to a dashboard plug-in. To attract more users and save on hardware, it wanted a mobile app that didn't have to be turned on and off. The app would also have to detect whether the user was behind the wheel and not riding in a passenger seat. In addition to GPS receivers, cellphones have sensors like accelerometers and gyroscopes that can measure speed and movement. Among the indicators Cordova's team used to determine that users are driving: sensor readings that show they've swung in or out of the car from the left-hand side and that the phone is secured in a dashboard mount.

For Cordova, who sets his alarm for 4 a.m. and spends two hours reading research papers on machine learning and artificial intelligence, the challenge was nirvana. "If I'm not solving difficult problems," he says, "I'm not happy." He sleeps on a sensor-equipped mattress pad that logs his tosses and turns and rates his moods throughout the day on a scale of one to ten using an app he designed. "If you can't measure it," he says, "you can't improve it."

He traces his passion to track and improve driving habits to a day 11 years ago in his hometown of Belen, New Mexico. A driver on a cellphone rammed into his Hyundai, smashing Cordova's head through the driver's side window. So much blood flooded into his eyes that he thought he'd gone blind. A severe concussion caused intense headaches, dizziness and confusion for the next year. "It really scared me," he says. "My biggest fear in life is something happening to my brain."

Nonetheless, he won a scholarship to Notre Dame, where he majored in physics and math. While working toward a Ph.D. in computer science and electrical engineering at MIT in 2012, he took an entrepreneurship class where he met Joe Adelmann, now 35, a former Air Force engineer whose father, like Cordova's, worked as a truck driver. They bonded over their interest in driver safety, and after learning that auto insurers were tracking policyholders' driving habits, they decided to start a company that could collect safety data through a mobile app.|||

Brad Cordova had deeply personal reasons to start a company to combat distracted driving and tap into the new market for data-driven insurance.