It is estimated by 2020, there will be over 21 billion of Internet of Things (IoT) devices. IoT devices can be your largest security risk to your business.

Many organizations will have issues identifying these devices and characterizing them as part of their current network access policy.  As companies are embracing a bring-your-own-device (BYOD) strategy, organizations must now get employee devices on the corporate network. They must also address the 21 billion IoT devices projected to have access in the near future.

IoT is covering everything now from video surveillance camera, motion detectors, HVAC controls and many other devices that are more difficult to manage and secure.  Once all IoT devices are connected to the network and identified, the IT organization must create or modify the network access policy as part of a corporate policy enforcement strategy. This should determine if and how these devices will be connected, as well as what role they will be assigned that will govern their access.

A false sense of IT security: Nine out of 27 different types of IoT devices (e.g. desktop PCs, IP phones, tablets, video conferencing systems) that they could identify on their networks. This number was consistent across respondents – even those who claimed to have no IoT devices when initially asked.

Insecure IT security policies: 30 percent stated that their company failed to have a specific solution in place to secure IoT devices, and more than a quarter does not know if they have security policies on their devices.

Lack of IT collaboration: Majority of respondents believe a lack of communication is some of the main challenges to securing IoT.

Working from home puts the enterprise at risk: Almost half of all respondents reported that in-office security policies failed to extend to their home networks – even when accessing sensitive company data.

Our complimentary network and security assessment can put your IT infrastructure and business to the test to ensure IoT devices will not be your largest security risk.

365 iT SOLUTIONS is a leading IT consulting and managed service provider (MSP) boutique in Toronto.

We offer industry leading IT solutions with our Canadian team delivering Managed IT Services, IT Support Services, IT Outsourcing Services, Tech Support Services and Cloud Services.|||

It is estimated by 2020, there will be over 21 billion of Internet of Things (IoT) devices. IoT devices can be your largest security risk to your business.