Let's take a look at my annotated copy of the FOSDEM 2017 main talk schedule, shall we?

Welcome to FOSDEM 2017

 The speech is 25 minutes so it will fit into your Burger King lunch break! 



 Kubernetes on the road to GIFEE

 "GIFEE" stands for "Google Infrastructure For Everyone." Presumably your computers are too fast and you need some more abstractions to slow them back down. No, I don't know what the second 'E' stands for. 



 Software Heritage: Preserving the Free Software Commons

 "The Free Software Commons" is just some bureaucrat's idea to put a shitload of free software on a hard drive somewhere. The talk description does not explain why archive.org is insufficient for this task. I think it's because archive.org will not establish a salary for the bureaucrat. 



 Understanding The Complexity of Copyleft Defense

 After 25 Years of GPL Enforcement, Is Copyleft Succeeding?

 An FSF bureaucrat spreads FSF propaganda. 



 Using Linux in Air Traffic Control 

Hardware and Operating System Platforms

 Someone is trying to use linux to do something. 



 Closing FOSDEM 2017

 This one is only ten minutes so you can attend it and get back before the fries are done.

RISC-V: Open Hardware for Your Open Source Software

 The talk description claims RISC-V is in use in both Internet of Things and supercomputing, which is amazing since nobody's produced any working hardware yet. 



 Free Software For The Machine

 Hewlett-Packard came up with a bespoke machine. They could not afford any marketing experts, so this machine is called "The Machine." The big innovation is that you just shit data onto the disk instead of bothering with a proper filesystem. The speaker is the same Keith Packard who made the X Window System even worse than it was before.

Bazel

 How to build at Google scale?

 Google, typically, open-sourced some trash software that only serves their needs. This guy is here to explain to you why you should ever, ever give a shit, and also you should probably get involved with the project and give Google free labor. 



 Continuous Integration at a Distribution Level

 Shepherding 30.000 packages to never break

 In addition to "30.000" being a strange grade of precision to apply to the number thirty, the second the audience realizes this idiot is talking about Ubuntu everyone will know this "never break" bullshit is a lie. 



 Continuous Localisation using FOSS tools

 Building a fast responsive localisation process using open source tools

 The talk description is in English and the talk will be given in English. You can find out more on the FOSDEM web page, which is in English. This shows you how important localization is.

CloudABI: easily develop sandboxed apps for UNIX

 Someone realized that it's much easier to secure software if you throw half of it out and ignore the other half. He has started a business with this as the planned profit source. 



 Resurrecting dinosaurs, what can possibly go wrong?

 How Containerised Applications could eat our users.

 Someone realized that "containerized applications" -- the practice of just tarring up all your shit with its shared library dependencies and treating that as a unit -- is part of what made Windows suck. The speaker's other talk involves advocating for 'rolling release' distributions. That's right: even the rolling-release idiots think AppImage sucks.

Write a Better FM

 Read The F* Manual? Maybe you need to write a better f* manual

 An idiot is afraid to say fuck. He works for Red Hat and Apache at the same time so obviously he is the world's leading authority on what documentation should look like: either contained entirely within runtime error messages or hidden behind a paywall. 



 Bridging the Gap between Legacy Docs and Modular Content

 Another Red Hat idiot wants people to stop writing documentation and write stories instead. 



 What open source and J.K. Rowling have in common

 Importance of storytelling in open source projects

 The talk description spouts meaningless shit about storytelling, but the real common factor between Rowling and Linux is their presence in the homes and hearts of millions of children and/or mouth-breathing retards who are impressed only because they haven't seen what competence looks like.

The Veripeditus AR Game Framework

 Enabling everyone to freely create Augmented Reality Games

 Finally, someone comes up with open-source gaming technology even less interesting or popular than VR. 



 LoRaWAN for exploring the Internet of Things

 Talk Hard: A technical, political, and cultural look at LoRaWAN for IoT

 An academic has a radio. 



 Datacubes on Steroids with ISO Array SQL

 Open Source, Open Standards, Open Terabytes

 An idiot calls multidimensional arrays "datacubes." Nobody knows why, or wants to find out. 



 You know what's cool? Running on billions of devices

 curl from A to Z

 Daniel Stenberg is here to tell you how important curl is, because telling people how important curl is happens to be his full-time job. 



 Everything You Always Wanted to Know About "Hello, World"*

 (*But Were Afraid To Ask)

 All I Want To Know Is Why The Woody Allen References*

 *(to a movie that came out before you were born) 



 Ethics in Network Measurements

 Moral obligations of engineers, scientists and hackers, based on example of RIPE Atlas

 An absolute asshole tries to justify the massive crowdsourced surveillance program they've built. 



 All Ages: How to Build a Movement

 Organizational advice from two idiots who have never organized anything. 



 Libreboot

Free your BIOS today!

 The idiot from last year is back, trying to sell you laptops preloaded with a version of Coreboot that has all the useful shit stripped out. 



 Pieter Hintjens

 In Memoriam

 It is kind of gross to make this some kind of scheduled event. Have some class and do an informal meeting after hours for this, people. 



 Tempesta FW: Linux Application Delivery Controller

 Yet another webshit trying to make his webshit faster. 



 User Session Recording for the Enterprise

 An Open-Source Effort by Red Hat

 Red Hat would like the ability to significantly increase the amount of data collected for the bug reports it ignores.

Portfolio of optimized cryptographic functions based on Keccak

 Yeah, it's still just SHA-3, man. 



 The Making of a Secure Open Source Password Keeper

 From the Electronics to the High Level Software...

 An Exercise in Full-Stack Irrelevance! 



 Securing Automated Decryption

 New Cryptography and Techniques

 Apparently nobody's told Red Hat that if something can be automatically decrypted you may as well never have encrypted it to start with. 



 It's time to SAFE the Internet

 Introducing SAFE, the decentralised privacy-first storage and communication network

 More ranting about the blockchain from Bitcoin Idiots, LLC. Why yes of course it involves both Rust and javascript, how did you know? 



 WireGuard: Next Generation Secure Kernel Network Tunnel

 Cutting edge crypto, shrewd kernel design, and networking meet in a surprisingly simple combination

 Recognizing that IPSec is an overcomplicated monster that nobody uses, an idiot sets about writing a simplified monster nobody uses. 



 Encrypting Matrix

 Building a universal end-to-end encrypted communication ecosystem with Matrix and Olm

 A moron thinks someone wants to use third-party servers with Open Whisper Systems' Signal protocol. Don't bother to learn his name; you won't need it. 



 Quantum computing and post-quantum cryptography

 a gentle overview

 Listening to a Russian talk about quantum computing is akin to asking your dog how to replace a circuit breaker.

Things are a little different this year, because FOSDEM has their shit together even less than usual. As of 29 December 2016, just about a month out from the conference, they still have not got any keynotes, main talks, or lightning talks scheduled. If we're very lucky, they never will.

Meanwhile, we'll make fun of the devrooms.

All of them.

My BSD sucks less than yours

 Two guys think they're going to "focus on the weakness" of their respective projects without anyone trolling. NetBSD is not participating because there is nothing that NetBSD does not suck less than. 



 GELIBoot

Booting FreeBSD from encrypted disk 

 Disk encryption was difficult to implement on FreeBSD because the programmer did not know what he was doing. 



 Transport Evolution on top of the BSD's

A New, Evolutive API and Transport-Layer Architecture for the Internet

 This has nothing to do with BSD. 



 CloudABI for FreeBSD: how does it work?

 That guy from Nuxi shills his poor-man's-selinux project.

Welcome Word Backup and Disaster Recovery devroom

Introduction and welcome word 

 No content, but at least it has the same title twice. 



 Essentials about Disaster Recovery with Relax-and-Recover

A generic introduction for beginners 

 A hobbyist backup project that "requires no maintenance." It creates bootable ISOs that put your computer back the way it was. No, I don't want that either. It only works with a few linux distros, none of which you want to use. 



 Disaster Recovery management with ReaR and DRLM

DRLM Workshop

 A shitload of bash scripts to control apache, tftp, and dhcpd to do all the maintenance shit that the previous product claims not to need. The guy seems to think someone will pay him to work on this. God help anyone who does. 



 Bareos - Backup Archiving REcovery Open Sourced - Overview

 The first actual viable backup project under discussion -- it's a fork of Bacula. Turns out all they've done since the fork is make a web interface. 



 Incremental Backups

Good things come in small packages!

 A Red Hat employee thinks QEMU is the right program to handle incremental backups. Nobody is surprised. 



 First steps with Relax-and-Recover (ReaR)

Understand how ReaR works by running it yourself.

 SuSE is back shilling the idiotic ISO maker again. 



 Relax-and-Recover Automated Testing

 "requires no maintenance" 



 Future ideas for ReaR, DRLM, and Bareos

Talk with ReaR, DRLM, and Bareos users about what they like to get

 All the people who gave the earlier talks gang up to ask an empty room what features it wants.

Closing loops

Concluding discussions in non-face-to-face communities

 A nerd does not know when internet conversations end because he lacks the typical real-world signals to which he is accustomed (primarly the other party rolling their eyes and walking away). Having described the task as "hard," he relieves us all by being just the man to teach us.

opsi: client management for heterogenous environments

An introduction to opsi. 

 Truly, half an hour is not long enough. This program is a shit festival of stupendous proportion. It's a python thing ... installed by downloading a VM ... from an OS repository ... which they tell you not to check the certificate of. The python thing uses mysql to store its data, but it does everything over http... except the user interface, which is java. It's like someone threw a grenade into a room full of bad decisions. 



 Puppet Catalog Diffs in TheForeman

Using octocatalog-diff to view catalog changes in the Foreman UI 

 'TheForeman' is a webshit systems administration interface, and this talk is about how to make it show the output of a real configuration management tool. The speaker is the "Stop Talking" expert from the lonely Community devroom, so with any luck the audience will get to witness his mastery at "stop talking now." 



 Replacing Dockerfiles with Ansible-container

 The talk description contains a typo and refers to Docker as 'Dicker'. This is a much more valuable contribution than anything else the Ansible team has done. 



 External node classifier for easy configuration management.

Analysis on advantages of using an external node classifier system. Examples on how to ease Saltstack with reclass.

 If that title is hard to read, it's only partly because it was written by a person whose first language is not English. The other reason it is hard to read is that it's a terrible idea attempting to solve a problem caused by incompetence. 



 Quit managing the infrastructure to manage your infratsructure

OpsTheater, an open source stack of best of breed infrastructure management tools

 This is a pretty common theme in modern systems administration (primarily among the people who call themselves "devops" and mean it): take a handful of tools that almost everyone on earth uses, make incorrect assumptions about how other people are using them, and then put it all on Github and give it a name. Congratulations, all those things are now Your Product, you genius! Please note: none of the tools this person is presenting are a spellchecker. 



 Does your configuration code smell?

 This speaker has never actually done anything except give a lot of talks and write a lot of books about everything Smelling -- code, design, projects, everything. I think he might just need to clean his laptop.

Welcome to the Desktops DevRoom 2017 

 This better not actually take five entire minutes. 



 Assumptions when porting to a Modern Display Server

Common issues you'll run into when porting

 This is a talk about porting things to Mir, the Canonical-sponsored Wayland clone which absolutely nobody on Earth likes or cares about. The speaker attempts to remain relevant by being pretty sure some of this might apply to Wayland, maybe? 



 Bundling KDE

Where does KDE land in the Snap and Flatpak world?

 This guy's primary hobby is 'trying to get KDE people to care about snap and flatpak.' Since snap and flatpak solve problems nobody has, and solve them in ways nobody likes, I imagine his hobby is a challenging one. 



 Haiku, a desktop you can still learn from

No, you didn't steal all our ideas yet ;-)

 Haiku, an OS that is entirely a reimplementation of another OS sends a representative to talk shit about "stealing ideas." The asshole they sent thinks that being multithreaded will help a program run well on older machines, despite older machines being more likely to have one core. 



 Corporate WebDesk

Building the next corporate applications

 Some dink ported his webshit from ASP.NET to javascript and ASP.NET. 



 Free And Open Source Software In European public administrations

Main implementations, main policies

 This is a handy talk to attend if you want to know which European administrations are running out of money. 



 From Gtk to Qt: An Strange Journey, part 2

The continuation of the original talk from Dirk Hohndel and Linus Torvalds about the port of Subsurface from Gtk to Qt, now with mobile in mind.

 Namedropping aside, this talk is actually about some guy using QML. 



 Web VR

Create VR content with A-frame and Firefox

 Shitloads of javascript, demands to use Fedora, and buried in the middle of the text, an admission that this has nothing to do with VR and you should go buy a real VR toolkit if you want to do that. 



 Open source behind a web request

explaining a web request through open source software

 This has nothing to do with Desktop. 



 Kube

The next generation communication and collaboration client

 SPOILER ALERT: This program does not exist. 

Kolab (the company that sells the imap shitware) is making noise about producing a Qt client for their product, and they have dispatched a drone to fluff it.

How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Tumbleweed

Why everyone should be running a rolling release

 A clueless retard, who happens to work for SuSE, shills SuSE's new product. Tumbleweed is an attempt to offend the gods by crossbreeding an overengineered bureaucratic fuckpile like SuSE with an undisciplined usually-broken teenage jerkoff festival like Arch. The retard in question has no idea what drawbacks could possibly be had by changing major versions of basic system components. That's why he works in QA. 



 Homebrew: getting to 1.0.0

Learn about what went into, how we did it and why we released Homebrew 1.0.0.

 Homebrew is like pkgsrc but not implemented as well and full of macshit. Literally nobody cares what version of your package manager you're using. The speaker can't even be bothered to describe the talk, because he knows this. 



 Writing Open Source Documentation for Open Source Projects

How SUSE is documented and what we can learn from it

 Unsurprisingly, SuSE has shit out tons of repeated-work packages to format documentation. They send an employee to talk about it, in case anyone wants to hear how great it is. 



 Continuous Integration with the Open Build Service

 OBS, the one genuinely nice thing SuSE provides to the world, can apparently get you 'a new Linux appliance with every commit', which is both hazily defined and doesn't seem like all that good an idea. The speaker mentions this functionality powers Tizen, which explains why Tizen is completely absent from the Western world. 



 Modularity & Generational Core

The future of Fedora?

 Fedora is ever-so-slowly figuring out why the BSDs have the concept of 'base system' and 'ports' as separate entities that do not meaningfully interact. Two Red Hat employees are trying to nail down sufficiently devopsy terms to replace shitty utilitarian drab terms like 'base system' and 'package group'. 



 Transactional Updates with btrfs

 A genius wants to reimplement Solaris boot environments with btrfs. Yes, this is already trivially easy with zfs. No, btrfs has not fixed their data-loss bugs. Yes, this guy is serious. 



 Building a distro with musl libc

Why and how Alpine Linux did it

 The only competent person in the building, in an act of pure kindness, will display a fully-functioning thought process to the audience. None of them will understand any aspect of it and the best-case scenario is mild confusion. 



 Deploying NPM packages with the Nix package manager 

 To cleanse the audience palate after the preceeding scary-ass display of intellect, the devroom organizers present the rantings of a mentally disabled lunatic on the topic of functional packaging of webshit atrocities. Relieved beyond words, the audience will take careful notes and rush home to throw themselves into implementation of this garbage -- an effort to drive out the painful memories of Natanael Copa making rational decisions and producing working software. 



 Distributions from the view of a package 

 A lifetime inmate of the MySQL ecosystem/prison gets super pissy about packagers, because his project's bullshit is apparently their problem. 



 Source code

Are we not forgetting something?

 Some asshole wants you to GPL your makefiles.

nucap -- recent work and directions 

 They added a plugin interface. No, I don't know why that's worth an entire talk. 



 Integrated Spice Simulation with Kicad

 Hahaha, not integrated gnucap simulation with Kicad. 



 SpinalHDL

An alternative hardware description langage presentation

 Attempt #10,467 to replace Verilog and VHDL with some hipper shit; this time it's Scala, functional programming, and OOP. Don't settle in; it will be gone before you can finish asking why the fuck anyone would use this. 



 Tutorial: my first hardware design

Basic course to create a simple FPGA design using OSS tools

 A carefully-titled talk, because it is not possible to create anything *but* simple FPGA designs with OSS tools. The first step in creating complex FPGA designs is always "buy the toolkit from the FPGA manufacturer." 



 Digital hardware design: what can we learn from software development – and what not?

 Not. Everything definitely goes into the "not" category here. 



 FLOSS Tools for High Level Synthesis

Integrating the FPGA into the Operating System

 The talk description is empty, which at least accurately reflects the availability of FLOSS tools for FPGA work. 



 Discussion session on HDL simulation and synthesis tools

 Scheduled for twenty-five minutes, with four participants, which should leave about twenty minutes of uncomfortable silence. 



 Xorn: A new approach to code organization for gEDA/gaf

How the attempt to Do Scripting Right changes the view of the world

 The guy who wrote it attempts to justify its existence. This should be easy, since it doesn't actually do anything. 



 KiCad Project Status 

 This definitely needs to be a presentation instead of a page on their website. I'm glad to see FOSDEM enabling important work like this. The world would be a darker, more efficient place without it. 



 Diving into the KiCad source code 

 A brave man will attempt to impart meaningful programming guidance in a 25-minute window. Subtracting the traditional fifteen minutes to get his laptop to recognize the projector and the ancient five-minute "is my mic working yet" ceremony, and he'll have just enough time to pagedown past the license header before he has to stop. 



 Footwork

PCB designs as code and EDA as code synthesis

 Someone reverted all the way back to the circuit design methods of the mid-1980s, except this time with lisp. Upon this base, they are reimplementing AutoCAD. 



 Kitnic.it and 1-click BOM

Making web-enabled EDA tools using Javascript

 The 'EDA tool' under discussion here is a web shopping cart. 



 Discussion session on PCB development tools

 Nothing has changed; no changes are forthcoming. But did you guys see the new web shopping cart?

(Ab)using Google's Chromium-EC firmware for your own designs

Building Franken-Chromebook-devices 

 Chromebooks are crippled laptops designed to corral people into Google's surveillance platform. A man offers to teach you how to adapt some of their controller software to produce your own crippled devices. 



 Creating the open connected car with GENIVI

 Remember that news story where some guys demonstrated the ability to remotely fuck over a Jeep? Red Hat is here to teach you how to design security vulnerabilities for your car company! 



 Making Your Own Open Source Raspberry Pi HAT

A Story About Open Source Harware and Open Source Software

 Raspberry Pi is a series of shitty computers designed to save parents money in the process of pretending their children are geniuses. An important feature of the Raspberry Pi is that it has hardware built in that allows you to blink LEDs. This guy sells the LEDs. 



 Groking the Linux SPI Subsystem 

 SPI is a light-blinking interconnect for Linux. 



 Isar: Build Debian-Based Products with BitBake

 Autohell clone #4,566 for the entire operating system. 



 Software updates with OSTree

Why and how

 "Because GNOME can't just use working shit that already exists" and "poorly", respectively. 



 How I survived to a SoC with a terrible vendor BSP

Working with jurassic kernels, missing pieces and buggy code

 Turns out hardware vendors don't give a shit about Linux programmers. The speaker presents a series of tactics for working with people who don't care about you and are not interested in your bullshit. 



 Kernel DLC Metrics, Statistic Analysis and Bug-Patterns

 The guy who tried to fix random-number generation is back to tell us that testing things is worthless and you should just use statistics to predict your failures. 



 Loco Positioning: An OpenSource Local Positioning System for robotics

Presentation with a demo of autonomous Crazylfie 2.0 quadcopter

 GPS is not good enough for this guy's autonomous indoor flying drone. I eagerly await the video of the talk so I can see if he's figured out how to make his drone localize and avoid a baseball bat. 



 Device Tailored Compositors with the QtWayland Compositor Framework

 The speaker teaches us how to make a Wayland compositor "from scratch":

His Turing Award is in the mail. 



 Testing with volcanoes - Fuego+LAVA

Embedded testing going distributed

 Jenkins plugins for testing your security vulnerability platforms. 



 From zero to first test in your own LAVA laboratory

 A Tizen developer wants you to watch him install some software. It's going to take half an hour. The last step in all Tizen-related test suites is "ensure this hardware is never sold in any country where anyone might speak English or have any money." 



 Adding IEEE 802.15.4 and 6LoWPAN to an Embedded Linux Device

 The most important part of designing an embedded security vulnerability platform is the ability of your hardware to connect to the internet. Without an internet connection, Brazilian funboys can't root your skateboard/refrigerator/other stupid thing you're selling. The speaker presents technology allowing Linux-based devices to share software attacks among a localized mesh network. 



 OpenPowerlink over Xenomai 

 Someone wants to replace CANBUS and QNX with this shit and linux.

Welcome!

 



 The State of OpenJDK

 Still everyone's favorite half-assed dodge to avoid paying Oracle any money! 



 Open J9 - The Next Free Java VM

 IBM has written so much shit in Java that they can't go back. They also won't be paying any money to Oracle, so they need something that works better than OpenJDK. They plan to open-source all of their JVM, which means you will be able to download it as an Eclipse extension sometime in 2035. 



 Diagnosing Issues in Java Apps using Thermostat and Byteman.

 You can use Java to hot-patch Java into your Java so that the Java can monitor the Java! 



 Optimizing Errors Away

 I wouldn't take this literally. This guy's employment contract hasn't been optimized away yet. 



 Shenandoah: Why Do We Need Yet Another Garbage Collector

 25 minutes to describe every available OpenJDK garbage collector and also introduce a new one, to a room full of Java programmers who are willfully ignorant of memory management to start with. This is another error that should have been optimized away. 



 Three ideas for the G1 GC (and how to get involved)

 What a shame this talk comes right after the Shenanodah garbage collector talk! After that tour-de-force, why would anyone want to work on a competing project?

 Oh, right. Because this one is coming from Oracle and is therefore going to actually be used. 



 Eclipse 4.7 Platform - The new greatness 

 The speaker claims they'll "improve Java tool performance by a factor by 1000"[sic], which raises the question of what the hell is wrong with the idiots who wrote the old Java tool. 



 Ruby's Strings and What Java Can Learn From Them

 I'm sorry. I was going to say something funny here but the talk title is making me physically nauseous. Let's just move along. 



 Experiences in a production environment (Graal)

 The production environment is Twitter. 



 Challenges updating your code to work with Java 9 Jigsaw

 The talk description is just a condensed CV for the speaker. He seems to divide his time between molesting Lucene and posting his CV to conference websites. 



 Helping Linux and Java Play Well Together

 No talk description, but the speaker is a Red Hat employee, so I'll just assume this talk is about systemtap. 



 JDK 9 Outreach - The Awesome Parts

 If I understand the badly-formatted talk description correctly, Oracle is excited that they can get people to give them feedback. Presumably "The Awesome Parts" is a kinder title than "Look At All These Emails We Ignored." 



 OpenJDK Governing Board Q&A

 Q. WHY

 A. lol I dunno 





Small languages panel

 Small panel mockery 



 An introduction to functional package management with GNU Guix

 The only relationship this talk has to GNU Guile is that Guix is written in it. It's like presenting a how-to-install-Windows-XP talk in the C++ devroom, only nobody uses Guix or Guile. 



 User interfaces with Guile and their application

 The speaker is careful to point out in the talk description that Guile is turing complete. In order to convince people that Guile is suitable for UI programming, the speaker holds a goddamn ncurses program up as an example. 



 Hacking with Guile…

Or how I stopped worrying and learned to love the REPL

 Oh thank christ someone wrote a colorized REPL for Guile. This will fix all the adoption problems! 



 Composing system services in GuixSD

or how we came to wonder what a "system service" really is

 In a rare flash of clarity, some GNU programmers stop what they're doing and realize they have no idea what the fuck anything is. Sadly, instead of learning anything, they built a shitshow to "help users and sysadmins reason about the whole system," because clearly only GNU programmers are capable of reason unassisted. 



 Reproducible packaging and distribution of software with GNU Guix

Distributing software with Guix

 In typical GNU fashion, the speaker assumed 'subtitle' meant 'subset of the title,' and so we have the above nonsense. 



 Network freedom, live at the REPL!

 GNU still thinks they can reimplement Twitter. Maybe they can, but nobody will ever know, because nobody will ever care. 



 Natural script writing with Guile

The newest step on my path towards the perfect script writing syntax

 In this context, 'script writing' is text-based role playing game scripts. Please allow a couple minutes for the last couple of people to file out of the room before you begin this ridiculous display. 



 Ao

Homoiconic solid modeling in Guile

 Turns out it's a lot of hard work to make scheme fast! Who knew! Oh, right: everybody knew that. The speaker doesn't have a solution, but instead wrote software that throws shit out and rewrites your code with the absolute minimum amount of information retained. 



 Mes -- Maxwell's Equations of Software

An attempt at dissolving [GuixSD's] bootstrap binaries

 Lisp guys are still mad that computer hardware doesn't speak lisp. 



 Adding GNU/Hurd support to GNU Guix and GuixSD

Porting Guix and GuixSD to GNU/Hurd

 At long last, someone is tackling the important work: porting software nobody uses, written in a language nobody uses, to an operating system nobody uses, to enable a package manager nobody uses. 



 Getting started with guile-wiredtiger

 A key-value store for your scheme programs, because it's 1987.

Into Geospatial

 As opposed to hydrospatial. 



 German weather data with R

 Some guy wrote a wget equivalent to download shit from the government. He named most of the functions after himself. 



 Intro to semantic annotations for geographic web maps in HTML

Pulling Schema.org, Dublin Core, Microdata, JSON-LD, HTML and SVG all together.

 Jesus, I *really* hoped we were past this 'semantic html' bullshit, but here we are again. 



 Khartis - How to simply create thematic maps in three steps

 An absolute shitload of javascript, that's how. 



 City Focus: A web-based interactive 2D and 3D GIS application to find the best place in a city, using open data and open source software

 By "best place," they mean "best place to live," but the example site defaults to Milan, which is not within a thousand miles of the best place to live. 



 Google Summer of Code 2016 @OSGeo

 They had over twenty kids cranking out software all summer! Come and see the wondrous benefits of hordes of undereducated programmers! 



 How to break the OpenStreetMap

Pros and pitfalls of editing OSM data offline

 An OSM guy is slightly pissy about the filthy casuals who invaded his nerd kingdom. 



 Easily creating location-based applications with OSMAlchemy

Learn how to create (web) applications using real-world map data with as little resources as possible

 Guys, it's soooo easy! All you need is python, flask, sqlite, sqlalchemy, osmalchemy, angular.js, a live network connecti-- wait where are you going 



 'Open Notices' - alpha

A global platform for official notices (planning, licensing etc)

 SPOILER ALERT: This software doesn't exist.

 Some dude wants to crowdsource awareness of legal public notices. I think he's serious. 



 airspace-v.com

international hangar flying

 Stupid programmer, you can't fly a hangar. 



 Creating georeferenced digital elevation models from unmanned aerial vehicle images

 Hiring a surveyor is a waste of time, when you can just hope some dude flies a drone over the land in question! As long as you know what camera lens he's using! 



 Working with spatial data in Go

 A fly-by-night shitware developer talks about reimplementing Uber in third-world countries. 



 Big Spatio-Temporal Datacubes on Steroids ...and Standards

 A career bureaucrat attempts to justify the overengineered garbage he helped ram through a standards committee or two. With luck he'll divulge the real motivation to his audience: it has generated an unending stream of grant funding for his university. 



 What to expect from MySQL 8.0?

 The same failure to execute we got from every other MySQL version! The speaker talks about GIS-specific functionality being planned, without bothering to explain why you'd use MySQL for GIS to start with. 



 Introduction to Boost.Geometry

 Incredibly, Boost is still a thing that people actually consider using. Unsurprisingly, Oracle is funding its development. 



 Geography on Boost.Geometry

The Earth is not flat (but it's not round either)

 I'd say an Oracle-employed MySQL coder giving a Boost talk already has three strikes against him. 





Intro to Graph databases

 A thirty-minute overview of the entire history of graph theory and its applications in computing is surely worthwhile -- especially since this talk is likely a Neo4J sales pitch. 



 Using graph databases in popular open source CMSs

Neo4J and Drupal, potential application areas and module introduction

 Shoving a graph database into Drupal is definitely worth your time! Just ask this guy, who makes money off selling Drupal! 



 Incremental Graph Queries with openCypher

 Someone has noticed that running queries on huge-ass databases can be slow. Instead of reconsidering their approach to data analysis, they applied several caching bandaids and are very proud of the resulting corpse. 



 Twitter Streaming Graph with Gephi

Visualising stream of Data

 The ability to visualize and interact with very large datasets is an important and fast-moving sector in information technology. These people have put together a system that enables a lot of interesting funtionality, and then glued it to the worst, least-interesting possible application: Twitter spam. 



 Bringing the Semantic Web closer to reality

PostgreSQL as RDF Graph Database

 Oh jesus, not these assholes again 



 (Cypher)-[:ON]->(ApacheFlink)

 It should be obvious by now, but anyone who looks at that syntax and is not immediately repulsed is a monster and should not be trusted with any important task. 



 From Shopping Baskets to Structural Patterns

 Ah yes, let's use graph databases to implement the "customers also bought:" upsell advertisements in shopping carts. We'll sleep better tonight knowing we've enhanced the human experience. 



 Designing a graph library for JavaScript

 Nobody 'designs' anything for javascript. They shit out something that barely works and then rewrite it every three months until the money runs out. Why lie about it? 



 Graph Processing on SAP HANA Express Edition

 SAP sends an employee to shill its products. No edition of SAP HANA is open-source. Some parts of SAP's UI toolkit are. It's not clear what the hell this talk is doing here. 



 Graph Analytics on Massively Parallel Processing Databases

 MPP here is code for "we use SQL and we are resistant to actual parallel processing." This talk is basically advertising for Apache MADlib, which is a bundle of third-party packages shoved into a database interface. 



 Graphs at scale

Scale out Neo4j using Apache Mesos and DC/OS

 More Neo4J spam, this time about how to work around its crippling performance problems. SPOILER ALERT: throw shitloads of hardware at it. 



 Network Traffic Analysis of Hadoop Clusters

Understand the common usage patterns and identify typical / atypical workloads.

 These people are working on figuring out when someone is using your Hadoop cluster to do bad things. Or something. They mumble about cybersecurity and network analysis but never make any actual points.

Portability of containers across diverse HPC resources with Singularity

 Some dudes are desperate to make containers relevant to HPC. They brag that you won't need to have any applications installed on your cluster (making the incorrect assumption that all users are going to play with this container toy) and that users' programs will run on diverse supercomputers across the TOP500 (making the incorrect assumption that users commonly have accounts on a wide subset of TOP500 supercomputers). 



 The birth of HPC Cuba

How supercomputing is being made available to all Cuban researchers using FOSS

 Like everything else in Cuba, other countries paid for everything. 



 Optimized and reproducible HPC Software deployment

with free software and GNU Guix

 Two GNU programmers with no visible HPC experience set out to solve problems that don't exist in ways nobody wants. 



 Enabling Reproducible Scientific Software Installation on Cray Supercomputers with EasyBuild

 Someone ported a Python app installer to Cray PE because they got sick of waiting for Cray support to get around to it. 



 Putting Your Jobs Under the Microscope using OGRT

 Someone wrote some software to figure out which programs are being used on a computer. Hope you like Elasticsearch. 



 Dask - extending Python data tools for parallel and distributed computing

 Someone wrote a scheduler and implemented it as a python library. This way, you don't have to learn to write real code, and your code won't run right on clusters with real schedulers. 



 Purely Functional GPU Programming with Futhark

 Someone noticed that programming for GPU accelerators is a pain in the ass. They responded by inventing a whole new language with its own compiler, for masochists, I guess. 



 The Marriage of Cloud, HPC and Containers

 Another guy trying to solve a lack of systems administration skills with containers and/or openstack. 



 Quickstart Big Data

 An Apache programmer thinks anyone in HPC wants to use Bigtop or Spark. He is mistaken, but is willing to set that aside to mislead the audience about the usefulness of trying to use third-party tools to make your software scalable. 



 Extending Spark Machine Learning Pipelines

Going beyond wordcount with Spark ML

 The only one of these talks to acknowledge that Spark is trapped in the JVM. Pleads with users of other languages to take it seriously anyway. 



 Using BigBench to compare Hive and Spark versions and features

 Someone wrote some software to determine which half-assed 'big data' framework is faster. Unfortunately the software does not seem to automatically insult the user for nerding out about benchmarking bad code instead of writing better code. 



 Making Wiki Gardening Tasks Easier Using Big Data and NLP

This talk will be about a NLP-based tool I have built for Fedora wiki to make wiki-gardening tasks easier for contributors

 Someone decided to use natural-language processing for the most important task humanity has ever underaken: policing the Fedora wiki. Why does Fedora have a wiki? Nobody knows. Search stackoverflow and see if someone explains it there. 



 A field guide to the machine learning zoo

 The speaker informs us that "little previous knowledge" is required, but declines to specify whether he's talking about himself or the audience. My prediction: both. 



 Intelligently Collecting Data at the Edge — Intro to Apache NiFi and MiNiFi

 Have you ever wanted to use a web browser to draw pictures of where your data should be stored? Have we got the product for you! Stop laughing, this is serious, people use this for serious things, STOP LAUGHING 



 Making two elephants dance: how Postgres MPP Data Warehousing entered the Hadoop ecosystem

 Not answered: WHY 



 BigPetStore on Spark and Flink

Implementing use cases on unified Big Data engines

 More benchmarking noise for terrible software. 



 Democratizing Deep Learning with Tensorflow on Hops Hadoop

 Some CS professor made a faster version of Hadoop to attract grant funding. It's still not as fast as getting your data structures right. 



 Kafka Streams and Protobuf

stream processing at trivago

 This one's got a PDF attached! Let's take a look! 

...

Oh, for fuck's sake. They're monitoring hotel prices to write travelblog spam. GET A JOB, ASSHOLE 



 Not less, Not more. Exactly Once Large-Scale Stream Processing in Action.

 Someone wrote checkpointing software that only works with one specific Apache product. NEXT 



 Why you should care about SQL for big data and how Apache Calcite can help

 You should absolutely not care about SQL for big data and nothing anyone does to 'help' is going to make it any better. "SQL" is the prototypical "I don't understand data structures" technology and "big data" is code for the current overpaid charlatans of the "I refuse to learn data structures" ilk.

Welcome to the Legal and Policy Issues Devroom

 Since all of the actual developers are engaged in other devrooms, it makes perfect sense to concentrate all the legal shit in once place while they're busy. 



 Free/open source software and drones

Safety, security and privacy issues

 A bureaucrat pontificates about bureaucracy. 



 Make your Corporate CLA easy to use, please!

 A Bloomberg employee seems to think that binding legal agreements should prioritize ease of use. This problem is real, but whining about it in Europe is probably not going to fix it. 



 Mixed License FOSS Projects

Unintended Consequences, Worked Examples, Best Practices

 Turns out there are consequences to playing fuck-fuck games with your project's licensing when you try to monetize it. Who knew? (Everyone knew) 



 Making License Compliance Easy: Step by Open Source Step.

 SPDX is a license classification scheme which has had the living shit trademarked out of it by the Linux Foundation. The speaker would like basically everyone to use it, generating a lot more work for themselves with no measurable gain. 



 Corporate Shenanigans

 You should start a trade association to maintain a vicelike grip on your source code. Eclipse did it, and everyone loves Eclipse, right? Right? [SFX: lone IBM employee cheering] 



 What legal and policy issues concerning FOSS need to be systematically researched?

 A team of academics crowdsources the topics for their next round of grant applications. 



 Principled free software license enforcement: an open source company perspective

 A Red Hat bureaucrat rambles about GPL enforcement, which has never actually happened. 



 Copyleft in Commerce.

How GPLv3 keeps Samba relevant in the marketplace

 This would be an interesting talk, because GPLv3 is a god-awful license written by facists. However, the core assumption that Samba is relevant in any marketplace is fatally flawed. 



 Bits, Gates, Traces, and Pins: Copyleft and Licensing in Open Hardware

 Some Intel employees waste everyone's time talking about Open Hardware, which does not exist. 



 A discussion of Fedora's Legal state

This is why I drink.

 The Fedora Legal Chair, who is not a lawyer, takes time out of his work (as the leader of Red Hat's Education Outreach team, whatever the fuck that is) to describe his hobby in great detail. 



 Radio Lockdown Directive

Major threat for Free Software on radio devices

 Some Europeans are concerned that they will have to abide by radio transmission regulations. They are attempting to derail the legislation by pretending it affects anyone but them. An FSF bureaucrat takes the lead. 



 Understanding The Complexity of Copyleft Defense

After 25 Years of GPL Enforcement, Is Copyleft Succeeding?

 "GPL enforcement" is a technical term that means "writing angry letters to people who use your source code." Someone from the FSF shows up to whine about how people aren't paying sufficient respect to the Founding Fathers of Shitty Software: the FSF. 



 Back to sources: what's in your binary?

Tracing back from a binary to its corresponding source code

 This guy started a business doing this; presumably if anyone actually cared they'd have hired him by now. 



 Patently Prepared

Are FOSS Companies Ready to Deal with Patents in the US and Europe?

 Yes. What's the other 24 minutes going to be about? Nobody knows. 



 Protect your freedom to operate with Open Patents

Hacking the patent system.

 Some idiots decided to open their own patent office. Nobody cared. 



 Is the GPL a copyright license or a contract under U.S. law?

 The answer is "nobody cares", because it's never come up in court, and it never will. That's not going to stop bureaucrats fantasizing about what might happen, or playing wargames in their heads about how they'd handle the case, but it doesn't mean anyone will ever have to give a shit. 



 F and in Freedom

Codes of Conduct & Community Guidelines

 An idiot thinks it's possible to determine the efficacy of a Code of Conduct by grepping for swear words. 



 Why we need a legal framework to operate successfull a Trusted Service Provider

An overview of some internals of our Trusted Service Provider

 Some dipshit registered a nonprofit and wants someone to write him software to run a certificate authority. Does FOSDEM not screen speakers at all? This is the conference equivalent of a dude posting 'someone write me a better Facebook' on rentacoder. 



 Reflections on Adjusting Trust: The Mozilla Root Program

Tales of running an open and transparent Certificate Authority Program and Certificate Transparency Program

 At long last, a Mozilla employee shows up to explain why they refused to ship a root cert from Honest Achmed's Used Cars and Certificates. 



 Increasingly permissive or increasingly dismissive?

 An FSF shithead shows up to screech about the dangers of having different opinions on software licensing. The incontrovertible and widely-reported fact that actually-free licenses are being chosen at a higher rate than GPL facism is completely wrong and bad and we'll all be sorry and it's not really happening anyway so everything is fine. The subtext is that anyone who doesn't like or use the GPL is an ignorant asshole destined for an ignominious fate. It is not clear whether such a fate is preferable to being associated with the FSF in any way. 



 Panel of European legal entities for Free Software projects

 The leaders of several bureaucracies are here to tell you why you need bureaucrats. 



 FOSS and the GDPR

Overview of key changes to EU privacy law that FOSS can use to promote individual's privacy and autonomy

 Nothing in this talk matters until well into 2018. 



 How We Talk About Free Software Legal Tools

 However the fuck we want, Deb. 



 Don't Send An Engineer To Do A Lawyer's Job

A beginners guide to community legal engagement

 A post-mortem on the dangers of doing any business whatsoever with a multinational corporation. This guy suggests getting a lawyer; it's probably better just to delete every email from anyone working on any Apache project.

Kubernetes 101

Orchestration doesn't have to be difficult

 ...but it absolutely will be if you use Kubernetes, which can't do ipv6 right, still hasn't nailed down nebulous concepts like 'storage', and is so otherwise full of warts that I think it might actually be the software version of herpes. 



 Taking containers from development to production

 Also could be titled "deliberately sticking your hand into the oven." 



 gRPC 101 - building fast and efficient microservices

 Google's in-house REST replacement for HTTP2. Useless to adults. 



 Kubernetes Operators

Managing Complex Software with Software

 Kubernetes is so great at orchestration they require third-party software to actually orchestrate anything. This talk is about etcd, but they call it "an Operator" to avoid recognizing that literally nothing else even almost works. 



 Namespaced file capabilities

 A Canonical employee describes trying to shove UID hacks into the linux kernel. 



 The Easiest Way to Start Developing with Openshift

 "Get hired by Red Hat." Without that step, you'd first have to answer the question "why the fuck would you want to develop with Openshift?" 



 Layer based container images vs dependency graphs

 SPOILER ALERT: everyone loses. 



 Cloud Native Java Development

Patterns and Principles for Designing Java Applications to run on Kubernetes

 "Cloud native" means "runs in Kubernetes." This talk describes how to design a Java program to run in Kubernetes, despite Kubernetes' promises that shit can Just Work with it, and also despite Java's "write once run anywhere" promises. 



 Singularity: The Inner Workings of Securely Running User Containers on HPC systems

 User-level containerization to make high-performance applications even harder to debug. Thanks, kid! 



 cgroupv2: Linux's new unified control group hierarchy

 The linux people are rewriting cgroups, presumably because nobody is allowed to touch them except systemd. 



 Troubleshooting Kubernetes

 You can save a lot of time by just Shooting Kubernetes, but the speaker would like to teach you how to manually capture a core dump from a running container and figure out which DNS problem is breaking your software. 



 Running virtual machines in containers

 Pointless containerization of virtualization, or pointless containerization of virtualization administration? The possibilities are endless, just like the stupidity of either of those plans!

LuaWt: Lua bindings for a C++ Web Toolkit library

 HAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAHAH 



 Quick functional UI prototypes with Lua templates and mermaid.js

 Oh, they're serious about this Lua/webshit mashup. Gross. 



 Next Generation of the LuaRocks test suite

 Amazing both that there was a previous generation of the LuaRocks test suite and that they could trick some poor sod into wasting time improving it. They never did get it working correctly on Windows, but like all open-source projects, they just marked the problems "known issues" and ignored them forever. 



 Making wearables with NodeMCU

 You know those people who beg for attention on Reddit and Youtube by programming an arduino to flash some lights, glue the whole thing to a pair of shoes or something, and then declare themselves Makers? 

 Yup. That. 



 A different Lua JIT using Eclipse OMR

Using the Eclipse OMR JitBuilder to improve Lua performance with minimal changes to the interpreter 

 If your scripting language is slow, shove some JIT into it! Enjoy this display, since nobody will ever look at any of this code again. 



 LuaJIT for AArch64 and MIPS64 platforms

Improvements and the status

 Fun fact: not all Lua programs will work on these ports. Success!

Welcoming and Introduction

 BEHOLD: OUR IRRELEVANCY VORTEX 



 A kernel in a library

Genode's custom kernel approach

 Write a whole bunch of software, then use it to implement OS primitives. Not sure why this talk exists, or who will attend, but then again that sentiment is the theme of this entire track! 



 HelenOS in the year of the fire monkey

 Paper-writing factory for European grad students. 



 Deterministic replay support for Genode components: Performance penalty and challenges

 Someone describes stack-and-register fuckery which is of use to nobody and does not work on currently-available computers. 



 Redox OS

A safety-first microkernel developed in Rust

 The programming language that Jesus Christ personally delivered unto Man is being used to write an operating system with all the sharp edges filed off so stupid users can't hurt themselves. Also impossible with this kernel: everything else. 



 Introducing kernel-agnostic Genode executables

 Hooray, now we can just use the linux kernel and run everything there! Seems like the next logical step is just installing linux and using that instead -- that's what the Genode developers do, after all. 



 TCP/IP for MINIX, the good, the bad, the ugly

 The guy who wrote the TCP/IP stack for MINIX finally admits it's shit. 



 The VFS paradigm from the perspective of a component OS

 The Genode developers edge closer to Plan-9-style namespaces, but stop well short of implementing anything useful. 



 Virtualization on the Hurd

 Porting virtualization tools to a virtual operating system seems crazy. Hurd has virtually existed for many years now and it virtually works fine.

What motivates the open source community?

- a qualitative exploration of the underlying experiences and motivations of open source community members

 The attached report is, hilariously, hosted on Google Drive. It is also utterly useless in every way, because it was poorly designed to ask the wrong questions of the wrong people. At least the presentation is short. 



 Rebooting Firefox Nightly

A community building project around the Firefox Nightly Channel

 Mozilla has successfully crowdsourced localization work, and would now like people to handle development builds for free as well. 



 Firefox DevTools Deep Dive

 The talk description starts out "No, Firefox DevTools are not Firebug" without stopping to apologize for that fact or explain why we got such a shitty alternative built in instead. 



 Firefox and WebExtensions

 Mozilla is also outsourcing the extension API. To their biggest competitor. 



 Firefox: The Puppet Show

Automating Firefox with WebDriver using Selenium and GeckoDriver

 Sales pitch for Selenium with apologetics from the guy who wrote the plugin to make it work with Firefox. 



 WebRender, the next generation graphics engine by Mozilla research

A technical talk about the web rendering architectures of today and tomorrow.

 WebRender is 3d javascript webshit, which only runs on Servo, which doesn't actually work but is written in Rust, which is slow as shit and not getting any faster. So by 'next generation' they mean 'see you in 2025.' 



 How Rust is being developed

The Rust development dashboard

 Poorly, slowly, and loudly. The dashboard in question is not written in Rust. 



 Corrode: Tool-aided translation from C to Rust

 Homeboy shows up to explain why he wrote a Rust development tool in Haskell. SPOILER ALERT: it's because Rust fucking sucks. 



 Embedding/Maintaining SpiderMonkey in a large scale project

 Nobody uses any of this shit. 



 Introduction to A-Frame

Build Virtual Reality on the Web

 Covered earlier, nothing added: shitty not-VR implemented in a browser. 



 (Mobile) Web Compatibility

Why is important to care about users from different platform. How can you unblock them?

 Of course it's not actually important to care about users, regardless of platform -- nonetheless, these losers have created an entire infrastructure around their desire to bitch that some website didn't work on their browser. They've truly leveraged a tremendous amount of ingenuity to apply industrial processes and tooling to the art of being ignored by webmasters. 



 So that was HTTP/2, what's next?

 Nobody really gives a shit, until the day inevitably comes that Google decides to shove QUIC down everyone's throat. 



 Web Logins after Persona

How I solved logins on my small websites

 Some nobody shat out some PHP to implement a buggy and insecure OAuth2 setup after Mozilla left him out to dry. 



 Discourse development for (complete) beginners

From a recent beginner to everyone else

 Ruby webforum shit. Disregard. 



 Diversity User Research: Becoming a Better Listener and Women in Open Source Technologies

Developing a deeper understanding of minorities in tech.

 Mozilla finds it crucial to support women in technology, as long as they're not queers. 



 Don't break the Internet!, Mozilla Copyright Campaign in Europe

 Mozilla's corporate political lobbying efforts.

Optimizing MySQL without SQL or touching my.cnf

 Dropbox goes into great detail describing all the ridiculous lengths they go to -- including rebuilding MySQL with specific compilers -- all in an attempt to avoid learning to program computers properly. 



 Applying profilers to MySQL

From PMP to perf, and why performance_schema is not a replacement in all cases

 Be like Dropbox! Profile MySQL so you can find out exactly which part of your shitty software should have been written by someone better than you. 



 Instrumenting plugins for Performance Schema

 ...see above... 



 sysbench 1.0: teaching an old dog new tricks

 ...and again. 



 Introducing gh-ost: GitHub's triggerless, painless schema migrations for MySQL

 Github, a company famous for capricious and unexplained downtime, would like you to run the software they wrote to molest your database on a fundamental level. 



 Autopsy of an automation disaster

 This talk contains the term 'split-brain,' which 100% of the time is an indicator that the person speaking has no fucking clue how anything works. Surprise: the speaker has no fucking clue how anything works. 



 Honeypot your database

And easy method to detect if you've been hacked

 Setting up notifications to go off if someone accesses a 'honey pot table' has to be the dumbest shit I've ever heard from the database world. What kind of bush-league amateur would ... oh, it's a MySQL employee. Imagine that. 



 The Proxy Wars - MySQL Router, ProxySQL, MariaDB MaxScale

 The author helped found the MariaDB fork. I wonder which of the above he prefers? 



 Painless MySQL HA, Scalability and Flexibility with Ansible, MHA and ProxySQL

 Bash, Docker, Ansible, ProxySQL, MHA, and MySQL! Painless! Next talk: carving a pocket watch out of granite with your dick! Painless! 



 Inexpensive Datamasking for MySQL with ProxySQL

data anonymization for developers

 This is literally a regex substitution on your sql statements. 



 Speeding Up Analytical Queries in MariaDB

 Sweet, more performance advice from people stupid enough to use SQL in performance-critical roles. I'll never get sick of this! 



 Data Analytics with MySQL, Apache Spark and Apache Drill

 Hilariously, the methodology seems to be "take the data out of MySQL immediately, use literally anything else during computation, and then put your results back into MySQL." 



 Group Replication: A Journey to the Group Communication Core

 Absolutely nobody uses this shit, because it doesn't work reliably. I can't tell if this is a series of excuses or an apology. 



 Fine tuning Group Replication for performance

 This is on the same topic, except it was written in a parallel dimension where the software works and is something to be proud of. 



 Mix ‘n’ Match Async and Group Replication for Advanced Replication Setups

 A master class on workarounds to your shitty RDBMS implementation, presented by a representative of the company that would like to charge you money for shitty RDBMS implementations. 



 MyRocks: the RocksDB storage engine for MySQL

 RocksDB is a database engine for people who write a lot of data and then never read it (i.e. idiots). It is trivially smaller than InnoDB, slightly faster than InnoDB, and nowhere near as mature as InnoDB. Switch today! 



 MyRocks in production at Facebook

 MyRocks, being a shitty implementation of a bad database for a terrible RDBMS, is of course something Facebook badly needed to integrate into their platform immediately. The speaker brags about achieving during the transition the kind of stability that would be expected as a baseline from any other RDBMS.

The Office Pokémon GO IV Calculator

Games, Fun, and Hacks with OpenOffice/LibreOffice

 In case you thought that LibreOffice developers were sad nerds with wannabe-enterprisey delusions, overcome with a desire to do literally anything to seem interesting to healthier human beings: you are correct. 



 LibreOffice UI Concept

A personal, user friendly and flexible interface

 More interface bikeshedding because people have grown used to MS Office's 'ribbon' thing and now get angry when it's not in LibreOffice. 



 How to make life easier for beginners

Contextual groups in LibreOffice' Notebookbar

 Because there are so many buttons that it's hard to find the buttons, they're moving the buttons around again, but this time with fewer rules. 



 Make your LibreOffice extensions and macros rock

Defining user interface has never been easier

 LibreOffice ports everything to Glade, which nobody has used for ten years. 



 Interoperability regression testing in LibreOffice

 A developer explains the phenomenal amount of work that goes into making sure LibreOffice slightly fucks up all your formatting at every opportunity. 



 LibreOffice Online Debugging

 As soon as someone decides to use LibreOffice webshit, it will immediately explode, but this guy's ready to figure out why. 



 LibreOffice XML Help in your local browser

Bringing 2017 to LibreOffice Help

 An asshole works on removing the integrated help system from LibreOffice because it doesn't support video or javascript. Guess where he's gonna move everything. 



 Extensions: Ugly Toupee or Hipster Hairdo?

 Talk description not found, exactly like the point of extensions in LibreOffice. 



 Cleaning up the spellcheck dictionary

And making it faster and more maintainable

 Probably the absolute easiest part of any word processor, now available as a documentary. 



 Office Basic Source Code Management

OpenOffice/LibreOffice Basic Development with 3rd-Party Editors, Version Control and Cloud Storage Backup

 If you spend your life writing Excel macros in an Excel clone, you might care about this crap. The rest of us can merely pause to enjoy the irony that someone went to all this work so they could use a text editor that didn't come with their word processor. 



 LibreOffice and your IDE

gbuild, json and other buzzwords

 Why spend your time developing software when you can spend your time developing software development software? 



 LibreOffice on Wayland via GTK3

 Even the speaker found this talk too dull to describe. 



 DrawingLayer - Optimization & Implementation

See how we optimized drawinglayer performance with buffering and multi-threading, plus some architectural overview

 We live in a world where people have to work on performance optimizations for word processors. This is the same industry developing autonomous cars. Good luck, world. 



 Exploiting Concurrency

How I stopped worrying and started threading ...

 Again: your 2GHz processor is not fast enough to run this word processor. It needs more than one. 



 Integrating LibreOffice Online via WOPI

 The only thing better than a webshit word processor nobody uses is a webshit word processor nobody uses EVERYWHERE! 



 Introducing LibreOffice SafeMode

 If your office software needs a 'safe mode,' perhaps you should take a moment to re-examine your software choices. Perhaps you should immediately stop using that office software forever, and use something that won't destroy your computer instead? 



 Enhance metafile importers - a restart

First steps in re-architecting our various metafile / svg importers into one

 Well, thank god for this! I'm tired of having to figure out which part of my office software is crashing my computer. If it's all one importer, it'll be much easier to assign CVEs to all of the buffer overruns. 



 What the cell?!

 Talk description not found, much like my interest in this entire devroom. 



 Tackling the LibreOffice update problem

Automated updates and update statistics

 Here's our subtle warning: LibreOffice is going to start trying to track its users, in the name of harassing them into installing updates, whether the user cares or not. And they're getting the tech from Mozilla, who know user-tracking better than any other open-source project! Hooray? 



 The Document Foundation Development Dashboard

How LibreOffice is being developed

 In the spirit of fairness, LibreOffice is also tracking its developers. This is much more efficient than treating them like humans. 



 The Document Foundation Development Dashboard: hands on

 This is the same talk description, given by the same speaker, with a different title. They really take this OpenOffice/LibreOffice split to heart. 



 Lightning talk session Open Document Editors DevRoom

5 minutes each - come to submit until 30 minutes before, until we run out of slots

 Sure, FOSDEM already has a lightning talks track. But fuck that NIH shit! We'll do it ourselves!

Computer games – not as easy as it looks

 Resume-building fluff from a non-participant. 



 Rapid prototyping of a backend for a geolocation-based mobile game with OpenResty, Redis and Docker

 "Rapid prototyping" is only required when you forgot to have a design stage in your software. 



 WebCam based games

OpenCV in practice: example for developers and business

 An idiot still thinks people want to interact with computers by waving their hands around. He offers to teach you how to make things like that. 



 Drawing based game design

 Artists working hard to raise awareness about their art projects. 



 Living Orb

Tangible game console.

 Someone hooked up a motion sensor to a Raspberry-Pi-like light-flashing platform. 



 0xFF

Drawing games for a DIY console

 Yet another "game console" that consists of shitty hardware connected to shitty software, with its shittiness excused by being called "retro." No one is fooled; this just sucks. 



 openEMSstim

Open-source muscle stimulation for interactive experiences & games

 Yes, this idiot would like you to electrocute yourself as a form of entertainment. No, I don't suggest you participate. Yes, I'm positive this talk will be overflowing with people eager to electrocute themselves. Yes, they are idiots. 



 Creating GPL'ed multimedia assets

 That guy from before who wanted you to GPL your makefiles also wants you to GPL your pictures and sound. 



 Can open source open minds?

Lessons learned making games about diversity for the IncLudo project

 This kind of shit is pretty revolting. Of course increased diversity is much to be desired, but setting up some kind of god damn money pit is not the way to do it. Rather than reaching into the industry and working with established parties to further their mission, they're striking out on their own and maximizing their buzzword potential. This enhances the grant flow, but it lessens the impact, and silos their work. 



 Presentation of Hellink, an educational game about Open Data

Creating a "real" game to raise awareness among students

 See, this is what I mean. These people had an idea and instead of founding a fucking Institute and spreading out their Impact Factor, they hired some fucking game developers and made a goddamn game. Take notes, previous talk. 



 Tablexia

Cognitive Training for Children with Dyslexia

 That's great, but it doesn't appear to be open source. What the hell is it doing *here*? 



 Hero.Coli, learning synthetic biology by playing: an update

Open Source, Open Data, Open Science

 Entry #5,193 in Educational Games Hell. No source code available. Open what, exactly? 



 Snap! Build Your Own Blocks

Interactive visual programming

 Webshit to clone Scratch. 



 Polymorph

A libre game engine based on Ogre3D and Puredata

 Brand-new project, unknown if it will even survive -- but props for using mercurial instead of fucking github. 



 Creating a game with Monogame and other open source software

 Yeah, *that* Mono. We're still pretending C# is open source, I guess. 



 Escoria, a libre point'n'click framework using Godot Engine

"Oh, it looks just like SCUMM!" -- Tim Schafer

 Just what we needed! Yet another finicky runtime that probably doesn't work on anything but Ubuntu!

Open Media devroom introduction

 HELLO WE DO NOT SOFTWARE! LOOK AT PICTURE PLEASE 



 Celebrating 10 years of Open Source Innovation in Online Video

Marking 10 years for the Open Source Video Platform - What's been done, what's next?

 This is a sales talk. 



 Open Source Support for TTML Subtitles

Status Quo and Outlook

 It would be nice if anyone relevant used this, but they don't, so this talk is mostly worthless, except for the link to the European Broadcasting Union's Timed Titles project, which they have named EBU-TT. Hahah. 



 What's new in GStreamer land

The last 2 years and the future

 No mention of the horrible security vulnerabilities that keep popping up as a result of gstreamer's whorish acceptance of any code spurted at its repository. 



 GPAC: delivery of VR/360 videos using Tiles

 More wannabe-VR crap you can safely ignore forever. 



 Overview of Upipe modules for broadcast professionals

 This talk will be standing room only; every single broadcast professional in Europe will be here. 



 Media Analysis tools

How we check media files

 "Poorly," says MediaArea founder and technical lead Jérôme Martinez, "and with very low accuracy." 



 Dissecting media file formats with Kaitai Struct

 A hex editor on steroids. 



 AV1: Status update

Progress, expected features and encoding gains

 A VP9 fork continues to be irrelevant. 



 AES67

Open Media Standard for Pro-Audio Networks

 Here's the traditional "oh my god what about jitter" crew, back to show you how they use RTP to stream audio. 



 AES70

Open Control Standard for Pro-Audio Networks

 Same shit but for switches and knobs. 



 Open Media devroom wrap-up

What's next?

 Shame, retreat, denial.

Beyond Trust - PostgreSQL Client Authentication

 SSL and Kerberos, just like literally everything else. NEXT 



 Tour de Data Types: VARCHAR2 or CHAR(255)?

 The above question, while trivial and uninteresting to most people, is actually just a representative sample of several similarly trivial and uninteresting questions which will be addressed in this trivial and uninteresting talk. 



 Replication & Recovery in PostgreSQL 10.0

 "Important information for anyone running replication or backup." Not important enough to link to anything. Just come to the talk. 



 Evolution of Fault Tolerance in PostgreSQL

 This is simple. In the beginning, there was no fault tolerance. After many years and a lot of hard work, developers successfully implemented a new kind of fault tolerance: none. Today, there is still no fault tolerance, but there's a shitload of code you can shove in front of, behind, and all around PostgreSQL to fake it. 



 Infrastructure Monitoring with Postgres

 When all you have is a PostgreSQL, all your data looks like nails. Nails fired into a toilet door with a broken nailgun by a drunken idiot. But hey, at least you only have to learn one database! 



 An overview of PostgreSQL's backup, archiving and replication

 Complaining that the PostgreSQL documentation is just too darn thorough, the speaker offers to helpfully obfuscate the topic and introduce uncertainty where there was none before. With luck, he will also leave out important details, hand out rank misinformation, and then tell the audience they should have just read the documentation.

Tensor Processing and Machine Learning for Signal Processing

Functional Algorithm Definition and Concurrent Automation

 GNU Radio, bored sitting alone in a corner totally unused, decides to experiment with machine learning. Nothing happens.

Welcome to the Ruby Devroom 2017

 Everyone in this room is old. 



 concurrent-ruby modern tools explained

 This is a sales pitch for the author's embarassing garbage, which requires a version of Ruby newer than that installed on most computers in the world, and doesn't seem to actually do much for the user. 



 A People's History of the Ruby Garbage Collector

Ruby GC from 1.8 until 2.4 and beyond!

 Ruby has had five different garbage collectors in the past few years. None of them cured it of its fatal flaw (being Ruby) and none of them will make this talk interesting at all to anyone. 



 Leverging Rust to Build a Windows friendly ecosystem for mruby

 The Rust Evangelism Strike Force deploys shock troops deep into Ruby territory, confusing the natives with offers of Rust-base API translation. 



 JRuby in 2017: Rails 5, Ruby 2.4, Performance

We'll survey the work going on to make JRuby more compatible and faster in 2017

 I don't know what kind of psychopath deliberately chooses to interact with Java, Ruby, and Rails at the same time, but it's probably not a coincidence that the speaker's name is listed as "Nutter." 



 What makes JRuby+Truffle run Optcarrot 9 times faster than MRI?

 Who cares? I can't even be bothered to read far enough into the talk description to see if he defines any of these ridiculous names. 



 Highly Surmountable Challenges in Ruby+OMR JIT Compilation

 Any challenge involving Ruby is easily surmountable: stop fucking using Ruby. There was never a reason to use Ruby; you're only doing it because you're an idiot. Stop it. 



 Scientific Computing on JRuby

 The trick reported by the speaker is "stop using Ruby." He says things get way faster when you use Java instead! Good news: actual scientists do not use this garbage anyway. 



 DIY: Home monitoring with Ruby & Pi

 The speaker develops software for his light-flashing platform that will flash lights if his house catches fire.

The emergence of open-source 4G/5G ecosystems

 A sales talk for the speaker's university grant-funding cash cow. 



 switchdev: the Linux switching framework

Running a mainline kernel on network gear

 Reverse engineering hardware support that nobody asked for. 



 Accelerating TCP with TLDK

Overview of the architecture and implementation of TLDK

 Intel. Presumably so their Omnipath shit doesn't suffer from Aries Shitty TCP Syndrome. 



 Writing a functional DPDK application from scratch

 Intel again! Nobody else actually gives a shit about DPDK. 



 eBPF and XDP walkthrough and recent updates

 At this point in the devroom, corporate control is handed over from Intel to Cisco, who proceeds to talk about shit only Cisco cares about. 



 Cilium - BPF & XDP for containers

 This is Go shit that smells especially Googly, even though the speaker's name is not divulged and Google seems curiously hands-off on the project itself. It probably violates some ridiculous patent that Google doesn't want to fight about. 



 Stateful packet processing with eBPF: an implementation of OpenState interface

 An especially shitty idea: keeping all network packet state in an in-kernel bytecode program loaded from userspace. What could possibly go wrong? 



 Getting Started with OpenDaylight

 Java shit for software-defined networking! Next year's talk will be a smashing success: "Getting the Fuck Away from OpenDaylight" 



 Open-Source BGP networking with OpenDaylight

using OpenDaylight to enable advanced BGP use-cases

 BGP is such a simple protocol that I can't imagine the fuckwittery required to deliberately involve a gigantic Java mess. 



 FastDataStacks

A fast and flexible platform for high performance applications using FD.io

 Shoving like four different organizational platforms into Openstack and hoping the Jenkins install doesn't fall over: the talk 



 PNDA.io: Big Data Platform

Open Source

 Network analytics software sales pitch. 



 When configuration management meet SDN

 Ansible, a particularly bad configuration management tool, is singularly ill-suited for managing software-defined networks. Here's how to do it anyway! 



 What do you mean ’SDN’ on traditional routers?

 Yeah, turns out Cisco has been doing this shit a long time. Not sure what this has to do with open source, but whatever.

Intro to the Software Defined Radio Track

 This introductory talk is twice as long as any other introductory talk. I don't know why. 



 DARPA's Hackfest Review

 Why is DARPA hosting a hackfest? Why are they doing it in Brussels? What the fuck is going on over there? 



 GNU Radio Project Intro & Update

manipulating one of the four fundamental forces of the universe

 I didn't know copyright law was one of the four fundamental forces of the universe. I guess the other three are emacs, C++, and fatness. 



 SDR, Ham Radio and the Debian Hams project

Turn-key solutions for hams using Debian packages

 This goddamn talk description keeps saying 'ham' and 'ham blend' and now I want a sandwich 



 From 0 to 6 GHz in 30 minutes: Bootstrapping your SDR experience

Start from scratch today, hack the EM spectrum tomorrow!

 Yep, another GNU Radio sales pitch. 



 SDR Panel: Which are the top 3 challenges for free software radio?

An interactive session. Let's talk about SDR!

 All three challenges are GNU Radio. I hope one day it can be overcome. 



 Understanding JESD204B

High-speed inter-device data transfers for SDR

 Actual technical content at a technical conference? The speaker will be ridden out of town on a rail and forced to live in exile. 



 FPGAs in SDR -- Why, when, and how to use them (with RFNoC)

Taming digital hardware for software radio

 Not the first FOSDEM talk with a corporate logo attached to it, but definitely the most useless FOSDEM talk with a corporate logo attached to it. 



 GPU-Enabled Polyphase Filterbanks

Everyday I'm Shuffling

 Interestingly, the entire content of this talk is just pasted into the talk description, complete with bibliography. Less interesting: the topic of the talk. 



 Receiving Wireless Mobile Traffic Lights

 This dude is honestly concerned about the security of temporary traffic lights. 



 SatNOGS: An SDR-based Satellite Networked Open Ground Station

 Some nerds use a light-flashing computer to flash radio signals. 



 gr-inspector

A Signal Analysis Toolbox for GNU Radio

 A grad student is paid to develop software to detect signals. He forgets to mention why. 



 Networked-Signal Processing in OAI

 Same grant-money funnel as described in the opening talk of the SDN devroom. 



 Virtual multi-antenna arrays for estimating the bearing of radio transmitters

 You know how you can triangulate on a signal source if you take readings from a few different locations? This guy likes that plan, but he wants it to be way, way more complicated, because he is an academic. 



 Monitoring the ionosphere altitude variation with a sound card

software defined radio processing of DCF-77 signals

 Find a clock signal, receive it, process out original signal, calculate time of flight: measure altitude of ionosphere. Simple, yes, but it's also a hell of a lot more work than it needs to be!

A dozen years of Memcheck: looking backwards and looking forwards

 Memcheck: the quickest way to feel like you're helping without having to read anyone's code. 



 sparcv9: new architecture to be supported by Valgrind

 Finally! 



 Valgrind, the anti-Alzheimer pill for your memory problems

 This appears to be a 'how to use Valgrind' talk but the description is too incoherent to be sure. 



 fortification vs memcheck

Making gcc/glibc fortification and valgrind memcheck work better together

 Simple! Turn on FORTIFY_SOURCE and throw Valgrind in the trash. Done! 



 Successful and not (yet?) successful optimisations in Valgrind

 Who is this talk for? People interested in currently-ongoing performance ricing which will probably be upstreamed and forgotten about next month? Who sees this and says "hell yeah, lock me in a room with THAT for half an hour!" 



 VEX: where next for Valgrind's dynamic instrumentation infrastructure?

 After a couple-hour break from his Memcheck retrospective, this speaker returns to demand the audience tell him what to do to fix his old code. 



 Binary analysis with angr

Using VEX for static analysis

 In an awkward turn of events, this speaker describes the ways in which he forked and fixed the previous speaker's old code. I predict angry staring from the back of the room. 



 Valgrind BoF and Hackaton

Open discussion of ideas for Valgrind - and then we hack!

 Red Hat says: keep shitting out that free code, citizens! We're counting on you!

Managing container infrastructure

 A Red Hat employee pretends anyone wants to use Openshift. 



 modular VDEplug: switchless switching networks (and libslirp)

VDEplug now supports plugins... including slirp

 Whatever the fuck VDEplug is, it can use different kinds of virtual networks now. 



 Live patching the Xen Project hypervisor

 Citrix wants you to know that you can 'live patch' Xen. Why that is preferable to just moving the Xen instance to another host, patching, and moving it back is not explained. 



 The next generation: Certainty in shared storage environments

 Another Red Hat employee shows up, this time pretending anyone wants to use oVirt garbage. 



 Pet-VMs and Containers united?

 More Red Hat, doing more stupid shit like trying to crossbreed oVirt and Kubernetes. 



 QEMU: internal APIs and conflicting world views

How abstractions inside QEMU (don't) work together

 The Red Hat festival continues, this time trying to make QEMU development less scary to unpaid open source developers so that Red Hat doesn't have to pay for so much open source development. 



 Network Block Device

how, what, why

 NBD is an NIH alternative to AoE or iSCSI. The project maintainer is here to shill for it. 



 Adventures in Building Unikernel Clouds

r a Crash Course in Building L2-L7 from Scratch

 A "unikernel" is when you have just enough shit in your OS image to run your program. This is obviously completely retarded, which is presumably why this guy (who founded a business hosting such programs) has to go to conferences and give talks about how to do it. Left to their own devices, it's unlikely anyone would want to try. 



 Improving your virtualization development workflow with Lago

 Lago is to oVirt what Vagrant is to VirtualBox. Yep. Red Hat. 



 20 years of Linux Virtual Memory: from simple server workloads to cloud virtualization

 This Guy's Career: a Red Hat Retrospective 



 VM: Hey VM, can I share a host with you?

Affinity rules in a virtual cluster

 The Red Hat Tribute to oVirt continues, this time about solving bad systems administration with software! How refreshing! 



 Using NVDIMM under KVM

Applications of persistent memory in virtualization

 A Red Hat engineer discusses how nonvolatile memory enables them to do all kinds of wonderful new shit that they could have been doing all along with regular hard drives. 



 OpenStack with Machine Containers

Replacing VM's with Fast and Secure Machine Containers

 A little after 6 pm, in a shocking twist, an Ubuntu developer wrests control away from the Red Hat mafia! Not only does the heretic not talk about oVirt, he suggests using Openstack to run containers! He is quickly escorted out in protective custody by Red Hat security guards. 



 Towards a HVM-like Dom0 for Xen

reducing the OS burden while taking advantage of new hardware features

 All that distraction allows another interloper to grab the mic: a Xen developer! And the bastard works on FreeBSD, which Red Hat doesn't even sell! SEIZE HIM

Let's take a look at my annotated copy of the FOSDEM 2016 main talk schedule, shall we?

Welcome to FOSDEM 2016

 Probably a lie.



 systemd and Where We Want to Take the Basic Linux Userspace in 2016

 Places we're NOT taking it include "Interoperability City," "Lake Reliability," and "The People's Republic of Sanity".



 Putting 8 Million People on the Map:

 

 Alternate subtitle: "we didn't give a shit about any of these people before we saw them on the news, but look what we can accomplish when we need to feel righteous about our shitty hobbies"



 Closing FOSDEM 2016

 I think the printer's jammed, we need you guys back at the office





Re-thinking Linux Distributions

 ...separate the operating system from the content 

 You know that huge pile of bad software the "devops" people wrote so that they wouldn't have to ever actually install their software? This guy wants to make that the norm. Everywhere.



 Beyond reproducible builds

 Making the whole free software ecosystem reproducible and then… 

 The speaker confuses reproducible builds with package signing, then makes a ton of excuses about why his talk summary is meaningless noise.





Cockpit: A Linux Session in your Browser

 Except it's not really "a linux session" as much as it is "onboard cpanel shit for people who should not be trusted with computers." Naturally, the strongest evidence that this is a mistake is its inclusion in Fedora by default.



 Enterprise desktop at home with FreeIPA and GNOME 

 A GNOME developer talking about security.



 Open-sourcing RIPE Atlas 

 This isn't "open source" in the "use this how you want" sense. This is the "help us do work for no money" sense. 



 What Do Code Reviews at Microsoft and in Open Source Projects Have in Common? 

 Every goddamn thing, to the author's surprise. Formalization of the process doesn't seem to improve anything, it's demonstrably irrelevant which formalized process your team adopts, and the author is "trying to make code review work as expected with my research," which will probably be too dull to be hilarious. 



 H2O: An Open-Source Platform for Machine Learning and Big Data/Big Math

 Setting aside the fact that "machine learning" has yet to prove worthwhile in basically any current implementation, and the fact that "big data" is almost always code for "shitty programmers who ran out of memory," this abhorrent pile of dogshit is intended to strap together a bunch of computers scalemp-style in an attempt to make single-threaded hobby projects relevant. Absolutely disgusting. 



 Gluster roadmap, recent improvements and upcoming features

 Everyone's favorite also-ran clustered filesystem continues thrashing around in irrelevancy, but at least they're spending a lot of time rewriting existing functionality. 



 Rearchitecting Linux I/O towards Petascale Storage

 Treat Linux like a microkernel and push towards a simpler distributed user-space storage architecture. 

 This one came as something of a surprise, since I've been using linux with multi-petabyte filesystems for many years. Unfortunately, the actual speech seems to be based around a version of Plato's allegory of the cave, but instead of shadows on the wall the speaker sees webshit technology and assumes there is no other reality. Because webshit runs in userspace, POSIX is irrelevant and filesystem i/o should be moved out of the kernel. Yes, the author works on Gluster.

Digital Hardware Design: Why is it still so hard?

 The speaker assumes that since FPGAs are getting cheap, all the problems will go away. The fact that all available FPGA development kits are either ruinously expensive or iredeemably shitty does not appear to factor into this.



 GNU Radio for Exploring Signals

 Talk Hard: A technical, historical, political, and cultural look at FM 

 Another entry in the "pretentious three-part FOSDEM title" history books. Seems like it could be an interesting talk if it were just about FM radio and less about GNU/crap.



 Vulkan in Open-Source

 A discussion of the new Vulkan graphics API and its impact on Open-source software 

 "so much industry momentum" that nobody gives a shit at all! Incedentally, if you've noticed how bad your haswell video support is on linux, this speaker is part of the reason why. Cheers!



 Libreboot - free your BIOS today!

 Libreboot is free (libre) boot firmware based on coreboot, intended to replace the proprietary BIOS or UEFI firmware. Boot firmware is the low-level software that runs when you turn your computer on, which initializes the hardware and starts a bootloader for your operating system. 

 Seems like a risky move putting the entire one-hour presentation directly into the talk title, but maybe it'll work out. We'll have to spend less time getting excited that they've finally got around to supporting laptops made a mere six years ago, or that post-Ivy Bridge laptops can never be supported. At least you can install this on your servers, thereby destroying all the useful remote operations shit that might have otherwise made your life easier!





Free communications with Free Software

 Is there any credible way to build a trustworthy communications platform without using free software? 

 The answer to this has always been "yes, as long as you're willing to sign an NDA before getting audit access to the code." The talk, predictably, has nothing to do with this question, instead focusing on handwaving an open-source software that everybody already uses.



 Building a peer-to-peer network for Real-Time Communication

 Can a true peer-to-peer architecture, with no central point of control, be a universal and secure solution? 

 No.

 Bonus answer: why the fuck would anyone pay for the infrastructure under these circumstances



 Mainflux

 

 Javascript bullshit, written in canonical node.js style: vendoring every single piece of software the authors have ever seen, shoving it all in one huge list of shit, insisting you install multiple docker images to run it, and then calling it all "lean" and "highly-optimized." What does it actually do? Take network requests and perform database operations. That's it.





RocksDB Storage Engine for MySQL

 

 Facebook figured out InnoDB sucks. Unfortunately, they're so rich that writing another database backend seemed like a good idea. Oh well. 



 How to design a Linux kernel API 

 No, the speaker has never designed a kernel API. He just writes books about them, and asks for money in exchange for "training" about them. I really don't understand why there is a talk here aimed at kernel developers, since they already have a mailing list, and their own conferences, and firmly-entrenched opinions on the topic.



 Baobáxia - the Galaxy of Baobab Trees

 

 some webshit thinks you can solve social problems with git





The Future of OpenDocument (ODF)

 

 Ah, this must be the sort of "momentum" that Vulkan experiences. In practice, an ODF document means one thing: the user downloaded OpenOffice and forgot to save in Word format. Good news, though! A quick email should be enough to get them to re-save it and send it to you.



 Scaling and Securing LibreOffice Online

 caging, taming and go-faster-striping a big beast of an office suite 

 In which it is revealed that their fake version of Office365 is wildly resource-hungry and subject to crippling security problems. At the end of the presentation, everyone who is surprised by this information will be given a Mac and a job at Facebook.





Rspamd - fast opensource spam filter 

 The Don Quixote of FOSDEM 2016. This speaker is attempting to speak to conference attendees about one of the lost arts of the internet: email that is not hosted by Google. He tries to make it interesting for the typical FOSDEM attendee by tossing terms like "http" and "json" into his slide deck, but then he ruins it all with technical discussion of hash algorithms and abstract syntax trees. If he just renamed the project "spam.ly" and gave the talk wearing jeans and a sport coat, Paul Graham would give him eighteen million dollars.



 Applying band-aids over security wounds with systemtap

 

 Last year I made fun of the systemtap team for their desperate attempts to seem relevant. This year they're back, and it's even worse. In 2015 there was a linux kernel vulnerability that had to do with a specific variable being signed instead of unsigned. Our team patched the kernel and redeployed and we were fine within hours. Red Hat's official "Band-aid" for several weeks was to use systemtap to bitwise-AND the value with INT_MAX, during runtime, on every boot of every computer. I tell this story to systems administrators as an example of how shitty Red Hat security responses are. Now they are giving a talk about how wonderful it is. 



 How to run a telco on free software

 

 The second theoretical talk at FOSDEM: the speaker does not work in the telco field. Presumably this talk is a sales pitch for all those telecom executives at FOSDEM. Tons of those. 





How containers work in Linux

 an introduction to NameSpaces and Cgroups 

 An introductory howto for people who actually want to know how to use the features their operating systems provide. Presumably scheduled after lunch on Sunday to give the engorged web crowd somewhere to sleep. I suppose it's possible that this talk is presented as a curiosity, but then it would have been titled "What people do in a real conference" or something.



 Micro-datacenter with Raspberry Pi and Kubernetes

 

 In this talk, the speaker brags about Kubernetes fault tolerance by unplugging several shitty computers from a cluster of shitty computers. It is not mentioned that Kubernetes is sufficient for this task: it will generate its own faults regardless of what hardware you run it on.



 Live Migration of Virtual Machines From the Bottom Up 

 Amit Shah finally gets around to explaining why QEMU live migration used to work fine and now it completely sucks.|||

