I have some good news, and some GREAT news.

Thanks to the engagement and feedback of our developer community, we are making all Indie plans free.

It’s true. Axway loves this community, and wants to show appreciation for your energy and commitment. Need more proof? Well, that brings us to the great news:

The free Indie plan will also include Hyperloop!

That’s right — previously reserved for our Pro and Enterprise plans, Hyperloop is now available for *all* Appcelerator developers, across *all* plans.

Free Indie plans, including Hyperloop, gives you the best of all worlds: the strongest, most robust cross-platform API, plus 100% access to the native platform SDK, all using JavaScript. Unbeatable native mobile app development capabilities, all for FREE.

But hold it — aren’t apps only as good as the data and services they connect to? Well, true. That’s why the Indie plan also includes API Builder (formerly Arrow Builder), which gives you an absurdly powerful way to connect your apps to any backend data source in mere minutes. Really.

This announcement is first in a long line of things we’ve got coming, all of which make our dev community even more central to what we build.

If you’re as excited as we are, then please help share the news and your thoughts with the hashtag #axwow. And as ever,

What if I already purchased an Indie plan?

Easy. If you bought a monthly Indie plan, your plan will simply set to free at your next monthly renewal. No more monthly billing. There’s nothing else you need to do.

If you bought an annual Indie plan, we’ll do you one better — we’ll upgrade you to a premium Pro plan at no charge, for a full year. When it comes time to renew next year, you can decide to stay on Pro, or downgrade to the free plan. We’ll email every Indie Annual subscriber the details, along with the steps to claim your free upgrade.

How do I get started with Hyperloop?

You can find everything you need, including sample apps, here.

How can I upgrade to the Pro or Enterprise plan?

If you want even more dev power, you can upgrade your free Indie plan at any time. For a comparison of seat plans, see our pricing page.

What if I need push notifications or other MBaaS services?

We’ve got you covered. Any seat plan, including free Indie, can easily add cloud services. Even better, all seat plans include our powerful API Builder (formerly “Arrow Builder”), so you can quickly create mobile-optimized APIs for any backend, and then purchase whatever cloud capacity you need to run them. Again, see our pricing page.|||

