Do you want to be faster by using AWS? I see many AWS customers struggling with high expectations and some even slow down. That’s why I wrote the AWS Velocity Series. Let me sum up what matters most when optimizing for speed.

There are many options when it comes to running an application on AWS. EC2 based, containerized, or Serverless. Choosing the best option for your specific use case is important. Learn more in part 4 of the AWS Velocity Series: Running your application.

If you start from scratch, I recommend that you create a Serverless app. Details in part 7 of the AWS Velocity Series: Serverless app.

If you have an existing application, I recommend that you Dockerize the application and run it on ECS. Details in part 6 of the AWS Velocity Series: Containerized ECS based app.

If you can not Dockerize the application, run it in EC2. Details in part 5 of the AWS Velocity Series: EC2 based app infrastructure.

The assembly line describes the work that is necessary from idea to production. If your assembly line allows manual errors, overwhelms critical resources, or does not continuously improve, you will never be fast. AWS will not be your savior. You have to save yourself. Design your software assembly and then iterate and improve it. A software assembly line could look like this:

Learn more in part 1 of the AWS Velocity Series: Set the assembly line up

Imagine your team is responsible for developing a web-based application that your business clients can use to forecast sales numbers.

The team’s next story is titled “full-text search”. The following tasks belong to the story:

If you think that you are solving issues others also have, it’s time to check the AWS services offerings.

You will find that AWS offers a fully managed Elastisearch Service. This means no need to install, backup, or monitor Elasticsearch. You only need to set some thresholds for alerting.

You also find that DynamoDB offers a feature called Streams which can make your life easier to stream data from DynamoDB into other systems. Within a few minutes of research, you completed 4.5 out of 6 tasks by using a managed service. That was fast.

AWS provides you many tools and services to improve your speed. You have to select and orchestrate them to support your goal. Start by looking at your software assembly line. Automate as much as possible and continue to invest in improvements. Get rid of as many tasks as possible by using managed services. And choose the runtime environment with the same mindset: limit your responsibilities to have time to differentiate your offering from your competitors.

The AWS Velocity series is split into readable chunks. Subscribe to our RSS feed or newsletter to get notified when new articles become available.

You can find the source code on GitHub.|||

Do you want to be faster by using AWS? I see many AWS customers struggling with high expectations and some even slow down. Th...