The AU EGL scholarship covers all billable AU expenses (full tuition, room and board) for

international student who will need a visa (preferably an F-1 or J-1 student visa) to study in the United States. The scholarship does not cover non-billable expenses such as mandatory health insurance, books, airline tickets and miscellaneous expenses (approximately U.S.$4,000 per year).

The AU Emerging Global Leader Scholarship promotes educational access and opportunity while enhancing international diversity. Bringing together the best of AU — academic excellence, leadership development, and global engagement — the AU Emerging Global Leader achieves, inspires, and serves with vision. The AU EGL is dedicated to positive civic and social change, and to returning home to improve under-resourced, underserved communities in his/her home country.

The most competitive applicants should have:

What are the benefits? The scholarship provides  everything from  full tuition, fees, room and board for one first-year (freshman) high-achieving international student

It is renewable for a total of four years of undergraduate study, based on continued satisfactory academic performance.  To be taken at (Institution): American University USA

: To be considered for the scholarship, candidates must be secondary school students (not university students) applying as first-year (freshman) students for the fall (August) 2017 semester.

U.S. citizens, U.S. permanent residents or dual citizens of the U.S. and another country are   eligible to apply.

Only one AU Emerging Global Leader Scholarship is available for Fall August 2018. If you are not selected as the 2017 AU EGL recipient and wish to continue the application process, you may be eligible for partial merit scholarships.

Students must apply Regular Decision only and must submit the AU EGLS application, the Common Application and AU Supplement, and all supporting documents by December 15, 2015.

To apply to the AU Emerging Global Leader Scholarship, simply complete the online application from the link below.|||

American University offers the AU Emerging Global Leader Scholarship (AU EGLS) annually to one exceptional International Undergraduate Student

Description:

The AU EGL scholarship covers all billable AU expenses (full tuition, room and board) for one international student who will need a visa (preferably an F-1 or J-1 student visa) to study in the United States.