Why Cybersecurity? The number and frequency of cyberattacks is on the rise, and the demand for employees with cyber security training is now higher than ever.

According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Cybersecurity jobs are up 74% over the past five years. There are more than 209,000 unfilled positions in the United States, and the global figure is projected at 1 million. Given the demand, it pays to learn cybersecurity: The median salary for an information security analyst is $88,890/ year, and pay often climb to six figures.

Cybersecurity is a great choice for career changers, too. While many security specialists get started with a degree in Computer Science or Engineering, the escalating demand means that employers are now hiring more frequently from cybersecurity bootcamps. After completing a bootcamp, grads will be prepared for an entry-level Cybersecurity Job with titles like Security Specialist, Security Software Engineer, or Security Architect.

SwitchUp is here to help jumpstart your cybersecurity career. Check out the top 2016 Cyber Security bootcamps below.

There’s one clear reason that we’re watching Cyber security careers in 2017- demand for jobs like cybersecurity specialist and information security analyst has completely taken off in recent years. According to the Bureau of Labor statistics, jobs in information security are expected to grow 37% by 2022- much faster than most careers. Hot areas for growth are security analytics / SIEM (10​%​); threat intelligence (10​% +); mobile security (18​%)​; and cloud security (50​%​).

Why all the momentum? It has to do with the way software is changing business. More and more sectors are quickly becoming mobile and web-based, from banking to retail to healthcare. As networks become broader they become more vulnerable, and hackers get more sophisticated.

For people who are interested in safeguarding information, it could pay to learn cybersecurity. The field offers a chance to do hands-on, exciting work with room for lots of growth, leadership, and creative problem-solving.

Cybersecurity is not just for those who already have an engineering degree. Thanks to training programs like bootcamps, people from a range of backgrounds are able to land entry level cybersecurity jobs. Because of high demand, employers are becoming more and more interested in hiring bootcamp grads. For those looking to make a switch into cybersecurity in 2017, we're put outlined a roadmap to get you started:

1. Learn The Basics. Not sure if Cybersecurity is for you? Try it out with these courses:

2. Research Bootcamps. A cybersecurity bootcamp can give you all the skills to either transition into cybersecurity from software engineering, or land an entry-level cybersecurity job. Take a look at the full list here and check out the following:

3. Choose A Career Path.There is a huge amount of room to grow in cybersecurity, so it’s a good idea to have an understanding of your long-term career goals. Take a look at a few career options post-bootcamp:

Cyber Security Analyst: Entry-level cybersecurity professionals will likely start out as a cyber security analyst or information security analyst. You’ll be responsible for protecting a company’s computer networks and systems by sniffing out risks and weaknesses. The role will continue to evolve with the company, as new products bring the potential for new cyber attacks. Entry- Level cyber security analyst salary: $70,500

Security Engineer: While Security Analysts try to find weaknesses in the system, a Security Engineer is concerned with building fool-proof security systems. This is more of a mid-level position, for those with some experience under their belts. Average security engineer salary: $93,653

Security Architect: While Security Analysts try to find weaknesses in the system, a Security Engineer is concerned with building fool-proof security systems. This is more of a mid-level position, for those with some experience under their belts. Average security engineer salary: $93,653|||

The best cyber security training courses and bootcamps. Free expert advice, rankings - find the coding bootcamp for you.