My first experience with an alternate reality game was in 2004. I was a starry-eyed 14-year old freshly aboard the hype train for the new Halo game. The theatrical trailer for Halo 2, at the time, would conclude with an Xbox logo directing the viewer to xbox.com, whilst also quickly flashing the text of another URL—ilovebees.com.

From that moment on, I was pulled into an internet adventure unlike anything that I had ever experienced. That Halo ARG would set the stage for my insatiable curiosity around internet cryptography and puzzle solving.

Fast forward to September of 2016, five days before the release of Rise of Iron, Destiny's latest expansion.

A post on the Destiny subreddit surfaced detailing a mysterious "infection." Moments later, stream viewers on Twitch discovered an account named which subsequently linked to a bungie.net subdomain. The following days would lead to an expansive listing of chat logs posted to Owl Sector, detailing an infection that had shaken the fictional world of Destiny.

Rise of Iron released the following week and most Owl Sector talk casually disappeared. Days later, the community would throw themselves at the expansion's raid: Wrath of the Machine. As they crossed the finish line, players began to discover monitors scattered, and quite hidden, throughout the raid itself. It was quickly discovered that these monitors were explicably linked to a chest room in the final boss chamber. This chest room was guarded by five laser grids.

Simultaneously, a link to yet another bungie.net page was posted to the Owl Sector site.

This link directed to a page simply titled "Sim." When navigating to Sim, the webpage would return sets of data in the form of nodes, glyph sequences, and alphanumeric strings. Also included was a data dump specifying that additional nodes in the sequence were required.

These were just the first few happenings of what would end up being a massive ARG implemented to launch with Rise of Iron by Bungie. This puzzle led to a final prize—the exotic pulse rifle, Outbreak Prime. With the help of many a redditor, Math Class would ultimately be the first clan to obtain the weapon.

This is how we did it.

After a very late night of data collection internal to Math Class, I’d wake up to go to actual work. While at the office and still consumed by the puzzle, I took to Reddit to see what the community had dug up. Thread after thread detailed what each internet persona believed they had found. There were users posting screenshots of their unique SIM page, Pastebin links to their copied node information, and even recreations of what they were seeing recreated in Microsoft Word. The lack of consistently formatted data was obvious.

I created a thread linking to a Google Form that I had been using to track data from the prior night. I also created a redirect from a domain I owned, owlsector.net (long story), to that same form. In the thread, I explained that data was going to be key and without coming together we would never break through to whatever the next steps could be. The thread took off, and entries began to pour in by the hundreds.

Admittedly, I had no idea what I was getting into. Thanks to Reddit, my form would ultimately collect over 15,000 data entries. Without this community provided data, the puzzle would have been impossible to solve.

It was also through this Reddit trawling that I saw a post from /u/mg2brandon. I thought he was onto something. We made quick introductions through PM and then immediately progressed to third base—an invite to the Math Class Slack.

There were several important data-related variables that had to be accounted for, collected, and organized. The data points we collected were:

The first big break came from following the inferred numeric forwarding protocol. As an example:

By following each transformation hop-by-hop we could assemble keys from the data of eight individual users. The ARG page had hinted at the use of Rijndael encryption in CBC mode and the need for a total of 8 key fragments. Given that each fragment was 32 bits long, Brandon attempted AES-256 decryption and was rewarded with a cryptic image:

Applying the same technique to the other numeric sequences resulted in a dozen more images. It wasn't clear yet how the images were interrelated, and we were still unable to decrypt the vast majority of our data.

The hours following were a frustration-fueled slog, and no meaningful progress would be made. Brandon and I agonized over what we were doing wrong; the lion’s share of the data was leading nowhere.

The big break came when Reddit user /u/MockingDolphin posted an analysis of how we'd been misapplying the non-numeric forwarding protocols. Essentially, we had fucked up the node transformations. Brandon and I were applying all transformations to the current node rather than the original node.

Brandon got to work on an updated decryption pipeline and quickly produced around 900 new tiles. Our heads exploded.

It still wasn't obvious how we were supposed to fit these tiles together in any meaningful way until /u/Zephyr_Foxworth commented with an observation about the symbols on the edges of diagonally-adjacent tiles.

The problem was that Brandon had thrown out the original tile identifiers for each image since he didn't realize that they were important, and he didn’t want to spend any time rebuilding and rechecking the entire set of tiles. Instead, Brandon wrote a program that would scan the symbol sequences of each individual tile and pair it up with its indirect-neighbors based on matching sequences. Computer. Fucking. Vision. Thanks, Go!

How did this work? When the symbols on the right side of Tile A matched the symbols on the left side of Tile C, we could programmatically place them on a grid without any knowledge of Tile B.

Unfortunately, the first attempt at this approach generated several useless checkerboards. "Damn." We needed to establish a set of directly neighboring tiles to interleave the checkerboards. Math Class members pored over the previously generated 900 tiles to find four that could confidently be placed on the grid:

Using those tiles as a starting point we could now assemble an imperfect but discernible image.

It was a map of the diamond room in Wrath.

From here, the story shifted to involve Datto and crew. It being a Tuesday, the normal raaaaaid night stream was up, and Math Class were throwing themselves at Wrath.

While Datto wound the stream down, the clan began assembling another crew to get into the raid and test our map. I joined in on that group while Datto pulled in Brandon.

After a few wipes (the raid was still new!), we made it to the diamond room around the same time as the other group and began putting our map theories to the test.

Datto and Brandon's crew would be the first raid group in the world to open the diamond. Inside was the fifth monitor and a chest.

After Aksis was defeated, that same group checked the hidden room underneath the boss chamber. The full laser grid was deactivated. They were able to open the chest. This officially began the Outbreak Prime quest in-game.

The next few hours were spent following a series of quest steps, most of which included some sort of math puzzle.

At the end of it all was Outbreak Prime. Outhouse was the first Guardian in the world to add it to his inventory.

The Owl Sector ARG was a master class in puzzle solving. It required Guardians of all walks and locales to come together and ultimately led to an an in-game quest that would throw the entire internet into a cryptography-fueled frenzy.

After the dust settled, Brandon became part of Math Class. We've been good friends ever since.

Critique anything about a Bungie game that you please. But one thing, one greatly intangible factor, that cannot be denied is their innate ability to bring humans together in inspiring and interesting ways.|||

