Our mission is to make the npm ecosystem more reliable. The Greenkeeper team is therefore proud to announce the immediate availability of Greenkeeper version 2.0. After a successful six month beta phase that has already served more than 50,000 dependency updates to open source and private users, and with introduction of a new interaction model that greatly reduces GitHub notifications, among other features, Greenkeeper 2.0 is now ready for wide release. 🚀

Start with Greenkeeper from $25 for 10 private repos per month on organisations or just $1.50 per private repository for personal accounts.

The biggest change in the way Greenkeeper works is using GitHub’s new Integrations API. This brings a number of improvements:

Greenkeeper 1.0 opens a Pull Request per dependency update. Especially for open source projects, these PRs tend to pile up and can make a bit of a mess.

Greenkeeper 2.0 solves this by opening a single issue per dependency that gets appended to when new versions come in. Users can then easily decide which version to merge. With a breaking update, Greenkeeper automatically detects the latest working version and users can choose to pin that version, so their projects don’t fail, and then can make the necessary changes for the broken update at their leisure.

npm shrinkwrap support is here. This was our #1 feature request after “less Pull Request noise” and we are very happy that with Greenkeeper 2.0, this is now available to all users. See our documentation on how to use this.

Greenkeeper 2.0 comes with native support for scoped and private npm modules. With Greenkeeper 1.0 we required you to use a separate module as a devDependency. All of that extra hassle is gone now. If you have scoped or private dependencies in your project, your first Pull Request includes setup instructions, so you can make sure npm tells Greenkeeper about all your new publishes.

Being based in Europe is great. However, having to bill European customers in Europe can be a pain due to the different VAT rates in each country. By integrating Stripe and Quaderno as our billing tool, we want to make the payment process as quick and pleasant as possible. Our new billing web app not only provides an easy and fast user experience to our customers but also makes our lives easier by automatically taxing everyone correctly. Soon it will also enable our customers to easily view their order as well as upgrade, downgrade or cancel their subscription.

At the end of last year we made our roadmap public. It contains 6 projects which we wanted to build as quickly as possible while being as transparent as possible. This way everybody can see what the Greenkeeper team is currently working on and get more info on the various projects. Two months later we can proudly say that we have completed half of the roadmap!

All the People who participated in Greenkeeper 2.0 beta program will be able to still use private repositories for free until May 31st, 2017.

We hope you’ll enjoy the new Greenkeeper as much as we do 😎🌴|||

Our mission is making the npm ecosystem more reliable. The Greenkeeper team is therefore proud to announce the immediate availability of Greenkeeper version 2.0.