In 1976 my wife Sherry, our daughter Dina, and I spent a leisurely afternoon at Al Alcorn’s home in Los Altos Hills. Al, a friend of ours, had invited us along with several if his high tech friends to hang out and enjoy the beautiful day. The three of us were dangling our feet along the side of his pool when a late arrival came over to us and, looking at the soles of our feet exclaiming that we were having a carrot juice flush, which we were aware of as we were vegitarians at the time and carrot juice was a daily regime. The individual introduced himself as Steve Jobs, and said he had just formed a company called Apple Computer. Not being a techie, he said that unlike the big industrial computers, his company was going to produce a small personal computer.

Fast forward to the early 1980s. Steve had been living in his home in Monte Sereno and although only ten minutes from he Apple headquarters building in Cupertino, he said that he needed to acquire a propert midway between Cupertino and Francisco due to his many trips to the city, and would I assist and represent him in locating same.

For the next couple of years in spite of his hectic schedule he would call and say “how’s your time, can we check out more property?” The quest to find the right property always came back to a property that he had seen several years prior while on his motorcycle up driveways in the woodside area. On one property was a barn that he felt had the charm and character that captured his imagination. The quest then became somewhat of solving a mystery. After many trips scouring the Woodside area we finally located the property with the telltale barn.

I contacted a broker in Woodside working with Coldwell Banker and she said she knew the couple who owned the propertyand would inquire if they might consider selling. The property, which included a large rambling hacienda built in 1925 by the copper mining industrialist Daniel Jackling, was a beautiful oak studded acreage that Steve, aside from the enormity of the house, immediately knew was the one on which we would make an offer.

An agreement was reached and Steve took title in 1984. His intent was to demolish the house and replace it with a smaller home more suited to his lifestyle. His plans were derailed for a number of years due to legal opposition regarding te possible historical aspects of the property. Finally the Woodside City Council granted Steve permission to demolish the house, which was done in 2011, tragically just months before STeve’s untimely death in October that year.

Thus my most memorable experience working with Steve Jobs was solving the mystery of locating the charming barn in Woodside that would ultimately be part of his home sweet home.

As an aside, having spent many hours with Steve, contrary to what I have seen others comment on his behavoir, I always found him to exude a lighthearted but no-nonsense demeanor, a sincere respect for those who treated him respectfully, and displaying a conviction that trustworthyness and pursuit of one’s dreams should be something which we all strive for.

Certainly fond memories of securing seats behind the Mac team at the 1984 introduction of the Mac computer at Foothill College; and pairing Sherry and I with an old aquaintance, Nolan Bushnell and his lady at his 30th birthday party at the St.Francis Hotel in SF where Ella Fitzgerald sang Steve Happy Birthday. These will all be lasting fond memories to share with family and friends for years to come.|||

