Technology is moving faster than ever. The days where knowing the basics of telecom systems and a little bit of web programming are gone. The needs change quickly, and companies don’t have time or resources to train people themselves. In this environment, IT professionals are rightly concerned about where their place in the world will be in a few years.

The End of The Full-Time Employee

The larger a company gets, the more likely it will be to have “dead weight”; that is, people who are not truly adding value with their presence. There are often people with dated skills kept on the payroll doing busy work or have such ill-defined jobs that no one is really sure what he or she do. As competition in the IT sector grows, companies are looking to minimize this kind of drain.

The side effect of this is that some hard-working professionals may find that their department is deemed as unneeded and work is instead outsourced. This doesn’t mean that the field engineer’s world is coming to an end. It’s just time for a change; one that grants both sides freedom and helps contractors to stay relevant and learn new things while getting paid.

Large companies like Verizon and AT&T are evaluating how they can squeeze every penny of profit out of their large organizations. This is where the gig economy comes into play.

To cut costs many MSPs and VARs are now looking into the on-demand marketplace for freelancers to find the talent they need. While this puts more responsibility on the IT consultants to keep their skills up to date, this is really in their own best interest. Many who have been at the same IT job for 20+ years face a rude awakening when their company downsizes or they are let go for another reason.

In reality, the on-demand field service management economy is doing everyone a favor by cutting down on those who sit and do one job while the world outside passes them by and leaves them with little marketable skills for the future. Some who have stayed in one job working with one kind of technology for 20 years or relegated to a ‘button-pusher’ job in IT find that they are forced to re-evaluate their entire careers around age 50 – the age when most people would hope to be looking at “smooth sailing” until retirement. IT Freelancing maybe require a bit more from the IT professional, but it really is in their own best interest to stay relevant.

Many enterprise-level companies are taking the leap and using field telecom engineers and other tech professionals to handle on-site and remote work. Managing the workforce is made easy since FieldEngineer.com provides remote work orders, contracts, payroll and all the needed infrastructure to quickly convert an unwieldy full-time position into a flexible and dynamic consultant position.

The fact that fieldengineer.com is designed for this industry means that both companies and field engineers get the tools they need to get the job done right. The large pool of experienced professionals come with pre-vetted resumes and references. You can quickly find the exact talent that is needed for the job on hand.|||

