Today we’re excited to announce that Programmable Chat has graduated from beta to general availability (GA). Formerly known as IP Messaging, Programmable Chat is Twilio’s full-featured SDK for adding feature rich chat to your mobile and web apps. Moving to general availability pulls the training wheels off, further improves performance, adds new features to our SDKs and REST API, and simplifies the pricing model. With these SDKs, customers have added chat to everything from customer support to interactive music video premier experiences.

During beta, businesses of all shapes and sizes added Programmable Chat to better facilitate their services. Enterprises like ING, one of the world’s largest banks, are rethinking their call centers and adding Programmable Chat to engage with customers the way they want to be reached. Used.CA uses chat to connect people to the sharing economy to buy, sell, and trade used goods and keep them out of the landfill.

“General Availability” is more than just a term. It means that Programmable Chat passed through our rigorous Operational Maturity Model and was deployed at scale in a wide range of production environments and use cases. It’s earned our stamp of approval that anyone can build a prototype with the product, and scale to global production.

Programmable Chat now offers the following benefits:

One of the biggest challenges we heard from beta customers was estimating costs for their varied use cases. Most people think about messaging apps in terms of users and messages, but our early granular pricing model didn’t easily map to those concepts. That’s why we’ve simplified our pricing model to just users and messages. Here’s how pricing works now:

Now that you’re ready to start adding Programmable Chat to your application, here are some resources to help you get up and running:

Join us May 24-25th in San Francisco at SIGNAL, our annual developer conference, where you can meet the team that built Programmable Chat, learn to build a chat prototype yourself, and hear best practices from customers with production deployments. Sign up here for 20% off your SIGNAL registration using code Chat20.

We look forward to meeting you at SIGNAL, hearing your feedback, helping you with your app, and sharing how we’re continuing to make building in-app chat as easy as possible.

We can’t wait to see what you build with Chat!|||

