Building a mailing list can be tough, but making the most of its’ value is not that easy either. Every subscription and sign up matter, as it can later result in sales increase that is why you need to take your email marketing efforts seriously. Ensure you send emails that are worth not only recipient’s attention, but also time. If you are out of ideas how to do it, you are in the right place to get inspired.



 1. Welcome new users or subscribers

Don’t forget to say hello to newly registered users or subscribers. In the world of internet business, not sending a welcome email is considered bad manners.

Similarly to welcome emails, order confirmation emails are now considered mandatory. Once the customer places his order, he expects to receive a confirmation that proves his part is done.

Window shoppers can sometimes be very impatient. Keeping them well informed about their order status to save you time manually answering numerous inquiries.

Let them know when their parcel is shipped and what is the estimated date of its’ arrival.  You can also introduce your customer to terms and conditions of your returns policy. Finally, leave useful links or email addresses customer can turn to in a moment of doubt.

Just because visitor registered to your website doesn’t mean he will immediately become a paying customer. Keep inactive users on your radar and give them direction what their next move should be.

Reviewed products tend to receive more attention from window shoppers as these products are associated with real experience with a brand.

Within 2-3 weeks after purchase, send an email to your customer asking to evaluate his experience with the brand. Usually, companies are asking their clients to review their product, but asking to evaluate customer service, product packaging or shipping, is as common.

Cart abandonment causes is a great deal of worry for e-commerce industry. According to numerous case studies, average online shopping cart abandonment rate is almost 68%. Roughly speaking, that makes 7 out of 10 window shoppers leave the site without completing the purchase. What a great loss of potential orders that could lead to increased revenue!

Remind your customers about carts they have abandoned. A friendly nudge will do no harm, especially if it is carefully personalized.

Let it be discounts on product category, seasonal sale or holiday special, keep your customers informed about the deals they could benefit from. This approach to sales is as old as time but is still relevant to this day. Just add a modern twist to it – carefully follow current events that your audience is deeply engaged to. Once something comes up, react fast! But beware, real-time marketing can be your best friend and biggest enemy too.

Understand your audience to present the offers in the most appealing way.

70% of window shoppers admit they would appreciate more personalized shopping experience. Keep that in mind the next time you want to send generic offers to your prospect or customer.

Create personalized product recommendations based on customers’ purchase history or visited pages and then deliver them to their inboxes. Doing this not only increases your chances to upsell, but also creates an image of a brand that knows their customers and cares for them.

Social media has significantly changed the communication between brand and customer. Now, more than ever before, customers are willing to communicate with the brand directly, let it be commenting under posts, submitting a question or joining the conversation. Businesses that manage to maintain two-way communication are able to gain loyalty of their customers which also usually results in increased revenue.

Occasionally encourage your customers to share their experiences with the brand using social media and unique hashtags, invite them to share pictures of the products they have purchased from your store. If you have any special events or projects going on, make sure your audience can find easy ways to take part in it.

Most e-commerce stores allow website visitors to request updates on items that are out of stock. Notifying window shoppers about items they are interested in can significantly increase customer retention. A simple email like this has a great conversion potential, as it is expected and personalized. Customer submits his contact information willingly, expecting to hear from the store about a certain item he is interested in.

If your store doesn’t offer visitors an option to get notified about certain items that are sold out, let your customers know about best-selling products that are back in stock.

If your website has “Save for later” or “Add to wishlist” buttons for customers to add items they are interested in but not ready to pay for it yet, consider sending updates about these items regularly.

Whenever you have an ongoing offer that applies to these goods, let customers know about it. The probability that they will return to your site is high, as these shoppers have already shown their interest in particular product.

To sum up all of the above, always keep your emails informative, playful and well personalized. Most importantly – remember that every customer is in different stage of his buyer’s journey, therefore different approaches must be used to present offers in the most relevant way.

Interested in optimizing your conversions using different tools? Schedule a personalized demo.|||

Building a mailing list can be tough, but making the most of its’ value is not that easy either. Every subscription and sign up matter, as it can later result