Mobile phones, laptops and Chromebooks becoming thinner and thinner each year. We went from the VGA connector to the slimmer HDMI connector, from Ethernet ports to either Wi-Fi, and from USB-A connectors to USB-C. With this move, we’ve gained amazing possibilities with newest connection, the USB-C connection. However, there are still a lot of legacy devices out there (think camera’s, printers, external harddrives, projects), which still need to be connected in some way to the newer generation of devices. This guide should help you find the best USB C hubs and docks!

On USB-C.today, we strive to deliver the best and most up to date information, and we test all devices. Some of these devices pass our strict criteria, and a lot of them don’t. Here is a list of the best USB-C hubs and docks recommend by us.

The Satechi Slim Aluminum USB-C hub with HDMI is a very small and light-weight hub. It’s got two USB-A and an HDMI port, it looks good and it’s pretty cheap. If you want to use it as a permanent dock at home, you should be aware of its limitations: like any USB-C hub, it’s limited to 30 Hz when hooked up to a 4K monitor. However, if you’ll be using it while moving between desks, or traveling in general, then we think it’s a great looking and affordable device.

Get the Satechi Slim Aluminium Hub here | See our Satechi Slim review here

The HyperDrive is a successful Kickstarter campaign launched by Sanho. It’s a great piece looking hub, and fits the recent MacBook Pros perfectly. We don’t advise it for people who wear a soft/hard shell around their MacBook Pro; the hub simply won’t fit. Charging devices off the hub is also not very useful. We do advise it for all MacBook owners who are looking for something very portable, or who have an external monitor that’s not 4K and wish to hook up their laptop in a single step.

Get the HyperDrive Thunderbolt 3/USB-C Hub here | See our HyperDrive Thunderbolt 3/USB-C Hub review here

We have a few runner up. The runner ups are devices we think are great, but unfortunately, have not been able to test.

The Aukey CB-C55 USB-C Hub turns a single USB-C port into six ports(VGA, HDMI, Ethernet, USB-C and 2x USB-A). Due to to the inclusion of the VGA and Ethernet port, it’s not as slim as the Satechi Slim, but it provides great capabilities for those wanting to connect to a physical network, or projectors, and we think Aukey CB-C55 USB-C hub is an excellent choice for the workplace, in which technology is often updated at a slower pace than at home.

The PowerHub USB-C Hub and Charger connects to yourMacBook’s USB-C port to give you 3 USB-A, 1 HDMI port, 1 USB-C, and additionally 5000 mAh of power.What caught our attention, is that this particular hub has a detachable cable. This is very interesting, because that’s pretty rare; almost all USB-C hubs nowadays have a short, captive (attached) cable. Although useful if you travel a lot, on your desk this results in a big mess of cables. This PowerHub can easily be put below your desk with a longer cable, which makes for a much cleaner setup.

Get the PowerHub USB-C Hub and Charger here

The OWC Thunderbolt 3 is another great looking device. It has 13 ports to charge up to six USB devices simultaneous, read SD cards at twice the speed of the Thunderbolt 2 and allows you to connect to ethernet networks. The OWC Thunderbolt 3 Dock seems like a great USB-C hub to consider for the MacBook Pro, and we’ll hope to review it soon!|||

Expand your options with the best USB-C hubs and docks for your MacBook Pro, Chromebook and other devices. Unbiased reviews, focussing on content only!