AWS announced the launch of AWS EdStart, a new program that helps educational technology (EdTech) startups build innovative teaching and learning solutions using the AWS Cloud. AWS EdStart offers EdTech startups grants of AWS Promotional Credits to build their infrastructure and solutions on AWS and create the next generation of online learning, analytics, and campus management solutions.

If you’ve got a big idea for a company that can change education, AWS EdStart can help. By joining, you’ll also have access to office hours, trainings, and community forums. Your solutions will be built on the same scalable platform used by D2L, Clever, Instructure, Ellucian, Blackboard, Coursera, and Echo360.

From idea to IPO and beyond, AWS is the infrastructure standard for education’s technology ecosystem. Through AWS EdStart, we provide qualifying EdTech startups with the low cost, easy to use infrastructure needed to scale and grow a business of any size.

“The AWS EdTech Startup program is a dream come true for any bootstrapped startup. It gives SKOOKi a perfect jumpstart and peace of mind to iterate the product and processes while utilizing the most trustworthy and robust infrastructure,” said AliSher Rakhimov, Founder and CEO, SKOOKi.

“Vocareum was built upon the notion that cloud infrastructure paired with open source technology will transform how students and professionals learn to code. Our mission is to improve assessment efficiency, student engagement, and learning outcomes with our cutting-edge and cost-effective computing labs. We are excited to find a home with AWS’s EdTech Startup Program, scaling our solution for educators worldwide,” said Sanjay Srivastava, CEO, Vocareum.

“The EdTech industry has seen marked growth in investment due to the impact it has on students globally and the potential for disruption. The AWS EdStart program from Amazon Web Services is timely. It enables startup EdTechs to build and deliver education solutions faster and more cost effectively than before by utilizing the benefits the cloud has to offer. Investors want startups to focus on innovation rather than infrastructure, and AWS EdStart helps education entrepreneurs keep their focus on student outcomes,” said Michael Cohn, Principal, GSV Acceleration.

Startups can apply to join AWS EdStart if they are less than five years old, based in the United States, and have less than $10M in revenue. Applications should include a plan for an innovative solution for students, teachers, or administrators that solves a current problem and/or disrupts current educational models.

To apply and for more information about the program, visit: aws.amazon.com/awsedstart.|||

