Have you ever wondered how you could take your customer’s experience to the next level? Do you know the difference between UX and CX? This article will explore how data analysis and customer profiling will make vast improvements to your organization by enabling you to make more precise decisions about your technology and your customers.

The terms UX and CX are often used interchangeably (and incorrectly), even by experienced industry professionals. However, while there is a lot of overlap, they do mean quite different things.

UX deals with prospects or customers interacting with your product or service and the experience they have from that interaction. Your product or service could range from a website, eCommerce store, or a mobile app. UX can be measured by metrics such as success rates, error rates, and shopping cart abandonment rates.

Customer experience is more strategic, involving all actions that a person has with your brand, and can be used to look at the entire customer journey. Some examples of  CX include customer service, marketing communications, and product/service delivery. As you can see, CX reaches well beyond the remit of the marketing department.

Essentially, UX is part of the CX whole, while CX contains some aspects outside your product or service. It is often assumed that UX is all about data, whilst CX is mainly bettered by customer profiling. This article will explore how, conversely, both data and profiling can be extremely useful to UX and CX.

There is no one-size-fits-all strategy for every organization, but here are a few great ways for you to use data to improve your UX:

The key to success in implementing data to your UX design is to use as many data points and sources as you can. With this data, you will be well on the way to developing the perfect mobile app, website or product for your brand. (Arkenea can take the stress out of this process, and help you create a UX that works in the mobile ecosystem, with very clearly defined success metrics and parameters).

One question that you should definitely ask yourself before implementing any major changes into your UX design is: is it really necessary? If you are considering adding something to your online store’s design then you should really think about whether it would actually benefit the user’s experience. (And whether it will actually drive conversions).

Little Sparrow Tea is an attractive online store created by Shopify, specializing in loose leaf tea. However, their product plays victim to too many calls-to-action. Their ‘add to cart’ button is competing with the social sharing buttons thanks to identical design choices – it is best to avoid any distracting secondary calls-to-action at such a crucial point of the buyer’s journey. It is best practice to include secondary calls-to-action on a post-purchase thank you page. Check out these brilliant examples of thank you pages that will take yours to the next level.

From purchase habits to hobbies and interests, the crux of CX is about understanding your customers through all interactions they have between with you. Customer profiling helps create a portrait of your customers to put their experience at the forefront of decision making.

Here are the main elements of customer profiling:

Listen to your customers: chances are that by paying attention to their desires and spending habits, you will be inspired to find ways that your CX can be tweaked to meet their demands.

According to a tech report by PWC, the financial services industry is being redrawn by FinTech companies. FinTech (financial technology) is a movement of companies using new technologies and innovations to compete with the traditional delivery of financial services.

These companies have completed customer profiling to discover that customers were challenged by financial data and struggled to understand it. FinTech companies are now particularly involved in overcoming these obstacles to engage more people in their personal finances.

Mint.com is a fantastic example of a FinTech start-up that seeks to assist users in interpreting their spending habits virtually. Colorful and interactive reports, goal setting, and attractive dashboards create a more engaging customer experience than traditional banking apps.

It is a common misconception that data should be limited to UX developments whilst customer profiling is a CX strategy. However, both data and profiling are extremely useful to both UX and CX.

Data feeds into all customer profiling. If your data is showing negativity, then your profiling is targeting the wrong audience and you need to go back to the drawing board.

Similarly, profiling can be extremely useful for UX. Using personas is great for your UX design strategy – it is important to design your website, app, or store with a particular user in mind. The entirety of your design strategy should be tailored to deliver a positive user experience for that user.

While UX decisions should be heavily data-driven and customer profiling should be a key factor in any of your organization’s CX strategy, it is clear that they are not mutually exclusive. Data (compilation and analysis) and profiling are two methods that can be interchangeably used to the benefit of any brand wishing to improve their customers’ experiences as a whole.|||

We explore how data analysis and customer profiling will make vast improvements to your organization and your customer's experience.