Datos IO, the application-centric data management company, today announced RecoverX 2.0, enabling organizations to be more agile, enhance productivity, and drive operational efficiency as they deploy their next-generation customer centric applications in the cloud and scale their traditional applications across hybrid-cloud and multi-cloud infrastructures.

Tweet this: Datos IO launches RecoverX 2.0 for the Digital Enterprise: Protection and Mobility for a Multi-Cloud World bit.ly/2bfN9cM

Since its inception, Datos IO has realized the importance of data as the only common denominator binding all clouds together. To enable success for customers in their journey towards cloud adoption, Datos IO brings to the table ground-breaking innovations:

Datos IO is focused on leveraging the promise of the cloud (elasticity, availability) while eliminating cloud silos and facilitating complete data protection and mobility across a multi-cloud infrastructure. This allows enterprises to go beyond data protection to two powerful use cases: first, easily exchange data across siloed organizations to realize the promise of a data hub; and second, increase application agility by enabling instant application deployments in the cloud.

"We are delivering a solution that no one has before,” said Tarun Thakur, co-founder and CEO of Datos IO. “Cloud data management is not about selling boxes, appliances, or proprietary filesystems. It’s also not about porting legacy backup software to the cloud. Cloud data management is about reinventing the control plane with cloud principles in mind – elasticity, application-centricity, and scale – because that’s what enables customers to manage, protect, mobilize, and harness the value of their data across all cloud boundaries.”

RecoverX 2.0 is focused on supporting customers in their journey towards cloud adoption, and facilitates both moving traditional on-premise applications to the cloud and protecting applications in the cloud, irrespective of the choice of database technology: non-relational, relational, or Big Data.

With the release of RecoverX 2.0, Datos IO extends its unique application-centric data management approach to:

To power protection and mobility of all of these data sources and to enhance the user experience of their rapidly growing base of enterprise customers, Datos IO also announced significant platform enhancements including:

RecoverX 2.0 is built upon CODR™, the company’s ground-breaking application-centric data management architecture. To learn more about Datos IO’s revolutionary CODR architecture, please check out our Secret Sauce page.

As part of today’s announcement, Datos IO also announced the availability of solutions with multiple leading data center infrastructure vendors across enterprise storage with NetApp, application-centric infrastructure with Cisco and application-centric data protection for virtualized infrastructure with VMware. This further demonstrates the transformative nature of Datos IO’s application-centric data management technology for mission-critical enterprise applications.

“The cloud has become a core pillar of an organization’s IT infrastructure, and as a leader in cloud security and data protection, Barracuda understands the challenges of protecting and managing data at scale,” said Fleming Shi, senior vice president, Advanced Technology Engineering at Barracuda. “We trust Datos IO as a fail-safe data protection and management solution – purpose-built to help safely scale our security threat detection applications running in multi-cloud environments.”

“3rd platform technologies are dominating IT spend,” said Phil Goodwin, research analyst at IDC. “As next-generation applications are born in the cloud and traditional application workloads move to the cloud, a critical cloud data management gap exists. Datos IO is addressing this gap with their innovative application-centric approach designed to help organizations protect and mobilize their data across multi-cloud infrastructures.”

“Datos IO represents an exciting evolution of data protection and management,” said Jason Buffington, principal analyst for data protection at Enterprise Storage Group. “Datos IO’s application-centric approach is designed to deliver protection and mobility services at scale, while remaining infrastructure agnostic. This should provide customers the flexibility and agility to leverage private and public clouds as determined by their application workloads.”

Datos IO is the application-centric data management company for the multi-cloud world. Datos IO delivers a radically novel approach to data management helping organizations embrace the cloud with confidence by delivering solutions that protect, mobilize, and monetize their data — at scale. Unlike traditional data protection solutions that protect applications either at a VM-level or at a storage LUN-level, Datos IO has reinvented data protection by eliminating any dependencies on VM or LUN constructs — thus, enabling a true application-centric data management approach. This revolutionary application-centric approach provides customers with dramatic backup storage efficiency, provides data management services at a granular level (e.g. rows/tables vs. entire VM or entire database), and enables customers to intelligently move their applications back and forth between public clouds or across cloud environments. Backed by Lightspeed Venture Partners and True Ventures, Datos IO is headquartered in San Jose, California. To learn more, please visit http://datos.io/ and follow us on Twitter at @datos_io.|||

Datos IO, the application-centric data management company, today announced RecoverX 2.0, enabling organizations to be more agile, enhance productivity, and drive operational efficiency as they deploy their next-generation customer centric applications in the cloud and scale their traditional applications