How to manage your static websites with AWS S3, CloudFront, and a command line

Here’s a short list of things you shouldn’t need to worry about when setting up a static website:

I myself was sick of worrying about these things. So I learned some Go, developed a small command line tool over the weekend, and open-sourced it.

AWS S3 is an affordable option for for hosting (and free for first time users), and AWS CloudFront is good for CDN. But setting up the two is a pain. The checklist is pretty long:

Luckily, my open source AWS-site-manager makes hosting and updating a static site as simple as a single command line.

AWS Site Manager is a simple command-line tool that makes it easy to host a static website with AWS S3 and CloudFront, without running afoul of best practices.

If this is your first time hosting a site, create an AWS account and register your domain name with a service such as Namecheap (make sure you use their monthly discount coupon).

So given all the trouble, why bother with S3 and CloudFront? The two main reasons are:

Given the advantages, the only barrier was the setup, so we created a command line tool for convenient future usage. Below, I’ll walk you through how to set up this open-source site manager.

Download the binary for Linux / Mac / Windows release here.

Or compile from sources: If you have Go 1.6 or above installed, run the following command:

If you haven’t set up AWS credentials on your environment before, you can set it up by putting the following lines in .

You should also set the environment variable of AWS_SDK_LOAD_CONFIG

 If you’re on Linux / Mac using bash put the following line in

You can read more about AWS CLI set up on its official documentation.

Assuming you’re going to set up a website example.com and www.example.com, you can:

The commands above will:

If you want to use https, and have the cert in PEM format ready, run the following command lines instead to setup HTTPS. (if your SSL registry sent you  /  , read this)

Finally, you need to set up DNS mapping to your CloudFront distribution endpoint. Consider using AWS Route-53 for that.

You need to setup a CNAME record to point your domain name to the Cloud Front Distribution. You can get your CloudFront Domain Name from AWS Management Console, then set your domain’s CNAME to the Domain Name.|||

I myself was sick of worrying about these things. So I learned some Go, developed a small command line tool over the weekend, and open-sourced it. AWS S3 is an affordable option for for hosting (and…