The Internet is the most widely use mode of communication in this modernized world. 99% of the world population are dependent on internet services for personal and professional work. But recently, a turnover in technology have generated an important topic of discussion that signals internet of things also called IoT. Tough we have the new invention of technology every time around us, but these inventions are either the modified version of existing things or the same technology that we have already listened, heard or experienced. But internet of things is utterly a creative idea that is held under the major discussion. After a period of time, such innovation in technology can be experienced that urge to decrease our workload and increase the efficiency of given task.

Though technology usually entices people with bags of advantage, but IoT is far beyond that. It is machine to machine, human to machine and sensor to machine communication. Sensor here collects data and analyze it. It can be even said that sensor is a brain and machine a physical body that performs the task. Hence, the combination of both this makes the internet of things. Making it further clear, internet of thing is the way to connect thousands of your appliances and equipment, anything from a small portable device to the large gears having the button for on and off.

This can be better explained with an example: Imagine you are driving a car, and suddenly there is a weak bridge at a distant. Being in the car, you can never figure out that the bridge is weak. Fortunately, you have a sensor in your car, and this sensor will automatically detect the condition of the bridge. Thus the received data is transferred to the machine and hence, once the machine gets this information, it will either turn off your engine or turn towards the other suitable direction for your destination. This has benefited you with two things, the risk of danger is reduced and your time to investigate about the other way for your destination is saved.

This is a just a basic example that describes internet of things. How about the case when two machine connects together and works with the data and analysis received by a sensor. Yes, different parts of the machine may work in a manner to give you the beneficial output. But how does sensor transmit information to the machine? This is done via a cloud-based application that transmits signals from sensor to the machine that reads them. Means the major point on the internet of things is that there is a number of connection that gets build up using sensor, machine and cloud application that requires experts to properly manage them.

1. In the business world: Running a business successfully requires advanced technology that increases the efficiency of work. When IoT is applied in the business world to investigate about machines and employees, it, in turn, serves the office with effective result. Suppose, a sensor is connected to all the machines in use, now if there is any trivial problem with the machine, it will notify the connected machine either turning it off or signaling the team for potential dangers.

2. Keeping the environment clean: If sensors are placed near the industrial area or busy places, it will immediately notify users for increasing pollution or when the pollution crosses the carrying capacity of the environment. This, in turn, will direct the machines to be switched off immediately. So, this ensures the safety of the environment. Just like the bin when it gets packed, it will direct the connected machine to empty it without human interference.

3. Health services: With globalization in the world, the concern for health have been increasing greatly. People are getting different types of diseases and infections that directly or indirectly affect their lifestyle. So, if IoT is implicated in the health field the situation would completely get reversed. Having a sensor outside your body will notify you for any kind of health threat. Like if vitamins are getting low, or your BP in slowly heading towards increment; it will immediately notify you before any unexpected situation arises so that you can visit the doctor immediately. This will save your effort to go for lengthy test or monthly health checkup to ensure everything is working perfectly in your system. This is also machine to human communication were signals detect your body, and notify you through a machinery equipment possibly wrapped around your hand or any other part of the body.

These are few areas pointed here where having internet of thing can be of potentially important.

But having said this, the fact that everything can have an advantage as well as a disadvantage can never be overlooked. Yes, bringing IoT is undoubtedly beneficial, minimizing human stress, workload, the involvement of human in the unnecessary task, and many more area but the point of concern is that when so many things are connected together, a large communication network is a set-up. So, managing all these communication networks can be tough requiring expert guidance. Even a slight mistake can ruin the complete system that is connected to each other.

Secondly, personal and professional information can be at higher risk. The chances of misuse of this information will be increased through the process of hacking. Thirdly, if you are planning to misguide your boss to take a day off, your job is at great risk.

Having a technology is of great importance but before bringing it in use, the safety for possible threats and damage must be designed so that no negative outcomes awaits the doorstep.|||

The practical use of Internet of things will bring a turnover in scientific research and discoveries serving a strong benefit for the individual, society and