UK chip designer Imagination Technologies has opened an official dispute with Apple after the iPhone maker revealed it wants to ditch Imagination's graphics chip and start designing its own.

The Hertfordshire-based company announced on Thursday that it had "commenced the dispute resolution procedure". A spokeswoman for Imagination told Business Insider that this essentially means the two companies will aim to reach a new agreement within the terms of the existing contract. She added that it was not a legal process.

Imagination also announced on Thursday that it intends to sell two of its three core business units in a bid to strengthen the company's balance sheet.

"Imagination Technologies has commenced a dispute resolution procedure with Apple Inc. ("Apple") and announces that it intends to sell its MIPS and Ensigma businesses," the company wrote in a trading update for the year to 30 April 2017.

It added: "While the Group has continued to invest in its MIPS and Ensigma businesses, it has now decided to actively market these businesses for sale, concentrate its resources on PowerVR and strengthen Imagination's balance sheet."

Let's take a look at each of those businesses, which are essentially Imagination's main product categories:

The MIPS and Ensigma product lines accounted for £21 million of Imagination's £73.5 million in total revenue in the six months to October 31, The Telegraph reports.

Last month, Imagination said it didn't know how Apple will make devices in the future without violating intellectual property laws.

"Apple has not presented any evidence to substantiate its assertion that it will no longer require Imagination's technology, without violating Imagination's patents, intellectual property, and confidential information," the company said. "This evidence has been requested by Imagination but Apple has declined to provide it."

In the update provided on Thursday, Imagination said:

Imagination's partnership with Apple goes back nearly 10 years. Imagination products have been part of all of Apple's mobile devices — iPhones, iPads, and iPods — since 2008.

Apple, which owns a 8.12% stake in Imagination, uses Imagination's graphics processing unit chip designs under a licensing agreement worth tens of millions of pounds to Imagination every year.

Apple's decision to ditch Imagination is a huge blow for the company — a UK tech icon with revenue of more than £120 million ($149.4 million) in the year leading up to April 2016.

Analysts warned that Imagination Technologies may not be able to survive without Apple, which brings in more than half of the company's revenue.

On the day that Apple announced it plans to stop working with Imagination, which employs roughly 1,200 people, the company saw its market value drop by more than 75%.

"In the worst case, survival, let alone value, is in question," Jefferies equity analyst Ken Rumph said in a note to investors at the time of the breakup. Rumph added that the breakup was likely to dent Imagination's profits by £65 million a year.|||

Last month, Imagination said it didn't know how Apple will make devices like the iPhone in the future without violating intellectual property laws.