, May 3, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- (NASDAQ: FB) today reported financial results for the quarter ended March 31, 2017.

"We had a good start to 2017," said , founder and CEO. "We're continuing to build tools to support a strong global community."

is no longer reporting non-GAAP expenses, income, tax rate, and earnings per share (EPS).

First Quarter 2017 Operational and Other Financial Highlights

will host a conference call to discuss the results at / today. The live webcast of earnings conference call can be accessed at investor.fb.com, along with the earnings press release, financial tables, and slide presentation. uses the investor.fb.com and newsroom.fb.com websites as well as Facebook Page (https://www.facebook.com/zuck) as means of disclosing material non-public information and for complying with its disclosure obligations under Regulation FD.

Following the call, a replay will be available at the same website. A telephonic replay will be available for one week following the conference call at +1 (404) 537-3406 or +1 (855) 859-2056, conference ID 93279401.

Founded in 2004, mission is to give people the power to share and make the world more open and connected. People use to stay connected with friends and family, to discover what's going on in the world, and to share and express what matters to them.

This press release contains forward-looking statements regarding our future business expectations, which are subject to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements are only predictions and may differ materially from actual results due to a variety of factors including: our ability to retain or increase users and engagement levels; our reliance on advertising revenue; our dependency on mobile operating systems, networks, and standards that we do not control; risks associated with new product development and their introduction as well as other new business initiatives; our emphasis on user growth and engagement and the user experience over short-term financial results; competition; litigation; privacy and regulatory concerns; risks associated with acquisitions; security breaches; and our ability to manage growth and geographically-dispersed operations. These and other potential risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ from the results predicted are more fully detailed under the caption "Risk Factors" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the on , which is available on our Investor Relations website at investor.fb.com and on the website at www.sec.gov. Additional information will also be set forth in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended . In addition, please note that the date of this press release is May 3, 2017, and any forward-looking statements contained herein are based on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable as of this date. We undertake no obligation to update these statements as a result of new information or future events.

To supplement our condensed consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in (GAAP), we use the following non-GAAP financial measures: revenue excluding foreign exchange effect and advertising revenue excluding foreign exchange effect; and free cash flow. The presentation of these financial measures is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. Investors are cautioned that there are material limitations associated with the use of non-GAAP financial measures as an analytical tool. In addition, these measures may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies, limiting their usefulness for comparison purposes. We compensate for these limitations by providing specific information regarding the GAAP amounts excluded from these non-GAAP financial measures.

We believe these non-GAAP financial measures provide investors with useful supplemental information about the financial performance of our business, enable comparison of financial results between periods where certain items may vary independent of business performance, and allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in operating our business.

We exclude the following items from our non-GAAP financial measures:

Foreign exchange effect on revenue. We translated revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2017 using the prior year's monthly exchange rates for our settlement currencies other than the U.S. dollar, which we believe is a useful metric that facilitates comparison to our historical performance.

Purchases of property and equipment. We subtract purchases of property and equipment in our calculation of free cash flow because we believe that this methodology can provide useful supplemental information to help investors better understand underlying trends in our business.

For more information on our non-GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP measures, please see the "Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Results" table in this press release.

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/facebook-reports-first-quarter-2017-results-300450988.html|||

