Hello and welcome again to Best Programming Book’s interview topic. We’ve been always looking forward into making everyone happy. As for us, interviewing cool, great and kind authors is the happiest thing we can think about because we can share it with all of you!

Today’s featured author wrote The Software Engineer’s Guide to Freelance Consulting. It’s about the questions “how” and “what” when working. The Software Engineer’s Guide to Freelance Consulting is a very helpful book, as a matter of fact, we’ve been reading it for a while! We won’t discuss anything here about the contents of the book, we will not unleash it, we will let you experience the mind blowing content of this book!

The Software Engineer’s Guide to Freelance Consulting, coauthored by Zack Burt, is just one of his bestselling books in Software Design & Engineering, Software Development and can you believe it, Entrepreneurship! Yes, because it’s computer and money! He also wrote 30 Days To Your First Freelance Programming Client: Step-by-step guide to finding your first client, also one of the bestselling in the same category.

Background: Zack Burt was born in Palo Alto, California in 1987. He began programming (with QBASIC) at age nine and immediately found a passion. Since 2003, he has been working in Silicon Valley and New York City in individual contributor and leadership roles. In 2007, he launched his software consultancy business after his PHP application “Lamefactor” was acquired by WikiYou, Inc. He is passionate about open source, both in submitting pull requests and launching open source projects. He currently lives in Manhattan where he enjoys playing basketball and meeting new and diverse people; he encourages you to email him if you’d like to meet.

 Favorite gadget: iPhone

 Hobbies: Pickup basketball

What does your typical workday look like?

Wake up. Answer urgent emails. Go through my Trello backlog and decide what I’m going to get done that day. Do those things. Do some strategic thinking and planning.

What, in your opinion, is the current most exciting technological advancement and why?

Artificial meat should have a huge impact on animal well-being and the environment.

What inspired you to write your book/s?

People kept asking me for advice on how to become a successful freelance programmer! Plus, I was working with Jay for a client and we enjoyed working together – so we wanted to do another project together.

If there’s one chapter in your book people should have read, which one should it be, and why?

“Finding Clients”. It’s available as a free download on my website, https://codefor.cash. If you don’t have any clients, then by definition, you aren’t a freelancer!

As an author, which book made the most impact on you?

Learning Perl was my favorite technical book. It’s known as “the llama” and it’s a cherished memory.

If there’s one subject you’d like to see a book about, what would it be?

How to get promoted as a software engineer – a guide to corporate politics for engineers.

How big is your current code base for your biggest project?

Is it a hassle to maintain?

What would you like to ask the next author being interviewed?

Mr. Zack Burt is one of the young authors we got to interview. He is a very cool person and never hesitated to accept our interview request. Mr. Burt, thank you very much for giving us some of your time, sir!

Website: https://codefor.cash (visit this website and get “Finding Clients” for free)

 Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/CodeForCash

 Twitter: https://www.twitter.com/CodeForCashBook

We are happy to tell you that we’re giving away 3 of our featured book, The Software Engineer’s Guide to Freelance Consulting and 3 of Zack’s other book, 30 Days To Your First Freelance Programming Client, with the help of our featured author! Check our site regularly or like/follow us on our social media accounts for updates.|||

The Software Engineer's Guide to Freelance Consulting, coauthored by Zack Burt, is just one of his bestselling books in Software Design & Engineering