We couldn’t be excited more than to attend the very first Magento Live India seminar. With the emphasis on Magento, the program was held to unite and nurture the magento e-commerce sellers and development partner.

And given that there were over 500 attendees attending the event, the event can be considered as a great success, with Magento already declaring the schedule for the next year.

The CedCommerce was also in attendance at the first Magento Live India at Bangalore and was attended by Abhishek Jaiswal one of the founders and directors of Cedcommerce.

The event oversaw the delivering of several important lessons concerning Magento Community by the experts and Industry leader, most notable of whom have been captured in this Magento Live India Digest blog.

Magento tweeted an important study by Retail Dive which states that “About 89% of retailers plan to put mobile solutions in the hands of their store associates over the next three years. The BP Special Report – The Mobile World of Retail states that retailers are expanding the use of mobile technology by giving associates mobile devices and apps with specific aims to use them for customer identification, customer engagement, associate training and task management, point of sale (POS) and payments.”

Another Magento tweet that caught our attention that Indian Online Retail market is poised to be $60 Billion by 2020 and has the potential to reach gargantuan $2 Trillion reports pymnts.com

Additionally, the report points to a study conducted by The Future of the Internet in India, which found more than 730 million people will eventually use the internet in India, which means more than 250 million new users. But it’s not only an increase in the number of people using the internet but also the reliance on it.

Therefore, more Indian Sellers would be establishing their online to cater to the 730 million strong customer base.

Magento reiterated its study of more and more people looking for Click-and-collect functionality which we first learnt at Magento Paris meetup. And given the market dynamics, online sellers will be compelled to offer this extremely flexible options to their consumers. It’s a win-win condition for both online sellers and their customers. Sellers save shipping amount whereas consumers save their delivery time.

Anupam Pahuja, MD, PayPal India, stated that online payment industry in India is scheduled to grow to 500 billion dollars. Surely, the Digital India Campaign would be the catalyst, and more and more companies are likely to offer wallet services to their consumers in the wake of common mass’s acceptance towards Digital payments.

Download an affordable Payment Wallet solution for your Magento 2 Store

The season headed by Ian Kinsella, Senior Director, Sales, APAC, Magento Commerce and Ben Marks, Evangelist, Magento Commerce saw them explaining the features of Magento Commerce Order Management, the market insights, and competitive trends – who is buying, what do they need, and who is playing in the space.

Ben Marks, Evangelist, Magento Commerce explained the process for selling the extensions developed by the independent Magento developers at Magento Marketplace. He emphasized that they must first pass the Extension Quality Program (EQP) and adhere to the Magento Coding Standards.

“Magento has added an automated installation test and additional manual QA, so you can check your extension installs without error and that it is configurable (as applicable), operates as expected, and does not break any Magento functionality.

For more information, visit the discussion.

The event saw Ian Kinsella, Senior Director, Sales, APAC, Magento Commerce and Max Yekaterynenko, Director of Community Engineering, Magento Commerce explaint about the need to understand the platform and the objective before actual transfer actually starts. Some of the best practices, tips, how-to’s and techniques to define strategy form Migration from Magento 1 to Magento 2.

Visit the entire discussions. See the presentation

And to see other discussions, visit Magento Live India 2017 Schedule and watch the corresponding presentations.

Started in 2010, the company has been involved in over 1000 ventures of customizing solutions to address all the unique needs. Fuelled by its rich experience, the company has developed highly popular Walmart Magento 2 Integration and Jet Magento 2 integration app being used by 500+ sellers across United Stated of America. And recently, it BECAME THE OFFICIAL CHANNEL INTEGRATION PARTNER OF WALMART. The company offers all the products that make selling easier on e-commerce|||

Read the latest Cedcommerce Blog to find out all the major developments, expert talks, and announcements at Magento Live India, Bangalore.