Agicent App Development Company, is a team of mobile apps developers, designers, and architects and we develop awesome Mobile Apps since 8 years. See our portfolio at agicent.com/our-portfolio.

We've build 300 apps till date, served 120 customers, and we love working with startups and entrepreneurs.

Our App Development Company turns your ideas into great mobile apps for iOS and android and also games. Hire us, and we do the rest.

PS:- Try using this mobile App cost calculator also to know how much does it cost to create mobile app.

Following are our major services offerings:-

Developing apps using native or cross platform technologies for iOS, android, windows mobile platforms.

Creating apps for iPhone devices running iOS software by using native technologies set like Swift 3, objective C with Xcode, or by using cross platform frameworks like ionic, phonegap, xamarin, unity

Agicent creates android apps using native technology set of java and android studio, and also using cross platform tools like cordova, ionic.

We create awesome games using Unity 3D engine wth C#, or by using unreal engine with C++. Also do iOS specific game development using cocos.

We do both front-end programming and backend programming for web apps and sites. We use technologies like angular JS, JS, bootsrap, html, css, jquery for front end while php, mysql, laravel for backend.

We can create both mobile apps and sites and web apps using these technologies.

We create quick minimum viable product in reasonable cost and in time as low as 2 weeks for both web and mobile apps. Our app developers can quickly understand what you need, and our team converts the requirements into viable wireframes and then jump on development with MVP's core functionality as focus.

So hire Best App Development Company if you are looking to hire best mobile app developers for your project.|||

App Development Company is an Apps Development Company in India. Visit App DevelopApp Development Companynt Company’s website from their page.