The title in itself clearly states the most common problem faced by members in group chats, the pain of scrolling up the screen when you were unavailable for some time and a lot of conversation has taken place. Phew! That pain is unbearable. The same problem I encountered yesterday when I woke up in the evening and found 150 messages waiting for me to be attended in one of the group chat in messenger. I didn’t want to go through each and every message as It would take a lot of time. So, I eventually skimmed through all these messages. In the course of skimming, I ignored some important messages about which my friend reminded the last night.

Worried about this problem, I thought of coming up with an effective solution.

The first step to every problem solving is Identification of the Problem. The success of any innovation in design depends on the satisfaction of the end user(s). Therefore, the problems faced by users need to be studied and best solution needs to be identified. In order to identify the problem and get more insights into it, I prepared a small questionnaire and circulated it among my friends. The questionnaire is kept small so that everyone can fill it and questions are focused specifically to what we need to achieve from it and not to divert the people somewhere else.

The following conclusions can be drawn from the above response:

The problem can easily be solved if we can find a method to name the conversations and group the messages.

Naming will allow us to figure out what’s there in the discussion and Grouping will help in effective management of messages and keep our conversation organized.

In order to achieve this goal, I have thought of adding a “Discussion” feature in the group chats. I have taken Facebook messenger as the target app. However, this feature can easily be integrated into any other chats.

One can think of having pinned message as the effective solution for the problem. Pinned messages allow us to mark a message as important. But pinned messages fail when we have some important discussion that needs full consideration where the purpose will not suffice just by reading the single message.

Channels (as used in slacks) could be effective means of proper organization of chat but they too can create problem if messages in channels to become too large.

Here’s how Discussion can play an effective role in eradicating this problem.|||

The title in itself clearly states the most common problem faced by members in group chats, the pain of scrolling up the screen when you were unavailable for some time and a lot of conversation has…