Business, Internet and Businesses Online, Self Improvement, Reference and Education

Over the last year, I have spent hours, day in and day out, learning different skills, and still am. One of the more interesting things I did was to try to determine what skills make someone successful as a digital marketer.

Digital marketing has only begun to flourish in the last decade and still is in constant change. It is a particularly interesting topic which includes a display on how to have an ability to find opportunities that come your way, grasp the existing media channels and improve your basic skills to evolve.

The series of necessary expertise and traits that successful digital marketers have all in common are the following:

They produce outstanding customer experiences, tell great stories and write extremely well, know their customers and markets, and never stop learning fresh marketing ideas. They test everything and assume nothing, trust in the process, use facts to make a decision, and enjoy toiling with technology. They achieve work according to a timetable, provide concrete results, and are likable.

But let’s dig a little deeper into those fundamental features.

One of the essential skills you must have as a digital marketer is to provide exceptional experiences for customers. With the surge of the digital era, you have now countless ways to interact with your clients and show your brand.

These relations are usually growing with time and consistency. However, it is your job to create and manage these experiences. You need to create experiences that truly resonate with your market so that results will by far exceed the ordinary.

It becomes more difficult than ever to get the attention of customers. So a big part of producing an outstanding customer experience is for you to tell a great story. Many successful marketers believe that this skill is essential and crucial to any successful marketing.

You have to be a good storyteller for the simple reason that potential customers can identify with captivating stories more than anything else. Marketing promotions usually talk about a story that consumers recognize with on an emotional level.

Therefore, this is an essential and necessary trait for you to have in a world where attracting attention can be challenging.

So many digital marketers underestimate this vital skill, but I don’t. The importance of content writing or copywriting is one of the most important abilities that you can have. It is a ground foundation for almost every promotion you are making.

From writing great blog posts to landing pages, broadcasts, ads, comments, and emails, copywriting is quite an elementary skill that can make a huge impact on your conversion rates. And it is also the basis for the volume of communication you need to grow your business.

Your marketing success all depends on your ability to know and understand your target market. It was one of the hardest points for me to learn. But if you can efficiently realize what your customers and competitors are undertaking, then you have an enormous advantage and skill.

What is even mainly valued to your business is to be the voice of your consumers. But do not think of this just as collecting data through statistics or surveys. Often, old fashioned conversations with your customers are vital to understanding their need and usually more valued than anything else.

Digital marketing is in constant change, and evolves at a quick pace; it is all because of the online world and the change in consumer behavior. It means that you have to learn more rapidly than ever and in doing so, learning has become an essential skill in marketing.

Thankfully, a wealth of information now abounds online which can help you learn new ways of digital marketing. The topics you should learn about embrace social media, content marketing, and mobile marketing.

All mentors put the importance of continuous learning by saying that you should self-educate as much as you possible by making it a daily 20%. Read books, blog posts, go to webinars, attend online and offline training because you can never learn enough.

Another of the essential skills of any good marketer is always to check things; whatever it may be promotions, ads, or campaigns so as to turn figures into results. So never assume anything.

Today, you have a fair amount of software tools at your disposition, making testing easier than ever before. They will help you test the efficiency of different offers, ads, boosts, copyrights and even designs.

By being able to drive revenue, a digital marketer tends to thrive fairly well. But he or she does so because they have learned to focus on consistency and trust in the process.

 

If you are connected to a quick overnight success rather than a long-term financial objective, you won’t succeed. Marketers who understand this simple skill can tie their efforts to improve revenue and prosper.

Nowadays, you have access to an incredible amount of facts and figures. In such way, you can understand your consumers much better than before. One of the fundamental skills you should need is how to analyze customer numbers so you can make ethical choices.

It doesn’t matter if you are using these facts to understand your market, to generate more efficient marketing campaigns or to optimize them, it will grandly improve your marketing abilities.

If you enjoy toiling, playing or working with technology, and are quite skillful with ordinary marketing applications and systems, you will have a better chance of succeeding.

Of course, it does not mean that you have to be some engineer to make it, but you do have to learn how to use several of these features if you want to be an effective digital marketer.

The frequently used marketing technology tools consist of marketing automation and distribution, broadcast and email marketing, basic marketing analytics, and a few different other software.

An essential skill in your repertoire of digital marketing should be to use timetables and written plans to ensure you achieve work promptly. Therefore, your work should be organized in a deadline fashion.

Successful digital marketers work backward from the take-off time and create a timetable which rules the work they do. You should respect the take-off day by doing everything you can to make sure you launch on schedule.

The digital marketing era has developed into a place where marketers must provide results. You have to perform in creating brand awareness, generating potential and qualified leads, and supplying revenue for yourself, so this is an important skill to have.

You should focus on providing results that can be easily identified and understood by you, that have a progressing impact on the revenue side of your business and that bring results on a monthly basis.

A lovable personality can help you along the way, but a large factor of any digital marketer is building relationships. It is an essential skill for you to be able to connect with customers, influencers, bloggers, editors, and Medias; being a likable person will help stand out and get attention.

Most of the time, it is overlooked! But having a friendly personality plays such a huge role and applies to maintaining any relationship.

Finally, the digital marketing world includes more than just words. A fundamental trait of digital marketing is to know about the visual appearance of all that you do.

To call yourself a digital marketer, you should have some basic knowledge of HTML, CSS or design skill such as Photoshop.

So here are the essential skills of a digital marketer that I have identified in working over the last year. What other skills do you think a digital marketer should possess nowadays? Let me know in the comments below.

Sergei VanBellinghen, Founder & CEO of First-Class Lifestyle and sergeivanbellinghen.com, Success & Self-Improvement Consultant, Freedom entrepreneur & business partner of Stuart Ross, also counselor in East Europe-West relationships, a passionate Globetrotter and an avid audio booker|||

Know the essential skills of a digital marketer and how to use them to improve your business online.