As marketing and sales teams shift to strategies that involve more personalized, direct interactions with consumers, many are turning to Account-Based Marketing (ABM). ABM is great, but many marketers are wondering which channels they should leverage as they shift to an account-based strategy. An increasing number of organizations are incorporating event marketing into their mix, but can events fit in with ABM? Events not only fit into an ABM strategy, but can be a logical extension of the account-based approach—the key is to make sure that your organization approaches events strategically and ensures key business objectives are met.

With the rise of digital marketing channels, consumers have become inundated with emails, eBooks, and social ads. It’s increasingly difficult for organizations to create online marketing campaigns that stand out. As a result, more and more organizations are turning to in-person marketing events to grab the attention of their audience and drive business results.

You’ve probably attended a revenue-generating event. They range from small-scale, VIP dinners to large industry conferences—and even though they range in size and format, revenue-driven B2B events typically share several common characteristics. While the specific details of each event depend on both the organization hosting and the target audience, successful revenue-generating events share these qualities:

Events of this nature should have the goal of driving pipeline, accelerating deals, upselling or cross-selling, or, in some cases, retention. If driving meetings are a goal, it is helpful to have a dedicated space for your sales reps to have personalized, in-depth conversations.

If you’re able to fill a room with the right mix of prospects, customers, marketers and sales reps, you’re likely to see successful results. In a study of the marketing activities that most influence the purchasing decisions of B2B customers, results showed that the top three most influential activities are:

In other words, when events leverage customer advocacy and references, they combine the three most influential B2B marketing activities into one powerful touchpoint. Ensuring that all of these moving pieces come together for one event, however, requires a lot of leg work and coordination among internal teams. But if your organization has already adopted an ABM strategy, you’ve already put in a lot of that hard work—and now you just need to set up the logistics of an event to reap the rewards.

If you’ve already adopted an ABM strategy for your organization, the good news is that you’ve already done a lot of the heavy lifting to set yourself up for a successful event. A successful ABM strategy requires that you take the following steps:

All of these steps are also necessary to set yourself and your team up for a successful revenue-generating event. Events can even serve to strengthen some of the actions required for an account-based marketing strategy. An event, for example, is the perfect platform for delivering account-specific interactions and orchestrating account-focused plays.

For example, an account-focused play for an event might involve your CEO hosting a VIP dinner before the event with top executives from key accounts. This play would involve the following steps:

This play will not only help to align your sales and marketing teams as you prepare to host your event, but it will also allow your CEO to build better relationships with key players within target accounts before your event officially begins.

To further carry your ABM strategy into event marketing, you should keep core tenets of account-based marketing in mind while planning your event. When choosing a location, for example, you’ll want to host an event where you have a high concentration of target accounts. Once you’ve confirmed your event’s location, determining who to invite and creating personalized outreach should be straightforward for those already practicing ABM—and interacting with prospects in-person will only serve to strengthen those relationships.

From there, you need to work through the logistics of setting up the event, which includes choosing a venue, finding keynote speakers and/or guest panelists, and sending out invitations. Make sure you put some time and effort into thinking through these details. You’re trying to develop in-depth relationships with each of the contacts and accounts that will be in attendance—and the content of your email invitation and ambience of the venue can go a long way in creating a more personalized and impactful experience for them.

For a more comprehensive and tactical approach to begin executing this strategy, download The Account-Based Event Marketing Checklist, and learn how you can best leverage your ABM strategy to before, during, and after events to further develop account-specific relationships and drive business results.|||

An increasing number of organizations are incorporating event marketing into their mix – here's how events fit in with your Account Based Marketing strategy.