The term consultative selling can get thrown around a lot. But what exactly does that mean? To bring clarity to that question, we will take a step back and compare consultative sales with a more traditional type of selling and in this exercise we will call that product selling.

One big difference between consultative selling and product selling is that consultative sales is more focused on the prospect and product selling is more focused on the product.

When we say focused on the prospect, we are referring to a sales approach where one tries to learn and understand the prospect’s needs first and then tries to provide a solution that aligns with those needs.

Product selling is more of an approach that just focuses on explaining the product and features available and tries to persuade the buyer into wanting or needing the product that the salesperson sells.

When we break it down like that, it is pretty easy to see why consultative selling can be a more effective, more professional, and more ethical way to try to sell to prospects.

To help you to see how you might transition from product selling to more of a consultative sales approach, here are some more specific examples of what a salesperson might do when trying to sell to a prospect using a product selling approach.

Here are characteristics of what a salesperson might do when using a consultative sales approach.

Each of those characteristics are basically the opposite the same point on the other side. You may prefer one side over the other but if you can see how consultative selling might be a more effective way to go, stop to think about what you do or how you interact with prospects in these areas and make small changes that shift you to being more about the prospect than the product and this will take you in more of a consultative direction.|||

Sales tool that provides sales script, cold calling script, calling script, objections responses, email templates, first meeting script, voicemail script, sales presentation and more