Not alone and not un­read, but the ground un­der­foot ain’t steady. An in­stance of Ho­mo eco­nomi­cus wouldn’t be do­ing this  —  no pay­day loom­ing. So I guess I’m not one of those. But hey, when­ev­er I can steal an hour I can send the world what­ev­er words and pic­tures oc­cu­py my mind and lap­top. Which, all these years lat­er, still feels like im­mense priv­i­lege.

A lot of good writ­ing is on Medi­um, which has learned its blog­lesson­s. Shortish-to-longish for­m: check. Some­thing fresh ev­ery day: check. Fol­low your faves: check. But on my phone, an ir­ri­tat­ing goober at the screen’s foot says “open in app”, try­ing to tempt me out of the bl­o­go­sphere, off of the We­b. I guess lots of peo­ple go there but I’m not gonna.

On a blog, I can write about blog­ging and whim­si­cal­ly toss in self-indulgent pic­tures of May’s bud­ding aza­leas.

I can end my ca­reer, right here, in a flash. I can rant about the per­fidy and cor­rup­tion of my lo­cal gov­ern­ing par­ty, who I de­vout­ly hope are about to be turfed by the vot­er­s. I can dis­cuss the dif­fer­ence be­tween O(1) and O(log(N)), which can usu­al­ly be safe­ly ig­nored.

On blogs, I can read most of the long-form writ­ing that’s worth read­ing about the art and craft of pro­gram­ming com­put­er­s. Or I can fol­low most of the economists’ de­bates that are worth hav­ing. Or I can check out a new pho­tog­ra­pher ev­ery day and see new a way of see­ing the world.

Hav­ing said that, it seems sad that most of the traf­fic these days goes to BigPub­s. That the ad­ver­tis­ing dol­lars are be­ing sucked in­ex­orably in­to Face­book/Google and away from any­one else. That these days, I feel good over a piece that gets more than twen­ty thou­sand reads (on­ly one so far this year).

But I don’t care. I’ll prove it by run­ning a pic­ture of a ce­ment mixer’s in­sid­es.

I won­der what the Web will be like when we’re a cou­ple more gen­er­a­tions in? I’m pret­ty sure that as long as it re­mains easy to fill a lit­tle bit of the great names­pace with your words and pic­tures, peo­ple will.

The great dan­ger is that the Web’s fu­ture is mall-like: No space re­al­ly pub­lic, no store­fronts but na­tion­al brands’, no vi­su­als com­posed by am­a­teurs, noth­ing that’s on of­fer just for its own sake, and for love.

If you’re read­ing this, you have my thanks. But let’s be hon­est: I can’t know what you like. Every hu­man prod­uct that’s re­al­ly worth read­ing or see­ing or hear­ing is made most­ly to please its hu­man pro­duc­er. Be­cause if you aim to please the world you usu­al­ly mis­s, the target’s just too big and you can on­ly guess where it is..

That, more than any­thing, is why I’m still op­ti­mistic about what­ev­er this thing is I’m do­ing here.|||

