Designhill Services, currently only open to the top graphic designers, has over 1,000 listed services in more than 40 design categories from a handpicked community of talent from over 52 countries. The company wants to limit the number of designers that can sell their services on the platform. As per Alice Jackson, General Manager, Designhill, "Designhill Services are exclusive for the top 5% graphic design talent. We are constantly striving to come up with innovative propositions and our intent is to increase the quality of output for clients and to reduce the risk for designers while giving them higher earnings."

Designhill Services offers clients a new and better way to find great talent. All talent is handpicked and services are pre-packaged with upfront pricing and delivery. It's unique and different from the crowdsourcing model because freelancers don't have to bid or enter design contests.

Our network of over 100,000+ clients can choose who they want to work with, from a pre-qualified set of amazing talent all over the world. Services range includes over 40 graphic design categories including logo and branding design, vector illustrations, packaging design, website design etc. The company also plans to include categories such as video and animation to the repertoire of services being offered.

On why Designhill Services provide a great opportunity for design talent, Alice said, "The new service gives the power to the designers to demand what they believe their skills deserve. Our exclusive network of over 100,000+ business owners is more than willing to pay the price for quality." She also explains, "From logo design to complete website designs, Designhill Services already has a broad range of services and we look forward to more in the future."

Designhill is a leading online graphic design platform that operates an ecosystem of graphic design services with a global community of 40,000+ creatives.

For more and updated details about Designhill 'Custom Service', please visit http://www.designhill.com/services/sell.|||

NEW YORK and GURGAON, India, May 4, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Designhill Opens its Doors to the Top Five Percent of Graphic Designers Worldwide to Help...