Severalnines, Europe’s leading provider of open source database management software, announced last week at the Percona Live Open Source Database Conference event that it has integrated the open source database load balancing technology, ProxySQL, with its comprehensive database management system, ClusterControl. Packaged in the latest ClusterControl release, ProxySQL enables MySQL and MariaDB database systems to easily manage intense, high-traffic database applications without losing availability. ClusterControl is the first and only database management system to automate the deployment and management of this exciting new technology. This capability increases a company’s ability to maintain business-critical productivity and end user satisfaction and, in turn, revenue.

High-traffic database applications draw an enormous amount of queries daily and DBAs and SysAdmins require reliable technology solutions that can automatically scale to handle those connections while remaining available for still more. Improper load balancing leads to downtime, an avoidable, detrimental effect estimated to cost companies an average of $5,600 per minute (or $300K per hour) across the globe according to industry research organization Gartner.

Load balancers are an essential component in database high availability; especially when making topology changes transparent to applications and implementing read-write split functionality. This is especially true with high-traffic websites where potentially hundreds of thousands of concurrent connections are constantly trying to access your data. ProxySQL has an advanced multi-core architecture to handle that large number of connections, multiplexed to potentially hundreds of backend servers squeezing every drop of performance out of your database cluster; all with zero downtime. This integration came from requests from Severalnines users who needed greater levels of scalability.

But having a highly-available load balancer designed for high-traffic isn’t the end-all solution to delivering high availability. You also need a way to deploy and manage the database cluster, handle upgrades, run backups, ensure failover and recovery, and the ability to scale the data nodes to accommodate ever-growing data. For this you will need ClusterControl, an all-inclusive open source database management system that removes the need for multiple management tools.

Vinay Joosery, Severalnines CEO, had this to say about ProxySQL: “With the growing importance of load balancers in today’s distributed database environments, ProxySQL has the potential to become an indispensable part of the high-availability stack. ProxySQL offers an alternative load balancing technology for MySQL users who need to handle massive amounts of connections. This addition complements the other load balancing technologies currently supported in ClusterControl.”

René Cannaò, Creator of ProxySQL added: “The ability of ClusterControl to deploy, configure and monitor the majority of the open-source databases makes it an ideal tool for their complete management. I am really excited to see ProxySQL into ClusterControl load balancers offering for MySQL, allowing the possibility to manage even more complex setups through the intuitive interfaces that ClusterControl provides”

Advantages of Using ClusterControl with ProxySQL 

ProxySQL users can also benefit from the features of ClusterControl and the benefits of the integration of technologies.

Simple and Secure Deployments 

ClusterControl lets you easily and securely deploy an array of open-source database technologies, caching technologies and load balancers. With a couple clicks you can have ProxySQL, or a number of other open source load balancing technologies, running on the database of your choosing.

Run at Peak Performance 

ProxySQL offers an advanced query caching engine and efficient routing using its hostgroup concept that sends queries to the cluster transparently and with ease. This coupled with ClusterControl’s automatic scaling functionality to grow the size of the database based on traffic and data growth keep you running at peak efficiency.

Stability, Failover, and Recovery 

ProxySQL and ClusterControl work together to monitor the health of the environment, re-route traffic to healthy database nodes all while ClusterControl can troubleshoot the issue and implement automatic recovery protocols to get the damaged node back up-and-running.

ProxySQL features are included in the commercial versions of ClusterControl which can be downloaded at severalnines.com with a 30 day trial.

About ClusterControl 

ClusterControl is the all-inclusive open source database management system for users with mixed environments that removes the need for multiple management tools. ClusterControl provides advanced deployment, management, monitoring, and scaling functionality to get your MySQL, MongoDB, and PostgreSQL databases up-and-running using proven methodologies that you can depend on to work. At the core of ClusterControl is it’s automation functionality that let’s you automate many of the database tasks you have to perform regularly like deploying new databases, adding and scaling new nodes, running backups and upgrades, and more.

About Severalnines 

Severalnines provides automation and management software for database clusters. We help companies deploy their databases in any environment, and manage all operational aspects to achieve high-scale availability.

Severalnines' products are used by developers and administrators of all skills levels to provide the full 'deploy, manage, monitor, scale' database cycle, thus freeing them from the complexity and learning curves that are typically associated with highly available database clusters. Severalnines is often called the “anti-startup” as it is entirely self-funded by its founders. The company has enabled over 12,000 deployments to date via its popular product ClusterControl. Currently counting BT, Orange, Cisco, CNRS, Technicolor, AVG, Ping Identity and Paytrail as customers. Severalnines is a private company headquartered in Stockholm, Sweden with offices in Singapore, Japan and the United States. To see who is using Severalnines today visit, https://www.severalnines.com/company

About ProxySQL 

René Cannaò is the Creator & Founder of ProxySQL. René has a background of System, Network and Database Administrator. In the last decade his experience was focused mainly on MySQL, working as Senior MySQL Support Engineer at Sun/Oracle, then as Senior Operational DBA at Blackbird (formerly PalominoDB), and then SRE at Dropbox. In this period he built an analytic and problem solving mindset and he is always eager to take on new challenges, especially if they are related to high performance. René then went on to create ProxySQL, a high-performance MySQL proxy. To learn more visit, http://proxysql.com|||

Stockholm, Sweden (PRWEB) May 04, 2017 --  Severalnines, Europe’s leading provider of open source database management software, announced last week at the Perco