PALO ALTO –  Tesla losses grew in the first quarter, blunting momentum as the electric vehicle maker moves to reach a broad, new market with its lower-cost sedan.

But the company topped analyst expectations for revenues, which grew to $2.7 billion from $1.1 billion from the same period last year.

Tesla on Wednesday reported first quarter losses of $330 million, or $2.04 per share, an increase of 17 percent from the same quarter last year.  Analysts predicted a $292 million loss, or about $1.17 per share.

Excluding expenses related to the SolarCity acquisition and other deals, the company lost $214 million, roughly $1.33 per share. Tesla stock dropped about 2.5 percent Wednesday and continued to skid in after-hours trading.

CEO Elon Musk told analysts Wednesday the company remains on track to start mass production on the Model 3 in July. The company has blown deadlines on its previous vehicles.

“We’ve gone to great pains to design the Model 3 for manufacturing,” Musk said. The company has been road testing the vehicle. “As far as we know, there are no issues.”

Karl Brauer, publisher for Autotrader and Kelley Blue Book, said Tesla is entering a major transition with the Model 3.

“Tesla’s numbers keep moving in the right, and wrong, direction. As production and revenue grow so do its losses,” Brauer said. “It’s also interesting that deliveries have essentially stalled at 25,000 units a quarter. Tesla needs the Model 3 now, and can’t really afford any delays.”

Clement Thibault, senior analyst at Investing.com, said the long-term outlook for the company is still cloudy.

“Excitement and hype can only take a company so far,” Thibault wrote in an email. “Tesla has a massive amount of debt with stable profitability only expected in 2020, and round after round of capital raising has already diluted shareholder value.”

The electric vehicle maker shipped about 25,000 sedans and SUVs in the first quarter, setting a company record and hitting a 64 percent growth rate year-to-year. The Model 3, a $35,000 electric car, is expected to bring Tesla to a broader market of customers.

During its earnings call, Tesla said it plans to expand customer service as its fleet grows. It will add more and bigger service centers and an armada of mobile repair trucks, including 100 in the next three months.

Even as investors have boosted the stock, Tesla has faced recent criticism for its products and Musk’s foray into Washington, D.C.

A handful of Model S owners have sued, claiming the updated Autopilot driver assist package is unsafe and delayed beyond the company’s promises. The company denied the legal claims, saying owners are instructed on the system’s limits and its scheduled rollout.

Musk, serving on two presidential business advisory panels, has also become a lightning rod for anti-Trump sentiment. A San Francisco tech investor launched a multimillion dollar campaign to get Musk to renounce President Donald Trump.

Musk said he’s raised immigration reform and climate change at the meetings, issues that might have otherwise been ignored.|||

