Today Fastdata.io announced it has raised a total of $1.5 million from NVIDIA and other investors. The company is introducing “the world’s fastest and most efficient stream processing software engine” to meet the critical and growing need for efficient, real-time big data processing. Fastdata.io will use the financing to invest in developing its product, marketing and talent acquisition.

Our FDIO Engine is unique in the industry, built from the ground up for both speed and efficiency. It can process large amounts of streaming data while natively accelerating any existing algorithms out of the box. This was made possible by low-level programming and harnessing the sheer power of NVIDIA’s efficient GPU technology,” said Alen Capalik, CEO and founder of fastdata.io. “The FDIO Engine will exploit NVIDIA’s latest GPUs and its CUDA API to make stream processing so much more efficient that it will usher in a new era, opening endless innovative opportunities for businesses and new applications.”

Fastdata.io is led by CEO and founder Alen Capalik, an industry veteran who has significant expertise with low-level kernel development for high-frequency trading financial systems and advanced cybersecurity technology. Fastdata.io has developed high-performance computing software, its FDIO Engine, which exploits the massively parallel processing capability of NVIDIA GPUs to provide economical true real-time processing of big data in motion.

Processing complex algorithms against terabytes of live streaming data, the FDIO Engine will:

Fastdata.io is one of the most innovative AI startups that we have seen using NVIDIA’s GPU-based platform to provide truly real-time stream processing,” said Jeff Herbst, vice president of business development at NVIDIA. “By leveraging CUDA and our most advanced GPU technology, the FDIO Engine promises to offer unmatched efficiency and power savings to drive new technologies forward.”

Fastdata.io will exhibit at the GPU Technology Conference on May 8-11 in San Jose, California.

Sign up for our insideHPC Newsletter|||

