There are 7 continents on Earth. 196 countries. 6500 different languages. 4 major races. But citizenship, language and race difference is not a barrier to achieving what you want to be, where you want to be, who you want to be…

Our featured author for today, Gish Jen, and her book, The Girl at the Baggage Claim, is one of the bestselling books in  Business & Money, Politics & Social Sciences and Medical Books category, and all over the book category. Some of her other books are Typical American (Vintage Contemporaries), Mona in the Promised Land: A Novel (Vintage Contemporaries), The Love Wife and more.

A member of American Academy of Arts and Sciences, she has been granted her a five-year Mildred and Harold Strauss Living award and received different awards too including Lannan Literary Award for Fiction, a Guggenheim fellowship, a Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study fellowship.

We won’t make this long, as we always say, enjoy reading and don’t forget to share this with your friends!

Hobbies: Not sure this is a hobby, exactly, but I love stumbling on things — in a museum, in a book, in a village in the middle of nowhere.

What is your recent book about?

The East-West culture gap, what lies behind it, and what it tells us about what it means to be human.

What inspired you to write this book?

I could see how baffled Westerners are by all things Asian – doing business in Asia, traveling in Asia, teaching in Asia, teaching Asian students in the US. What’s more, I could see that Asian Americans straddle a gap that is not well understood, and that many other immigrants and children of immigrants do, too. And I knew I could explain it in a way that might be helpful to all concerned.

What is the best chapter in your book people should read and why?

Many people find the first chapter eye-opening. It makes them begin to question a lot of fundamental things about life as they know it.

If you could give one piece of financial advice to our readers, what would it be?

As an author, which book/s made the most impact on you?

I have always looked to literature for a sense of where true north lies, and will always love best the works that first gave me that sense– Little Women, King Lear, Pride and Prejudice, War and Peace.

What would you like to ask the next author being interviewed?

What does money mean to you?

There we go! Thank you very much, Ms. Gish, for accepting our request. You and your assistant were so nice to us. We will never forget your kindness toward us, a true humble person. We’re very happy to have you featured here.|||

What inspired you to write this book? I could see how baffled Westerners are by all things Asian - doing business in Asia, traveling in Asia...