Pager has moved from a bundled extension and into core. The in-core pager is on by default for any command that can produce long output. The pager extension is now deprecated. Please migrate off of it by removing from your configuration. If you have the pager extension enabled, it will override the in-core pager and will work as before. Unlike the pager extension, the in-core pager is disabled per underlying command, not per alias. This means that if you configure it to be off for , it will be off for all aliases that use log. If you want paging e.g. for one log-alias but not for another, please keep the pager extension enabled for now. The in-core pager does not yet support attending commands that were not designed for it, so third-party extensions will not be paged until they have been updated to use the in-core pager. If you want paging for a command from a third-party command, please keep the pager extension enabled for now. Color is now a core feature on by default. See for details. Set in your configuration to disable it. The color extension is now deprecated. Please migrate off of it by removing from your configuration. The file content view on hgweb now allows you to select a range of lines and follow history of those lines over time. and can now be configured to abort if no destination was explicitly given. This can be useful if your workflow is such that the destination is hard to predict. Set configuration option and to enable them. can now be configured to display the paths relative to the working directory. Set configuration option to enable that. learned to update across branches with a dirty working directory with . A new fileset has been introduced to evaluate a fileset in the context of specific revision. A new fileset has been introduced to simulate between revisions and select files with desired properties. For example, to find files not modified between revisions and : A help topic has been added. It documents the syntax used to define what is in a bundle file. Clients can now define the path to a file containing cookies that should be sent in HTTP requests. See .

Aborts from an HTTP server are now properly reported back to the client instead of resulting in a 500 return code (f3807a135e43) lock: remove possible confusion between pid from different namespace (1f151a33af8e) hgwebdir: allow a repository to be hosted at "/"

matcher: adds a new matcher type. It matches files inside a directory, but not any subdirectories. sslutil: issue warning when is used. The is better in everyway. pager: improve error reporting when calling out to page (issue5491) hgweb: use monospace font for commit messages in gitweb theme template: introduce new and function and the ability to define a in a template hg: hardlink is enabled more widely on some filesystems, to speed up certain operations.

blackbox: allow to log time spent blocked (eg: waiting on user input) using the config option, rebase: fix a bug where public changeset could still be rebase in if the rebase set had multiple roots, rebase: fix rebase possible rebase crash when working directory parent is obsolete (issue5219) (<1> not sure if we should include stuff touching experimental feature) patchbomb: use a single pager to display all output from (BC) mq: reject new patch name containing leading/trailing whitespace convert: fix the handling of empty changlist descriptions in P4 largefiles: set the extension as enabled locally after a share requiring it|||

