NOTE: We have created a new group: IRREGULATORS, to take the FCC to court, among other legal and regulatory actions. We have also released a FREE download of “The Book of Broken Promises: $400 Billion Broadband Scandal & Free the Net”.

Since the beginning of 2017, the FCC has been a path of destruction with the overarching theme to erase all laws, regulations and consumer protections and to let a few very large monopolies/duopolies (or oligopoly)—Verizon, AT&T, Centurylink, and the cable companies—do what they want at your expense.

And this FCC can follow this path because there are only three current commissioners (out of a full complement of five), where the FCC Chairman, Ajit Pai, a former Verizon attorney, controls the agenda with the second Republican Commissioner, Michael O’Rielly. This means that the only Democrat, Mignon Clyburn, (who has always taken a pro-consumer position), will lose every vote, but rather it means that the American Public loses as well.

But there are other areas that have gotten little or no attention and they are at the core of your communications.

More importantly, the wires are important. Your wireless phone service requires a fiber optic wire. Your cell phone call or selfie or streaming video goes from your phone and tablet to a wireless antenna or cell site, which are attached to the wired networks. Thus, 5G requires a wire, 4G requires a wire, 3G requires a wire; even WiFi requires a wire. It does not go into the sky to a satellite, or into the ether, but travels over a physical wire. And this wire is also paid for mainly by the customers of the state utility (which also includes the inflated rates of BDS services), another fact that has been ignored or denied, and which we documented.

In all of these FCC decisions, Chairman Pai has created a ‘fake history’ of communications in the US. The FCC has neglected to mention that the copper wires are part of a state utility and that the BDS services use the exact same wires that are used for phone services. But it is also the rewriting of the history of broadband and the networks that is really appalling.

We have released a free (PDF) download of “The Book of Broken Promises: $400 Billion Broadband Scandal & Free the Net. The 3rd book in a trilogy that started in 1998, “The Book of Broken Promises” by Bruce Kushnick proves that few have a clue about the factual history of broadband, much less fiber optic deployments in America that customers paid for, especially the FCC.

America’s households and businesses have been overcharged at least nine times for broadband/fiber optic services, including the wiring of schools, libraries, and hospitals—about $4000-$7000 per household, and the total is way over ½ trillion dollars by 2016. You can thank just a few companies: AT&T, Verizon and Centurylink, who control the state-based utilities, along with the cable companies, Comcast and now-Spectrum et al. And this is the low number.

More importantly, Verizon, AT&T and CenturyLink control the state communications utilities, such as Verizon NY or AT&T-California, a fact that has been erased. And the copper wires, as well as most of the fiber optic wires, are part of these state utilities, including those used for FiOS or the wires to the cell sites, or all of the other ‘business data services’.

And The Book of Promises also relates to Net Neutrality and many other FCC proceedings. While the FCC, ISPs, wireless, cable and phone companies, and their minions, claim that Title II harms investment, the book details that the companies have been able to use Title II to have phone customers improperly fund the network investments for wireless, cable and all of the other services, over and over.

We have formed a new group: IRREGULATORS and at the core are retired and semi-retired communications experts, lawyers, and forensic auditors who are former senior staffers from the FCC, state advocate and Attorneys General Office, as well as x-telco employees and consultants.

In short, there is no longer a serious need to file comments at the FCC or do petitions as the agency has been hijacked. Like the immigration law challenges, the courts are the only venue left to stop the onslaught of customer harms.

What are needed are audits and investigations. Instead, the FCC is covering over one of the largest accounting scandals in American history to protect the incumbent phone companies, as well as hide the fact that their own negligence to examine their own accounting rules for literally 16 years has helped the companies at the expense of getting America cities and rural areas upgraded and even maintained, but also how it help to overcharge customers billions per state.|||

NOTE: We have created a new group: IRREGULATORS, to take the FCC to court, among other legal and regulatory actions. We have also released a FREE downloa...