Education is an important tool in the world of business. As companies grow, so does their workforce and there is a never ending need for knowledge and learning, however, most of the organizations lack the sufficient space and infrastructure to support an education module. This is where interactive e-learning websites and portals are highly valuable.

If you are not aware of the latest e-learning concepts and are trying to develop an e-learning website similar to Udemy for the first time it’s obvious that you would be having a lot of questions running in your mind such as What would be the overall cost and how long will it take to produce? These are the questions that come to the mind of every buyer of e-learning software. If the buyer has enough knowledge about the requirements, time and cost response is likely quick and accurate. Otherwise, there are no fixed answers.

Developmental costs and time can be only determined depending on the project size and the features you would want to incorporate in your website. In order to get a holistic approach let’s look at some of the factors which could impact the cost of your e-learning website.

The amount of content you add to your e-learning website will have significant implications on the cost to create e-learning website. If you are just adding text and a few images then the cost would be considerably less compared to adding high-quality video, animations and customized features. Logically a course that is primarily text driven would cost less, but the learner will have lesser learning benefit and his quality expectations won’t be met.

Having an interactive website will help in generating more user engagement. It is important that the content developer you selected is familiar with the content format you are using. If you are developing story-line modules, they are often billed hourly, hence a 3-hour online course will take roughly 300 hours of content production at a budget of $30-$45000. Simulations more time consuming but they can be vital to your industry, it can be particularly effective when it comes to operating medical equipment. Also take a look at the existing business model and features to be used in e-learning website.

After preparing the source of content, the next step is to identify the learning objectives to be achieved by the level of interactivity. This will help you in maximizing the instructional goals which the website aims to achieve. Good designers will help you understand the level of interactivity required to achieve the instructional goals. The instructional designer’s success depends on,

Most of the freelance instructional designers will charge on hourly basis. On an approximate note, it would take roughly 40 hours of instructional design per hour of finished course. Generally, instructional designers charge $100 to $150 per hour.

Many a time developers spend a lot of time in refining and fine-tuning the website. Hence the overall process gets delayed and compromised. Making changes to the website is common but frequent updates will slow down the learning process which will, in-turn, reduce the business turnover. It’s better to formulate the plan before and stick with the decision which will give you more control over the e-learning process.

Platform compatibility is essential and this can be achieved by only investing in a responsive design tool. This gives the ability for the e-learning course which you created to be accessible on all devices and browsers. As a result, no valuable time or resources are wasted on creating multiple versions of the e-learning course.

The final deliverable is entirely dependent on the complete utilization and the quality of resources you have in hand.Controlling your resource rates is one area which you can control to an extent. In some rare cases, you may be able to repurpose your existing assets such as Printed materials and content for classroom training. For instance, e-learning videos and modules can be slightly modified and reused for a different learning project. Apart from that, there are other online platforms which come with conversion tools which will allow you to transform your Powerpoint presentations into modern, portable online courses.

If you don’t have enough number of resources to handle the development process you can outsource it. By outsourcing your e-learning, you can create scalable solutions on demand. Partnering with an e-learning development agency will help in stacking your team quickly or slow down the process without suffering any losses. Another option is to go for ready made clone scripts.

Agriya after extensive market analysis launched an Udemy Clone script — Teachr which has most of the features present in Udemy. It can be customized according to your needs and can be used across multiple business verticals.|||

Education is an important tool in the world of business. As companies grow, so does their workforce and there is a never ending need for knowledge and learning, however, most of the organizations…