With the popularity of memes, social media users have increased the growth of these memes. Memes had started with the internet. But, since then, the taxonomy of memes changed completely.

With the growth of social media, memes has reached to a different level. And now social media are trying to use these memes to gain more popularity.

Facebook, Twitter, Reddit and Tumblr are the top social media platform and community like 4chan and 9gag are also some famous meme sites.

You will find different types of memes in different platforms. There are plenty of FB pages on memes and many subreddit as well.

While reading about social media, I found a patent application which discloses a method of meme distribution to right audience. The patent application filed by Facebook. It seems they are working on some meme analysis engine. After reading the patent, I found a meme analytic and distribution method and how Facebook is going to do that.

The meme analysis engine will aggregate different meme by using a set of filters. It will analyze the key terms or words present in a meme. Then, it will categorize them in different aspects like age, gender, geographical, linguistic and any other combinations. It’ll even include earning and education ranges into account.

It’ll define a background group and a target group. Here background group can be your friends list or total fans of your page or members in your group. A metadata, which include a time, geo-location tag, a content type, and a content popularity etc., will help to define a target group. And from these details, a target group will be defined to provide right memes.

Language is another factor to determine a right audience. The linguistic model will analyze a relevancy of the written text to the target group as well as for background group. Like for a Spanish meme, it will choose people who set Spanish language in their profiles. It will also analyze several other factors like locations, posts, and comments to consider a person in a target group.

After that, the meme engine will be ranking those memes to the background group and to the target group. It will then render those memes accordingly to both groups. Further, it will analyze how users of the both groups interact with the provided memes. From these details, it’ll improve its meme engine to provide a meme to a right people.|||

With the popularity of memes, social media users have increased the growth of these memes. Memes had started with the internet. But, since then, the taxonomy of memes changed completely. With the…