Rubycoders uses Stripe system in order to receive payments via credit card.

Rubycoders never keeps the credit card information in its local database. Therefore, it increases its security.

 Stripe has a very powerful event system:

An Event has some properties. Among them, the type property is very important because it identifies what happened in Stripe.

 For example:

As soon as Stripe creates an event, it sends an HTTP POST request to a specific configured url which has been set consequently.

Once Rubycoders receives the request from Stripe, it analyzes it and then it launches the correct routine in order to manage the event.

For example, if the event is a , Rubycoders sends an email to the customer making him aware of the successful subscription creation.

Stripe includes several types of events but Rubycoders is interested only in a couple of them. Indeed, we want to instantiate the correct routine for each event we would like to manage.

First of all, you have to set up the router in order to receive the http post request

then, set up the action in :

The http post request contains the of the event. For that reason, we can recover the event through the method, offered by the class which is here mentioned stripe-ruby gem

The class is the core system. It is a simple Ruby PORO class which analyzes the incoming event and instantiates the correct corrisponding class.

Finally, in case everything was successfully done, the controller will answer with a http code. Otherwise, the controller will answer with .

This is the class

If the event type is:

Then, we will have a class named which will contain the method .

The class instantiates dynamically the correct class analyzing the event type.

For example, the event has the corresponding class and method

In this post only the basic system has been explained in order to make it as clear as possible. For that reason, the management of the exceptions was ignored. However, if there is an incoming event with any Ruby PORO class, the system will offer an exception to be managed.

It should be important to put PORO classes inside a namespace, like or similar ones.

Bonus

 To improve the security, it is better to accept the http requests only coming from Stripe web hooks domain.|||

Rubycoders uses Stripe system in order to receive payments via credit card. Wikipedia says: Stripe is a US technology company, operating in over 25 countries,