TheStartup.com is the third startup I started and this is the only startup that proved to be successful even before its official launch.

Yes, I am writing this article on 18th April that is even before its launch which is on 1st may 2k17. The Subscribers list and the pre-registers’ list is so good that I can say that I have finally made something worth it.

Because the last two didn’t prove to be successful.

But this time its different. We have already got a nice list of subscribers and pre-registered members, an alexa ranking which occurred in just 48 hours without any cheating (the last website took 3 months), the website’s name on the first page of google for theistartup in just 6-7 hrs (last time it took me 4-5 days for just the website’s name).

Till now everything is going fine and we are even getting good responses and emails from many people, getting social media likes and much more.

Let me start from the first website I launched, it was not something like a real startup but just an everyday online tech magazine. The website was really beautifully designed and looked somehow like The iStartup’s website only.

But from there my journey began. I got to know about WordPress and how to work with it, learned many things like SEO, SMO, Online Marketing and much more.

I can’t say that my website was a pure failure because it attracted many people but it didn’t satisfy me because I was looking for something else and so I moved on from it.

Also Read- Content Marketing Strategy for increasing sales: A step by step Guide.

The Parent of this Website- SmashBucks.in. That is also an example of a startup from scratch. The startup was supposed to help businesses in SEO, SEM, SMO kind of stuffs. I got traffic but very less people were converted to our real customers and I started to think about something new.

Believe me or not the idea of The iStartup came into mind in just some seconds. A day before I had read a quote from rand Finshkin “The best way to sell something: Don’t sell anything. Earn awareness, respect and trust of those who may buy.” and then I decided to start a service for all the startups for Free. The next day I shared my idea with my partners and they all loved it.

Although SmashBucks is still running and I will continue it for those who might buy.;)

Basically what ever I did, I did with all my past experiences put together. The Steps I used were like this-

This is how I marketed my own website with no tricks or hack but just with just some knowledge and a good startegy. The ideas worked and now we are waiting for the official launch.

We really wish to help all the startups in getting what they want and if our offer for 1 Free Month does quite well according to our expectations we would extend the time period to 2 Months.

Hope you love working with us.|||

How did I do it? How did I started my website from scratch and do it's marketing all over the web. My own startup story from The iStartup.com.