Here is a bit of insight into the eating habits of project managers and business experts who suffer from planning overdoses: Don’t be surprised if they get irritated by how spaghetti looks on their plates.

Maybe this type of pasta reminds C-level executives of their daily intake of stress. What is so infuriating about spaghetti, anyway, and how is it connected with enterprise performance?

Spaghetti is a chaotic dish that you might associate with project planning, especially if you work in a multi-project environment.

 Google AdWords research shows that there are usually 100,000 to 1,000,000 searches for ‘Gantt charts’ every month. It’s stressful to imagine that the scope of a project’s potential is limited to these charts. Project management experts are familiar with Gantt project planning, though it’s cumbersome to use when managing large numbers of projects at the same time.

 Jan Willem Tromp, a Dutch scientist who’s been exploring the challenges of multi-project environments for 20 years, says that re-planning is off his to-do list. Luckily, Tromp does not use Gantt chart apps, and here’s why:

“Every time I look at videos about resource management for projects I get the same picture. The message is that with Gantt planning you can easily re-plan if resources are overloaded just by rescheduling a task. It is always beautifully demonstrated in the video. If this does not help, you can also reduce the percentage of work for your team members – 50% on task #1 and simultaneously 50% on task #2. I always get allergic reactions to this because it is bullshit. In reality, you’ll get spaghetti. It introduces multi-tasking, and because of that efficiency will drop.”

Rescheduling is a nightmare. It creates a lot of planning and management overhead. Changing project plans leads to messy outcomes and often entails chaos – you’ve got a scenario full of lines that stretch to all sides, so it’s difficult to discern priorities. Your project management methodology is close to the brink of disaster. How can you prevent your tasks from getting tangled like spaghetti? The more sauce you add to your spaghetti plan, the less sticky it becomes.

 The secret sauce from Jan Willem Tromp creates the perfect flow for your project schedule. In order to get a robust plan that does not need to be adjusted all the time, just dedicate more time to your project network and approach project management from the perspective of resource availability. Effort-based workloads and clear priorities will prevent your data from clumping and reduce your planning overhead.

Who knows, maybe you’ll fall in love with Italian pasta once you’re relieved from your project management nightmare. Sign up for an invitation to explore the perfect software for web-based project planning and scheduling and keep your business environment organized.|||

Advanced project management methodologies for efficient project planning and scheduling. Resource and capacity management web-based tools.