regular inspection on the comprehensive performance of products, in particular to a new product before setting a batch production, or structure, materials and process for a product with the change of test may affect the cable's performance. Through the type test: the product can be tested to meet the requirements of the operation, and can be compared with the old products. Such as insulation and sheath thermal aging performance, long-term stability test of power cables

The DC resistance of the conductor is measured by single arm DC resistance method and double arm direct current bridge method. The test procedure is more complicated than the former.

When the cable is connected with the AC voltage, the current flows through it. When the voltage amplitude and frequency are fixed, the capacitance current is proportional to the capacitance of the cable (Cx). For EHV cable, the current of the capacitor may reach the value of the rated current, which is an important factor to limit the capacity and transmission distance. Therefore, the capacitance of the cable is one of the main performance parameters of the cable.

moisture , an insulating layer and a shielding layer off all kinds of insulation deterioration phenomenon, both in the cable or cable manufacturing operation are measured and capacitance of TAN 8.  high voltage cable, measuring Cx and TAN delta are under its working conditions, namely high voltage under the commonly used are high voltage  also began to use the current transformer ratio bridge.

The insulation strength of wire and cable is the ability that the insulation structure and insulation materials under electric field without breakdown n order to check the quality of wire and cable  safely, all types of wire and cable insulation generally have a dielectric strength test. Insulation strength test can be divided into  test and breakdown test. High voltage experiment is a certain voltage  applied to the sample under certain conditions  we judge the product of whether it is breakdown Time is generally higher than the rated voltage of the voltage test , the voltage value and the pressure time also found some shortcomings, such as the production process has serious external insulation damage. There are serious defects in the electric field distortion on the conductor insulation sharp; in the production of a penetrating defect or conductive impurity.

The breakdown test is to measure the breakdown field strength or breakdown voltage under certain test conditions. The breakdown test can be between ability and working voltage assessment cable withstand voltage safety margin. One of the important parameters in the design of cable when the breakdown field strength.

In the operation of general cable under AC voltage, but in HVDC transmission system and some special occasions are also under DC voltage, the high voltage cable may also suffer from atmospheric voltage (lightning) and over

The aging test is a test of whether the stability of the system can be maintained under the action of stress (mechanical, electrical and thermal).|||

