Conferences are about gathering information and knowledge but are also opportunities to meet and learn from like-minded folks in the web design community. Plus, you’ll be exposed to a large amount of new information, so be prepared to absorb the latest techniques brought to you by distinguished authors and speakers!

As you may know, we run a few practical conferences every year ourselves. Next up: SmashingConf New York1 on June 13–14!

This 2-day-one-track-event brings together smart and friendly people willing to share their tricks and training methods, like Sara Soueidan, Jake Archibald, Yiying Lu and Eric Reiss.

We are also running 10 Smashing Workshops3 on June 12th and 15th! Learn about amazing illustrations from Yuko Shimizu, fighting UX and design battles with Joe Leech, and commanding Responsive Web Design with Vitaly Friedman, plus so many more! We sold out all workshops in the last year, so please don’t wait too long to secure your seat!4

Enough for the plug, now let’s dive into our list for May throughout September.

HOW Design Live11

 “One of the largest annual gatherings of creative professionals in the world, HOW Design Live is a career-changing, life-altering experience that provides: more than 80 educational sessions, 13 keynotes, nearly 4,000 attendees, an exclusive opportunity to preview new tools, technologies and products, Workshops and Master Classes and a creative community that embraces everyone and empowers real opportunities.”

ElixirConf.EU13

 “ElixirConf.EU is a community conference created to promote education, networking and collaboration within the Elixir/Erlang/Ruby communities.”

UX Academy15

 UX Academy is an 8-week course to “learn the foundations for creating successful user experiences” taught by 3 experts in the field. At the end of it, participant leave with a “Certificate of completion signed by all three trainers”.

.NET Summit 201717

 “The .NET Summit is the training event for all web developers and software architects. A unique combination of cutting-edge topics offers you a deep insight into today’s modern software development. You benefit from the knowledge of the best-known German-speaking web experts. Each of the speakers goes into detail in the half- or full-day workshops.”

Create Upstate19

 “Create Upstate 2015 was even bigger than last year, with a line-up of stellar speakers, a new Marketplace, and some fantastic food, this year is sure to go down in the record books. This isn’t just a conference. It’s a gathering of the Upstate NY design community, an opportunity to connect with people across the entire state.”

Respond 2017472921

 “Now in its third year, and curated by John Allsopp, cited by Ethan Marcotte as one of the originators of Responsive design, Respond goes beyond the technology, to address the myriad challenges we face in delivering modern, responsive Web experiences. Featuring a mix of renowned international and local speakers, including the founder of Responsive Web Design Ethan Marcotte, Respond is one of the World’s leading events for the Web industry.”

PyDays Vienna23

 “PyDays Vienna is a regional Python conference organized by the community, a place to exchange knowledge about Python and its uses, and an opportunity to meet like-minded people and share ideas.”

CSS Conf EU 201725

 “Dedicated to everyone who loves and writes CSS: CSSconf EU is a one-day, one-track community conference that unites world-class speakers, top-notch engineers & web designers, and many more with an affinity for CSS in Berlin, Germany.”

JS Conf EU 201727

 “JSConf EU is a professional, not-for-profit, labour-of-love conference for the JavaScript community. It’s a two day affair, with many related side events in the days surrounding it. JSConf EU is an invitation for the community to come together and for new people to get to know and join the community.”

Respond 2017472921

 “Now in its third year, and curated by John Allsopp, cited by Ethan Marcotte as one of the originators of Responsive design, Respond goes beyond the technology, to address the myriad challenges we face in delivering modern, responsive Web experiences. Featuring a mix of renowned international and local speakers, including the founder of Responsive Web Design Ethan Marcotte, Respond is one of the World’s leading events for the Web industry.”

OSCON 201731

 “OSCON is where the open source community gathers to celebrate achievements, spark new ideas, and map the future of open computing through collaboration, education, and connecting people with technology.”

JAX 201733

 “JAX is the conference for modern Java and web development, for software architecture and innovative infrastructure. Well-known experts provide their experience in this field – comprehensibly, practically and success-oriented. A special focus is on Java Core and Enterprise technologies, Microservices, the Spring ecosystem, JavaScript, Continuous Delivery, and DevOps.”

Front Salt Lake City 201735

 “Two full days of dedicated time away from your desk, learning better ways to work together and to be inspired to grow your career in UX and Product Management. Immerse yourself in 2 days of real world, from-the-trenches case study talks and interactive panels discussions from innovative, working professionals.”

JsDay 201737

 “From case studies to project management, from new technologies to established ones, from development environments to best practices and mobile development, everything a javascript ninja should know [will be] covered during the jsDay 2017.”

BIM 201739

 “The International Conference on Building Information Modelling (BIM) in Design, Construction and Operations is reconvened following the success of the first meeting that took place in Bristol, UK. The conference fulfils the vital task of bringing together experts from industry, practice and academia to debate those key topics, to develop innovative solutions, and predict future trends. The conference includes a range of presentation forums, including plenary papers, workshops, seminars, and panel sessions.”

Performance Matters41

 “NCC Group’s annual Performance Matters event brings together like-minded individuals with an interest in web performance. We’ll have a great line up of guest speakers, live demos, presentations and Q&A sessions. The event gives you the opportunity to increase your knowledge, discuss hot topics, network with your peers and learn from some of the world’s top web performance experts.”

ACE! 201743

 “ACE! is the largest regional conference of its kind in Central Europe, attracting people from all over the region. The Building Software Better track includes the traditional ACE! content such as agile, lean, Scrum, Kanban, and other tools and methods for improving the software development process. This year we’re adding a Building Better Products track that features Lean Startup, LeanUX, Design Thinking, and Customer Development topics.”

WeAreDevelopers45

 “Our mission is to connect developers globally. WeAreDevelopers.org was founded in order to enable developers across the world to share their knowledge and experience with one another. The WeAreDevelopers Conference takes place in Vienna once per year and provides thousands of developers with the latest insights.”

Respond 2017472921

 “Now in its third year, and curated by John Allsopp, cited by Ethan Marcotte as one of the originators of Responsive design, Respond goes beyond the technology, to address the myriad challenges we face in delivering modern, responsive Web experiences. Featuring a mix of renowned international and local speakers, including the founder of Responsive Web Design Ethan Marcotte, Respond is one of the World’s leading events for the Web industry.”

phpDay 201749

 “phpDay 2017 will be from 12th to 13th of May. We’ll show new development traits, best-practices and success cases related to quality, revision control, test-driven development, continuous integration and so on. There are also talks about design, project management, agile and various php-related technologies like Zend Framework2, Symfony2, Laravel, Drupal, WordPress.”

JSDayES 201751

 “JSDayES is a two-day multi-track conference (English & Spanish) focused in Javascript and its ecosystem. JavaScript, NodeJS, React, AngularJS, Polymer…”

Revolution Conf53

 “RevolutionConf is a one-day, platform and language agnostic, software development conference being held on May 13, 2017 in Virginia Beach, VA. We are a 501c3 non-profit that formed specifically for running this great event. Join us for a day of coding, learning, and networking while overlooking the beautiful sand and beaches of Virginia Beach.”

beyond tellerrand // DÜSSELDORF 201755

 “In 2010 Marc Thiele founded beyond tellerrand. The name beyond tellerrand expresses the aim, that everybody involved wants look a bit further, look beyond the edge. It also reflects the global perspective of the event. The expression is a mix of the English word”beyond” and the German phrase”Über den Tellerrand schauen,” which means”Think outside the box”.”

Riga Dev Day 201757

 “Riga Dev Day is an event by software developers for software developers. The agenda will be carefully organized to include over 40 of only the most relevant topics and technologies. Expect the delivery to be hands-on and immediately useful. Oh, and we have zero tolerance for sales pitches. With tracks, covering JVM, Oracle, Mobile, DevOps, Web development, IoT, Databases and other case studies, you have a lot of space to share ideas across different backgrounds, with estimated 400+ participants.”

An Event Apart Boston 201759

 “An Event Apart Boston is three days of intense focus on digital design, UX, and more. If you care about creating the best possible experiences for the people who use your work, and crave concentrated time to level up your skills in the company of your peers, An Event Apart is the conference you’ve been waiting for.”

SDD 201761

 “SDD 2017 features over 100 in-depth sessions and workshops on a wide range of key software development topics, delivered by world-class speakers, with a keynote from Neal Ford. The event runs for five days, with the main three-day conference taking place from Tuesday to Thursday, and optional all-day workshops on the Monday and Friday.”

AccessU63

 “John Slatin Access U conference was named after John Slatin of the University of Texas, a pioneering leader in web accessibility. The goal is to provide tools that can immediately be put to use by designers, developers, project managers, administrators, and anyone who is responsible for online content and development. John Slatin Access U teaches those skills in an interactive and communal environment where you will learn everything you need to know about integrating accessibility into your company.”

Web Teaching 201765

 “Web Teaching day has been run since 2010 and has been a meet-up for a small group who either teach or are interested in the teaching of web design and development. A day is created to allow us to share practices, ideas and frustrations with peers and like-minded people. A great learning opportunity, and a fantastic, friendly networking event. We are always looking for new people to join us.”

Syntax Code & Craft Convention 201767

 “The Syntax Code & Craft Convention – more commonly referred to as ‘SyntaxCon’ – aspires to become the SouthEast’s premier programmer’s code gathering. The event is focused on fostering ongoing education among the developer community and will provide sessions, talks and workshops across 4 main tracks: Mobile Development, Front-End Development, Back-End Development and Platforms.”

React Europe 201769

 “The conference aims to give talks that inspire and explore new futuristic ideas dealing with all the techs we enjoy including React.js, React Native, GraphQL, Relay, Universal apps, inline CSS and more. ReactEurope is also a great occasion to socialize, meet new people and old friends, hack together, taste delicious food and have fun in the beautiful city of Paris.”

Spring I/O 201771

 “Sping I/O 2017 is the leading European conference focused on the Spring Framework ecosystem. Join our 6th edition. Spring I/O 2017 will be held at AXA Auditorium” in Barcelona.

PhoneGap Day EU 201773

 “Join PhoneGap and Cordova experts from around the world to hear what’s new in web and mobile development. Get the inside scoop on emerging frameworks and technologies and learn valuable tips and tricks to help with your next project. This is one of the best opportunities to network and learn from top industry leaders, meet with members of the PhoneGap team, hear the latest PhoneGap news, and find out what’s coming next!”

Voxxed Days Athens75

 “This developer conference will bring together popular speakers, core developers of popular open source technologies and professionals willing to share their knowledge and experiences. It’s a 3 days event, one pre-conference day with workshops, the main event day with 2 keynote sessions, 3 tracks on different topics and 17 international speakers and one post-conference day with workshops.”

UpFront 201777

 “The conference will bring together the world’s foremost authorities on development, design, UX/UI and all things web and is ideal for any developer or designer looking for access to hot topics and the latest trends.”

Sud Web 201779

 South Web is a humanely sized wandering conference that emphasizes the well-being and the values of exchange. Two days dedicated to continuous improvement to better work together. Take home a new look to better understand the web of today and the world of tomorrow.

DEVit Web Conference 201781

 “Each year we meticulously vet and select remarkable speakers to deliver the best talks on web development. Whether it’s Frontend, Backend, DevOps or Mobile that you care about, join us to learn about the most modern practices and techniques. A truly 360° conference!”

ITKonekt 201783

 “ITkonekt is a unique event in IT world. On one place gathers the biggest IT companies, whole gaming community, IT experts, students of technical and IT sphere, as well as junior IT people, experienced Seniors and managers of big IT companies.”

Strata + Hadoop World85

 “Strata + Hadoop World is the largest conference of its kind in the world, keeping a laser-sharp focus on how data can be used to shape critical decisions across disciplines and industries, from finance and sMarch cities to retail and government. Our talented and expert speakers will share compelling data case studies, proven best practices, effective new analytic approaches, and exceptional skills.”

UXLx – User Experience Lisbon 201787

 “UXLx is a premier User Experience Conference, and our speaker lineup is really the cream of the crop in the industry worldwide. You’ll not only be inspired by their 10 thought provoking talks but you’ll have the opportunity to learn one on one in their 20 practical workshops.”

Front-Trends 201789

 “Front-Trends is one of Europe’s most established annual conferences for professional front-end developers to meet, learn and get inspired. See how the pros build the future face of the web and get motivated from a wide spectrum of front-end talks beyond the ordinary.”

UX London 201791

 “We bring engaging industry leaders from around the world to present a combination of inspirational talks and lively, hands-on workshops. Each day of the conference focusses on a specific area of UX. Our flexible ticket structure lets you immerse yourself in the whole event, or just the days most relevant to you.”

php[tek] 201793

 “php[tek] is a PHP conference like no other: it brings together great technology content and great people and mixes them up in a wonderful cocktail of PHP fun. We like to think of php[tek] as a professional conference with a community flair. You will find a high-quality presentations by the brightest experts in the PHP world, coupled with a welcoming and friendly community of attendees and speakers.”

DevOpsDays Toronto 201795

 “Devopsdays is a worldwide series of technical conferences covering topics of software development, IT infrastructure operations, and the intersection between them. Topics often include automation, testing, security, and organizational culture.”

TypoTalks Berlin 201797

 “Many people still haven’t embraced the joy of change. TYPO Berlin 2017 will tackle methodological agility, and aims to facilitate a rethinking. Visitors and speakers from all over the world meet at TYPO Berlin. The program encompasses more than 60 presentations, workshops, interviews, films, discussions, and much more on 5 stages.”

Frontend United 201799

 “Frontend United is a yearly European conference that moves from country to country. Its aim is to bring frontend developers, designers and Drupal themers from all kinds of backgrounds closer together and share knowledge, experiences and ideas face-to-face. We reach out to specialists around the globe to share their passion.”

PyConWEB 2017101

 “A conference about Python and Web stack, Django, Plone, Tornado, TurboGears, Pyramid and other web-related tools. Talks and workshops by core developers and experts. Now, all covered in one conference” with “30 international speakers and 3 tracks of talks and workshops.”

Webinale 2017103

 “The webinale is the conference for digital professionals, trendsetters, and makers on the World Wide Web – it is the optimal crossover platform for knowledge, inspiration, and experience across all fields of Web technologies.”

Angular Cruise105

 “Sail the Bahamas with us! This is a 3 1/2 day conference with speakers, excursions, workshops, and more. 2 Keynotes, 14 Angular talks, 4 Angular Panels, 3 Interactive Angular Sessions, Unconference Sessions and ONE BILLION Angular Games!”

Emerging Learning Design Conference 2017107

 “OLC is teaming up with Emerging Learning Design (ELD) for a 3-day professional development opportunity where we will share presentations on the topics of active learning, digital humanities, games and gamification, STEAM, and so much more!

 You’ll get the chance to hear from experts regarding current and emerging trends focused on the convergence of teaching, learning, and technology.”

Web Rebels 2017109

 “Web Rebels is a non-profit, community driven conference for everyone who loves developing applications and services using web technology. Two days, one track, 16 speakers — and a member of the JSConf Family Of Events.”

Awwwards Los Angeles Conference 2017111

 “Each year digital architects, pixel visionaries and curators of dreams alike, come together in iconic cities all over the world to share with us their best-kept secrets.”

Shift Developer Conference 2017113

 “The biggest Developer Conference in Southeast Europe. This event, Shift 2017 is the sixth and will bring together more than 1500 attendees. During the two conference days, Shift becomes a meeting place for developers in the most beautiful city in the world.”

RevolutionConf 2017115

 “RevolutionConf is a two-day, platform and language agnostic, software development conference being held on June 1-2 2017. The goal of RevolutionVA is to unite software developers in the mid-Atlantic region through conferences, and career and learning opportunities.”

Music City Code 2017117

 “Music City Code conference strives to inspire progress in the technology community through education, professional development & thought leadership.”

Digital Design Days + OFFF 2017119

 “Digital Design Days is a 3-day event offering exclusive conferences, the second Offf Milano edition, professional workshops, digital showcases & installations, a party, an unmissable experiential Gala DDDinner and many more networking activities.”

WebConf Asia 2017121

 “Webconf.asia is a one day conference featuring awesome talks with practical advice from international web experts. Whether you are a (UX/UI) designer, a front-end or back-end developer, copywriter or project manager – you will love the high-quality talks.”

RubyC-2017123

 “RubyC is the major Ukrainian conference devoted to Ruby, Rails and related technologies. Organized annually by Svitla Systems, RubyC gathers hundreds of Ruby enthusiasts from all over the world to discuss the latest news and spend a beautiful summer weekend in Kyiv.”

UXPA 2017125

 “Whether you’re running an in-house UX department or managing a team at an agency that services many clients, you know how hard it can be to keep on top of emerging trends.”

WoidKonf127

 “Most iOS and tech conferences are focused on talks from start to finish. Thus they create a very dense timetable with very limited space for conversations, breathing and thinking.

 Woid: Konf is an experimental iOS conference that combines technical talks with great social activities in the gorgeous bavarian forest.”

Enterprise UX 2017129

 “There are dozens of excellent UX-related conferences. Why do we need one more?

 Because enterprise UX problems are uniquely wicked ones, with overwhelming challenges of scale, complexity, and distributed decision-making, and intertwined with organizational behavior. Rather than covering basic UX skills, Enterprise UX 2017 will provide inspiration and models of success from leading organizations like Hewlett-Packard, Pacific Gas & Electric, and SAP. We’ll cover how UX is practiced in these enterprises, and how in turn UX is changing the way those enterprises work.”

UX Scotland 2017131

 “Returning for its 5th year, UX Scotland 2017 is the UX & design conference that allows participants to connect and learn from their peers and leaders in the industry. You’ll leave with new ideas and skills to improve your user experiences, an increased professional network, and memories of many useful conversations.”

Kerning 2017133

 “Kerning features two days of workshops (June 7th and 8th) and a Conference day full of talks (June 9th). Kerning offers a very interesting chance to meet developers, gurus, managers and innovators from all over the world. Kerning is a non-profit event. We want to help grow a community of prepared developers keeping knowledge affordable.”

Flupa UX-Days 2017135

 “Since its first edition in 2012, the FLUPA UX-Day has quickly established itself as the essential meeting place for UX professionals (from the public or private sectors, researchers, students). Bringing together more than 200 participants each year since 2012, 300 in 2015, the FLUPA UX-Day offers exchange with UX professionals.”

The Lead Developer UK 2017137

 “When you’re busy leading a team, coding and maintaining standards, how do you find the time to stay ahead of new technologies and develop yourself as a technical lead?

 The Lead Developer UK 2017 is a 2-day conference featuring practical advice from experts on leading and motivating your team and high-level sessions on new and disruptive technologies.”

JS Heroes 2017139

 “We’re planning for JSHeroes to be the biggest tech Conference in Romania, dedicated solely to JavaScript. We’ll get our engine going with 20 international JavaScript experts and we’ve chosen a venue that allows a crowd of up to 500 attendees.”

UX Burlington 2017141

 “A single day, conference-style gathering, focused on what it really takes to build a great user experience on the web. The conference will be held in Burlington, Vermont, a celebrated, vibrant, small city located on the eastern shoreline of Lake Champlain.”

Generate San Francisco 2017143

 “Generate conferences are brought to you by net magazine and Creative Bloq, the world’s leading design titles, and curated by Oliver Lindberg. All our events aim to be a valuable source of practical takeaways, inspiration and networking opportunities. Generate is packed with top content from world-class speakers and help you sharpen your web design skills.”

ReactJS Day145

 “React.js is the JavaScript library developed by Facebook and Instagram to create fast and reusable user interfaces.

 Introducing new development paradigms and best practices to the frontend, it has gathered a large and active community of developers. The conference is organized by GrUSP, the organizers of jsDay, in partnership with FEVR.”

M-Enabling Summit 2017147

 “The M-Enabling Summit is the only program exclusively dedicated to promoting mobile accessible and assistive applications and services for senior citizens and users of all abilities. It is an annual meeting place for all who create and contribute accessible ICT products, services and consumer technologies.”

GoTo Amsterdam 2017149

 “We believe that learning is a life-long process that’s why we create conferences for developers by developers. That’s what drives us to produce the best meeting place for innovators and thought leaders. In 2017 GOTO Amsterdam returns for its seventh edition. The conference topic is Digital Transformation, a topic that couldn’t be more relevant.”

NDC Oslo 2017151

 “NDC Oslo will be a 5-day event with 2 days of pre-conference workshops and 3 days of conference. The conference will cover topics such as NET Framework, Agile, C++, Cloud, Database, Design, DevOps, Embedded, Front-End Framework, Fun, Functional Programming, Gadgets, Internet of Things, Javascript, Microsoft, Misc Languages, Mobile, People, Programming Languages, Security, Techniques, Testing, Tools, UX – Web and more.”

TECHSPO LA 2017153

 “Are you an early adopter of tech products? Looking for a job at a startup? Covering the Los Angeles tech scene for a publication? Looking to invest in the next Facebook? Or just a plain old tech enthusiast? Then YOU and thousands like you attend TECHSPO LA! The Best Part? It’s FREE!”

ConvergeSE 2017155

 “It’s for designers with a free heart and a love of details. It’s for the developers who code for joy and are filled with a passion for technology. It’s for the love of the web and the love of our community. Converge SE is for you and me and everyone.”

UX Strat Europe 2017159

 “UX STRAT’s vision is to help mid and senior-level UX/Product/Service Design pro’s continue to grow in their skills & careers.”

CSSDay 2017163

 “CSS Day is a two-day advanced web development conference, one day about CSS, and one day about HTML. The new HTML Special treats a few advanced HTML5 topics such as iframes, links, and SVG.”

dmi:Design Management Conference Europe165

 “The Design Management Conference #DMC17 held every year in Europe, draws executives, founders, and emerging leaders in Design and Innovation Management. This year in Oslo we will focus on sustainability in all its forms: sustainability in business models, markets, organizations, culture, cities and environments.”

The O’Reilly Velocity Conference167

 “We’ve reached a point where the component parts of our software—technical, social, and organizational—exceed our ability to control their complexity. How do we build and manage systems that are too large to understand, too complex to control, and that fail in unpredictable ways?”

O’Reilly Fluent 2017169

 “Since 2012, Fluent has brought together talented people from diverse backgrounds who are building great projects and experiences for the web. Developers, software engineers, interaction and UX designers, and web professionals come to Fluent to share their experiences and expertise, and to keep up with the sheer volume of new and evolving web development tools and practices.”

Devoxx Poland 2017171

 “Devoxx is a conference by developers for developers at an affordable price this way every developer can enjoy this unique experience. [We provide] a first class tech conference where passionate developers can network, hack, get inspired and learn all week long. During 4 days, 2.500 Devoxxians from 20 different countries attend Devoxx Poland including 100 speakers and another 600K developers enjoy the presentations online. Making Devoxx the biggest Java conference in Poland.”

Pixel Pioneers 2017173

 “Pixel Pioneers is a brand new series of affordable events bringing world-class advice from the brightest minds in web design and development to the UK. Curated by Oliver Lindberg, former editor of net magazine with more than a decade of experience in the web industry, the events are tailored to the web’s vibrant community. ”

App Design & Development Conference175

 “Millions of app designers and developers around the world work side by side every day to build some of the most incredible and innovative applications. This single-track two-day conference will take place this summer in a lively town of Barcelona, Spain.”

We RISE Women in Tech Conference177

 “Women Who Code Atlanta is hosting a conference featuring you! We RISE is all about growing and showcasing women in technology. For two days, we’ll be featuring women and allies doing amazing work from all over the world. You won’t want to miss this one-of-a-kind event!”

GORUCO 2017179

 “GORUCO is a one day, single track conference in New York City. Over the years GORUCO has invested considerable time, energy, and resources into diversity and inclusion initiatives.”

AngularUP 2017181

 “Hear top speakers from around the world. Learn about the present and future of Angular and its ecosystem, TypeScript, tools and much more. Join our Angular tour of Israel, float in the dead sea, walk in the streets of Jerusalem, and eat great Hummus.”

QCon New York 2017183

 “QCon empowers software development by facilitating the spread of knowledge and innovation in the developer community. A practitioner-driven conference, QCon is designed for technical team leads, architects, engineering directors, and project managers who influence innovation in their teams.”

DWX Developer Week 2017185

 “The DWX – Developer Week will bring the fields of .NET, Mobile and Web development, soft skills, makers and Internet of Things under one roof in Nuremberg. The participants will get to see 200 experts in the field, some 250 lectures and practice their craft during the workshop day.”

O’Reilly Artificial Intelligence Conference187

 “Underneath all the AI hype, real breakthroughs are happening—and obstacles to applied AI are being overcome—allowing AI developers to create software that doesn’t just do what it’s told, but has the ability to anticipate the needs of its users through a combination of pattern recognition, knowledge, planning, and reasoning. That’s why we’ve created the O’Reilly Artificial Intelligence Conference, bringing the growing AI community together to explore the most essential and intriguing topics in intelligence engineering and applied AI.”

Learn X Design189

 “This conference brings together researchers and practitioners from a wide variety of higher education design settings with the intention of connecting emergent models and ideas around the digital, with the scholarship of teaching and learning.”

UXLausanne 2017191

 “Improve and develop your skills, attending a human-sized conference, blending together creativity and pragmatism. Share moments and ideas with the UX community, as well as connecting and amplifying your network and its impact. Meet innovators and people sharing your interests from all across Switzerland and Europe, discuss your projects and get a whiff of the new trends.”

Dutch PHP Conference 2017193

 “The target audience for this conference are PHP and Mobile Web Developers of all levels, software architects, and even managers. Beginners will find many talks aimed at helping them become better developers, while more experienced developers will come away inspired to do even better and with knowledge about the latest tools and methodologies.”

Patterns Day195

 “Patterns Day will have something for everyone: designers, developers, content strategists, product owners, project managers … we all face the challenges of creating and maintaining robust design systems. Spend a day in Brighton in the company of your peers, learning all about modular design and development processes, illustrated with case studies of all shapes and sizes.”

The Creativity Workshop in Prague199

 “The Creativity Workshop in Prague will help you become more creative in your personal and professional life; the creativity training we provide uses the tools of creative writing, memoir, art, photography, storytelling, mapmaking, and guided visualization.”

The Creativity Workshop in Dublin201

 “The Creativity Workshop in Dublin will help you become more creative in your personal and professional life; the creativity training we provide uses the tools of creative writing, memoir, art, photography, storytelling, mapmaking, and guided visualization.”

AngularCamp 2017203

 “AngularCamp is a collaborative community event for all people which are interested in coming together to share their recent work in a collaborative manner. At the beginning of the event, participants propose ideas for talks, workshops, and demos that are then curated and put into sessions.”

EuroPython 2017205

 “EuroPython was the first major Python programming language community conference ever organized by volunteers. It started 2002 in Charleroi, Belgium, which attracted over 200 attendees. It now is the largest European Python conference with around 1200+ participants every year, the second largest Python conference worldwide and a meeting reference for all European programmers, students, and companies interested in the Python programming language.”

Chain React 2017207

 “A two day, one-track React Native conference hosted in Portland, Oregon. Chain React: The React Native Conference will consist of multiple talks on React Native given by mobile software engineers at Facebook, AirBnB, and others, on a variety of topics from beginner to expert level. We’re expecting a few hundred attendees and are working hard to put on a great conference.”

IWMW 2017209

 “IWMW, the Institutional Web Management Workshop, is the premier event for the UK’s higher educational web management community. The annual 3-day event provides opportunities for those with responsibilities for managing institutional web services and related digital channels to learn from case studies, hear about innovative approaches and share and discuss challenges in managing institutional web services.”

Digital Summit Portland211

 “Digital Summit fills your brain and professional toolkit with thought leadership and practical solutions designed to supercharge your customer strategies. Sessions and topics featured at Digital Summit include: Content, Search and SEO, Email, Mobile and Video, UX and Design Social and Strategy.”

CoderCruise213

 “Tired of the usual web technology conference scene? Want a more inclusive experience that lets you get to know your fellow attendees and make connections? Well, CoderCruise was designed to be just this. It’s a polyglot developer conference on a cruise ship! This will be a 7-day cruise out of the port of New Orleans that will include 3 days of conference (while at sea) and 3 days at the ports of Montego Bay, Grand Cayman, and Cozumel.”

The Design & Content Conference 2017215

 “Designers and content strategists team up. Hear from industry leaders about crafting experiences and telling stories that shape the future of the web. A day of workshops, two days of talks, and thoughtful extras in one of the most beautiful cities, Vancouver, BC, Canada.”

The Creativity Workshop in Reykjavik217

 “Non-profit community conference on OpenUI5/SAPUI5 web development – hosted at SAP labs.”

That Conference 2017219

 “That Conference is your “Summer Camp for Geeks”. Held at the Kalahari Resort in the beautiful Wisconsin Dells, it’s your last chance to get away before summer slips away. Spend three days with a thousand of your fellow campers and their families, geeking out on everything from writing some epic code to making paper airplanes.”

The Creativity Workshop in New York221

 “The Creativity Workshop in New York City will help you become more creative in your personal and professional life. We use many techniques in creative writing, memoir, art, photography, storytelling, mapmaking, and guided visualization to accomplish this.”

NDC Sydney 2017223

 “NDC Sydney 2017 is set to happen 14-18 August at Hilton Sydney. The conference will have the same format as its European sisters NDC Oslo and NDC London with 2 days of workshops and 3 days of conference sessions.”

UX & Digital Design Week 2017225

 “During a whole week you’ll immerse yourself into London’s technology industry exploring hottest trends and latest inventions. You’ll get firsthand knowledge about modern digital product and service design with lectures and workshops from world’s best design studios and product companies.”

Material Conference 2017227

 “This conference explores the concept of the Web as a material and examines its affordances and capabilities from various angles. Looking back at 25 years of Web history, we trace its original field of application and evaluate the – sometimes more, sometimes less – intentional progress it has made so far. How can we teach the next generation what it meant to live in an offline world? Are we ourselves in the process of unlearning our ancestors’ knowledge about crafts and materials? How does this apply to our experience with the ever fast evolving Web, its tools and technologies?”

TypeCon2017229

 “TypeCon is an annual conference presented by the non-profit Society of Typographic Aficionados (SOTA), an international organization dedicated to the promotion, study, and support of typography and related arts.Since the inaugural conference in 1998, TypeCon has explored type for the screen, printing history, Dutch design, type in motion, Arabic calligraphy, the American Arts and Crafts movement, experimental typography, webfonts, and much more. Special events include the Type & Design Education Forum, and an exhibition of international type and design.”

Web Summer Camp 2017231

 “Spend the last days of summer immersed in hands-on & engaging web-related workshops. Hands-on web development and engaging web design workshops give you practical experience and broaden your knowledge.”

droidcon Berlin 2017233

 “droidcon is a global developer conference series and a network focusing on the best of Android. The idea behind droidcon is to support the Android platform and create a strong network for developers and companies. droidcon Berlin 2017 will again consist of a barcamp and two conference days.”

The Conference 2017235

 “During two days we explore complexity and trends in the digital world. We invite speakers from all over the world representing a wide range of disciplines. The sessions are carefully curated to help you connect the dots between the widespread topics. Think of it like your favorite arts museum.”

Reasons to: 2017237

 “Today’s digital creatives are multi-disciplined, they draw their inspiration to do great work from many different influences. Reasons to: is curated with that in mind, bringing content from many disciplines to give designers, coders, creatives, filmmakers, animators, installation builders, illustrators, artists and more the opportunity to see and hear new perspectives and the best content in the world.”

Pacific Northwest PHP 2017239

 “The Pacific Northwest PHP Conference is a 3-day event in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States for PHP and Web developers. Our past conferences have included world-renown speakers from the PHP community, about a wide range of topics — from APIs and CMS to unit testing and version control.”

UX Salon Squares 2017241

 “Squares 2017 is an event for Creative & Digital Design professionals. If you’re passionate about getting the pixels perfect and in love with the creative process, this conference is for you.”

INDUSTRY: The Product Conference (2017)243

 “Increasingly, organizations are looking at how modern tech startups are using new processes and methods to ship disruptive products. At INDUSTRY, you’ll be exposed to many of these in four progressive tracks, Ideation, Design, Development and Growth, delivered over two challenging days.”

Form Function & Class 8245

 “Get ready for another jam-packed day of learning the latest, most important ideas in digital design & front-end, delivered to you by industry leaders in the Philippines, Asia, and the rest of the world. The name of our conference alludes to the 3 elements of a website: form from HTML, function() from JavaScript, .class from CSS. It also refers to 3 concepts central to the craft: form, function, and continuous learning.”

Fluxible 2017247

 “A week-long celebration of user experience. Get to know top speakers from around the world at this “cheeky, ironic, playful” single-track conference. Delicious food, onsite baristas, and live music too! Learn new skills through hands-on deep dives with expert instructors. Choose from half-day workshops on important UX topics in the morning and afternoon.”

Generate London 2017249

 “Generate conferences are a source of inspiration, education and networking opportunities. Our shows are packed with top advice from world-class speakers.”

CONNECT.TECH251

 “CONNECT.TECH is the Southeast’s premier annual conference dedicated to JavaScript, Web and Mobile related technologies, tools, and frameworks. CONNECT.TECH will feature presentations and workshops from global technology and thought leaders as well as local community speakers. The 2016 event had 800 people and we are planning for 1000 total people for 2017.”

Berlin Expert Days 2017253

 “We are an open organization and hosting annual technology conference BED-Con in Berlin. Our goal is to connect people.”

Camp Press255

 “Camp Press is an unplugged community event for dreamers, creators, builders, and geeks.

 It’s a participatory community event devoid of technology and constant online connection. It’s a place to create genuine long-lasting relations with and learn from top technologists and web creators of all types.”

Strange Loop 2017257

 “Strange Loop is a multi-disciplinary conference that brings together the developers and thinkers building tomorrow’s technology in fields such as emerging languages, alternative databases, concurrency, distributed systems, security, and the web.”

EuroIA 2017259

 “The EuroIA summit is Europe’s leading Information Architecture (IA) and User Experience (UX) conference. It is a unique event that brings together veteran Information Architects, experts from diverse fields practicing IA, and newcomers to the practice of IA and UX design. It showcases best practices and real-world results, along with the methods used to get there.”

Here are a few links to help you keep up with newly scheduled design and development conferences. The events are shared through Lanyrd and have been sorted by category.

If you’re planning to attend any of these events, we’d love to hear your thoughts in the comments section below. What are you most excited about? What are you looking forward to learning and experiencing?

By the way, the Smashing team is constantly organizing a series of workshops269, as well as the Smashing Conferences270 — it would be wonderful and a great honor to meet you personally someday!|||

Here is a list of all web design conferences this year. There are always benefits to attending any event. Read more »