I trust Stephen Hawking's word when it comes to black holes and quantum mechanics, but I'm more dubious when the famous cosmologist says, as he does in an upcoming BBC special, that it is urgent for humans to colonize another planet in the face of catastrophes like climate change, asteroid strikes, epidemics and overpopulation.

The Beeb is resurrecting its long-running science program, "Tomorrow's World" with a documentary called "Expedition New Earth," in which Hawking says the human species must set up shop beyond Earth within the next hundred years in order to ensure the survival of our species, according to the Telegraph.

I really hope someone on the show's production team, or the BBC's promotions people, or maybe the outlets picking up the story are misrepresenting Hawking's level of hysteria and urgency here, because it's sorely lacking in the logic department.

The most likely worlds for colonization are our moon or Mars (which is also Elon Musk's target of choice for a colony in the next century), and in case you hadn't heard, neither of these places are habitable. Even if Earth were to suffer the catastrophes that Hawking worries about -- and they all worry me, too -- it would still be more habitable than the moon or Mars.

This is to say nothing of the trip to each place, which is highly risky, expensive and involves exposure to an awful lot of cosmic radiation and weightlessness that can do very real damage to the human body, especially on the long trip to Mars.

I feel like I should be able to drop the mic here, but openly disagreeing with one of the smartest men on Earth demands a little extra diligence.

So to be clear, I think pursuing a small human colony is a great idea. The scientific discoveries and technological innovations that will come out of such a venture are well worth the effort.

But this notion that Mars or the moon is our salvation because the end of the world is nigh is really silly.|||

I trust Stephen Hawking's word when it comes to black holes and quantum mechanics, but I'm more dubious when the famous cosmologist says, as he does in an upcoming BBC special, that it is urgent for humans to colonize another planet.