What began as a couple of blokes and an idea in 2010 is now an international operation that’s pulling in up to 10 million views a month, with every step of growth happening between the four walls at one Richmond share space.

Rome2rio founders Michael Cameron and Bernhard Tschirren, both former Microsoft engineers, sought out a small pocket of space at co-working community Inspire9 as they looked to take their start-up to the next level. Just a handful of years later they’re Inspire9’s major tenant, with their staff occupying their own open floor area towards the back of the building.

As far as rapid rises go, Rome2rio’s is hard to top.

The start-up’s speedy growth is one of the Australian tech industry’s most remarkable stories: in seven years the company has grown from two Melbourne-based staff to 31, with 11 new staff added in recent months.

The company also recently revealed plans to move to a 1300sqm office space near its current digs to accommodate the more than 100 employees it plans to bring into the business.

Rome2rio chief operating officer Kirsteene Phelan, who joined the company in late 2015, provides a glowing endorsement of co-working spaces as the perfect environment to grow a start-up or small business. And she would, too, given that’s where she met Cameron and Tschirren and landed her current gig.

“I started a consultancy and worked for about four or five different companies who are in Inspire9 simply because I was in the building and it was easy. People knew what I could do and I would get referrals through that micro-community.”

“I met Michael, Bernie and Rod (executive chairman Rod Cuthbert) and explained to them what I did and where my expertise lay, and they wanted me for a project. I started on that project and because I’d had some operational and HR experience previously, they eventually got me to take on other segments of the business, and now I’m the chief operations officer.”

In case you’re yet to experience Rome2rio, it’s a trip planner that allows you to enter a starting point and a destination anywhere in the world, and it will search timetables for almost every possible mode of transport in order to find the best way of getting you there. Recently, it also added the ability to book those services.

Impressively (and almost unheard of in the age of the tech start-up), the company has thus far been almost entirely self-funded, without requiring any significant investment from outside sources.

You could argue that Rome2rio was always destined for success, given the firepower they recruited early on in Cuthbert.

Cuthbert decades ago recognised the power of the internet and created one of the first tourism websites, Viator, which he sold 19 years later to industry giant TripAdvisor. For a fledgling travel website, there could be no better recruit to have in its corner.

While the business has grown so drastically that it’s currently transitioning towards opening its own office a stone’s throw from Inspire9, Phelan says the co-working space was the ideal place for the business to mature organically, without having to worry about the day-to-day minutiae like hiring a receptionist (one is provided for everyone in the office), organising and paying for utilities and providing office furniture.

And as the business continued to grow, the co-working community provided a readymade recruitment stream.

“We’ve actually hired several people out of Inspire9, not only myself but a number of developers have been hired. We’ve also had consultants come in from being in Inspire9,” Phelan says.

Phelan says the co-working concept’s true value for their business has often been its ability to provide a test market for concepts and ideas.

“When you’re first starting a business there’s lots of decisions you need to make every day, and if you’re by yourself, you’re sort of within your own echo chamber,” she says.

“But when you’re in a co-working space like Inspire9 you can go and talk to someone else as informally or formally as you like and get advice from them about how they’ve done things, and you start to get a sense about how you can make all of those decisions, and make them more quickly because you’ve had expertise at your fingertips.”

Find a space and work your way on Spacely|||

What began as a couple of blokes and an idea in 2010 is now an international operation that’s pulling in up to 10 million views a month, with every step of growth happening between the four walls at…