The World Economic Forum on Africa 2017, held in Durban (South Africa) from 3 - 5 May 2017, has recognized six women entrepreneurs in Afrika who are said to be creating opportunities and preparing the continent for the fourth industrial revolution.

This comes after earlier in 2017 they opened applications for any female entrepreneur whose business is less than three years old, uses innovative technology or business models, and has at least one year of revenue generation to be considered for their second annual search for Afrika's top female technology innovators and entrepreneurs.

The six women entrepreneurs named by the World Economic Forum on Africa 2017 are:

Oluwayimika Angel Adelaja of Fresh Direct Nigeria (Nigeria), which has pioneered stackable container farms – helping urban populations gain access to high quality produce, reduce stress on land-use and reduce the need to import vegetables. Esther Karwera of Akorion (Uganda), it has developed software that connects smallholder farmers into digital value chains, helping them sell directly to agribusinesses. Aisha Pandor of SweepSouth (South Africa), the South African startup has created employment opportunities for 3,000 domestic cleaners since it was founded in June 2014. Temie Giwa-Tubosu of LifeBank (Nigeria), it is deploying the latest in digital supply chain thinking to deliver blood and other high value medical products to hospitals and health centres. Darlene Menzies of FinFind (South Africa), her company aims to remove a major bottleneck to Africa’s growth: helping SMEs and start-ups secure financing. Charity Wanjiku of Strauss Energy Ltd. (Kenya), Strauss Energy’s proprietary solar roofing tiles are able to undercut conventional solar tiles by 30%.

The six winning women entrepreneurs and innovators have been invited to attend the World Economic Forum on Africa 2017 to contribute their ideas on boosting entrepreneurship across Afrika.

Cover Image: One of the sessions at World Economic Forum on Africa 2017.|||

