My take on a great .

1. Actionable – Unless a blog post is a news story, it should help people solve a problem. Will your reader, having read through your blog post be better able to solve the problem that she was looking to solve? Content upgrades including checklists and action plans are a great way to ensure that your content helps readers with a problem they’re facing.

2. Combined Relevance – Our brains work by associating new information and patterns with old, familiar ones. Take advantage of this in your writing by introducing metaphors and connecting the something that your readers can understand easily with more difficult or hard-to-remember concepts.

3. Urgent – Pick a topic and there are probably dozens if not hundreds or more posts about it already. If you want to maximize the effect of your content, create a sense of urgency. How? Help people visualize the results that taking action will yield.

4. Scannable – Use images when they can convey a concept better than text. Break your post into sections with engaging headers. Use bullets and numbers to organize steps or lists.

5. Entertaining – People often equate entertaining with funny, especially when it comes to blog writing. However, humor is only one way to make a post entertaining. You can also try suspenseful, argumentative/controversial, allegorical, inspirational, etc.

6. Definitive – Write enough content that you can truly help someone solve the problem they’re trying to solve. If it’s a huge, complicated problem and you only have time to write a short post, take on a smaller part of the problem and attack it comprehensively.

7. Simple – The topic or concepts don’t have to be simple, but when you write a blog post, the language you use should be easy to understand and the way you explain how to solve a problem should be as simple as possible.

SEO is frustrating. Like, REALLY frustrating.

If you’ve spent any amount of time trying to build rankings for one of your sites, I’m sure you’ve run into some pages that were outranking you and thought, “REALLY? WHY?!”

Here are some best practices though:

Include synonym words and phrases that Google suggests in search results:

Include links to the following (study on outbound linking and SEO):

2. Things You Might Not Know About Me

7. ‘X’ Things You Must Do After ‘Y’

8. How to ‘X’ in ‘Y’ Hours/Days/Months

11. [Desired Benefit] that No One Talks About

13. Things I Wish I Had Done Differently

Banging your head against a wall , but if you’re frustrated with your SEO results, there’s a better solution.

2. Tell the end of the story first.

We had just sold our company for over $1M. But even for a modest acquisition, boy did it take a lot of work and strategy to get there.

I once had a client yell at me for 10 minutes straight.

Is launching a SaaS as a first time founder a fool’s errand?

SEO leads have a 14.6% close rate. If you’re close rate is worse than that, here are some things you can do to improve it.

6. Go for the cliffhangers.

I started with an eTrade account and $10,000. One year later, I was a millionaire. But I was so close to losing everything.

If you think your 15% conversion rate is good, let me rain on your parade. It’s not.

Content upgrades are additional downloadable worksheets, checklists, action plans, etc. that enhance a post and make it more actionable. Every post should have one. Backlinko has a about them.

Here are 5 ideas for content upgrades:

Here’s what you want to do in your conclusion:

If you follow this guide, you’ll have all of the elements of a perfect blog post even if, like me, you’re not the best writer.

The ultimate goal is to maximize the number of eyeballs, and further, to maximize email list conversions. Blog posts following this guide do just that.

I’ve actually printed out this guide for myself and keep in on my writing desk for quick reference and highly recommend it.|||

A comprehensive guide on how to write the perfect blog post for maximizing SEO and sharing potential.