Many companies make the mistake of rushing to get their websites up and running without much regard for aesthetics. This is a crucial mistake, and one that could cost these companies dearly. In fact, an unattractive website can increase your bounce rates significantly and practically push your customers into your competitors’ laps.

Recently, a company called Vistaprint conducted a survey in which 1800 consumers provided their initial reactions after visiting a variety of eCommerce sites. The results were surprising, and they show the importance of aesthetics when it comes to website design. Some 42% of the consumers who were surveyed said they were “very unlikely” to make a purchase from a website they viewed as ugly or unprofessional, and 21% of those surveyed said they were “not likely at all” to buy anything from an unattractive or unprofessional site. This means that if your site is unattractive, you’re losing up to 21% of your business.

When a consumer makes a purchase online, he or she will form an opinion of your site in a matter of seconds. If your site is cluttered, or if it’s difficult for that consumer to find what he or she is looking for, then there’s a very good chance that the consumer will leave your site in favor of a competitor’s cleaner, more professional site for a strong user experience. What’s more, online shoppers are more concerned with trust than the actual location where the product comes from, and if your website has numerous errors or is difficult to use, consumers will associate this with numerous errors in your products, too.

That’s why aesthetics and design are so crucial to your company’s website. When it comes to eCommerce, no matter what you’re selling, your website serves as the first line of contact with consumers. You can think of it like your storefront and your sales team if you had a retail shop. You wouldn’t have a storefront in disarray, and you wouldn’t have your sales team hide in a hidden corner at the back of the store. You’d make sure your storefront was neat, and you’d have your sales team front and center where customers could easily find them.

Now that you understand why it’s so vital to have an attractive, professional-looking website that’s easy for consumers to use, it’s important to take some time to examine the various aspects of your own site so you can make improvements. Here is a list of website components you should check, and what you need to look for.

It’s plain to see just how much an ugly, disorganized, or unprofessional website can cost you. Per recent surveys, you’re losing at least 21% of your potential customers. Take the time to review and improve the important aspects of your site, and you’ll find that your sales will start to increase immediately.

  

|||

In fact, an unattractive website can increase your bounce rates significantly and practically push your customers into your competitors’ laps.