Despite its late entry into user analytics, Heap Inc. is emerging as a serious contender against the tech giants that dominate the field.

The startup, which has won over more than 6,000 companies since launching four years ago, further cemented its position today by securing $27 million in new funding.

The financing comes courtesy of four returning investors that participated in Heap’s previous $11 million raise last August. They are Initialized Capital, Pear VC,  Menlo Ventures and New Enterprise Associates, with the latter two sharing the credit for leading the new round.

Heap will invest the funds in broadening the feature set of its analytics platform, which promises to help companies understand how users interact with their services more easily than the competition. One of the ways it achieves this is by providing an automated data collection mechanism that takes little effort to embed in large websites and apps. Heap says that the simplicity of the service is a particularly big asset on the mobile front, where logging user activity often requires custom code.

The aggregated data is available through a cloud-based dashboard that the startup says can accommodate users of all technical backgrounds. Heap provides drag-and-drop controls to help marketers and other business professionals work with the information, while staff with more advanced requirements have access to a built-in query mechanism. The service also provides the ability to export measurements from its platform to third party tools where they can be integrated with other data.

As part of its development efforts, Heap will work on providing even deeper insight into user activity. In an interview with TechCrunch, Chief Executive  Matin Movassate specified that the roadmap includes “support more data types and larger volumes of data” as well as integration with new information sources.

Heap’s competitors in turn are also bolstering their capabilities. Alphabet Inc., the elephant in the room, recently redesigned the Google Analytics dashboard to help marketers access data about traffic to their websites with fewer clicks. The home page is now customized for each user based on what metrics they’re tracking in the service.|||

