How the Uber of health insurance is dealing with high costs, an Obamacare repeal, and a fraternal bond to Trump’s son-in-law. On a chilly December day, CEO Mario Schlosser is sitting in a conference room at the company headquarters, looking at charts that track signups to Oscar, the health insurance company he runs. From his laptop, Schossler flips and zooms into the infographics with the smooth proficiency of a data scientist—which he is. He’s undoubtedly the only health insurance CEO who studied artificial intelligence at Stanford. The numbers are tracking, in close to real time, how many people are signing up for Oscar’s policies during the Affordable Care Act’s annual enrollment period. Schlosser would prefer that Oscar not be so dependent on the ACA, but at this moment, that’s the reality. Oscar Health underwrites individual policies, and the endangered Obamacare program is its pipeline.

Oscar’s offices on the sixth floor of the toney Puck Building are a central-casting picture of a generic internet startup. Young people clattering on computers shoulder to shoulder; iPads to sign in guests; whiteboards everywhere; a microkitchen; conference rooms named thematically (each one an homage to a different person named Oscar). It’s a stark contrast to the traditional image of a health insurer: a wood-paneled sanctum with actuaries poking at calculators and, in a giant corner office protected by an assistant, an avuncular CEO in a jacket and tasseled loafers (likely a one-time deputy director of HHS). In the basement would be support workers barking claim denials at customers still dazed after waiting on hold for two hours. Oscar promises something different: a system that swaps red tape for red carpet. Technology, transparency, and hi-touch are its watchwords. Though Oscar takes pains to emphasize that it serves all ages, every aspect of its service—from the design of its app to its whimsical, tweet-friendly ads—sends out a millennial dog whistle: Come to me, my mobile-first darlings. Oscar does not remove all the pain from health insurance: Its members are covered only for doctors within its network, and it exercises some of the cost control that virtually all of its competitors use. If you want Sloan Kettering to treat your cancer, you may have to struggle to get covered. (By the way, “members” is Oscar’s preferred term for its users — “customers” sounds too meretricious, and “patients” implies that they are sick. Oscar thinks of itself as a wellness machine.) Nonetheless, Oscar has built an interface to health care that, at its best, is as refreshing as other experiences transformed by tech. One might assume that Oscar might be in line for similar success as friction-reducing internet powers like Amazon or Uber.

The numbers on Schlosser’s screen marking Oscar’s subscribers don’t seem game changing— some thousands in each age group; the largest chunk in the 26 to 35 bracket. It’s not surprising that young adults are susceptible to a health care insurer with the vibe of an internet startup; after all, Oscar has been called the “Hipster Health Insurer.” But there are both older and younger signups as well, even some people over 65. “It’s exactly on target,’” says Schlosser of the mix, his English heavily accented by his native German. As for the numbers themselves, Oscar had about 120,000 members last year and may not (because it left two markets) have many more this year — a long way from the million Oscar once hoped to attract within a few years. “We’ve been a startup inside a startup,” Schlosser explains. “The individual market as a whole is a startup, and insurance markets take a few years before they find [themselves].” It turns out that disrupting health care is not so easy. In the highly regulated field of health insurance, Oscar hasn’t had the opportunity to slip in under the regulatory radar like Uber or Airbnb. Though the ACA has generated millions of new entrants to health insurance, it hasn’t been a big profit generator for insurers, some of whom are bailing from Obamacare. This year Oscar raised rates by about 20 percent (in line with other insurers) and exited in two of its very small number of marketplaces. Regardless of the cost-cutting measures, Oscar is still losing plenty of money, with net loss of at least $128 million in the first three quarters of 2016. As it has improved its processes, revenues have grown faster, but that trend might be affected what what might turn out to be the biggest problem of all. The Affordable Care Act was vital to Oscar’s launch, and still provides virtually all of its customers. It is now on the verge of repeal, with no coherent plan for replacement. And since November 8, 2016, there has been an added complication. Oscar’s co-founder and chairman, Joshua Kushner, is brother of the man who is perhaps the president elect’s most trusted advisor: Donald Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, married to Ivanka Trump. This adds an unwelcome element —perhaps a potential conflict of interest, or a Shakespearian twist of corporate fratricide — to an already perilous set of scenarios.

But if Oscar’s leaders are worried, they do not show it. In multiple interviews, they profess that the company’s most difficult days are past it. The case they make is simple: They’ve made early-course adjustments to refine their system in the direction of profitability. They can juke and weave to work with whatever replaces or doesn’t replace the ACA. They’re moving on their long-range plan to start offering group insurance. And that stuff about the Kushner brothers — journalists can’t resist a story with headlines like, “This Trump-in-law may lose millions if Obamacare is repealed” — is a clickbait-y sideshow. Oscar will prevail, they believe, because it offers a superior product and a superior process. Oscar has built the health insurance equivalent of a better bicycle. But now it must test it in a hurricane. When I greet Josh Kushner several weeks ago at Oscar’s offices, he reminds me we met at a conference in 2013. I had been moderating a panel where several leaders of young companies, including Kushner, presented their business models to an audience that then voted on which one seemed most likely to succeed. I remembered him as a poised presenter, and he hasn’t changed, even though his life has gotten pretty weird of late. At 31, he speaks carefully but with a clear passion for the subject of the company he co-founded. Kushner got interested in health care as a business in 2012, after he hurt his ankle. During his brief hospital stay, he felt frustrated at not being able to access any information about his own case. While virtually every interaction he had in the digital world was based on the company knowing him and catering to his needs and preferences, here he was in a multi-billion dollar facility, where no one had access to his medical records and he couldn’t get a clear explanation of what went wrong. Weeks later, when he got his bill, Kushner—a product of Harvard who’d worked at Goldman Sachs—could not decode any of it. While the rest of us grouse and suffer about the system, Kushner did something about it: he created a startup. A successful venture capitalist — his firm, Thrive Capital, had made early bets on Instagram, GitHub, Twitch and Warby Parker — he was struck by the contrast between the companies he funded and the health care world. In an era where people routinely had access to their own data and their own choices, the medical sphere was unsustainably antiquated. He paired up with two friends — German-born entrepreneur and engineer Mario Schlosser and former Microsoft engineer Kevin Nazemi — to start Oscar. (The pair would originally become co-CEOs while Kushner was chairman of the board, and, in its early days, the public face of the company.) The name came from Kushner’s great-grandfather, less because of the elder’s personal accomplishments and more to give a counterintuitively fuzzy moniker to a business known for mean impersonality. At first they looked into building a product, maybe an app, that would help make health care clearer to consumers. Then they realized that they would have to sell it or at least coordinate it with hospitals and insurers—institutions that were part of the problem. They concluded that in order to make real change, to manage costs, and keep the data in a single stream, you needed what they called “the full stack” — control of the entire process, from the insurer’s premium to the network of doctors and medical facilities to the claims system itself. Instead of cherrypicking, they would have to full-on compete with Anthem, Aetna, and United Healthcare. In terms of ripeness for attack, the health care industry is years past its shelf date. Bills are incomprehensible; customers find it nearly impossible to figure out what’s covered; their claims are routinely challenged with no explanation; and to find specialists in the network, they must call from out-of-date lists of doctors, many of whom aren’t taking new patients. You simply don’t get the feeling that anyone at most of these traditional insurers is sitting around thinking, “How can we make this great for our customers?” Envisioning Oscar as a classic disruptor, investors showered the startup with cash, beginning with $150 million from Khosla Ventures, General Catalyst Partners, and others. (Thrive has had its own stake in the company from the beginning.) Another early investor: Peter Thiel. A year ago, it closed another round, led by Fidelity and adding Google Capital, for $400 million, at a valuation of $2.7 billion. “I completely believe that outcome could be quite spectacular if you get it right — multiple, multiple billions of dollars,” says Joel Cutler of General Catalyst and a long-time Josh Kushner friend.

The company began to evolve a model to satisfy members after every interaction, not enrage them. Its bills would use the internet’s best design principles—rather than bizarre codes that hide vital information—explaining what services you got and what you paid. Oscar also took pains to create a world-class app that let members expediently handle appointments, pay bills ,and check their histories on their mobile devices, providing members with the kinds of data that Josh Kushner wished he’d had access to when he hurt his ankle. At least in theory, Oscar carries out these principals of efficiency and pleasantness to every part of its medical process. The core of the system involves a four-person “concierge” team consisting of a nurse and three aides trained in navigating the health care system. A member always works with the same team, which has not only access to the patient’s medical history, but also a personal familiarity with the patient. The team locates an in-network specialist and can even set up the appointment. Oscar also has a staff of MDs in house who are available, free, for video-conference consultations. True, other insurers offer telemedicine and virtual consultations, but Oscar’s VP of care delivery Harry Ritter claims that the company’s processes lead people to prefer this system, and also to embrace the more limited network of doctors that they might have enjoyed in past years. “We don’t do it with a stick,” he says. “We make it so damn easy and so compelling to use our tools, to engage with us as a company, to work with our virtual doctors and all that kind of stuff, that people will do it.” All of this sounds great — who wouldn’t want a better system? — but there is a huge difference between disrupting the hospitality or transportation industries and the health care world. Airbnb travelers or Uber riders have the freedom to choose those services over the traditional options. Most health care customers do not make their own choices: the majority of the insured are limited to what their employers offer. Until recently, individual insurance was so difficult and expensive to secure that people considered themselves lucky if they could get anyone to insure them. But fortune had smiled on Oscar Health. Its founders insist that they didn’t start Oscar with the ACA in mind — they just wanted to do better for consumers. Yet Obamacare created a marketplace where, for the first time, a population of buyers were assured a choice of insurers. In a once-in-a generation bonanza, an outsider company could slip into competition with the giants of the field. “It provided a window of opportunity for new entrants,” says Larry Levitt, senior vice president of the Kaiser Family Foundation.

In 2014, Oscar began offering coverage to a limited number of New York City residents, signing up around 14,000 members. It lured them with quirky, millennial-friendly animated ads: over the inevitable ukulele soundtrack a voice promised to make health insurance “simple, intuitive, and even fun.” Later Oscar would become probably the first health care insurer luring customers by boasting of superior product design, showing side-by-side comparisons between its Ikea-style claim forms and the hieroglyphs of its competition. For the next two years, Oscar began an ambitious expansion, soliciting members in New Jersey, San Antonio, Dallas, Los Angeles (West Hollywood, naturally), and Orange County, CA. In 2015, it had 35,000 members. By the end of the enrollment period for 2016, the number was 135,000. It’s a fraction of the millions covered by the big insurers. But Peter Lee, the executive director of California’s health exchange, thinks that the company has made a genuine beachhead. He says even to be included among the options for the state’s purchasers, Oscar had to ace a number of due diligence tests. He also professes admiration for the company’s goals: “They really are consumer centric,” he says. But Oscar’s gains came at a price. Oscar wound up losing a lot of money in some of those areas, particularly in Dallas and New Jersey, where regulatory conditions made coverage particularly expensive. “It’s a combination of some things we could’ve done better, and some things we [couldn’t help],” says Schlosser. He admits that Oscar miscalculated medical risk in some markets. And the vagaries of Obamacare — which basically works, but could really use some tweaks — hurt Oscar. Worse, other insurers bailed in those markets, and Oscar didn’t want to left holding the bag as the insurer of last resort. So in the middle of 2016, Oscar announced to people in those regions who had taken a chance on a new kind of health care insurer that they would have to find someone else. Frowny emoji! Oscar got a lot of bad press for its setbacks, but the company believes that the course adjustments it made last year — as well as continued progress on its ever-evolving process — has put it in good stead. 2017 could be poised as a breakthrough year for Oscar. But it could also be the year where politics leads to its undoing. To serve its New York members, Oscar has opened its first dedicated clinic, in collaboration with Mount Sinai Heath System, one of its new partners for services in the city. The fourth-floor facility near the Jay Street subway stop in Brooklyn doesn’t resemble a doctor’s office as much as a spa, or the headquarters of a cool startup—down to the Nespresso machine and free Kind bars. In a conscious homage to the Apple Genius Bar, the traditional crabby receptionist is replaced by smiling “greeters” who help you log in on an iPad. They are trained to stand next to visitors instead of behind them, to foment a feeling of collaboration. Those with actual ailments are shuttled to exam rooms where doctors continue the digital huddle; visiting Oscar members who are feelin’ good can drop into a “multipurpose wellness center,” which will host classes on disease maintenance, pregnancy, and yoga, as well as TED-type talks on subjects of community interest. If the Brooklyn site works out, Oscar will grow these out in its other coverage areas.

The collaboration with Mount Sinai is part of Oscar’s new “narrow network” in New York City. This term refers to a tightly bounded but high quality set of medical services, and is a key component of Oscars full-stack approach. At its 2014 launch, Oscar quickly had to assemble the care networks for its members — essentially, it was renting a collection of doctors, hospitals, and emergency rooms to work under a controlled fee structure. But this year it has finally contracted with a small group of high quality providers (besides Mount Sinai, there is Montefiore and Long Island Health Network). In its new coverage area of San Francisco, Oscar is working with the prestigious UCSF medical network. Niyum Gandhi, executive vice president of Mount Sinai, thinks the collaboration represents the future. Mount Sinai shares with Oscar, he says, a vision of an integrated system with a seamless flow of data and collaboration from the concierge teams to general practitioner to specialists to hospitals. “Oscar has the DNA of innovation,” he says. Also new for Oscar is a massive operations center in Tempe, Arizona. Located off a busy interstate highway, it has 60,000 square feet. When I visited last month, Cathal McCarthy, Oscar’s head of customer experience, comes to greet me. A prize hire, he had just joined Oscar the previous month after 12 years heading customer-facing teams at Apple, ultimately rising to senior director of world wide sales, customer service, and contact center technologies. (Unfortunately, McCarthy this week revealed that he is leaving Oscar — he says it’s an amicable parting due to his unwillingness to move to New York City, the logical place for him to contribute.) McCarthy walked me through the vast facility, filled with mostly empty workspaces designed for brokers to help people buy policies, and concierge teams to deliver care. Built for 900 people, currently only 100 work there. It is a testament to Oscar’s optimism that it believes all those spaces will be filled — as well as the 30,000 additional square feet of adjoining workspace that Oscar also rents. I spoke with one of the nurses anchoring a concierge team, a recent transplant from Missouri named Mandrea Dolphin. She used to work in emergency rooms, but finds more satisfaction the personal aspect of her interaction with Oscar members — even though she never meets them in person. “Some members I talk to every week,” she says, using secure email or texts to send reminders or follow up on appointments. “This is new,” she says. “Especially for an insurance company.” This year, Oscar is making an incursion into the far more stable market of businesses who offer insurance to employees. Beginning next month, Oscar will start selling to small groups — companies with under 100 employees — and hopes to eventually serve medium-sized companies after that. (The overall road map winds up insuring the biggest companies.) Because Oscar has announced no customers, it is too soon to tell how successful it will be, but its customer-centric practices may well find favor among tech startups and similar operations, increasing its user base over last year’s. Oscar will also operate this year with a relatively fresh leadership team. In 2015, Schlosser became the sole CEO. In January 2016, Oscar hired Joel Klein as chief policy and strategy officer. With a resume that includes posts as Assistant Attorney General, New York City school chancellor, and most recently the CEO of Rupert Murdoch’s troubled education startup, he will help Oscar navigate the difficult regulatory hurdles bedeviling the health insurance sector.

Oscar had other marquee hires last year, including Alan Warren, a former Google vp of engineering who had been a leader in setting up that company’s New York office. (Warren had also spent time at the ill-fated Google Health project, which provided him expertise, if not a desirable track record, in Oscar’s field.) Warren oversees over 60 engineers, who not only work on the app and convivial interfaces but also are constructing a digital infrastructure to make Oscar a platform where third-party developers can add value. Down the road, he sees the company as a pioneer in exploiting machine learning to improve services for customers, and maybe even to anticipate medical crises. All this activity and innovation, of course, is happening while a shadow looms over health insurance: the fate of Obamacare, which at this moment seems to be careening toward a fate where Congress cuts off its head and then figures out how to paste on a new one at some future date. Given that virtually all of Oscar’s members come from ACA health marketplaces, it is hard to understate the implications for this startup. Amazingly, Oscar does not seem to regard the probable repeal as a threat to its existence. In conversations with its top executives, they paint a picture of a company that may have made use of the ACA for its start, but can live without it. Whatever system individuals use to get health care, Oscar will now be right there — the changes might even give Oscar an advantage over its less nimble competitors. Meanwhile, it will make bigger incursions in the group health market.

Still, politics are going to either help or hurt Oscar, as well as the health care world at large. And that’s why there’s been considerable interest in the possible effect of the relationship between Charles Kushner’s two sons, one of whom co-founded a health care company and one of whom has the ear of the man who will ultimately decide what happens to American health care. Jared Kushner will not only probably be in the room where this decision happens, but he also may well be the most knowledgable person on the subject — with that knowledge gained through discussions with his brother. In fact, in Oscar’s early days, Jared Kushner, in addition to Josh, was listed as a “controlling person” in regulatory filings (Josh has been the sole person with that designation since 2014)— so he clearly knows the world from Oscar’s point of view. Though its co-founder and the chairman of the board, Josh Kushner is not operationally involved with Oscar on a day-to-day basis. His desk is on a different floor of the Puck Building. But according to Schlosser, he does have significant input in multiple aspects of the company like strategy, hiring, and marketing. And of course, he’s a major shareholder. Though the two brothers may have different views on policy, they apparently do not let that affect their relationship. “Josh and Jared are incredibly close and loving brothers, but they well understand the boundaries well of their personal lives and their professional lives,” says General Catalyst’s Cutler. It seems extreme to speculate that Jared Kushner would make a family intervention specifically to boost Oscar (though so far the transition team has failed to meet even low expectations regarding conflicts of interest). But as the Trump administration figures out what to actually do with health insurance after the ACA is presumably repealed on paper, it is definitely to Oscar’s benefit that such a close insider has a deep grasp of this issue. A White House connection, of course, was never part of Oscar’s plan, and the company certainly doesn’t use it as a talking point. When pushed, Joel Klein portrays the fraternal drama as a non-issue. “We will follow all of the rules,” he says. He admits that this unique situation might be so hazy as to preclude bright boundaries, but is nonetheless certain that the Kushner distraction is non-material to Oscar’s fate—rather, he characterizes it as an “amusing media story.” “What happens on health care is going to happen,” Klein says. Klein is more forthcoming when it comes to the biggest hurdle Oscar must overcome: it is competing in a heavily regulated field where a superior product may not be the ticket to winning. “When anybody sets out to be a disruptor, which we unabashedly set out to be, the question is can you disrupt the system, or will the system beat you back?” he asks. Not surprisingly, he is optimistic. “I think we’ve built something that’s very special. And, I think the growing pressures on the healthcare system are going to mandate change. That pressure is on our side. There are no guarantees in this thing, but it’s an exciting time to try it.” Ultimately, it is Josh Kushner himself who best expresses the company’s view that while Obamacare offered a great opportunity to ship, Oscar has now established itself, and its fate is no longer tied to the success the ACA. “It’s like we’re this beautiful spaceship that was able to be built because there was some new space program — but we launched in an unstable environment,” he says. “But we can quickly redirect this beautiful spaceship to very stable environments.” Still, Oscar’s Millennial Falcon can’t land softly if politicians keep pursuing a scorched earth policy, figuring out only later how to patch up, or “replace” the health insurance system they set ablaze. That’s not just a problem for Oscar — it’s a problem for all of us. At the end of my conversation with Kushner, I ask him to remind me of something. In that entrepreneur bakeoff where we first met, how did Oscar do? Kushner pauses before leaving the room. “We won,” he says, and then disappears into the thicket of busy workstations.|||

On a chilly December day, CEO Mario Schlosser is sitting in a conference room at the company headquarters, looking at charts that track signups to Oscar, the health insurance company he runs. From…