Content pirates have so far always found a way to stay ahead of those who create, format and distribute “highly secure” digital media of all kinds. While 4K movies have for some time managed to avoid becoming one more category of loser in this race, nobody should have believed too firmly that things would stay that way. And well, they apparently didn’t.

As it turns out (and it’s now apparently confirmed that the pirated movie copy is indeed a “genuine” 4K rip), pirates have managed to crack the Advanced Access Content System (AACS) 2.0 encryption system used for 4K ultra HD Blu-ray discs for the first time ever. In this case, the piracy was applied to the movie “Smurfs 2” and was first discovered by the still mostly HD content-focused BitTorrent tracker UltraHDclub. The rip of the Smurfs movie was (unsurprisingly) met with considerable praise by fans of pirated content who would just love to get their hands on premium 4K movies and shows for free, as they’ve been able to do for HD and normal Blu-ray content of all kinds for years now.

If the “Smurfs 2 rip is indeed real, it’s quite an impressive achievement for whoever pulled it off, since the AACS 2.0 encryption standard now used for 4K Blu-ray video sources has been considered uncrackable so far.

The piece of content is titled “The Smurfs 2 (2013) 2160p UHD Blu-ray HEVC Atmos 7.1-THRONE.”, with no further technical information having been provided so far. Furthermore, if any of you are eager to go out and seed this movie as soon as possible, bear in mind that the total file size is over 53 GB, making one wonder if it would be simpler to just, you know, stream or buy a copy instead.

Some of the comments from downloaders who spotted the movie torrent when it went live were quite effusive in venting their happiness about this little piracy milestone seemingly get (literally) cracked:

“This is history in the making and I`m proud and glad to be able to participate and experience it first hand. This is so freakin amazing and it feels sort of unreal but yet it isn’t which is the best part,”

“Great job! Congratulations to the person/team who achieved this awesome milestone. I’ve got nothing but love for you!”

However, despite the excitement in these circles, and possible frustration on the official content distributor side, what we still can’t completely confirm is whether the movie rip is the real deal. According to the torrent piracy tracking website TorrentFreak, the audio for the rip seems to match but other indicators of perfect digital emulation like content light levels, frame-average light levels and even colors seem to be a bit off. These things were gathered from screenshots of the “Smurfs 2” pirate content and thus we’re not yet sure if this is a true case of a full 4K Blu-ray crack that would open the door to total 4K disc movie piracy of the kind that’s now pervasive for 1080p Blu-ray discs and other media of nearly an kind.

Update: Further checking by a source reporting to TorrentFreak indicates that the pirated “Smurfs 2” 4K UHD Blu-ray movie is indeed the real thing|||

