The Case for DX: Why Data Experience Matters (Part 1)

Much of this “X”perience follows traditional user or customer experience definitions, and it certainly includes the UI/UX of your SaaS vendors, but DX goes beyond the warehousing and BI tools that you use to store, manage, and view data. DX is more than interacting with the data itself. It includes how much your company talks about data, how often you make data-driven decisions, and how data-minded your team is. (Among others…)

The data culture of your company is a derivative of the cumulative DX’s that happen every day.

So why does data culture matter?

Because data is becoming easier and easier to generate, and top-notch companies are finding ways to leverage it towards achieving their business goals — through UX, operations, sales, etc. (Just Google “embedded analytics” and you’ll see what I mean.) Meanwhile, the byproduct of this focus on data is that consumers/users/stakeholders of all kinds are becoming to expect more regarding their implicit and explicit data experiences.

While not yet quantitatively investigated to nearly the degree that UX or CX has been, DX matters. DX should be designed with the same investment as user experience (UX) is designed because soon (maybe not yet, but soon) those data-related interactions will undoubtedly affect your stakeholders’ perceptions, engagement, and investment in your company as much as UX does.

One of the biggest differences between UX and DX, however, is that DX directly affects both internal and external stakeholders (whereas UX design is primarily an external stakeholder issue). We’ll get into why DX matters externally in Part 2 of this post, but the TL;DR for internal stakeholders is that there are four key components of their DX interactions:

Below is a description of each, as well as actionable suggestions as to how these interactions can improve the DX of your internal stakeholders.|||

Much of this “X”perience follows traditional user or customer experience definitions, and it certainly includes the UI/UX of your SaaS vendors, but DX goes beyond the warehousing and BI tools that…