Smaller companies have smaller data teams (maybe just one person), bigger companies have bigger. The tricky thing is that the several aspects of a data project need several very different kind of skills.

How should you build up your data team to make this skills work the best together? I’ll show it to you through an example of a fictional startup.

Note: For the sake of the example I tried to come up with a startup, that doesn’t exist for sure. But you can apply this scheme – I am going to show you here – for any online businesses.

Okay. Let’s say you are one of the founders of Adtrefa.io (Adapt trees from Australia)! You came up with the wonderful idea of helping people to adapt trees from Australia. Cool. You’ve already built the web application – and it flies! In one month you’ve got the first 10.000 users. Then another 10.000 users in the next one. You are on a constant grow, the dream came true.

As a wise startup founder you know that:

But before you start to hire, it’s worth to understand first, how data analysis and data science works in online businesses like yours. Here you go!

First, let’s see, how already established Data Teams are doing it at bigger companies.

Usually the whole process starts with the Tracking Team, which is responsible for data collection. They are passing the data to the Data Infrastructure Team, which takes care of the data storage. From the stored (and sometimes already cleaned, restructured and/or aggregated) data, the Analytics/Data Science Team picks what it needs for its analyses and it turns the data into meaningful insights. Eventually this insights land at the Managers and Decision Makers, who take the action on the learnings!

Parallelly with the chart above – this is the flow of the data between the different tasks:

It has four major steps too:

You can break down this data flow into smaller tasks, but I won’t go into that in this article.

 Also some people would argue that data cleaning should be mentioned here. I left it out, because the data cleaning can happen on the Data Infrastructure and on the Data Analytics part as well – so I didn’t want to specify, who in your data team should do it.

As I have described in the intro: the tricky thing is that different parts of a data project need different skills.

 The data collection and storage part needs more engineering skills. The analytics part needs a mix of coding, statistics and business knowledge. And the decision part needs a business mindset of course.

But this is not black or white! Eg. none of the Managers can make decisions without at least having a high-level understanding of the engineering things. And none of the engineers can build up a meaningful easy-to-use infrastructure without knowing the business and analytical needs.

So who does what in your data team?

The good thing is, that you will already have the first bubble (developers) and the last bubble (decision makers) in your company. So you only need to fill up the Data Engineering and the Analytics positions…

Good question! Let’s get back to the Adtrefa.io fictional startup project!

 Mid size startups (~500 employees) usually have at least 3-4 Data Engineers on the Data Infrastructure Team and around 6-10 Data Scientists and Analysts on the Analytics Team (sometimes Data Scientists and Analysts are split into 2 teams). Of course the exact numbers and the exact structures are differing from company to company.

Your problem – as a startup – is that you can’t and won’t hire 10 people immediately to do data projects.

 In a very ideal case you could hire 2 people though:

If you can hire only one person, I’d go with the Data Analyst first – but in this case make sure, that she/he has above average technical skills as well (preferably fluent in the above mentioned languages: SQL + Python or R). If she/he has a good understanding of technical things – together with your developers they will be able to build a “bridge” until you can hire your first Data Engineer. And with that, you can start your first data project without a well-established Data Infrastructure (Team).

 If you go this way, your second hire on the Data Team definitely has to be a Data Engineer, who can focus on building a Data Infrastructure that will scale with your company, when the grow will reach the 1M or 10M users.

Then if you have done this first two data-hires right, these people will be able to advise, how should you extend your data team in the future – based on their needs.

Communication is key. And this is true for data projects as well. Across your four data teams – everyone should talk to everyone.

When developers are passing the data to the Infrastructure Team, they talk and create things together. No question about that.

 It’s obvious, that the same happens when the Infrastructure Team passes the data to Analytics Team and when the Analytics Team provides the insights for Managers.

But here, I’d like to emphasize, that subteams, who are not in a daily contact with each other should communicate as well! Eg. managers should know, what Data Engineers are doing. For instance it helps them to understand, why data servers cost so much and what does it mean budget-wise for the company (so they can calculate the ROI of the data projects). Or another example: developers should understand, what Analysts/Data Scientists are doing, because it helps them learning, what kind of data they should collect. And so on and so forth.

Your data flow goes through on these four steps:

And in parallel with that, these four sub-teams will be working on it:

Everyone in this process should have at least a high level understanding about this whole process. That’s the only way to build an efficient data team and turn your raw data into meaningful, useful and successful decisions!

If you want to be notified first about new content on Data36 (like articles, videos, handbooks, etc.), sign up for my Newsletter!|||

If you build a data team, the tricky thing will be that the several aspects of a data project need several very different kind of skills.