As you all know, the Alcatel 6060, supposedly the Idol 5 was already spotted on GFXBench and now, again some of the specs of this handset are leaked in the same website. The noteworthy point is, the specs revealed today are found to hold some dissimilarities, in comparison with the previous one.

By last month we got a chance to look at the phone, in all its glory. There were some hints about the upcoming handset too along with it, by the famous tipster, Roland Quandt. Obviously, he compared the appearance of the new handset with its predecessor Alcatel Idol 4.

Some of the hints given by him were, the new handset bears the model number 6060C and it is expected to be coming as Cricket Wireless variant, with some enhancements in the upper and lower speakers. In addition, the image clearly infers that the Boom key was positioned, pushing it a bit down, while compared with the Idol 4.

According to the new listing by the GFXBench, the Alcotal 6060 (purportedly Alcatel Idol 5) will be featured with a 5.2-inch Full HD display, which renders a resolution of 1,920 x 1,080 pixels. It is powered by a MediaTek MT6757CH processor, clocked at 2.3GHz with an Octa-Core Mali-T880 chipset. This processor holds a 2GB of RAM and 32GB of internal storage.

On the software front, it runs on Android 7.1.1 Nougat platform and supports connectivity options like NFC. Most of the specs are found to be similar with the previous listing, except for a few changes. Correspondingly, the earlier listing stated that, it is powered by a Snapdragon 652 processor, with 3GB RAM, runs on Android 7.0 Nougat and there is no NFC support.

Further, both the listings have revealed the same details, when it comes to the cameras. The Idol 5 will sport a 12MP rear camera that is capable for shooting 4K and HDR videos, while an 8MP sensor is set for the selfie shooter.

The above details have led to a consideration that the device might come in two variant, based on the processors (Snapdragon and MediaTek). The Snapdragon 652 could possibly go to the US market, while the MediaTek would see the Asian markets.|||

Alcatel Idol 5 Specs details Spotted again on GFXBench Website with diaTek Helio P20, 7.1.1 Nougat OS, 12MP Rear Camera and Snapdragon 652.