If the titles and the book covers don’t give it away (although you should not judge a book by its cover), three of the six top sellers for the “dark fantasy horror” genre have descriptions that contain phrases like “sexy”, “adult urban” or “a budding romance.” I do not judge people that like these books, but I would argue that these are in the wrong category. Even though these might have elements of “dark fantasy horror”, it seems that their main themes are adult. (You are probably thinking, this can be solved using multiple genres. You are right, read on!).

Basically the top sellers from Amazon for the genre “dark fantasy horror” contains little, if any, actual “dark fantasy horror” and its a waste of time to go browsing through it.

Instead of looking at top sellers, one can also simply search the genre. This will run into another problem. Here are three sequential results on the first page of searching for “dark fantasy horror” from Amazon:

Of course, one of these has “steamy sex” as a description (Problem #1), but even more problematic is that all three of these books are sequels. I would never recommend you to read a sequel before reading the first book, with exception of a few books — like The Book of Merlyn is a great one to read no matter what. Currently, though, you have to trudge through a bunch of sequels because there is no way to filter them out on Amazon or Goodreads.

Problem 3: Book suggestions come from only one (or a few) authors

If we do a similar search on Goodreads, we will find another problem. Here are the top results for searching the genre “dark horror fantasy”:

These search results are also problematic in terms of providing good recommendations as four of these six books have the same author! The number of distinct authors increases very slowly as you go through the search results from Goodreads. This is not helpful because I believe you should be recommending a new author just as much as a new book. I don’t need a recommendation service to just go look up books from the same author.

I enjoy when friends give me recommendations since I have a good idea of whether (or not) we share taste in books and I can easily decided to trust them (or not). I don’t enjoy having recommendations from random people based on their web history, since you never know if someone just read some book and secretly didn’t like it but told the internet they did.

For some special people these types of recommendations might work (e.g. if you are just starting out on a genre). But usually these type of results are derivative. Amazon will show me books from “Customers who bought this item” and Goodreads will show me “members who liked X also liked” but the results are similar. For example, here are Amazon’s:

The first two books are possibly good recommendations, until you see that both those books are two of the most popular books in the genre of all time. So if you are new to the genre they are good, but I am not, so of course I have read those before. The other books are both books from the author of the Weaveworld, so I do not want those suggestions (Problem #3).

I want a new recommendation from a different author.

Problem 5: Goodreads and Amazon don’t want to give you a quick recommendations

You can certainly find a good book suggestion from Goodreads or Amazon, but it might take a long time. It seems that these sites are designed to keep you looking, in fact, because they have an incentive to elude you from getting complete information quickly. Because of this, I have given up with Goodreads and Amazon. There are other services, like whatshouldireadnext.com, but this hardly provides similar recommendations for Weaveworld by Clive Barker, as it suggested a book about LA ghost stories and a book about cambodia war crimes.

In light of this, I propose a simple solution.|||

I will read 3,000 books in my lifetime. Since there are millions of books that exist, how can I find the best ones to read? I made a book suggestion service for just that.