Maybe you want to validate your idea or run a website for your non-profit or are just looking to save some money.

There are number of providers who offer free web hosting services, which will match your needs and expectations.

“I don’t care how much money you have, free stuff is always a great thing” ~ Queen Latifah

Having said that, free hosting come with their own limitations which includes things like:

So without further delay, here are 10 free website hosting providers in no particular order.

Started out of Cape Town, South Africa in 2007 — Yola.com is home to over 12 million websites.

Over the past 10 years, they have established themselves in the web hosting space with their easy to use tools and multi-lingual support.

The coolest thing about Yola.com is that they offer all their features to the free plan users, and only cap on the usage. So you can get onto them, try it and if needed, can always jump onto the paid tier. This means, you don’t have to pay for any extra features, you pay for extra usage — which is a fair proposition.

Trusted by 7,50,000 community members, x10 Hosting is one of the leading free hosting providers.

Unlike many popular free hosting providers, x10 hosting provides you with cPanel and the ability to install scripts of your choice. What sets apart x10hosting in this game is, they offer you unmetered bandwidth and free space usage — and only nudge you for the premium plans, when you cross a fair threshold.

If you are a business looking to get online soon, Wix is the place to start from.

The easy to use site builder is one of the best tools that allow you to create your websites easily and go live soon.

With Wix, more than 100 million sites have found their place online, so rest assured you can trust on them to provide a quality product.|||

Maybe you want to validate your idea or run a website for your non-profit or are just looking to save some money. There are number of providers who offer free web hosting services, which will match…