Note: We couldn’t display all Messenger bots on the infographics, that’s why we’re sharing a public spreadsheet with 1000+ Messenger bots. Some bots may offer services across multiple categories on the infographics. In that case, we categorized them according to their primary use case. If you know other Messenger bots not present in the spreadsheet, please comment this article and we will add them.

Analytics – These bots help business owners to get insights about their product right into Messenger. From performance analytics to business ones, a wide range of bots are helping teams to save time and get relevant information.

Communication – Messenger improves communications between individuals and businesses. These bots are usually adding features for these communications.

Customer Support – A lot of software help startups with customer support. These bots put those solutions right into Messenger. (not in infographics)

Design – Designer collaborate on Messenger and these bots are here to help them work more efficiently.

Developer Tools – Many Messenger bots are built by developers for developers. From bug tracking to productivity tools, those bots are widely used among technical teams.

Education – A lot of bots educate Messenger’s users and help them learn new things.

Entertainment – We all work hard, why not having some fun while chatting on Messenger?

Finance – These Messenger bots for business teams and employees target people interested in finance in general. (not in infographics)

Food – Food lover? Check out these great bots dealing with recipes, nutrition and cooking!

Games – Messenger also supports a variety of bots games. (not in infographics)

Health – These bots help you stay healthy. (not in infographics)

Human Relations – Human Relations is an important topic to keep your team motivated and get new talents coming in. These Messenger bots are designed to help the HR team keep up the good work. (not in infographics)

Marketing – Marketers use a broad range of tools and some of them are integrated into Messenger thanks to these bots. (not in infographics)

News – Stay updated thanks to these bots.

Productivity – Become more productive on Messenger thanks to these bots. (not in infographics)

Shopping – More and more bots are helping Messenger users buy anything they want. (not in infographics)

Social – Let’s get social and interact with other Messenger users, friends and family. (not in infographics)

Sports – For those who practice sports, you should check out these sport bots. (not in infographics)

Travel – These bots help you prepare and schedule your travels right into Messenger.

Utilities – These Messenger bots are saving you time and efforts for a variety of everyday-life tasks.

You’ll find here a public spreadsheet with more than 1000 different Messenger bots!|||

Always wondered what the Messenger bot ecosystem looked like? Here's a global overview of the best Messenger bots around.