Sometime in the last several months, I received an email from Pluralsight with an offer to receive 1 full year at a pretty good discount ($199 or $249 I believe). I signed up for a personal account, using my personal email address. This account was for me, paid for by me. I’ve been using the site (not as much as I had planned) and all has been fine.

Recently, I started receiving emails from an account manager at Pluralsight, whose name I will not include here. First email from April 20:

Again, I’m using my personal account and this one isn’t affiliated with my employer. I understand it’s fairly safe to assume I’m employed, but I don’t think my company would have an interest in this…and I don’t feel obligated to respond. Responding with a polite “no thank you” is how I would normally handle this, but I have a pet-peeve about someone contacting me on my personal email, about a work-related sales pitch. I don’t have time to respond to every one of these types of emails.

Like the last one, I read this, then deleted it. My reasoning is still the same. I am a PAYING CUSTOMER, on my personal account, and am being contacted via my personal email as a way to sell something to my employer.

This one included an attachment for the report mentioned above. At this point, I’m starting to get frustrated with the number of emails I am receiving about this. Yes, I could respond and say “no thanks”. On the other hand, why should I feel obligated, or better yet, why does the account manager expect that I am obligated to respond to these sales emails?

I’m continuing to get more irritated now, as the perceived obligation to respond continues to increase.

I’m pretty fed up at this point and decided I would vent my frustration here instead of just replying to the email.

I know I’m not the only one receiving these emails, and I know Pluralsight isn’t the only company that is doing this sort of thing. But I’m tired of being solicited all the time, and having companies expect/demand a response. In this case, signing up for a personal Pluralsight account obligates me to be a conduit for sales to my employer, too?|||

Sometime in the last several months, I received an email from Pluralsight with an offer to receive 1 full year at a pretty good discount ($199 or $249 I believe). I signed up for a personal account…