I mean, it’s not so bad. It pays the bills and it fills a spot on your resume. But you hate it nonetheless.

You want to be happier but you aren’t sure how. That new 70 inch TV you got didn’t seem to make a difference. Some days you hardly watch it, others you spend hours staring into it. It doesn’t change a thing — on all days, it does nothing to alleviate your stress, boredom, and general sense that your life is not your own but one that someone else pick out (rather haphazardly) for you.

Sometimes you see other people on the internet and they’re happy. They make more money than you, they work at exciting startups, they live in cool places. That’s what you want. To work at Google, to be the CTO of your own startup, to live somewhere warm and beachy. Preferably all at the same time.

Of course, that’s not possible. You’d never get past the coding interviews at any big company; if you did, it’d be through luck and they’d see right through your facade as soon as you started working. And you’ll never be able to work at a fast paced startup — you don’t have the “work ethic” (ok, more like naivety) to work weekends, evenings, and late nights because you believe so much in the “mission” that your company is going to “change the world” (not unlike every other startup).

No, that’s not you.

But warm and beachy? You could do that. You see lots of people posting selfies on Thai beaches, sipping sugary cocktails while they work on their startups. Selfies of people posing with temples, monks, jungles, beautiful sunsets.

Maybe they’re in Thailand, maybe they’re in Singapore, maybe they’re in Nepal. You’re not really sure; you’d be hard-pressed to label these countries on a map. But where they are doesn’t matter so much as the fact that they’re happy. Smiling, tanned, attractive, slightly drunk, and very productive.|||

I mean, it’s not so bad. It pays the bills and it fills a spot on your resume. But you hate it nonetheless. You want to be happier but you aren’t sure how. That new 70 inch TV you got didn’t seem to…