WAKE UP! The Dream is Over & The Healthcare Nightmare is Here Healthcare is no longer a part of the American Dream

I feel like the healthcare news of the last few years was as exciting and sad as the rise and fall of Heidi and Spencer on The Hills. #speidi forever. It all began with this beautiful dream of reform and revisions and fell into an acceleration of the worst kind: higher costs and lower coverage. One thing became clear in the last 100 days, Obamacare is going to die a slow death over the next few years, similar to the fate of the once famous, now infamous health startup, Theranos. Giddy up!

So what is next? I really don’t know. I don’t expect unicorns or rainbows that’s for sure, so what can I do and how should I prepare myself? At this point in the story it might be time to put the kids to bed, grab something stronger than that light beer and saddle up. This ride is going to get dirty. (Not the fun kind, like splashing is puddles in the warm summer rain, but more like getting bucked off a broncos onto the hard muddy ground). Side note from the editor — please end all horse and unicorn metaphors stat.

For all of your visual learners think of it like this:

For you verbal learners, here is your reference:

The answer is C ladies and gentlemen, John is up shit creek without a paddle. Being lean is about to get real trendy. I need an injection of hope stat.

As the ruff and tumble men and women before us, that fought cholera and measles and those damn red coats (sorry John Oliver), it’s time to take up arms. No No No, I don’t mean buying a shiny new musket or asking Crocodile Dundee to borrow his knife, I mean arming yourself with health knowledge.

You can only control one part of this shifting equation, your health. I don’t mean to be all fairy princess and say that with the flip of your wand you can keep all of your health problems at bay, but you can fight back.

I propose we create a great big health army. Not the violent kind, more like Dumbledore’s Army. Where you, me, Harry, Hermione and even Ron can share our health knowledge and support each other. A place to share our story. I am as giddy as muggle on Christmas just thinking about it. Wait — isn’t this what is coming from Corevity in the next few weeks? Whoa, that story came together nicely. Refer Friends, get dark chocolate and fight the health revolution!

AND CLICK THAT GREEN HEART BELOW ↓ IF YOU LIKED OUR POST

Corevity | A Health Community for Millennials. A health community of beautiful people, images and experiences. We know you want to be healthy. We want to help. Coming spring 2017. Join our exclusive community.|||

I feel like the healthcare news of the last few years was as exciting and sad as the rise and fall of Heidi and Spencer on The Hills. #speidi forever. It all began with this beautiful dream of reform…