WhatsApp is biggest mobile messaging messenger used by billions of people worldwide. WhatsApp is free to use mobile messenger and anyone can use this cool app without paying.

There’re a lot of features like Voice calls, video calls, smiles and even GIFs. You can send almost all kind of media, documents etc on WhatsApp. Features like Video Calls and GIFs support was earlier introduced and works well without having any issue. WhatsApp looks and works like a familiar mobile messaging app.

Using WhatsApp you might feel that you are forced not to send files larger than 16 MB. If you want to share your familiar video or any song or wants to send any document which is larger than 16MB then you can’t do that using WhatsApp.

But don’t loose yourself, there are a lot of ways and hacks that are useful to send files larger than 16MB on WhatsApp(iPhone, android, windows). If you just need to send your video files then it can be done very easily. Follow the steps given below which will surely help you.

Read Also : How To Stop Android Mobile From Making Thumbnails Permanently

However, you can compress your video file if it’s larger than 16MB. There are many software/tools available which will compress your video to requires size. You can compress your video or break into parts then send it to the receiver.

WhatsApp has pushed its users to 16MB file size limit because they can’t handle more than that much data within the servers. They are having a lot of users and also, Whatsapp users can use this service for free. If they kept increasing the file size limit then it requires more servers and hosting space resulting in more cost.

Also,  WhatsApp isn’t a place to share larger files/videos, it’s a place where you can stay tuned with friends. But you can use few tricks to send videos larger than 16MB on WhatsApp.

You probably have heard about video/audio compressing tools. These tools decrease the frame rate of videos, picture quality, and sound quality. You can compress video/audio file to your required size using video/audio compressing tools. Hence, these tools can decrease your video/audio file size below 16MB.

You can clearly see above that how a video compressor tool compresses my video to very small size. Video quality is also good even after compression.

If you’re still not satisfied using tools or need to send document file larger than 16MB then you should use any free file hosting services like Zippyshare or any other service. You can upload files for free on these websites and then share the files with anyone you wants to.

There are many free file hosting services. You can try any service which is best for you. Using these services you can upload your Videos, Files, Documents etc. but make sure any confidential Video/Data isn’t uploaded on these servers.

Follow The Steps Given Below:

These methods will surely help you and you can share videos/files with your friends/family which are larger than 16MB.|||

WhatsApp users have limits not to send files larger than 16MB. Read here how you can send files larger than 16MB. Send videos, audios larger than 16MB