It’s fashionable to multitask nowadays; it’s what I was taught was the status quo. Unfortunately, multi-tasking is much like doing lots of things badly. Increasing my productivity was top of my list when I decided that I wanted to monetise my blog. It was time to impart these time management tips to you.

My medical conditions mean that I don’t have a lot of energy so the time I do have, is precious.

I know that is the same story for Mum bloggers too.

The people who tend to multitask subscribe to the idea that “staying busy” means you’re working hard but being busy isn’t necessarily working hard.

You want to work smarter and not harder.

This is especially true for you if your time is precious.

I’ve known for a long time that multi-tasking does not work. You tend to achieve very little and what you do achieve, tends to happen very slowly.

When there is something that I need to achieve, I write it on a post-it note and put it on my productivity matrix**.

Seeing the task on a post-it note helps me to determine whether or not it’s an urgent task, what the ROI will be if I should delegate the task or schedule it for further down the time.

Managing my time isn’t about squeezing as many tasks into my spare time as possible. Otherwise, I would get nothing done.

It’s about simplifying how I work, doing things more efficiently, and relieving any potential stress.

I compiled this list of tips to help you become an efficient blogger

There are a plethora of books and tips for you to organise your world so that you can be made more effective in work and life but these tips are things that help me personally.

Read through the tips and figure out which may be very helpful for you to do and try them out.

On A Daily Basis, I might have a list of 10 things on a To Do list, but I aim to achieve 3.

If I don’t achieve any more than 3, I don’t beat myself up about it.

There are enough hours in a day for everything you’d like to do; you just need to figure out your most important tasks first.

Also known as ‘Eating That Frog’ by the King of productivity – Brian Tracy.

Eat That Frog! is all about overcoming procrastination and learning to manage your time.

It’s perfectly normal to feel drowned in work, but when you learn to “eat your frogs” – meaning do your most important tasks first – you’ll work more efficiently and be happier too.

My husband was always creating To Do lists of things he wanted to achieve; sometimes there were about twenty items on the list, and if he didn’t achieve them all in one day he would become furious.

I watched him becoming angry one day, and I was scowling as he ranted.

“How long would it take you to do each of the tasks on that list and do them properly?”

The answer was… longer than 24 hours if you plug in eating, showering and sleeping.

This was when I taught him the all important lesson of aiming for 3 of those things and forgiving yourself when you don’t do more than 3.

He became much more efficient with his time and to do lists after that and a lot kinder to himself.

Because of my medical conditions, if I don’t get a deep sleep and wake up naturally, I become completely useless and have to write the day of completely.

If I write on a day like that, nine times out of ten, I have to rewrite on another day.

On those days I do tasks that require very little brain power and just give into it in the hope that the next day will be much more productive.

The number of times I read about people staying up to 3 am to work on a post or a product.. it baffles me.

Arianna Huffington has tried her best to wake people up to the power of sleep in her series of books .

When you are well rested, you become much more efficient and productive in your output.

I cannot emphasise enough, how much you need a good nights sleep.

When I was diagnosed with my condition, it was obvious from the beginning that my energy levels were little to non-existent.

I didn’t have a choice about whether or not I said ‘no’ to things.

Physically, if I did something, I would become so exhausted my body would shut down completely.

Saying ‘no’ is one of my favourite things to do.

I don’t mind being selfish because when I’m looking after myself, I’m investing in my future and the future of my family.

Regarding productivity, saying no to things that will just waste your time can give YOU more time to work on the things that you want to work on!

There are a lot of things in our lives that make us insanely unproductive and can distract easily.

1. To write without being distracted, I start with a clean desk.

 2. Turn off notifications

 3. Close your email provider (infant, try checking your email once or twice a day, you will be amazed how much more productive you become)

 4. Set your daily priorities in the morning, or better yet, at the end of your day for the next morning.

 5. Try to make your computer a distraction-free place; empty the bin, organise your folders and install an extension to ensure you are only able to open about five tabs at a time. For Chrome, you can install XTab https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/xtab/amddgdnlkmohapieeekfknakgdnpbleb?hl=en

 6. Use Pomello and Trello or a regular timer set to 25 minutes.

 7. Listen to binaural beats (check Spotify or youtube) and listen using headphones

 8. Close the door

 9. Make sure you have plenty of water to stay hydrated

 10. Get up every 25 minutes and stretch your legs

OTHER POSTS YOU MIGHT LIKE|||

Are you in desperate need of some time management tips to help you stay ultra productive and smash your to-do list on a daily basis?