Anyone who works in data science understands the grueling task they sign themselves up for and how much of an ally R Programming language can be when deal with tons of statistical data. From governments and countries, R is becoming a popular language and environment for cutting-edge scientific algorithms to build intelligent analytics applications.

So, what is R and where you learn it?

R is an open source, free language and environment for statistical computing and graphics. It was designed by Ross Ihaka and Robert Gentleman, and written primarily in C, Fortran, and R and is a GNU package.



R provides a range of statistical and graphical techniques including linear and nonlinear modeling, classical statistical tests, time-series analysis, classification, clustering, etc. It also simplifies the process of creating mathematical symbols and formulae, when required.

Now if you want to master this language, you can definitely find numerous courses and tutorials that can help, but we have created the ultimate course that is different from others. Our course includes a step-by-step breakdown of R and everything you would need to start learning this language.

The course will take you from Point A to B and at the end of this course you will have the confidence and experience to start writing codes and structure algorithms by yourself. We have also packed this course with multiple live real-world examples that will help you not only understand the theory behind R, but also how it actually works in application.

No more complicated and confusing resources, or boring teachers that talk over your head. Our instructor not only breaks down R for you, but keeps it light, relevant and to the point and not only equips you with the knowledge but also the exact know-how of working with R.

What will you learn in this course?

R you ready to learn the hottest statistical programming language and environment with the easiest course yet! Enroll Now and master R!|||

R programming language is very popular among data scientist for handling tons of statistical data with ease. Buy R programming course & master r basics now