Since its inception, Google has been refining its employee perks to create a positive and highly productive environmen. The resulting employee satisfaction has helped propel the company into one of the most valuable — parent company Alphabet has a value of $650.79 billion as of this writing. However, plenty of companies have done the opposite of what Google does and are thriving — here are some examples.

Google employees are free to take breaks any time they’d like and the company abounds with options for doing exactly that. The company emphasizes breaks as a way to encourage creative thinking, knowing that having hired self-motivated people means the breaks will be productive.

However, numerous other companies discover they don’t get the same results from stuffing their office with lounge chairs and snacks — even when the motive is an attempt to foster a corporate culture.

Nextiva Chief Executive Officer Yaniv Masjedi hit on the issue when he evaluated the employee perks of his own startup. In his office, they had to stop providing snacks for his employees, because they complained that their preferences weren’t taken into account.

So Masjedi did a massive culturL pivot. He got rid of the free food and the other irrelevant perks, and started scheduling 20-minute employee interviews to get feedback on how they’re enjoying their work and how they feel about the culture.

As a result, morale went way up, and, based on the feedback, Nextiva improved its training programs. The CEO quickly realized that letting the employees have a say in how they do things had a much bigger effect on culture than yogurt and candy bars.

Interestingly offering generous benefits before your startup has been around for three years lowers its chances of survival according to a study conducted by the Journal of Management.

Dashlane, a startup that made a password management app, doesn’t have any typical startup perks. No out-of-this world benefits, no flashy toys at the office, and no work-from home policy. If you walk into their SoHo office you’ll see a standard cubicle layout with average office furnishings.

CEO Emmanuel Schalit is rigid in his philosophy that he’d rather spend his “resources and money on things that are going to make [them] stronger as a team.” Instead of getting his employees laundry service, he gets them high-tech communication tools that keep them in better touch with the remote team.

He maintains that giving employees generous benefits gives them ulterior motives to stick around. And his employees aren’t complaining. In three years, the company has only lost one employee.

So before giving your employees tons of company equity and free meals, consider putting money into something that enforces company values.

While Google does have a hierarchical structure, employees still set their own goals and decide when and how they work — including what they want to take ownership.

Wistia, a video hosting startup,  ditched the trendy flat management structure. While the company had no trouble managing their responsibilities when they were a team of five, once they grew to a team of 30, they found that the teams’ creativity and energy was compromised because of logistical issues.

The company’s solution was to delegate ownership over projects. CEO Chris Savage created a structure of teams and managers, all with very well-defined roles.

The managers became responsible for delegating authority over any project. This removed unnecessary bottlenecks from the process in the same way a flat structure does, all while ensuring that nothing ever slips through cracks.

Thanks to constant process iterations, Wistia has grown to be a multimillion dollar startup with over 50,000 customers.

Too many startups look to Google’s employee perks as if they have the answer to everyone’s productivity problems. But the reason startups like Wistia and Dashlane have not only survived, but thrived in the high-stakes tech community is because they determined whether and when they should appropriate trendy start-up fads. By being true to your own vision for your company, you can find the right solution for your company without stealing Google’s.

P.S. If you liked this article, you might be interested our online perks marketplace. Please click here to learn more.|||

