I must profess that user-experience design or UX should no longer seem an alien concept to anyone who works in technology. Users participate in their own experience when browsing through the feeds in Facebook accounts, book an Uber, or swipe left/right on some popular app (you know that app… come on). These tools have become second nature or a habit during a commute or checking on friends’ activities. The reason is the user experience and ease of use it creates for us as a user.

When a client who never worked with a UX team member inquires, “I want a UX designer to add to my team,” certain questions arise:

The client invariably has a quizzical look denoting “what did I sign up for?” ‘Cause I know: they want a “unicorn” to do a bit of all but don’t know:

All of the aforementioned client problems could be resolved with a clear “client onboarding” process. Identifying and working with a UX Engagement Partner could be a solution that helps resolve this delicate but consistent hurdle new clients face.

Within the technology service industry it is imperative that a client who is newly engaging with a UX professional be given consulting or direction on roles a UX designer performs and how they can be fit to the client’s needs. The engagement partner builds a bridge to help the designer ease into their new role; and to help the client plan a roadmap for the team’s and the designer’s successful delivery of assets.

Working with a few clients over the past year, I created a playbook for this UX Engagement Partner and would like to share it:

As a Director of Product Design and an engagement partner, I have been following the above script for a year of role assignments. Most of the onboarding exercises have been a success. The retrospectives, I have noticed, usually become a catalyst to new work and relationships. The above approach can be used as a client experience testing tool. Their feedback helps to augment the approach. I am sharing my approach and findings with the hope that it helps other UX engagement partners succeed in onboarding a UX candidate to a team unfamiliar with User Experience Design.|||

