Have you ever wondered how other businesses get featured in the news? In this interview, PR consultant Joel Kessel shares tips that will help you make the most of PR as a free marketing tool. Joel's advice can help you get clear about your message, communicate strategically and authentically, and increase your impact on the people you serve.

About two years ago, I launched my personal blog. That was an effort to find other revenue streams outside of my traditional agency, Kessel Communications.

I also launched an advisor program and started a podcast. Recently, I have launched my 30 Days to a Bigger Stage program for authors, to help them get publicity for their book. I wrote an ebook and other resources to use as value add lead magnets for my website.

They’re the same thing, but they’re different ways for people to connect and engage with us. The agency is a virtual agency, so I’m blessed to have about five other consultants that make up my team and help run that side of the business. That frees me to focus on the online programs and other ways to generate revenue.

You can hire the agency to do it for you, or to help you learn. If clients want to learn from us, they can use the advisor program or the 30 Days to a Bigger Stage online course.

I started the advisor program to help clients who are on limited budgets. It’s an affordable way to get a lot of guidance, advice and direction from someone like me—to make sure they’re going down the right path. When I engage with a client through that program we work together. We build trust and rapport and over time, the question comes up, “Can your agency help with this?”

It’s a natural flow. I work with them on the advisor program. Then, if they want us to do any work it gets passed over to the agency side. I have that team to help execute and put a program in place for the client.

As a high-school student, I had to do a class project for English. It required me to interview a professional about an area of interest to me. I chose to interview a local radio host. Through that connection, I got a summer job at that radio station in Canton, Ohio.

I worked the graveyard shift on weekends. One night I talked with one of the news reporters and he asked me what I wanted to do as a career.

“I’m liking this radio thing. This is a great opportunity for me.”

Then he painted a clear picture of what it was like to work in radio, and he told me about PR.

“You can still work with media. You can still be creative, be a writer, and do all those things you enjoy on the media side, but do it as a public relations professional.”

Taking his advice, I went back to school and majored in journalism with a focus on PR. That conversation with Dan Palmer at WHBC at 11:00 on a Friday night changed the trajectory of my career.

First, I time block. I set up time blocks every week to focus completely on specific things. Every Wednesday afternoon from 1:00 on, I focus on my podcast. I do interviews and produce the show.

I learned somewhere to have a focus day, a buffer day and a free day as a way to manage my time. The focus days are for doing the real work that brings in results. Buffer days are used to prepare for the work, set up meetings, and do administrative tasks. On free days, you unplug. You step away and get re-energized. I use this pattern as much as I can.

For now, my buffer days are Mondays and Fridays. On those days I try not to have any client meetings. That is when I prepare for the work I will do on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. Occasionally, I have a free day during the week, but typically my free days are Saturday and Sunday. I do not work on the weekends. That’s family time, and it’s very important to me.

Also, the Calendly app has been a time-saver for scheduling meetings. When people say, “Can you shoot me a few dates?” I simply say, “Here is a link. Pick an hour.” That’s been really helpful.

I have an open window coffee meeting the first Tuesday morning of every month. I do this because I get a lot of phone calls and e-mails asking, “Do you want to go grab coffee? Can I pick your brain?” I can’t say yes to everybody. I’d never get anything done if I did! Instead I say, “Sure. Let’s meet the first Tuesday of the month. This is where I’ll be between 8:30 and 10:30. I’ll even buy you coffee.”

It’s a nice way to say yes, but it’s already part of my routine. It’s not like I’m spending ten hours a month with various coffees that are going to lead nowhere.

Yes. I tell them, “You might be the only one, or you might be there with two other people.” That’s okay. We can learn a lot from each other in a group conversation. I just make sure they know what to expect.

There are three things that jump out.

First, there’s no clear message. They haven’t taken the time to clarify who they are and what they do, or why they matter. Kary Oberbrunner has been one of my coaches and mentors. He has a great saying, “Clarity attracts, confusion repels.” It’s so true, so true.

On my website, I have a free resource about developing a message map. That’s a very helpful tool to stay on message, and to clarify your message. The message map has three areas. What’s the problem? What’s the solution you provide? What are the results? It’s that simple.

I’ve got mine in front of me right here. The problem is, there are so many ways to communicate, connect and engage. It’s overwhelming for people. What are the solutions? There are many tools and resources to help guide communication efforts. I’ve got the message map tool, a communicator map tool, the advisor program and the agency. As a result, you get more clarity, alignment, focus and confidence in how you’re marketing and communicating with others. That’s just a quick snapshot of my message map.

Second, they’re chasing that shiny new thing. There are so many new whiz-bang, cool things coming out. Everyone is chasing that new thing. When you use Facebook Live their algorithm shoots you straight to the top of people’s feeds. But is that where your audience is?

Instead of chasing the shiny new thing, a small business owner should ask, “Who are we talking to? Who are we engaging? Who is our customer? Who is our audience?” Then they should ask themselves, “Where do they get their information and how do they get it?” If we understand our audience better, their needs will decide the channels we use to get our message out.

Third, there’s no clear strategy. As a result, they’re not ready. They miss opportunities. They’re all over the place. It’s very tactical. When they choose to reflect on their strategy to connect and engage with their audience, it makes life a lot easier.

Every small business needs to make their message about their customer. Make it about them. The usual attitude is “It’s all about us. Look at how great we are. Look at our wonderful new product or service.” Stop. Just stop it.

Make it about the customer. That’s the best thing any organization can do if they want to make sure their message is memorable and authentic. When you make it about them, you’re serving. You’re making their life easier, their life better. It’s about them. They remember that.

If you do these 5 simple things, you put yourself in a better position for success.

Having a clear strategy helps manage your media appearances. There are so many ways to communicate, connect and engage. We can’t do it all. There’s a model I love and teach called PESO. It’s an acronym for paid, earned, shared and owned media.

Earned media is what we’re talking about here—media placements. Let’s take that as an example. When you write this article and publish it, here’s what I will do:

For the shared media piece of the process, I will post it on Facebook. I will Tweet it out, and talk about it on LinkedIn. I will share it through my social channels.

If I want more people to read it, I’ll pay to get it boosted on Facebook. That’s paid media.

Owned media is everything I own—my website, blog and the materials I create. I’ll probably write a blog post. “Hey, gang. I was interviewed by Harvey, talking about PR for small businesses. Here’s what we talked about, and here are three other things that I would add.” Then there’ll be a link to your article.

That’s a really good way I think to use free placements or media placements. Go back and fuel your other awareness efforts by following that PESO model.

Absolutely. I have three resources! On my homepage, there’s the 7 Steps to a Powerful Message download. That’s a great resource to use in developing your message map. Everyone is welcome to subscribe to my podcast, Conversations on Communications. As I already mentioned, I offer the advisor program that gives you access to me for a full month. We schedule a couple of phone calls and I can give you guidance and direction on what you should be doing. I also offer the 30 Days to a Bigger Stage program. It’s an online course where authors learn to get publicity for their books.|||

PR consultant Joel Kessel shares tips to help you use PR as a free marketing tool just like the pros. No one will know you don't know what you're doing!