Elon Musk understands things from a first principles point of view. When he wanted to calculate how much a rocket would cost to make he looked at aluminium prices on the London Metals Exchange, not what the local aviation grade aluminium manufacturer charged.When you understand the fundamental basics of what you are trying to learn or apply you can understand where the next layer of complexity fits, how it depends on the fundamentals and how the next higher layer of complexity affects the system.

I don’t have a physics degree but I have studied it at university level. Mathematicians and physicists please add to the conversation (be gentle) if you can add to or correct my thinking. I also have a pilot’s licence and after 30 years of looking at aeroplanes and drones, there are fundamentals that are obvious in every aircraft.

Ignoring speed as a component of traveling at altitude, if you want to lift more weight you need more force, more energy. Big heavy lifting aeroplanes need big engines and there has never been a case where they don’t. Some may say you need more power but power is the rate at which the energy is delivered. A high powered aeroplane can accelerate faster than a low powered plane but both require the same amount of energy to get to a particular speed, even if one takes longer.

So this takes me to UAV’s or flying cars. Actually it relates to the romantic notion that we will all fly around on human carrying X8 family multi rotors to weekend BBQ’s and trips to the beach. It's the magnificent idea that we will be able to take day trips to remote mountain tops without carving out 4x4 tracks or climbing on foot for two days.

I have no doubt we will get there but there are a few more hurdles than many people realise.

Take the Chinese Ehang X8 human carrying multi-rotor. If it or a similar design proceeds to a useful machine then they will have managed the fundamentals resulting in a practical aircraft. But what fundamentals are they overcoming? Can they overcome the issues of rotational inertia that cause large props to be slow to react to rpm changes extremely quickly? That ability is the very thing that allows a quad copter design to maintain control. It’s also why it has to be electric motor powered as electric motors are the only device that can hope to make those adjustments quickly enough. Otherwise you need heavy, complex helicopter style rotor heads and variable pitch blades. The Ehang has to be able to do that in turbulent conditions to be anywhere close to human rated.

But the most important fundamental is one layer deeper than that. That is energy. The pure, simple energy required to lift a weight off the ground. Ample supply of energy is what drives weight and cost leading to practicality and commercial viability. Energy is the biggest fundamental to overcome.

It doesn't matter what method you use to lift a flying car to 500m be it props like a multi rotor, rotary wing like a helicopter, jet engine like a Hawker Harrier or rocket motors like a Falcon 9. Wings, no wings, a giant spring, catapult or monster elastic band, it doesn’t matter.

But what about a new type of super hyper engine? Doesn’t change it!

But they are inventing better batteries aren’t they? Doesn’t change it!

It takes 10 joules of energy to lift 1kg to a height of 1m off the ground. Period! Lift it with your hand, your leg, a giant crane, it’s all the same. You can waste as much energy beyond that as you want. It still takes 10 joules for that one kilogram raised one meter in earth’s gravity.

Let’s assume you have a Family Multi Rotor Wagon (a DJI FMRW X8) that can carry 4 people and for arguments sake weighs (with occupants) 700kg (a Cessna 172 empty-weight is about 800kg).

That is 3.5 million joules of energy you have to supply just to get it to 500m above ground. (700kg X 9.8m/s^2[gravity] X 500m)

That is before efficiency losses through propeller inefficiency, losses through wiring, air friction etc. Then there is energy to hold it there, move it from A to B while maintaining enough energy output to maintain altitude, energy to offset turbulence and maintain control in a chaotic atmosphere. All of that is more energy required.

But what if it had wings as well because they are more efficient? Nope. Wings or no wings, it still takes 3.5 million joules to get a 700kg Cessna 172 up to 500 meters, not including runway roll, overcoming air resistance etc. those are all extra. It will take 3.5 million joules of energy to get the 700kg MFRW X8 to 500m as well.

The efficiency of a car far, far out performs that for short to moderate distances envisioned for the idea of a small family flying car design. A Nissan Leaf travels about 5km on those 3.5million joules (real life figures). The UAV hasn't even gone anywhere yet or barely. The battery pack for a Nissan Leaf is substantial. It’s 300kg.

The Nissan Leaf can travel about 160km (in ideal conditions) so it will expel about 112 million joules to do that.

For the 700kg flying car multirotor, maintaining that 500m above ground level altitude will be 700kg X 9.8 = 6860N of force or thrust has to be maintained to hold altitude. The Machine has to force 700kg of air down every second and that air has to move a distance of 9.8 meters, so in joules that’s 6860N X 9.8 (again) gives us 67,228 joules of energy every second it stays at altitude.

If it takes 2 minutes to climb it effectively has to hold that same hover power for two minutes. We have already accounted for the energy required to lift it so..

Add power reserve so the machine always has 20% left in the tank so to speak in case it encounters heavy turbulence on landing and uses a lot of power to counter or the landing cannot be completed and a new location is needed. Regulations will require fixed time of flight reserves.

All of those calculations above are purely for moving a weight up a to certain height, holding it at that height for 10 minutes and then lowering it again. Mass, gravity, distance and time.

Using a Nissan Leaf battery at 300kg and 112 million joules available and not including all those inefficiencies or power reserves you get about 18 minutes. Throw in all the inefficiencies and reserves and you will barely make the flight. Note: VFR helicopters require 20 mins of reserve flying time once they arrive at a destination. That’s more than the available flight time!

Romance can’t change physics except in movies and CGI rendered pictures. The Ehang 184 claimed 20 minutes flight time with one person on board and weighed about 200kg plus another 100kg in person and baggage and it wasn’t clear if that allowed for safety reserves that will be required to be human rated. The mechanical technology exists to make it work but the energy cost and energy densities are still yet to be conquered.

There is a reason a Robinson R22 helicopter is the size, weight and cost ($260,000) that they are. Aeroplane builders don’t add weight and inefficiency for the fun of it. They operate to practical physical realities of flight.

A litmus test is to consider instead, the idea of converting an R-22 to be fully automated so the passengers only have to select a destination and see if you get a buying craze for a tried and trusted flying machine let alone an untested one. It’s a cheaper experiment to see what the market will bear.

The Uber flying car thing is not really a flying car but an attempt to update the concept of a helicopter but it will still have the same energy rules to fulfil as above. High usage and bums on seats will help to bring costs down but for a flying x8 for $260,000 to move one person around won’t create a market and they won’t be going far. The Ehang claims 100km/h so if our pretend machine above did that it would go 18km straight line in 10 minutes then need a new battery or a 4hr recharge. No one would want it.

First principles are needed when the dreams take hold because at the end of the day your dreams will never escape the ground if you don’t know what it actually takes to get them off in the first place.

About Me: I run the UAV Drone Buyers Group (co-op) on LinkedIn.

LinkedIn Group: www.linkedin.com/groups/13503622 Request to join to be kept up to date.

Through the UAV Drone Buyers Group I co-ordinate bulk buying opportunities for UAV or aviation related products to lower the cost of acquisition and provide order certainty for manufacturers. Also on FB: www.facebook.com/dronebuyers/|||

