Dan conducted studies to see if people will do a boring task if they find it meaningful. He conducted two studies with the goal to measure at one point would a participant have enough?

A bionicle is Lego a toy for kids 6–14, which is a movable robot.

Structure: the study had participants build bionicles one after another for money, but with diminishing pay. Participants got paid less each time starting at $3, then $2.70, $2.40, etc.

Condition A (meaningful condition): every time a participant finished building a bionicle, the staff disassembled the bionicle and put it in a box for the next participant.

Condition B (sisyphic condition): named after Sisyphus a Greek king, who was punished by the gods to push a rock up a big hill, and every time right before he got to the end, the rock would roll down, and he would have to start again from the beginning. In this condition, after a participant finished his first bionicle assembly, the staff would ask if they want to do another, and while a participant was working on a new one, the staff disassembled the one the participant just finished. Once he was done with the second one, the staff asked if he wants to do the first one again, and that cycle would go on and on between two bionicles.

Results: people stopped building much faster in condition B, where participants were doing the same thing over and over and over. Participants felt no sense of progress, and were thinking “why am I doing this? I just did it.” Participants love for LEGO was a factor in condition A only. In condition B there was no correlation, the joy was sucked out of the situation.

Structure: the second study had a similar procedure of diminishing pay wage. Participants were given pieces of papers, where they needed to match up papers of same characters.

Condition A (acknowledge condition): participants wrote their names and gave it to a research assistant who scanned the papers and said “aha” upon receiving their papers.

Condition B (ignore condition): the research assistant didn’t look at the papers or said anything.

Condition C (shred condition): the research assistant put the papers straight into a shredder without looking at them or saying anything.

Results: people worked most in the condition A and least in C. Condition B (ignored condition) was almost as bad as condition C (shredded condition). Simply by not acknowledging people we demotivate them a lot. Just looking at something and saying “aha” has huge contribution.|||

Dan Ariely is is an expert in motivation and a Ph.d. in Psychology. He’s the James B. Duke Professor of psychology and behavioral economics at Duke University and is the founder of The Center for…