When I present the “pay-up” by letting great investors “pay-down” argument to entrepreneurs, I generally get three kinds of pushback. Here I debunk them all:

There are some companies out there which command just about whatever price they want from just about whomever they want, including from Enrique.

Unicorns in the making are very rare companies which make it to $1 billion of enterprise value and beyond. They are exceptionally rare, and it’s not useful to benchmark off of them when going through your financing. Even some unicorns had a hard time at some stage or another when they were raising money. Others “false positives” had a unicorn-like experience raising capital due to momentum and herd mentality and raising money at the right time, but don’t end up making it to the promise land.

Regardless, these unicorns are real outliers, and comparing their experience to yours is not that useful to your situation. In fact if you’re in the situation, you are certainly not reading this. I guarantee no one with an emerging unicorn is reading this. They don’t have time. And they certainly don’t need my rambling advice.

We know the stories about Facebook being able to dictate terms. It’s also now a $100 billion+ company. It was retrospectively rational for its VCs to pay whatever price Mark wanted. It’s also not often that you get a global network effect. Complaining about not getting the Facebook treatment is a bit like saying:

Hey that’s not fair. Beyonce’s got a huge rock and she’s married to a great guy.

Well sista, these four walls you built, baby they’re crumbling down.

Another argument for the entrepreneur who wants the higher price is that Ajay’s willingness to pay up means he believes more, and the fact that Enrique is being “cheap” indicates he doesn’t believe in the company as much.

A VC who is super valuation sensitive in the early rounds is simply handicapping the odds the company doesn’t work—and why would you want a VC who is skeptical and unsure of the success you know is coming?

I don’t love this argument. Enrique’s doubt and skepticism, if coupled with high emotional intelligence and strong interpersonal skills, can in fact be a vital force to improve the company.

You don’t actually want a yes-man. As founding CEO you have a lot of power at the company, and having a VC who can tell you the truth as they see it, and improve the company as a result, is much more valuable to the enterprise, and therefore to you, than a yes-man VC.

Be careful, here: building a company is hard work, and the siren song of a yes-man can feel seductively good to a stressed entrepreneur who structurally doesn’t get much positive feedback from anyone.

What you’re actually looking for is someone who you will respect, which may inversely correlate with price at the time.

Now this is a decent argument: which is that the price in the early innings matters more to the entrepreneur than it does to the VC in the long run.

Here’s the logic: if the VC wants to own a piece of the company, then the VC should be in at whatever price the entrepreneur wants—unicorn or not. After all, the outcome is many ways binary. The company is either going to work or it’s not, and if it works, then the pre-money, at least of the A round, doesn’t matter that much. Said differently, the discrepancy between the bid/ask matters more to the entrepreneur than the VC, and so the VC should pay up as such if they really want to invest.

Why would you want a VC who doesn’t realize that the price matters a lot to you, but doesn’t matter that much to them in a world of binary outcomes? What makes a great VC is company/entrepreneur picking. The great VC’s realize that not missing great companies matters much more than getting a better deal on the ones that in fact work. And the price on the losers doesn’t matter, because owning more of something worth nothing is still nothing. Therefore, if they are a great VC, and they view your company to potentially be great, then they won’t negotiate much.

There is some merit to this argument on an individual deal basis, but if you approach it this way in aggregate across your portfolio as an investor, you tank your returns. The problem is that it’s only retrospectively evident where you should have paid up. And even the great VC’s genuinely don’t know what’s going to happen, and so they have to play the odds. As a wise man once told me:

Look: the job of a VC is to buy low and sell high. Part of their job is picking great companies so they can sell high. The other part though is buying low to begin with. For all the talk of helping great entrepreneurs, never forget that that’s their job. That’s what they get paid to do.|||

Entrepreneurs keep making the same mistake over and over again: prioritizing valuation over the quality of the partner. It’s time to stop.