After the Honor 8 and 8 Pro, Huawei seems to have been working on a new successor to the lineup, which is allegedly referred as the Honor 9. The design outlook of the upcoming phone has been leaked a couple of times recently, in which one of it showed the phone sporting a light-purple back. Now the latest buzz about it is, a new render of it have surfaced now.

Sourcing from ‘The Tech Point’, the new render features the Honor 9 in a Black color variant, covering the device in almost all the angles. Interestingly, the latest leak hugely coincides with the previously emerged renders. The most important thing to note about this new render is, the phone purportedly comes sans 3.5mm headphone jack.

The absence of this audio jack, obviously leads us to conclude that we can expect some water-resistance feature from Huawei, very soon. Apart from it, we can also find one other feature to be missing, which is the Honor 8’s highlighted Smart Key, placed on its rear.

In the earlier model, the Smart Key is integrated with a fingerprint sensor, while the key is capable of being programmed to evoke up to three shortcuts for apps or actions. But here, the fingerprint scanner is moved up to the front, with a physical home button. Therefore, assuming it to be true, we couldn’t expect the Smart Key function any more on the newcomer.

Besides, from the new Honor 9 renders we can see the USB Type-C port placed below, right in between two set of grills, where one would be the in-call mic and the other, is speaker.

Consistently, the other arrangements, such as the placement of earpiece; selfie camera; dual rear cameras, with dual LED flash; loudspeaker; laser focus; the noise cancellation mic (IR blaster); and even the power buttons are way too much identical with the same old Honor 8.

This factor leads to a wild speculation that the phone might just be a refreshed one, of the previous model, which could be named as something like, Honor 8S. In that case, the whole idea about the 9, will probably have been misled, all of now.

In any case, we are expecting up-gradation in the chipset part, which was HiSilicon Kirin 655 in the previous one; and also in the case of batter, which a 3,000mAh one, earlier. Anyway, let’s wait for a little longer, to see what it actually is.|||

The latest Honor 9 Render photos surfaced online. the device is successor of honor 8 or 8S From the image, we can see the USB Type-C port below.