Toss is a convenient ultra-minimal command line tool to send files over LAN, WiFi, and virtual networks.

Then paste the token into a chat system like IRC, Slack, etc.

Then paste the token into a chat and your team member can do this:

... and see the output of your command.

The program outputs a token generated from a random local TCP port, the size of the file you're sending, a hash of the file's contents (unless it's a pipe), and all the available IP addresses on all the interfaces in your system. It then listens for to connect and if presented with the correct claim token streams the file. If its input is a file it will continue to service requests one after the other (not concurrently) until it is terminated with CTRL+C or a kill signal. For pipes it terminates when the pipe closes.

The program takes a token and then attempts to connect to all the IP addresses specified in it. If connection is successful it listens for a hello message (based on the hashed token) and if this is correct sends a claim message (a different version of the hashed token). If this exchange succeeds will send the file and will receive it.

To toss a pipe, use . To catch something and pipe it to standard output, use . Both programs send status and error messages to standard error.

The token can include a file name (the part before the slash) but this is optional. If this is not present will name the file based on its hash or the output file name provided on the command line.

Transfers are done using TCP over ports between 30000 and 65535. You may have to configure your local firewall to allow this, or at least to allow it between certain IP addresses.

Toss will work across the open Internet if no firewalls are in the way but it's mostly intended for LANs, WiFi networks, and ZeroTier virtual networks (plug, plug! we wrote this!). This little utility serves as an example of how easy things are if devices can communicate directly.

Toss does no encryption and authentication is based on the token alone. Files are checked against a 64-bit hash, but pipes rely on TCP CRC checking alone. If you are transferring sensitive information over an un-trusted insecure network we highly recommend encrypting it with a real crypto tool like GPG or a similar.

The command prioritizes private IP addresses and only tries globally scoped IPs after all attempts to use private ones have failed.

On Linux, Mac, and BSD just type . The source is self-contained and there are no dependencies.

Some work has been done to prepare for a Windows port but this is incomplete. Pull requests are welcome.|||

toss - Dead simple LAN file transfers from the command line