About two years ago I attended a Meetup about raising funds and entrepreneurship. The woman who spoke was a serial entrepreneur with a few successes in her record and she shared her story of struggle and endurance. Towards the end she accepted questions and one guy said he’s been working on an idea for a while, trying to make it work, and keeps getting “No’s” — from investors, potential clients and whomever. His question was “how many no’s does one need to hear before giving up?”

That evening it sounded to me as a very childish question and I think a few laughs were heard in the crowd. I thought he’s quite lame, asking (and doing this in public) for such a specific advice, when the only person who can really tell if he has to give up is him. After all, we knew nothing about his startup, so how can we help? 



With time I realized this was not a thing to laugh about but to sympathize with. That guy was asking out loud for strangers’ help since they would probably be most honest and harsh and that was what he needed the most — to know when to stop, so he won’t waste his life. He can start something else, he might land on something better, he can make it — but probably not where he was at that time. What he was actually asking for was a recipe for failure (not success).

When I realized the time has arrived, I recalled that question and in a way feared of sounding like that guy. I feared of the thought of quitting and feared of not knowing if and when I should quit.

Shitty. And in two words — very low or rock bottom.

The thing with failures is that it takes time to call it as it is. It’s never quite clear, glimpses of hope strike out of different corners, like the last beat of a dying heart; you’d probably hold on really tight to that beat. 

Same here I guess. Memontage (a digital memorial platform), my startup that failed was sparked by my wish to honor my late mom. It was a pro-profit out to do good in the world, to touch people’s hearts. With such a mission in hand, you don’t just call the quits.

The more vested you get, the less you can pin a moment in time and say stop. That’s the ugly part I guess: holding on to something, losing the belief in it and grabbing a shaky rock, about to fall and disconnect with you.

But here we actually did OK. It took Noa Zehavi Raz (my wonderful Co-Founder) and me 6 months since launch to feel it isn’t working. We went through changes of business models, approaches to investors and accelerators, local and international markets and so on and so forth.

Still the hardest point is to realize that. It took me awhile to admit — to myself and then to others. It took me awhile to cry it out but when I finally did, it took about four straight days of doing so on every occasion. 

Then fear entered — what the hell am I doing now with my life? 

We decided to look for a new thing but after you fail your whole body is uptight and scared to move a step forward. Your mind is full of “what if? and what then? and if not?”. Terrible.

I don’t know how we did it, but for about a month we kept working in ..hmm.. I don’t have a clue really. It was a mix of brainstorming and pitching ideas and testing them but nothing felt right. It was the brainstorming phase but without the excitement and enthusiasm that should accompany the process. What a shame. We drove in auto pilot mode and didn’t even enjoy the view or the road as we should have.

Luckily (well, luck has nothing to do here) we listened carefully to ourselves and learned a lot about what makes us tick and happy, about what we’re really good at and exceptionally capable of. And that’s a great lesson we took from our 1st startup —we harnessed all our abilities and talents to find something new. 

And then one day we found an idea we love. And suddenly that bright eyed look and speedy talk and crazy energies entered the room again. And we naturally took great use of all the lessons we got till now — actual experience and theoretical advices. Three days later we had a manual demo of the idea, and within 4 days we got dozen positive responses and reviews from people we think highly of, value their insights and find them relevant to our new product.|||

About two years ago I attended a Meetup about raising funds and entrepreneurship. The woman who spoke was a serial entrepreneur with a few successes in her record and she shared her story of struggle…