When’s the last time you read something racially abusive on social media? With Twitter trolling and insular Reddit threads, the sad reality is probably ‘all too recently’.

What’s worse is that when a perpetrator – or platform – is called out, others often pile in using ‘free speech’ to defend them. No more.

Today, researchers are calling out the realities of this excuse:

Free speech is an honourable principle to hold. And generally we think of principles as ideas people use to guide behaviour.

But Mark H. White and Christian Crandall, from the University of Kansas, have collected data that suggests something different: “That we tend to make up our mind on something [and] then decide that the principle is relevant or irrelevant.”

They observe that often, using free speech to defend racism isn’t so honourable after all, it’s racists taking advantage of ‘free speech’ to defend racists.

The researchers came to this conclusion after inviting hundreds of participants to respond to recent news events involving someone being punished for racist speech.

These responses were then compared to each individual’s racial attitudes (these were measured using the widely respected Henry and Sears Symbolic Racism 2000 scale).

What the researchers found was a positive correlation between people with racial prejudice and people using the ‘free speech argument’ to defend racism: “Explicit racial prejudice is a reliable predictor of the ‘free speech defence’ of racist expression,” they write in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.

Simply put, if you defend racism with ‘free speech’ it’s quite possible you were a racist first.

You might think people who use ‘free speech’ to defend racist language are just big, principled supporters of freedom. But Crandall says this fundamentally isn’t the case:

“We give them a ‘news’ article with the same speech aimed at police — and prejudice scores are completely uncorrelated with defending speech aimed at police,” he explains.

“[Scores are] also uncorrelated with snarky speech aimed at customers at a coffee shop, but with no racial content.”

What this means is that those surveyed didn’t call on the free speech defence when the same abusive language was used in some situations, but chose to use it to defend racist attacks.

It would be irresponsible to suggest that everyone who makes the ‘free speech’ argument in the context of racism is prejudiced, and further research will be needed to bolster the psychologists’ findings.

But the correlation within the findings shows that racial prejudice is one key reason that can lead people to use the argument.

Next time you see abuse play out online, or even consider weighing in, remember the ‘free speech’ argument may not be as upstanding as it appears. This isn’t about condemning others, you might need to check yourself before you wreck yourself.|||

Does free speech cover all? It's time to feed the trolls.