Two days ago, there was a large phishing scam that plagued the internet. It was a Google Doc phishing attack perpetrated via Gmail. On Wednesday, a worm in the form of an email arrived in a lot of Gmail users' inboxes from contacts they knew. The email stated that a Google Doc document had been shared with them.

If the user clicked the link to open the document, it immediately redirected the user to a Google account selection screen for authorization.

If the user gave the fake app posing as Google Docs permission, it had the ability to read, send, delete and manage your email. It also had the ability to manage your accounts. These permissions allowed the worm to replicate itself by sending itself to all your contacts.

Once Google got wind of this phishing scam, they swept into action by disabling the malicious accounts, removed fake pages and pushed updates through Safe Browsing to users within an hour. It is highly commendable that Google nipped it in the bud early enough.

If you already gave the fake Google Docs app permission, here is how to protect yourself.

Phishing scams have been around for a long time and they aren't going anywhere soon. Just last year, there was a case of a hacker who stole nude pictures from celebrities via a phishing scam that targeted iCloud accounts.

Here are a few tips to help you avoid falling victim to these scams.

This phishing attack took advantage of the OAuth protocol, a convenient way for internet accounts to link with third-party applications. Users don't have to hand over any password information. They just grant permission to a third party app.

One of the features Auth0 provides is API Authentication and Authorization using the OAuth 2.0 authorization framework. Auth0's API authorization features allow you to manage the authorization requirements for server-to-server and client-to-server applications. If you want to use Auth0 authentication to authorize API requests, note that you'll need to use a different flow depending on your use case.

In addition, our ODIC Conformant Authentication pipeline allows you to create third-party clients for your APIs and display consent dialogs for authorization.

If a user is authenticating through a third-party client and is requesting authorization to access the user's information or perform some action at an API on their behalf, they will see a consent dialog like so:

If the user chooses to allow the application, this will create a user grant which represents this user's consent to this combination of client, resource server and scopes. The client application will then receive a successful authentication response from Auth0. However, if a user decides to reject consent to the application, they will be redirected to the specified in the request with an error like so:

At Auth0, we are crazy about security. I hereby recommend this personal information security identity guide for you, your friends and family. Take the time to go through this guide and protect yourself from cybercriminals and phishing scams.|||

Learn how the Google Docs Phishing Scam was perpetrated and how it could have been avoided.