The color scheme of the ClassPass offices in New York City is dominated by a breezy turquoise. It appears on table legs, rocking chairs, and in the company logo, formed out of shoelaces. The founder, Payal Kadakia, leans into the fashion-forward lobby to introduce herself, flashing a bright smile beneath long, bouncy hair. The whole effect is dazzling.

She wants to discuss ClassPass's future, but I'm keen to talk about its past: After a meteoric rise to cult-favorite status as the go-to fitness service for millennials across the country (the company booked more than one million classes in 2014), ClassPass raised its prices nearly 200 percent last year, leading to outrage among clientele and—perhaps not directly—the departure of Kadakia from the company's senior-most leadership position.

At an event soon after the price hikes were made public, Kadakia said she was taken aback by the backlash. She still stands behind the move. "I never feel bad. You can't feel bad—you have to just make the best decision you can at the time you're in, and be like, that's the decision I believe in," she says now. "Make a decision, though. The worst thing you can do is sit there and do nothing, right?"

That definitive inertia is what brought Kadakia here in the first place. In 2011, she was quietly raising money for her lightbulb idea—a fitness service that gave users membership to not just one gym, but all of the best boutique exercise classes in the area—on the side of her "real" job at Warner Music Group when a mentor told her that if Kadakia didn't trust her idea enough to pursue it full-time, she wasn't worth investing in. "Ever since that day, February 11 of 2011, I never, ever looked back. Just straight forward," Kadakia says. "I'm going to go and get everyone to class."

The company officially launched in 2013, giving users the opportunity to experiment with all different kinds of exercise—spinning, hip-hop dancing, Pilates—at a major discount from the studio sticker price. Fitness enthusiasts flocked to the brand. By 2016, the company was valued at nearly half a billion dollars.

But last year was a tough one for the startup. They upped the monthly unlimited membership from $99 to $125 in July 2015, then to $190 for New York-area users in April 2016 before finally abandoning the unlimited model altogether seven months later (the cheapest package is now $45 for three classes). The customer reaction was swift.|||

The founder addresses the fitness company's recent troubles.