Today I was reading articles on Hacker News, notably one on machine learning which lead me to consider a subscription to Nature Magazine. Upon visiting their website, I was presented with a "Chrome upgrade screen" that prompted me to download a .js file that upon further inspection came from a personal dropbox account.

I might have been able to get to the bottom of this by myself, but in this day and age, I think these kinds of problems are better solved by the internet horde. I just want Nature.com to investigate why I got this message on their website and Google to see if they can do something. I would also appreciate it if Dropbox was to investigate the account the files are coming from as well.

All the information I could obtain is in this repo and I have run the code through prettier.js to make it more legible, even though it is rather obfuscated.

The opening few definitions are to obfuscate common javascript properties/methods, typical of malware aimed at browsers. I saw a technique similar to this in a PHP variant back a couple years ago, used by the Blackhole exploit kit which used Wordpress as a vector.

kgafde [ ( , , , ) ( , , ) ( , , , , ) [ , , ][ ( , )] ( , , , ) ]; Is actually equivalent to . So calling `kgafde` will for example make a string like so: ( ) this is equivalent to String('My fresh new string')

To determine what this script actually does, you can simply start up a prompt, and run the stuff between square brackets in variables like this to gain a better understanding. The bits between the square brackets are properties or methods of aliases to some of javascript's base classes.

With a little bit of care, you don't have to run any malicious code but understand the script.

So in the above example, I got from that jumble because:

After unobfuscating most of the code on the main function, we can get a Function constructor that recieves the code in .

In the second function, the two lines

This method is to prevent the code from running if it has been modified.

The code is downloaded from this dropbox account: BE CAREFUL! I AM NOT RESPONSABLE FOR ANYTHING THAT WILL HAPPEN TO YOUR DEVICE. DO NOT RUN THIS CODE UNLESS YOU KNOW WHAT YOU ARE DOING.|||

fake-chrome - A repo for someone with more knowledge than me to inspect this code.