Testing such theories is hard, however, because you need a large group of identical self-propelled units to manipulate and observe. Fish and birds make troublesome experimental subjects, because they literally have minds of their own. Cellular components such as the filaments that give cells structure also display collective behavior but are difficult to isolate and purify, while synthetic particles with the right properties are hard to produce. Living bacteria make a good compromise, said Julien Tailleur, a physicist at the National Center for Scientific Research and Paris Diderot University in France: They take in energy by consuming food, and they move on their own using flagella or other means, attributes that give them the essential hallmarks of active matter. At the same time, they are easy enough to experiment on, and they are available essentially “for free” from the natural environments where they grow: oceans, soil, the human body.

As a bonus, many bacteria resemble Vicsek’s flocking arrows, at least superficially: They are often rod-shaped and have “heads” and “tails.” In fact, Vicsek himself was motivated by collective motion in bacteria, though his name is now associated more with birds, perhaps because the arrows in a figure from his 1995 paper look more like birds than bacteria.

In the years that followed the publication of Vicsek’s paper, experiments confirmed that his model can describe bacterial behavior in simple artificial setups, but they also showed that the model was too simple to do justice to the full complexity of bacteria in nature. Vicsek himself, along with collaborators at Tel Aviv University, took the first step, placing bacteria in two-dimensional films over a thick layer of agar and showing in a 1996 paper that the swirls and colonies they formed could be explained by his model plus “a few natural extensions” to take into account factors such as bacterial chemistry and the fact that bacteria reproduce.

Then in 2004, Raymond Goldstein, a physicist then at the University of Arizona, and colleagues placed bacteria in three-dimensional droplets and observed jets and swirls that appeared and disappeared. The phenomenon could be explained only by adding fluid dynamics to Vicsek’s model, which had been done earlier by Sriram Ramaswamy, a theoretical physicist at the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore. “We suddenly realized, my goodness, we have a system that’s appearing to do what theory said should happen,” Goldstein said.

In 2010 a team co-led by Hepeng Zhang, a physicist then at the University of Texas, Austin, took another step, using microscopes and image analysis software to quantify movements of individual bacteria — not just groups — in a film. This study confirmed that despite bacteria’s physical and chemical complexity, large-scale patterns in their motion can be explained by simple, Vicsek-like models.

Since then, Goldstein, Zhang and others have become increasingly adept at coaxing bacteria into strange and wondrous acts. Goldstein, now at the University of Cambridge, showed in a series of papers starting in 2013 that confining bacteria in channels can induce them to choose a single direction to flow in. Taking this idea a step further, Roberto Di Leonardo at Sapienza University of Rome has used flowing bacteria to transport small cargo; others have induced them to turn tiny gears. To some, such experiments suggest the potential for bacteria-powered micromechanical devices.

Zhang, now at Shanghai Jiao Tong University in China, has maneuvered bacteria into forming something like a liquid crystal — a type of material whose individual units arrange themselves in response to external influences like electric fields. He did this by exposing a dense group of rod-shaped bacteria called Serratia to an antibiotic that prevents cells from dividing, thereby causing them to grow far longer than normal (though he later discovered different bacteria that are naturally elongated). Eventually the colony got so crowded that the bacteria aligned and began flowing. At certain points in the flow field the cells’ alignment broke down — one group of cells might be perpendicular to a neighboring group, for example. At such “topological defects,” Zhang found, bacteria push and pull the surrounding fluid. This motion then dictates how the entire mass of bacteria move and align. Theorists, including Ramaswamy, had predicted that such alignment and defects would emerge in active-matter systems under certain conditions, and they had been seen in crystals made from rod-shaped cellular components called microtubules. But no one had seen it definitively in living bacteria.

The implications could be significant. Ordinary (passive) liquid crystals have catalyzed a multibillion-dollar display industry, and some active-matter physicists hope that living liquid crystals could likewise lead to new technologies. Zhang isn’t ready to call his creation a liquid crystal, however, and hesitates to suggest an application. “I’m just a physicist,” he said. And researchers are aware that bacteria could present challenges for technological applications: They have to be kept alive, and unlike conventional materials, they reproduce spontaneously. Igor Aronson, a physicist at Pennsylvania State University who adds bacteria to ordinary liquid crystals to create hybrid active-passive materials, suggests another kind of application: Bacterial liquid crystals could help simulate how bacteria interact with biological materials such as mucus, which has properties similar to those of liquid crystals.

The myriad experimental advances have left what is possibly the biggest question largely unanswered: Why do collective behaviors exist at all? Do they help bacteria survive and reproduce, or are they mere byproducts of bacteria’s basic biology, rather like magnetism, which could be considered a byproduct of quantum mechanics?|||

The new experiments suggest that simple models can explain the behavior of thousands of interacting organisms.