Computer hacking, as seen in the linked video essay, is as much sonic as it is visual. Amongst command line prompts, transparent screens, three-dimensional file managers, novel GUIs, and blinking text, there is a vast world of sounds: Teletype-like clicks, the whirrs of hard-drives and fans, various swooshes, pings, and beeps that support graphical movement, and ubiquitous booms and sizzles when computers explosively crash. Unlike my present interaction with Microsoft Word and my Macbook Pro, which is largely silent save the clicks of the keyboard, computers in these hacking films are always sonically present. Whereas Microsoft Word and macOS seek to melt away from the user, the interfaces in these films — spanning over three decades — have a forceful presence. This paper will explore this presence and the ways in which, for many spectators, it differs from reality. While conceding that this is often true, realism in representation is more complex than such simple statements of adherence attest and this paper will thus probe beyond these statements into considerations of larger industry trends in human-computer interaction (HCI) design for how cinematic interface representations and HCI design practices bleed into one another in a cycle of mutual influence. Sonic realism, it will be argued, is not necessarily congruous with sonic reality, and especially so when the external “reality” is itself a complex, technically mediated construction, coupled with the trends of a fickle marketplace. Furthermore, it will be argued that while the sonic representations of hacking as heard in these films may not accurately adhere to the “real” sonic worlds of hacking, they serve a particular narrative function that sets the hacker off from surging market trends that embrace “transparency” in HCI design.



Representations of computing and hacking in cinema

 Joceline Andersen (2011) traces representations of computing in film as early back as 1927 with Fritz Lang’s Metropolis (Germany). Later, the 1950s and 60s brought films like Desk Set (United States, 1957), which centers around an ENIAC-like computer that provokes job fears in the employees tasked with working alongside it, and Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey (United States, 1968), which features the sentient HAL9000 as a deadly yet logical general artificial intelligence. As Andersen notes however, these are outliers: computing really found a place in cinema in the 1980s, as the computer found commercial and domestic form in standalone “personal” systems like the IBM Personal Computer and the Apple Macintosh, the latter which featured the first mass-market graphical user interface (GUI). Films like Tron (United States, 1982), WarGames (United States, 1983), and The Terminator (United States, 1984) are merely the most frequently cited of a large mass of films that addressed computers and computer hacking throughout the decade. Into the 1990s and 2000s, computers became commonplace in film, their domestic place hardly different than that of a telephone or television set. Yet, while the computer became suffused with the banality of domesticity, computer hacking still maintained an aura of intrigue and mystery, as the vast set of hacking films from the 90s and 2000s indicate: Lawnmower Man (United States, 1992), Hackers (United States, 1995), Johnny Mnemonic (Canada/United States, 1995), The Net (United States, 1995), Masterminds (United States, 1997), Enemy of the State (United States, 1998), The Matrix (Australia/United States, 1999), Swordfish (United States, 2001), Firewall (Australia/United States, 2006), Live Free or Die Hard (United States, 2007), The Social Network (United States, 2010), Chappie (United States, 2015) — to name just a few.

Representations of hacking and computing in film span at least forty years. Throughout this period, major changes in computing technology have taken place — in GUI interfaces and control schemata that have become entirely naturalized, in exponential advances in computing power and memory, and, returning to the subject of this paper, in interfaces that have grown increasingly silent. Yet, despite these changes, the command line remains prevalent in representations of hacking, seemingly both embedded in and productive of a dense soundscape that blurs the boundaries of the diegesis. While most sounds seem to be linked to some human-interface action, others have no immediate referent, as in Hackers where its electronic music blends in with interface sounds to the point of impossible attribution (and this blurring of the diegesis is of course emphasized by the animation sequences meant to stand in for the digital world of the fictional Gibson supercomputer). Unfortunately, fully describing the soundscapes of these films and analyzing the ways in which they blur the traditional diegetic/non-diegetic boundary is beyond the scope of the present analysis. Instead, these soundscapes will be considered for how they function towards the end of realism.

Two theories of realism

 What counts for realism in film? Does the camera, and its linked technologies for recording sound, capture the real world? If it does, should it be put to that use? What even is the real world? This is a debate that has waged since the inception of the moving image and recorded sound and it will certainly not be settled here, but I will attempt to flesh out its two poles briefly via the theories of Siegfried Kracauer and Michel Chion. For Kracauer, writing on film from the 1920s to the mid 1960s, cinema is linked to photography. Both mediums can record the physicality of life itself, life beyond the lens. As he writes in Theory of Film (1997): “Films come into their own when they record and reveal physical reality” (p. xlix). Kracauer does not deny that there is a whole mediating technical apparatus of cinema (though he does not use the language of mediation), but he argues that its influence should be minimized and it should act to serve the representation of the real. While Kracauer has not written on film sound and its representation of the real with the same depth as the film image, a review of two German sound films written in 1928 points towards these connections:

Film sound, thus, serves the same purpose as film image — it should represent the real in all its totality. It should render the impermanence of memory permanent.

Michel Chion, writing on film and film sound from the 1980s to the present, provides a counterpoint to Kracauer. For Chion, “realism” is not synonymous with “reality,” i.e., the experiences of phenomena that are lived. Realism in film is constructed in the transposition of three-dimensional reality to a two-dimensional audiovisual format. As he writes in Audio-Vision (1994):

The apparatus of recording thus cannot simply “capture” reality as if a butterfly in a net. In mediation, it is always altered. Moreover, realism is not just constructed at the intersection of the outside world and the mediation of the recording apparatus. Rather, realism is designed from the ground up, and often so with little true resemblance to reality — such as in the creation of Foley sound effects or in sound design for science fiction or animation. This “rendering” of reality, to use Chion’s term, serves to transmute the three-dimensional, deeply multisensory world, to a flat world only accessed by two senses. Sound design can be used to fill in the gaps where the intensities of the other senses lay dormant. Realism thus is constructed to serve reality, to represent reality, but with no claims that it does so objectively. Realism, for Chion, is always mediated. This is similarly put by sound studies scholar Jonathan Sterne (2003), who argues that all sound and perception thereof — even the live sound of a concert — is a mediated event. Sound is always shaped by exteriors, whether those exteriors be the acoustics of a listening space, the shape of a listener’s ear, the microphone selection and placement in recording, or the mix in which a beeping interface is embedded.

Realism(s) and the soundscapes of hacking

 Discussion between the poles of Kracauer and Chion plays out in the public discourse on sonic representations of computer hacking. Across blogs and forums, spectators of these films — and often those with occupations around computing — express disdain and frustration for the incorrect portrayals of computing and computer hacking. A post at Den of Geek, titled “The things the movies think computers do,” goes on to lay out a variety of ways in which Hollywood is (no doubt) unrealistic in their portrayals of computers. A post at Pop Crunch awards “beepy computers” a place as “7th most inaccurate movie sound effect.” For a user at the NeoGaf forums, these representations are “just so bad and continue to be bad. It’s as if they don’t even try.” As a user at the tech blog Gizmodo writes, “God, this is like my biggest movie pet peeve of all time. Computers do not make that much noise! No software company would program that much noise into their programs because it would drive their customers insane.” As a user at forum StraightDope writes, “Is anyone else annoyed by the sound effects currently used when portraying a computer at work in movies today? […] When you’re checking out a web page, the computer does not go “beep beep beep” as the page displays! […] Can’t they get an image and sound of an ACTUAL pc?”. Certainly, comments such as these are not the sole response to sonic representations of hacking in cinema: other viewers, some who admit to not having much prior knowledge of computing, find them unobtrusive, if not helpful, while others simply respect them as acts of sound design that serve a purpose to heighten the intensity of a scene (à la Chion). Yet, complaints of a lack of adherence to reality, framed as a lack of realism, should be contended with for their pervasiveness.

Returning to Chion (1994) and Sterne (2003), total adherence to reality is impossible. Sound is always filtered through the medium itself in practices of recording and mixing. Counter Kracauer, recording and reproduction offer no pure access to an unmediated world of sensory perception. Recording does not and cannot duplicate the world. In the face of this, arguments over adherence to reality become uninteresting, little more than back-and-forth quarrels that levy a film’s quality to its representations. Instead, recognizing that realism is always a construct, it can be analyzed for its complex and indirect relation to the external world. Two nodes of this complex relation will be explored here: (1) the mutual influence between cinematic and real-world interfaces and (2) the greater market move towards “transparent” interfaces, counter cinema’s continued use of the command line in representations of hacking.

While the trajectory of influence between technological innovation and cinematic take-up may frequently be thought of as unidirectional, in the case of HCI interface design, this influence has worked both ways, forming an intermedia feedback loop where media representations influence HCI design, which in turn influence media representations, ad infinitum. The work of John Underkoffler, former research at the MIT Media Lab, provides a prime example of this messy cycle of influence. While working at the MIT Media Lab, Underkoffler was tasked by Steven Spielberg with designing the interfaces of Minority Report (United States, 2002). In developing the gestural interface of the film, Underkoffler notes influence from ongoing MIT Media Lab projects, but there is no doubt influence from other, commercial gestural interfaces such as various wired glove technologies like Nintendo’s 1987 Power Glove. In the end, Underkoffler developed a fully functional prototype of a gestural interface called g-speak for use in the film. Since that time, Underkoffler has left the MIT Media Lab to start Oblong Industries, which now sells a modified version of g-speak for use in large-scale meeting/collaboration environments.

In addition, following Minority Report’s release, a wealth of gestural and multitouch interfaces have come to market, from gaming controllers such as the Nintendo Wiimote and Microsoft Kinect, to the touch interfaces of Apple’s iPad and iPhone. Of course, this is only one, relatively commonplace example. Further research would be useful to highlight the crossover between cinematic and real-world interface design. Furthermore, sound does not play an overwhelming role in either the g-speak of Minority Report or its real-world counterpart of Oblong Industries. Yet, the point remains: the referents to which cinematic representations point can be blurry. What is constructed for film, whether that is the telemetric beeps of a keyboard press or the gestural multitouch interface of Minority Report, does not necessarily engage 1:1 with a real-world referent. Occasionally, the reverse occurs where the construction inspires the real-world development and commercialization of said referent. In this blurry, intermedia feedback loop, what becomes of the objective real?



Continuing to problematize the reality/realism connection in sonic representations of computer hacking, I would like to lay out what many would consider an inaccurate representation on the part of the filmmakers before considering the purpose of such a representation for how it serves a narrative function. As noted earlier in this paper, the command line — or some custom amalgamation of command line and GUI — reigns supreme as the prototypical cinematic hacking interface. Yet, since the mid 1980s with the advent of the GUI and its first popular implementation in the Apple Macintosh, the command line has been increasingly pushed under the surface of the screen, replaced with the GUI’s “desktop“ metaphorization of the underlying system. For Lori Emerson (2014), this is evidenced by a trend towards interface “transparency” that has only increased in ubiquity in recent years. This transparency does not reveal the system to the user; on the contrary, the ideal transparent layer is the interface itself. Transparent or invisible interfaces attempt to efface the interface, “alien[ating] the user from having access to the underlying workings of the device,” as Emerson writes (p. xi-xii). The result, Emerson continues, is a marketplace of “consumers rather than producers of content” (p. 1). While I may produce content in Microsoft Word, for instance, I am restricted to create within the confines of the interface, which itself works within the confines of its undergirding software. I do not create freely, but according to the restrictions of the software and its interface. This is a mild example, as creation — analog and digital — is always bound by material limitations. Take instead the Amazon Alexa Voice Service line of devices. Another line in the now long lineage of voice-activated devices, Alexa’s goal is to provide a seamless, transparent user experience that allows the user to order products from Amazon, control home automation products, access the news and weather, and, with third-party development, get an Uber, order food, translate across languages, with more learnable “Skills” constantly becoming available for download. As Amazon notes, “All you have to do is ask.” Choice may seem abundant here with the growing library of Skills, yet, choice is exactly what is disappearing. The true, open choice of a programmable digital system is replaced with a stylized, voice-activated menu of pre-defined options. Emerson was writing pre-Alexa, but her words ring true: “Ideally, the seamlessness of ubiquitous computing devices will make even choice itself recede into the background. In the imagined near future, things will simply happen and we will simply do” (p. 3).

What does this have to do with sonic representations of hacking? It is my contention that this trend in computing is foregrounded in opposition to hacking representations in cinema specifically because of its absence. WarGames and Tron excluded, the GUI interface — whether in its Windows, Mac, or various Linux forms — was popular at the time of each of these films’ release. Yet, the predominant hacking interface takes the form of the command line, complete with black background and fixed-width fonts. There is nothing transparent about them — regardless of any literal transparency in the form of displays. This lack of transparency is augmented by the dense sound design of which they’re coupled. The command line, both in its filmic representations and real-world use, is less removed from the underlying workings of the computer than the GUI. Unlike the move towards transparency, which emphasizes usability at the expense of “under-the-hood” access, the command line emphasizes the machine. The interfaces — both sonic and visual — in these films do not seamlessly blend into the background as the Amazon Alexa does. Rather, they are foregrounded, sonically as well as visually. While transparent interfaces tend to favor silence or haptic feedback, these hacking interfaces are abundantly noisy. While it is rarely clear if these soundscapes are functional, they serve to emphasize the human-machine interaction as one that is not seamless, is not embodied, is not embedded in daily life as the dream of ubiquitous, transparent computing aspires. The objects call attention to themselves as clicking, whirring, beeping, pinging machines — laborious machines that distinguish the hacker from the mere user, the tool from the mere commodity. These sonic representations may be inaccurate, but, à la Chion, they heighten the experience of the event in a way that an accurate portrayal — again, bearing in mind the blurriness between accuracy and inaccuracy — never could.|||

Beeps, Pings, and Whirrs: Sonic Representations of Hacking in Cinema Computer hacking, as seen in the linked video essay, is as much sonic as it is visual. Amongst command line prompts, transparent...