When starting this post, I wasn’t sure if I should focus on what causes anxiety or what triggers anxiety. It can get confusing but there is definitely a difference between the two: a cause of anxiety is something that caused your anxiety disorder to be a part of you in the first place. It is the reason you have anxiety. For example, your upbringing or a past experiences are causes or reasons for your anxiety. A trigger is something that makes that already-existing anxiety worse.

Not everyone that deals with anxiety experiences their relevant symptoms every day. Some deal with their anxiety 24/7, but others have a somewhat more manageable type of anxiety that can occasionally get worse when triggered. Triggers basically kick the anxiety disorder into action and cause it to have more impact in your life, making it harder to manage.

So, back to the main point… what can CAUSE anxiety in the first place?

If something distressing happened to you in the past, you might feel anxious about facing similar situations again in case they stir up the same negative feelings and thoughts. Feeling anxious could also be something you learned early on in life based on a past experience or influence. For example, if someone close to you such as a parent tended to see the world as hostile or dangerous, you may have learned to feel the same way.

Often we can develop anxiety following a series of stressful life events or a particular habit. This is especially true if we experience many different pressures all at once. For example, if someone has work pressures, financial difficulties, and relationship problems, all at the same time, it isn’t surprising that they may suffer from anxiety. When thinking about it in this way, anxiety is often the result of feeling as though we cannot cope with the demands placed upon us.

Stress, exhaustion, long working hours, pressure at home or at work or at school, money problems, relationship problems… everyday problems that can all lead to anxiety and other mental health issues if not managed or dealt with. Even then, sometimes life is hard and shit happens. It’s as simple as that. Just do your best to deal with what’s on your plate and don’t be afraid to ask for help.

This isn’t an obvious one. It wasn’t for me anyway but since doing some research into it, I think it may be one of the main causes of my own anxiety. So that’s fun!

Some people may have a thinking style that lends itself to experiencing anxiety. For example, anxious people tend to expect that the worst possible scenario will always occur. They also feel like they must constantly be on guard in case something bad happens — their “ worse case scenario”. They believe that by thinking about all the things that could go wrong, they will be better prepared to cope if it happens but this is not the case. It actually creates an unhealthy thinking habit, as you end up being constantly alert and creating a unnecessary amount of the stress hormone, cortisol which can wreak your health in other ways.

Research has shown that people with abnormal levels of certain neurotransmitters in the brain are more likely to suffer from generalized anxiety disorder. When neurotransmitters are not working properly, the brain’s internal communication network breaks down, and the brain may react in an inappropriate way in some situations. This can lead to… yep, you guessed it — anxiety!

Also — (warning my personal opinion ahead, not a professional’s!) I think your brain chemistry and thinking style can often go hand-in-hand. It makes sense that a frazzled brain network could cause your thoughts to get stuck in an endless negative thought loop or spiralling black hole of panic.

It’s estimated that about half of patients who utilise mental health services for anxiety disorders such as GAD, panic disorder, or social phobia are doing so because of alcohol or benzodiazepine dependence. More generally, when it comes to those struggling with substance use or abuse, their anxiety is typically known to result from intoxication or withdrawal from drugs such as cocaine or prescription drugs.

For some people, anxiety may be linked to an underlying health issue. In some cases, anxiety signs and symptoms are the first indicators of a medical illness. Examples of medical problems that can be linked to anxiety include: heart disease, thyroid problems, drug abuse or withdrawal, asthma, chronic pain, rare tumours that produce certain “fight-or-flight” hormones.

Studies have shown that the risk of anxiety or having a predisposition to anxiety may be hereditary, but the role of genetic influence versus the influence of the family environment still remains unclear. However, your brain chemistry is obviously determined by your genetics to some extent so, in my opinion — it seems quite likely that genetics can play a part.

So, what do you think are the causes of your anxiety? Whatever the reason, it’s always best to talk to a professional. Self-diagnosing rarely does anyone any good.

Mental Health Support in the US|||

When starting this post, I wasn’t sure if I should focus on what causes anxiety or what triggers anxiety. It can get confusing but there is definitely a difference between the two: a cause of anxiety…