Brief biography of in case you’re not familiar:

Everything up to 1917 is accurate but as you know he wasn’t killed in this war, or in any war; he died many years later from a low speed car crash pre-seatbelt. He did take a bullet through the leg at Cheppy but he recovered. The bold phrases in the timeline present an alternate universe where he chose not to start the tank school.

In fact, Patton’s sword was never used.

In 1917, Patton was stationed at headquarters in Chaumont and hated it. Even after a promotion to major he wrote that he “would trade jobs with almost any one for any thing”.

So when command approached him to run a nascent tank division, he bit. He wrote to Black Jack Pershing, the top American general in Europe, and speaking of his experience in Mexico said:

Effective cover letter? Probably. Also worth mentioning Pershing was engaged to Patton’s sister for part of the year.

Pershing liked him for the job but around this time got sick and was hospitalized, delaying his attachment to the tank project. In the hospital, he roomed with Colonel Fox Conner, an old friend – they met on a train in 1913 because of a cavalry sword:

Conner was a tank expert and a world-class mentor (he coached Eisenhower and Marshall). According to one Patton biographer, Conner tried to talk Patton out of taking the tank job. Read ’s Nov 3 diary entry; he was totally on the fence:

But the next day, like anyone on the fence about a big decision, he let events decide for him:

He soon regained his confidence and was writing letters like this one:

My point is: that sword. He spent years learning to fence, it was named after him, it was the best of its kind. It started his friendship with Conner, who almost talked him into an infantry command. He probably put his hopes for career advancement into it and identified himself with it.

At times of change, it can be dangerous to identify yourself with obsolete skills. You have to give them up and learn something new.

Technological change is hard to pinpoint in real life (read about ‘diffusion lag’ for more on this) but easier to track in war. The British & French were fielding tanks a few months earlier and was the first American assigned to tank combat duty.

If you work for a living in 2017 (or 1990, or any other year really) you’re probably experiencing the ‘changing nature of work’. This means that technological shifts lead to changes in what people can get paid for and the value of different skills.

One large-scale trend is the decline of the middle:

This means (a) job growth is concentrated in knowledge worker jobs and (b) better automation is constantly raising the education / skills bar for knowledge jobs.

100 years ago to the year, was a knowledge worker. If you don’t believe me, consider:

Like all knowledge workers, he wasn’t always engaged in productive work; the ‘productive work’ of the organization is happening elsewhere (making things, moving things). Instead, he focused on problems his organization didn’t yet know how to solve.

More on this in section 5 but my point is: Patton wanted to be on the front lines during the whole war. He would have been happy to be a cavalry commander. Technological change made the nature of his work deviate from what he prepared for.

Let us see another christmas …

I started a new job (my first) at a different moment of technological change and crisis. It was 2007 and in finance, the trading floor was in the final throes of transitioning to electronic order books; automated and high speed trading were beginning to dominate trading volume. Plus there was an asset bubble starting to pop.

I joined a tiny futures trading desk in Chicago and lucked out because the CEO was one of the 2 best technical managers I’ve worked with.

He was an ex-floor trader. When electronic trading started showing real volume, he took the plunge and moved his business upstairs. Many floor traders didn’t do this; they knew they could get better price information by watching the other floor traders.

The remnant floor traders, focused on the important & difficult skills they’d spent their careers learning and improving, didn’t think about the other tactical advantages that electronic trading would provide: the immense reaction speed, the ability to watch many markets at once and arbitrage them against each other, the ability to replace heuristics with math.

On Sep 29 during the crash in 08, we had an algorithm that traded futures pairs and we were watching it carefully as the the congress voted down a bailout. We switched from CNBC to c-span because CNBC had a 5-second broadcast delay in case somebody swore. People were swearing in the office – with every new vote a new bottom dropped out of the market.

Our algo was holding its own. We almost didn’t run it but the CEO made the call to let it work. Unlike less capable managers I’ve met, he understood the tools at play and could make a quick, informed decision on a high-stakes trading day.

Another time someone on my desk asked what falafel was and the CEO gave a 5 minute how-to lecture on falafel, with the sourcing and preparation of ingredients and the cooking time. It turns out he owned a middle eastern restaurant in college.

If leaders can’t operate the organization’s tools in a pinch how likely is it they can create effective tactics? If they don’t (sometimes) join you in the trenches, how likely is it they can pick the right moment to drive forward to the next trench? My first boss was with us on the trading desk on the worst days and had his own worst days in the past, and the things he asked us to do often worked.

For all his preparation and work Patton was only involved in two actions in the war: the Battle of Saint-Mihiel and Meuse-Argonne Offensive.

Before his first tank engagement he joined a French night patrol and crawled right up to the German barbed wire to test if the ground was firm enough for his tanks. It was, but the morning of the battle was muddy and the tanks bogged down in the trenches.

He went down from his observation post to un-bog and stayed at the front. Between 6 and 9 am he walked around and ahead of his tanks, leading them over and through obstacles.

At 9ish he met Douglas MacArthur on a hill and had a conversation with him:

Later in the day when some of the tanks ran out of gas he jogged back to the Allied supply lines to order some.

His tank group’s only job was to escort infantry, but ’s style of war was all about movement and fast advance; so whenever he could spare some tanks he led them ahead of the infantry line.

Even given the contradiction between his orders and his tactical style, the stars aligned for him that day. His career-scale fears about choosing tanks and never getting to see combat evaporated. Even the stress of planning the battle was gone – no plan of action survives first contact with the enemy . Worries about never seeing combat were replaced by very real fears about his physical safety, but Patton had a strange hunger for danger.

Maybe he was self-medicating with the adrenaline rush of combat. Cartoonist Bill Mauldin thought Patton was crazy for this, in the same way Mark Twain thought Teddy Roosevelt was crazy.

The most interesting thing to me about this all-day march at the head of his tank batallion is that for the first time in the war so far, ’s personal goals and the army’s goals agreed. You can say that for large organizations to work people have to follow orders but I think that absent this agreement, creative leaders with hard challenges can’t perform.

Mihiel was followed by Meuse-Argonne, where Patton looked death in the eye. Approaching Cheppy as the tempo of enemy fire increased he convinced himself he was going to be shot dead. Like Lt Dan in Forrest Gump, he was from a long great military tradition, and as his fear increased:

didn’t die, but he was shot pretty seriously in the leg. His orderly dragged him into a hole to patch him up and then Patton sent him on a series of errands, first back to the advancing line of tanks to direct their fire against the guns that took Patton, then to tell his second-in-command to take over.

When he was safe, a few hours later, in an ambulance, he had it detour to HQ so he could make his report.

On his birthday, 11/11, at 11 am, the war ended in Ferdinand Foch’s private rail car at Compiegne. Patton was still recovering.

He was 33 years old to the day and had spent only about half of his career up to then ‘working’ (i.e. deployed). The other half was school (both teaching & learning) and practice.

Not everyone is in a position to originate the tactics of tank warfare for their national army. But the emphasis on lifelong learning & teaching in ’s career are common to most new jobs in the developed world. (Especially the most interesting, challenging and lucrative jobs). Even at a busy moment like running a headquarters division during WW1, took time off for officer training.

Reputation and credentialing, widely used in every military, is something we’ll see more of in private sector employment and recruiting. If we get certifications right, residential colleges will lose their appeal over ‘distance learning’.

Remember how it took about 15 years for online dating to go from slimy to standard? The remote-gig ecosystem is currently fiver, upwork, 99designs, and friends, and doesn’t provide great ways of resume checking (it’s just ratings & portfolio). Match.com is to Bumble as 99designs is to future gig recruiting platforms.

It’s getting less and less valuable for managers to tell their team exactly what to do. Here’s an article about changes to boot camp:

You will learn by the numbers, I will teach you is over. ‘Critical thinking’ isn’t corporate newspeak for the army. It’s a real goal. As the variety and diversity of tools of war increase, soldiers at every level are called on to:

With limited time to train everybody on every system, the most junior person in a unit may be the only person who knows how to use a certain technology critical to the unit’s goals or survival.

Organizations are learning the lesson that it’s critical to surface knowledge from everybody. From an article about NASA and Challenger:

The military has a pretty good model for learning throughout your career, but in the private sector job training hasn’t taken off. In my opinion it’s a chicken-egg problem. Companies don’t want to invest in worker education because the returns take a while to manifest. Workers, in turn, don’t stick around that long because companies don’t invest in them.

I looked up census stats on tuition programs by private companies, which may be a proxy for job training, and found some interesting takeaways:

Education is a life & death resource like water but it’s far harder to deliver.

I’ll start with the worst case. A 2017 follow-up by Case & Deaton to their 2015 ‘deaths of despair’ work claims the mortality effect they observed is caused by reduced ability to grow in your career through on the job training:

‘return to experience’ is the key to this paragraph. People born in 1945 were able to advance in their careers, later generations not so much. The people they’re studying don’t have college degrees and presumably expected to not need them because that’s how things worked in the past.

Now for the best case:

The author, Robert Gordon, is a labor economist who studies productivity in the 20th century. In this line he’s talking about quality of life gains as well as economic productivity. My point in excerpting this: technological change plus increased education can be transformative in a good way.

We lucked out in the 20th century by pushing high school just at the rise of automation technology changed what we needed from our workforce. High school was an incredible investment we made in ourselves in the 40s onward. Remember, was lower back then and finding the tax revenue for education was harder.

In my opinion we haven’t lucked out on education in the 21st century. aren’t an effective innovation (opinion, but echoed in the Pew article I linked elsewhere). We need to offer more kinds of education to adults who have started their careers as well as to companies that need their staff to get better at something.

If we get this wrong it could be disastrous. From the abstract of an article about population collapse:

Have you designed a cavalry sword (i.e. something obsolete)? Are you on the cusp of turning down a leadership role in something that ‘isn’t big yet’?

Remember, even if your cavalry sword has your name on it, to be ready to give it up when the world moves on.

Alternatively, if you choose not to remember how patton lived and take nothing else from this article, remember how he died – low speed car crash! Buckle up.

These things came up in my research and are interesting and Rube Goldberg esque.

This is percent of firms in each industry providing any tuition assistance. I don’t think this dataset has information about the amount of tuition assistance. It also doesn’t measure other salary impacts (for example, educational services is 6th-best at 20-something %, but that’s probably a ‘house discount’ and may cause people in education to get paid less; for example, graduate students teaching in exchange for tuition). Data from US Census.|||

