Best-selling author, radio, television and famous conference speaker L. A. Marzulli recently made a shocking discovery that sent waves throughout the extraterrestrial community.

His cutting edge research is renowned and known by many in his community, due to his many years of being an active researcher and member of the extraterrestrial community. Many look to him as an admirable, respectful and credible source when it comes to extraterrestrial findings such as UFO sightings and theories.

HE HAS NEVER SEEN ANY MUMMY LIKE THIS BEFORE

In his most recent discovery that even L.A. Marzulli himself claimed that it was his utmost honor to be able to be at the site of discovery, which is a disclosed location somewhere in Peru. He claimed the that the findings were extraordinary and just simply out of this world.

L.A. Marzulli was unable to take videos or examine the specimen as he claimed that it was a private institution and that he is lucky enough to even be able to see the specimen with his very own eyes right in front of him.

WHAT IS THIS INCREDIBLE, EXTRAORDINARY SPECIMEN?

It is the world's first completely intact mummy, even with its skeletal system being in good condition. They were able to see a complete vertebra, which L.A. Marzulli has claimed that throughout his entire career in this line, he has never seen any mummy like this before. "Long-necks" are a species of human, even maybe alien, that has been theorized about because certain incomplete mummies have hinted that this was a possibility.

Being an expert, L.A. Murzulli then went on to take the still photos of the completed mummy from all angles, especially from the back as this showed the vertebrae of this extraordinary mummy, which connects straight to the skull, suggesting that this mummy might actually be a different species, or what we classify as "alien".

Being an artifact that belongs to a private institution may actually suggest that there is a lot more going on about this mummy that meets the eye. Private institutions such as the Smithsonian has been privately collecting many ancient artifacts of unknown origin, hiding them from the world. The public knows nothing about these artifacts, and what they might even entail about the existence of beings other than humans that existed in a time way before us.

One can only wonder and hope that one day this classified information is released to the public, such that we are not left in the dark. For now, we can be contented with the discoveries that dedicated and truth-seeking public figures such as L.A. Marzulli release to the public. It might not be everything, but at least it is a part of a bigger picture we get to see.|||

