Ideas are fickle — sometimes, they come to you completely unprompted in the shower. But sometimes, you know that you need that next-level breakthrough idea, you and your team have been working on it for weeks, and yet…the well is dry. How do you get out of the idea-drought and back into the flow?

You probably read that header and immediately thought, “Oh great, another article about brainstorming. Yawn.” Hold your horses, though — you’re about to learn why that’s not necessarily the best way to generate ideas (let alone useful ones).

The “traditional” brainstorming model came about in the 1950s, created by Alex Osborn. Everyone gets together in a room and talks about ideas, following the four tenets of Osborn’s brainstorming model:

This sounds pretty good on its face, right? The problem is, there’s not much evidence that this method actually works.

For one thing, this method of brainstorming makes it very easy for a few people in the room to get all the air-time. Introverts, quiet people, or others who aren’t used to speaking up (or don’t like being put on the spot) are likely to contribute less or have their ideas steamrollered in a grup brainstorming session like this. This method of brainstorming is also ripe for unconscious bias. (And it’s not very friendly to any remote workers on your team!)

Aside from that, there’s evidence that working on solutions in face-to-face groups can lead to less creativity and that brainstorming out loud can lead to less ideas. People tend to be bad at thinking of creative ideas while someone else is talking. As Leigh Thompson, a management professor at the Kellogg School, puts it:

Dr. Tony McCaffrey, a cognitive psychologist, suggests that instead of using brainstorming, teams switch to “brainswarming” as a way of generating useful ideas. The emphasis is on solving a problem. Once the problem has been stated clearly, it’s written at the top of a whiteboard, with potential resources for solving it written at the bottom.

Once you’ve done the setup, everyone starts working on solving the problem with the resources at hand — but individually, rather than as a group. McCaffrey’s experiments have found that “top-down” thinkers start with big-picture ways the problem can be solved, and “bottom-up” thinkers tend to either add more resources that can be used, or analyze how the resources at hand can be used to solve the problem. Eventually, these two groups meet in the middle, with potential solutions.

“Brainswarming” example (you can watch this video for a full demonstration)

The focus on letting people approach the problem in their own way and clearly stating the problem both make this method great for product development. Aside from trying out the brainstorming technique, here are a few other tips to help your team with more effective idea generation:

You’ve switched up your brainstorming techniques and have a list of ideas — now what?

The Canva team suggests running your favorite ideas through this string of questions:

After you’ve put each idea through that process, you’ll have fewer (but stronger) ideas. Once you’ve narrowed it down to 3–5 ideas you really love, it’s time to get some feedback and figure out which ones need to make it to the final stage (implementation) and when they’ll make it to that stage.

First off, you need to talk to actual users to make sure that there’s a need for this specific feature or product. Teo Yu Sheng, UX designer at ReferralCandy, put together a great list on creating better user interview questions — you’ll find it helpful whether you’re interviewing users to kickoff the idea generation process, or further refining ideas.

Your user interviews will probably help you narrow down which idea should be the highest priority, but in case they don’t, one question that can help you prioritize your ideas is:

Often, it can be better to get a series of “small wins” via fast-to-implement ideas, even if each idea doesn’t have an epic ROI, than spend months implementing one idea that you’re positive is going to be the one — only to find out that user’s needs (or something else) have changed and the idea is no longer relevant.

Two other questions to think about:

After you’ve picked an idea to prioritize first, you can prototype and test it before you get it in the hands of all your users. Joe Salowitz’s list of 16 prototyping tools and when to use each one can help you pick the best tool for that process.

Once you have a prototyped version of the idea, it’s time for user testing to see if it should be put in the product (and if any changes need to be made before then). AppCues has a great guide on minimum viable usability testing with some creative ideas (drunk user testing, anyone?).

And now, you’re at the end — it’s time to actually implement that final version of the idea into your live product! Now, you can either start the process all over again with a different problem, or move on to one of your other ideas that you had put on the backburner while focusing on this idea.

What’s your idea generation process like? We’d love to hear about it — and if you’re looking for a tool to help manage your product development process, be sure to check out Clubhouse!|||

Here are some tips to help you generate awesome ideas and then take them to market as products.