This tutorial goes through the steps of creating a simple Express.js application.

You'll benefit the most from it if:

I'll be using Nanobox as it's the easiest way to get started with application development. It also ensures that, in the future, I won't have to worry about creating, configuring, and managing my applications infrastructure when it's ready for production. Which, for me, is a big deal.

Note: If you've never used Nanobox before, you'll first need to create a free account and download Nanobox Desktop. Also, Don't worry about whether or not you have Node.js or Express.js installed. You won't need them!

Note: All nanobox commands must be run from the root of your project.

First, create the project folder and change into it:

A simple config file, called a defines your application's infrastructure. Nanobox uses it when creating any of your application's environments (development, staging, production, etc.)

At the root of your project, create a with the following:

Normally, you'd probably have Node.js and Express.js already installed and would have used the Express generator to create your app. I'll show you how to do it without having them installed (since thats one of the great things about Nanobox). You can easily dive into any new language or framework without having to get your local environment setup just right beforehand.

This will read your , create an isolated development environment, and drop you into a console within that environment.

The engine specified in your installs Node.js and NPM (or yarn) automatically, so you'll just need to install Express:

To allow connections from the host machine into the app’s container, configure your app to listen on all available IP’s ( ) by modifying :

Now, using the command, add a DNS alias so you can access your application from a browser without having to remember the IP that Nanobox generates for you:

You can run your app using one of two ways.

If you're still inside of the nanobox console you can simply:

If you've exited outside of the console already, you can pass your app's start command with :

Thats it! You're application should be running and you can visit it at express.dev:3000 (or whatever alias you created above)|||

This is a simple Express.js example app tutorial. Whether you're getting started, or familiar with Express, Nanobox provides the ideal development workflow.