Four Exciting Ways Drones Are Being Used Today

Besides being used for purposes related to photography and everyday leisure, quadcopters are now being used for an extensive number of purposes that will help improve the way we live. Its everyday uses are proving to be more and more prominent, not only for entertainment purposes, but as a way to significantly improve solutions to a given problem. Because of this, drones are expected to become a new way of everyday life, and are only expected to rise in popularity.

#1) In Florida, farmers are now using drones to cut their costs, while reducing time workers have to spend in the field. As a result, the dynamics of agriculture are expected to dramatically change across the state. John Watts of the Gulf Unmanned System Center’s UAV, says there are no drawbacks when it comes to the use of drones.

Drones are so helpful to the agricultural field that he claims you could put a drone in the air and get all the necessary image in just 20 minutes. In contrast, without a drone this would take all day.

#2) Now you may not believe this! But, in China drones are actually being used to ‘hunt’ students who cheat. It is especially being used with the more popular and widely taken annual “Gaokao” entrance exam, taken by more than 9 million students country-wide.

Since last May alone, 23 students alone have been arrested on the grounds of cheating thanks to the latest quadcopter innovations. With so many eyes in the sky, I don’t think these kids will be cheating any longer!

#3) Down in Victoria, Texas, officials are using quadcopters as a means to track the latest river floods. Whether or not you’ve seen the news lately, citizens of the state had experienced some pretty awful weather.

Thanks to a nearby drone hobbyist who provided the drone at an emergency center, no longer will emergency responders need to resort to helicopters (and their associated expensive costs) for search and rescue!

Fire Chief Taner Drake said, “It proved that it’s just a fantastic tool. It just opened everybody’s eyes that we had video footage of stuff we’d have to pay thousands and thousands of dollars to get.”

#4) Did you know drones are even being used in the NFL? Take the Atlanta Flacons for example who are now considering the use drones and virtual reality software allowing its own players to take a 3-D look at live action from practice. This should really help up the game of today’s NFL stars!

General Manager Thomas Domitroff stated, “We will always be an organization that will attempt to be on the front end of the learning curve when it comes to nutrition, sports, science, and the athletic performance of our athletes.”

These are only some of the latest drone news to hit the headlines as of lately and just comes to show how safe and useful these gadgets are just becoming. Not only are they helping to improve our everyday life in dramatic ways, but are just as equally becoming a great tool for entertainment and leisure. To see our latest quadcopter reviews click here!|||

