Before you even consider launching your blog, you need to create at least ten pieces of content, so people have the option of perusing.

The very first tip I have is; always remember to be as authentic as possible.

Use your voice to share your advice and opinions and don’t be afraid of using it!

I learnt the hard way that by trying to please everyone, you end up pleasing no-one.

I’ve been thinking about this a lot lately.

As I alluded to above, I haven’t been writing authentically with my craft blog Heart Handmade for a long time.

In my defence, I started my craft blog in 2010 before Pinterest existed and it was possible to churn out a post full of inspirational photos, and you got lots of traffic.

That post is still the biggest traffic generator to my site.

It was Christmas night and had received about six different beautiful notebooks from Santa Claus and had no idea what to fill them with.

I opened one of the beautiful notebooks and decided to turn it into a blogging notebook and then I used it to brainstorm other possibilities.

This is the second highest generator of traffic to my blog.

It’s a helpful piece of content, and it resonates with people, which is why it’s successful.

I also make a point of updating them regularly, by refreshing images for Pinterest and social sharing platforms and refreshing the SEO keywords.

Eventually, I started writing posts that were helpful to people.

Solving problems and posts that resonate with my life.

I have no real preference; it just depends on when I started to jot down my ideas and what device I was using at the time.

Evernote, Dropbox paper and google docs are all available as apps for your tablets or phones.

When I’m writing in these apps, and I need to include a URL, I write the text and have the URL afterwards.

You need to come up with an effective blog writing process.

Once you’ve managed to do that, it becomes so much easier to create a post.

But before you can create a process or a template, there are some things that you need to know.

SEO (search engine optimisation) is a method of targeting certain keywords so that when people search for those particular keywords, your site comes up in the top results.

If you manage to implement SEO best practices throughout your content consistently, this strategy will naturally push the content of your blog to the Google top 10 and in turn, will increase your traffic.|||

Do you want to create content for your blog that has the potential to go viral? Check out this six step process & copy the blog template to use on your blog