But, in my mind, there’s only one real way:

Paul Graham knows all about getting rich this way. He did it in 1998, when his company, Viaweb, sold to Yahoo! for $49.6 million.

Now, he helps others do the same at Y Combinator, which helps “incubate” promising new startups. The combined value of YC companies is over $65 billion dollars.

In his book Hackers & Painters, Paul Graham has a chapter titled “How to Make Wealth” that shares the principles behind getting rich.

Money and wealth are not the same. Money — be it pieces of paper or numbers on a screen — is a store of value. Wealth, on the other hand, is value itself.

Now, there’s a downside to working for a company. Whenever you’re part of a whole, you can become burdened with the “weight of the average”:

These days, people throw around the word “equality.” But let us not confuse equality of opportunity with equality of outcome.

Graham mentions how two programmers (getting the same salary) can be entirely different in effect:

This explains why it’s hard to get rich in big, slow-moving companies:

At a company, if your work helps a million people, you probably won’t become a millionaire. That’s because you aren’t directly paid for wealth created.

So the first step to riches is to step away from this to a system where you are directly rewarded for your contribution.

An example of this is software development. If I develop software on my own, selling it to 10,000 people instead of 100 people gives me 100 times the payoff. I get paid for doing more and reaching further.

There’s a second piece to the puzzle, though. How are you going to help a million people in the first place?

People that do this, says Paul Graham, are in positions with leverage:

Everyone who gets rich of their own efforts has both of these qualities, says Graham:

I’m not big on “riches for riches” sake.

I’m more interested in the wealth side of things. I want help as many people as possible and only then be rewarded for it.

My writing income is set up (via Patreon and other sources) is that I only make money when I am doing well. If I don’t get results, I don’t get to eat. A perfectly executed article can go on to reach 100k or even 1M people — maximum leverage. A poor article may only reach 1000.

This type of work is not for everyone. There is safety among the average…

But if you want the challenge, if you want to have a bigger impact on the world, and you enjoy the idea of getting paid for your contribution perhaps a measurable, high-leverage occupation is what’s right for you.|||

Paul Graham knows all about getting rich this way. He did it in 1998, when his company, Viaweb, sold to Yahoo! for $49.6 million. Now, he helps others do the same a Y Combinator, which helps…