Recent data from a survey conducted by Open Sourcing Mental Illness (2016) suggests 51% of individuals in the tech community have been diagnosed with a mental illness. This is a big figure compared to the 20% prevalence in the general population. While we don’t yet know why the difference between these two numbers is so big, we do know that the mental health of employees impacts the whole organization.

Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It affects how we think, feel, and act. It also helps determine how we handle stress, relate to others, and make choices. As you can imagine, a lot of decision-making, handling stress, and interacting with others takes place at work. More days of work are lost by mental illness than by other chronic health conditions including arthritis, asthma, back pain, diabetes, hypertension and heart disease.

70% of costs associated with mental illness are found in the indirect costs of employee absenteeism, presenteeism (i.e., when people are at work but not fully productive), turnover, and training costs for replaced workers. It’s true: happy employees are more productive, and less likely to leave their job.

The World Health Organization (2005) recommends a mental health policy for any business or organization wishing to improve mental wellness. At Keen IO, we are passionate about making a workplace culture where people are not only productive, but where they thrive. We’ve seen time and again that investments in the wellbeing of our employees pays off big time, and we thought establishing a mental health policy would be another great benefit to help people grow. Our policy addresses the vision for improving mental health in the workforce and creates a model for action.

At Keen IO, our mental health policy covers 7 critical areas. These are summarized below or you can view the full policy here.

Keen IO’s Mental Health Policy promotes the mental health and wellness of all employees through advocacy, education and support. Keen IO strives to be an organization of excellence in mental wellness by:

Our values are the set of core beliefs that guide our actions and behavior. We live our values ­and they influence the way we treat our clients, engage with our stakeholders, and the way we work and interact with our colleagues, both within and outside of Keen IO.

We recognize achievement of our mission depends on the combined dedication, creativity, and compassion of our entire Keen IO team.

The Mental Health Policy overviews “mental health impairments” according to the American Psychiatric Association, and prevalence.

An overview of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and employee rights under the ADA.

These are changes in the way things are normally done at work that enables an individual to do a job or enjoy equal access to a job’s benefits and privileges. Included are accommodation ideas, broken into 10 areas:

Keen IO strives to support the mental health of all employees, whether or not they disclose a mental illness to HR. Company-wide supports outlined in the Mental Health Policy include: accommodations (including 50+ individual accommodations offered universally to all employees such as flexible scheduling, modified break schedules, space enclosures, leave for therapy, work from home, etc. (a list of all accommodations can be found in the full policy)); Keen’s internal coaching program; Keen Learning Labs; weekly introspective happy hour; Keen values; and Keen perks.

It is not uncommon for employees to be confused by or unaware of their mental health coverage. To simplify this process and reduce the barrier to entry, coverage for each of three insurance plans offered at Keen is made explicit and broken down by psychotherapy copays, psychiatry copays, inpatient and outpatient facility care, and prescription coverage. A direct link to providers accepting these policies is also provided.

In addition, resources including the company employee advocate contact and other supports are provided in the policy. The Mental Health Policy at Keen was reviewed with all employees in an in-person training and recorded for future viewing. A number of employees have since reached out to the People Development team at Keen to request further supports around their mental health. And mental wellness is a regular topic covered in coaching sessions.

Aside from being concerned for the wellbeing of other humans, investing in a mentally healthy workforce is good for business. Employers today recognize that there is a strong business case for investing in the programs and services necessary to create a mentally healthy workforce.

Interested in developing a mental health policy for your organization? Visit the Open Sourcing Mental Illness resource, “Guidelines for Mental Wellness in the Workplace.”|||

Recent data from a survey conducted by Open Sourcing Mental Illness (2016) suggests 51% of individuals in the tech community have been diagnosed with a mental illness. This is a big figure compared…