If you are an Empath wanting to go from exhausted to empowered and create an amazing life, this is the programme for you.

I am an Intuitive Empath myself and I have been in a massive spiritual journey of connecting with and stepping fully into my own personal empowerment.

I can say that today my life is fully aligned with my true self and I live an amazing life that I have created for myself.

So I’ve created this programme with the purpose of helping you do the same.

This programme is for you to do a soul activation, i.e, giving fuel to the existing spark in you that craves for change, raising your vibration and aligning with everything you want.

This programme is based on the Law of Attraction but it is not a superficial approach to the LOA.

It is a programme designed for you to go deep within yourself, feel what needs to be released and shift into a positive vibration.

It is a programme where you have access to 21 exclusive coaching videos where I coach you on the Law of Attraction & Personal Empowerment as an Empath, and also access to the eBook “21 Day Law of Attraction Vibrational Alignment”.

The programme also includes a 1 hour Coaching session with me on Skype (a face-to-face session is available if you’re based in the UK).

As a bonus, I am also offering your personal human design type and analysis (if you don’t know what the human design is click here) where you’ll know how to move successfully through life according to your type and energy.

After Doing This Programme

This is is going to be an amazing 21 day journey that will completely transform your life.

You’ll have access to information that will shift you into a much higher vibrational frequency: the one that matches and is aligned with your true self and the awesome life you want to create and manifest for yourself.

This is a life-changing programme that will impact how you see yourself and everything else for the rest of your life.

So, In This Programme, You Get Access To:

1 Exclusive Video per Day, where I coach you on specific topics on the Law of Attraction & Personal Empowerment

This equals to 21 hours of Law of Attraction & Personal Empowerment for Empaths exclusive training videos.

Carla’s 21 day Law of Attraction program has helped me immensely. I have read “The Secret” and many other books about the law of attraction but Carla’s program really put it in perspective for me.  I can’t live life miserable and overwhelmed and expect the good life handed to me on a silver platter. Life is hard but the more you live life in the light, and with the most positive attitude you can muster up, life will get better. You have to believe your special to see the special in this world….  Carla’s program is amazing and I would recommend it to anyone interested in learning more about the law of attraction!!

Carla, I have known The Law of attraction for years. Dabbled here and there, though I live my life in much of the way of the “law”. I have never implimented it fully. I have always said I have lived a blessed life. I guess that was the Law of Attraction working for me without my knowing it. But it seemed like once I decided to dabble in it. I wasn’t getting it. You have made the Law of Attraction open to everyone. Your guidance and approach to it show’s that it truly is there for the taking for anyone. That’s beautiful thought. Thank You

Thank you so much for creating the 21 Day Law of Attraction program. I have studied the Law of Attraction a little bit before, but your program really helped me understand how it works, and best of all, you guided me through everything: from the manifestation idea to creating goals and manageable steps to encountering resistance to creating joy in my life. I am so happy to have been a part, and I will reference the program often!

To Start This Programme Today, Please Click Below:|||

If you are an Empath wanting to go from exhausted to empowered and create an amazing life, this is the programme for you. I've created this Programme with the