Quality images drive conversions has become a universal statement. From Facebook to LinkedIn and from Amazon to Instagram, the post that has maximum shares or the product with maximum sales have all one thing in common – Quality Images.

Ebay is no different. Quality images, here too, attract customers’ attention and help sellers to increase their revenues. Therefore if you sell at eBay, you must adhere eBay image policies and guidelines to increase your products sale.

Your Product must be the center of visitors attention, any deviation from the main product must be avoided, therefore, avoid using any sort of background that distracts users from the watching the main image. Ideally plain white background should be applied as it eradicates the cluttering.

No shadows and reflections of the product. It reduces the clarity of the picture and is a huge turn off for the visitors. Using diffused lighting, shadows and reflections of all the products can be easily removed.

The image shouldn’t seem too soft or blurry. Again, it reduces clarity and therefore prevents users from clear visualization. And if the visitors can’t see the item clearly they’re supposed to buy, bounce rate for that product page is meant to be higher.

Use any object such as tripod that can keep the camera stationary enabling it to capture blur-free images.

There is no explaining. High-Resolution images wreak information, higher the resolution, more is the visibility of the elements embedded in the products. Minimum acceptable resolution is 500 pixel on the longest side whereas Ideal Image is of 1600 pixels on the longest side.

All the captured images must utilize the space available within the frame. There is no point in image occupying only the portion of the Frame whereas the rest of the space went unused. Thus images that fit the frame are the way forward.

Apart from the main images, images of the products must be captured from all the angles and must encompass all the details and blemishes. Try utilizing the maximum permissible limit of 12 photos for all the products and prevent uploading images that look similar.

Note: Each image added increases the sales up by 3%

One of the best practice is to compare the products with the common objects. It enables visitors to actually get a sense of ‘how-a-product-is-in-real-life’. Once visitors deduce its actual sizing, it makes decision making easier.

You could invariably tend to provide the tint to your products to increase its attractiveness but it’s neither a good ethic nor a good practice. It is one of the DON’T practice to follow. Moreover, clear or, TINT-less picture paves way for the honest marketing and increases the trust of customers on your brand.

These sort-of photos explain the products with great details. Visitors can see if the product has any subtle variations or some patterns that are not visible unless the close-up shot is taken. Moreover, detailed information, thus close up shots, are the part of comprehensive knowledge setup which the potential buyer of your product deserves.

Props come as an innovative and creative way to show the applications of your products, however, if the props being used occupy the space of the image so as they finally obscure the main image or limit the view-ability of the main product – this practice is highly discouraged under eBay’s image guidelines and policies.

eBay picture hosting ensures that your item will be visible on a variety of mobile platforms as your listing may include photos embedded in the item description area, as a result these may not render properly across every mobile device platform.|||

eBay image policies and guidelines clearly state some fundamentals to be followed. And if these guidelines are implemented, it leads to increase in sales.