Save an archived copy of all websites you star using Pocket or Pinboard, indexed in an html file. Powered by the new headless Google Chrome and good 'ol .

is a script that takes a Pocket export, and turns it into a browsable html archive that you can store locally or host online.

Runtime: I've found it takes about an hour to download 1000 articles, and they'll take up roughly 1GB. Those numbers are from running it single-threaded on my i5 machine with 50mbps down. YMMV.

On some Linux distributions the python3 package might not be recent enough. If this is the case for you, resort to installing a recent enough version manually. The official Python documentation is a good place to start.

It produces a folder containing an , and archived copies of all the sites, organized by timestamp. For each sites it saves:

You can tweak parameters like screenshot size, file paths, timeouts, etc. in . You can also tweak the outputted html index in . It just uses python format strings (not a proper templating engine like jinja2), which is why the CSS is double-bracketed .

It's possible to pull links via the pocket API instead of downloading an html export. Once I write a script to do that, we can stick this in and have it auto-update on it's own.

For now you just have to download and run each time it updates. The script will run fast subsequent times because it only downloads new links that haven't been archived already.

The archive is suitable for serving on your personal server, you can upload the archive to (or pinboard) and allow people to access your saved copies of sites.

Just stick this in your nginx config to properly serve the wget-archived sites:

Make sure you're not running any content as CGI or PHP, you only want to serve static files!

This is basically an open-source version of Pocket Premium (which you should consider paying for!). I got tired of sites I saved going offline or changing their URLS, so I started archiving a copy of them locally now, similar to The Way-Back Machine provided by archive.org. Self hosting your own archive allows you to save PDFs & Screenshots of dynamic sites in addition to static html, something archive.org doesn't do.

Now I can rest soundly knowing important articles and resources I like wont dissapear off the internet.

My published archive as an example: sweeting.me/pocket.

Hosting other people's site content has security implications for your domain, make sure you understand the dangers of hosting other people's CSS & JS files on your domain. It's best to put this on a domain of its own to slightly mitigate CSRF attacks.

It might also be prudent to blacklist your archive in your so that search engines dont index the content on your domain.|||

pocket-archive-stream - 🗄 Save an archived copy of all websites starred using Pocket.  Outputs browseable html.