Obviously, we all know that, for the last few years the OnePlus have been giving out pleasant and robust smartphones. After the well-received OnePlus 3 and OnePlus 3T, now the leaks are surrounding its next flagship, the OnePlus 5. Today, we have found a new rumor originating from the Chinese website, Weibo.

Accordingly, one of the surprising facts is, Kumamoto Technology in Weibo has leaked the key set of specs along with the image of OnePlus 5. As per it, most of the specifications seems to be the same as the previous rumors stated, except a few new additions. As you can notice, the image clearly shows off the dual rear camera setup that is positioned vertically.

Now the fresh leak have revealed that, the device will be powered by a Snapdragon 835 processor. The earlier leaks, said that the handset will hold an 8GB of RAM and 256GB internal storage. But, the memory arrangements differ in the new leaks; they have stated that the device will come with the 6GB of RAM and 128GB of internal storage.

However, there have been a considerable volume of issues in the memory part, continuously; hence, we could conclude that it might come in the two different variants, one with 8GB and the other with 6GB. Let’s wait see what the company has actually planned.

On the battery capacity, it packs a massive 3600mAh one, which is 25% faster, while comparing with the OnePlus 3T. Unfortunately, the presence of 3.5mm headphone jack is still uncertain.

Another leakster Mocha RQ states, the device is expected to feature a FHD display, and have hinted that the flagship will be debuted by the end of this month. Moreover, the price of the phone is expected to be low, when compared to the Galaxy S8 or the forthcoming iPhone.

Finally, if you are waiting for the OnePlus 5, then you will have to wait a bit longer, because the exact details aren’t disclosed yet. However, it is expected to see the light of the day, by this year. Stay connected with us, we will keep you informed about the latest updates regarding it.|||

The latest OnePlus 5 new leaks rumored with an image and specs details. the phone will featured with 3600mAh Battery, 6 or 8 GB RAM and Dual rear camera.