Apple's alternative to the Amazon Echo and Google Home could be with us sooner rather than later, with a new report indicating the Siri-enabled smart speaker will drop later this year.

The rumour comes from notorious Apple tipster and KGI analyst Ming-Chi Kuo, who claims that the Cupertino giant will launch the smart home device at its WWDC event in June.

It will apparently come with a loftier price tag than its rivals and be offered as a more high-end product, featuring a subwoofer and seven tweeters (the speaker kind, not the social media kind) with "excellent" sound.

According to Kuo, it would also house a more powerful processor than an Echo or Home speaker and sync comfortably with other Apple devices.

So, while it's seemingly set to be announced next month, when would it actually make its way into homes?

Well, Kuo suggests this would be sometime in the second half of the year, which is, let's be honest, about as broad as it gets. In other words, it could be any time between July and December. Although, with the next iPhone and the Apple Watch Series 3 expected to headline the tech giant's annual September conference, this could also mark the point where the Siri speaker would hit the market.

By leaving some room between an announcement and the actual launch, this would give developers the opportunity to create Apple's equivalent to Echo skills. This would hopefully result in a more fleshed out speaker come launch day, instead of something that only features the company's own services.

However, it's worth pointing out that Apple is already far behind in the smart speaker game. While whispers are indicating the company is preparing its first iteration, Amazon is also rumoured to be launching a screen-enabled Echo next month.

Another big question if Apple were to eventually announce a smart speaker is how well it would cater for non-Apple users, as well as its own.

Expect to hear more noise on this over the coming weeks and months.|||

Apple's alternative to the Amazon Echo and Google Home could be with us sooner rather than later, with a new report indicating the Siri-enabled smart speaker will drop later this year.  The rumour comes from notorious Apple tipster and KGI analyst Ming-Chi Kuo, who claims that the Cupertino giant will launch the smart home device…