I was scheduled to drop into Tokyo for two weeks on a project. Since I had lived in Tokyo for some years most of the tourist attractions like Tokyo Tower, the Imperial Palace, or Akihabara are less attractive to me. So I wanted to try something I have never done before. Drop!in to a completely new experience. My hotel was in Odaiba which is a small island in the bay of Tokyo. From there I had a fantastic view of the Rainbow bridge and the Tokyo skyline. It was a lovely spring day.

Since the hotel charged extra for the breakfast buffet and I had no intention to eat more than bacon and eggs I started to explore the area around the hotel. The only restaurant that was open in Odaiba when I left the Hotel was Eggs’n’Things. A cure Hawaiian breakfast joint with ocean view. I chose Eggs and Bacon and received this delicious monstrosity. Sure you might argue it’s not Japanese food (oh no!). But hey. It’s Bacon and Eggs. There is nothing wrong with it, unless you are a vegetarian.

As every good tourist I made my way to Shibuya. Which is a fun spot to be on the weekend. They even had an advertisement for a Robot Show in Shinjuku. Maybe I would go there at a later stage. While walking around Shibuya I was thinking what should I do ? So I checked my drop!in app and voila found a Machine Learning event nearby.

I am a huge data/AI geek, so obviously if I find a space to learn something new about ‘data science’ I am first in line. Maybe I can even find some talent to hire? The event seemed close enough on the map, so I started walking. Good decision. Tokyo is a really lovely place to walk. Sidewalks are usually wide and it was such a pleasant spring day.

As I slowly walked towards the location I noticed the wonderous little side streets Tokyo has to offer. This one here is a typical example where you find again hundreds of mini-restaurant and shops.

And then I found the location. I guess that would be the building name. My Japanese is still acceptable, so there was hope for the best. The building looked a bit dodgy, but there is nothing to be afraid of. It was a data-science meetup, so my worst fear would have been to be killed with calculators.

Strange red door, some other geeks slowly showing up. Seems I was right. Event though I had not signed up for the event I was allowed to join. Which was actually quite nice from the organizer. Daisuke. Thanks!

This is Daisuke, He is running this event. A lot of people came over and wanted to work on the Kaggle Titanic dataset. Japan is quite prone to Natural desasters like Earthquakes, Typhoons, Gozilla, and Alien Teenage Mutant maid/schoolgirls, so obviously working on this dataset was the obvious choice. I guess …(https://www.kaggle.com/c/titanic/data) This dataset is useful for supervised learning because it has survival encoded as a binary variable.

Soon we started to work and the discussions in the room were getting quite intense. Fun time though. But now I was getting hungry since I only had breakfast. Due to the grumbling stomach I left this event and went to one where I could get some food. I hate eating alone…

Again I checked drop!in and found this food preparation event. Sounded about just right. Sugar, Vegan, Traditional Japanese. Seemed like just the experience I want to have . From the map it seemed close by so I started to walk from Shibuya to Jingu-mae

And the second part of my adventure began. Again through the endless labyrinth of small side streets of Tokyo’s Shibuya district. Packed with people at this time of the day.

Hey what is that? A VR Park in Tokyo that does not require admission ? Count me in. Might Japan be finally catching up with 1997 technology? There is still hope. I personally prefer AR over VR because it is an extension of real experiences and not an artificial fake one. But then I am not on Facebook either. I like real stuff.

This part of Tokyo has a lot to offer. Just think about hanging out on a Sunday afternoon drinking beers with friends on the leather couch outside is a really nice proposition. Damn, that was the point where I really regretted that I had to take this trip alone.

Shibuya is one of the few areas in the otherwise squeaky clean Tokyo where graffiti wall art is respected and in many cases quite beautiful. I liked the paranoid pig.

Wandering further I noticed what looked like a huge pile of garbage. But it is actually a small indy shop selling goods handcrafted by the indigenous hardworking people from India, Nepal, and other parts of Asia. Because we know Japan is not part of Asia.

After that little detour I walked further. Shibuya is a creative district in Tokyo. Small designer stores are everywhere

There is always something weird happening here. I soon ran into a weird group of Frankenstein lookalikes carrying balloons. Probably advertising for something, but I was to lazy to ask

While waiting to cross this street this young lady was entertaining me (and the other people waiting). I guess this is one thing I really miss in Singapore that this type of buskers are not that accepted here. Or in some cases even frowned upon if they try to make money for the South-East Asia trip.

While on the way I bought this funny t-shirt. For some reason it’s in German saying “Always stay cool. Go skateboarding, enjoy the day”. Seemed to be my motto for this afternoon.

One recommendation for Tokyo is that is it really really bicycle friendly. If I would have encountered this shop earlier, I would have totally rented a bicycle for my adventure. 1000 JPY (~9 USD) is not expensive at all in a city like Tokyo for 3 hours of entertainment.

Ah ! Here is my building. Q-Plaza. The place for my feast. Home-made Japanese sweeeeeeets ! Here I come!!!

Quickly run up, 6th floor, the cooking show is about to start. Great stuff! Bow to Midori-sensei, she is a really great teacher and explained how to make Japanese sweets to me even in English. Actually most people in the group spoke English well (which really surprised me) and we had so funny conversations about cooking and the world. Here Midori-sensei is preparing kidney beans as a basis for the daifuku sweets. I was surprised she took something that I would have considered a really really western bean like the kidney bean. Hope we can eat soon.

For the other dish (‘green tea gardens’), our teacher had already prepared green tea paste since this has to boil a longer while.

The Azuki (red-bean) paste will be the basis for the construction of our ‘garden’. The green tea paste is then pressed through a fine sieve so it looks like grass. As you know all good gardens needs to have grass. You then need to careful distribute the green tea grass around the base.

With the white been paste and sakura powder I made little pink petals. Well I was actually planning on making a flower. But I guess the artistic talent is not that strong with me. Then I added some read leaves and a yellow nut in the middle of my pink petals flower and voila! My Japanese desert was completed. Awesome! The final version looked like this. Yummy !

In a second step we made daifuku. Which are kidney beans in a mochi wrapped topped with a sakura leave. I was really happy with my results and got high praise for my second dish from the others in the team which made me quite happy.

This was my final takeaway from the event. I ate a bunch of desserts, met fun new locals, and learned a new skill. Further, I guess I developed a deeper understanding into Japanese culture and overall making these sweets was surprisingly easy.

Thank you everyone for the fun time! I guess I was just quicker then everyone else. I guess I don’t have the patience.

A arrived back at the hotel just in time to see the sun setting. I

Thank you for reading all the way here. Highly appreciated. Overall I had a fun time in Tokyo and met a bunch of fun people. The name of the iOS app I used is drop!in which I can highly recommend, btw.|||

I was scheduled to drop into Tokyo for two weeks on a project. Since I had lived in Tokyo for some years most of the tourist attractions like Tokyo Tower, the Imperial Palace, or Akihabara are less…