Now that summer is here; it’s time for all those DIY projects to come out of your garage. Utilize the summer as much as possible by getting all your pending work done. Think you need a new coat of paint for your garage? Make it a DIY! In fact, most jobs around the house can be easily done as a DIY thanks to amazing products available that help you immensely in doing the job.

If you have a big painting job to do, a cordless paint sprayer will reduce the time and effort you need to complete the job, while maximizing efficiency and giving a perfect finish to your painting job.

The list of cordless paint sprayers and battery operated paint sprayers we have organized for you will make any painting job around the house a piece of cake!

The Chapin 20V cordless paint sprayer is one of the best options for a DIY paint project. It features a 20V lithium-ion battery along with a battery charger that can provide up to 1.75 hours of continuous spraying, which is approximately 50 gallons.

This sprayer is a battery operated paint sprayer that can be hoisted on your shoulders with the help of shoulder straps. No pumping is needed for the operation of this sprayer, making it very easy to use.

This Graco product is actually a 20V cordless paint sprayer and is one of the fastest and easiest ways to complete small projects that are piling up. It can spray without any thinning required. It’s compact and lightweight design allows you to spray longer and more effectively.

This Wagner cordless sprayer is a great option for your house, fence, and deck painting among other projects. The backpack contained in the kit acts as a portable container of paint to provide you with maximum mobility.

This Graco ProPack is a  cordless paint sprayer that allows you to complete any small projects in and around your home without interruptions or refills.

To pick the right cordless sprayer for your painting jobs, there are a few parameters that help-

By now you will have your favorites among the cordless paint sprayers above. So choose one and get working on re-upholstering, re-finishing or simply painting things inside and outside your home! Don’t forget to keep safe and follow the instructions that come with the battery operated paint sprayer you purchase and study the equipment properly before beginning to use it.|||

If you are going to do a DIY painting job, then check these best cordless battery operated paint sprayers and save your money while getting an easy paint.