You want to start the most powerful and successful blog there is which the world will crumble at its feet when it sees.

So what better way to start off than by using WordPress on Bluehost?

I was just as confused and curious as you are sitting there right now reading this very second.

I searched and I searched until I tried out every possible variation to ‘how to start a blog’ on Google and I was left with so many options that I didn’t know where to start.

Since then I have managed to grow my site, Saint, from 0 to 1500 traffic in a day (45,000) in less than 1 month and now Saint is competing with major league behemoths the likes Forbes, Mashable and Wikileaks with its content marketing strategy and SEO strategy.

This simple step-by-step guide contains what I learned along the way, and you’ll start your soon-to-be in the makings successful blog that’ll soon will be making you $1000s a month to millions of dollars. I’ll show you can start your colossal blog on just the price of a packet of gummy bears a month.

Click here to start a blog on WordPress, then you can use the tutorial below for the quick and simple directions

I never said this before to anyone but I am going to share it with you. I didn’t really have anyone to guide me by the hand and show me which was the best writing platform to start off my blog and which was the best web host.

Do you feel that too?

Only after trying out just about every platform there was and migrating from every web host there is only then did I finally settle on what soon will be WordPress using Bluehost. 🙂

 Bluehost is the top web hosting of 2017 which is also why I use it for Saint.

There was a reason why I visited the Bluehost headquarters in Provo, Utah a few days ago if you saw my Snapchat.

The whole reason for the trip was that I needed to personally negotiate with the guys over at Bluehost to give just for you, the most exclusive Bluehost deal ever for you to start you blog on cheap forever.

You can start your blog for only $2.75 a month (of course this is only through my link, but I also earn a small commission if you purchase from my link, and it also helps pay back for my returning flight home too haha). You’ll also get a free domain so that you can start off your blog with the name that you really want for your soon-to-be successful blog.

What more, I don’t want you to start off like how I did without having no one to guide me by the hand and be there when I really needed someone experienced and knows the ins and outs of blogging which is why I’ll also give you my personal email address on Gmail for Free and I will be your personal trusted adviser. I’ll give you free one-to-one advising whenever you need any advice to grow your site and I’ll help you grow your blog/website from 0-1500 within a few weeks. Finally I’ll also show you how you can monetize and devise your own monetization strategy for the maximum profits and make your first $1000 for free.

There you go. So hurry up, grab the deal before it ends! 🙂

Now you might be asking

The truth is there’s literally tons and tons of reasons why you won’t want to start your blog on Blogger or Blogspot

I can go on and on and it’ll literally take me whole another article to write all the reasons why you shouldn’t start your blog on Blogger or Blogspot, but you see if I were write that article on let’s say on a platform like Blogger, then that article won’t even see the light at the end of the day.

You get the picture.

There are several reasons for why it’s recommended for you to choose Bluehost for your WordPress blog and I honestly believe Bluehost is one of the best web hosting providers out there. These reasons include:

First, you’re going to need to head over to Bluehost so that you can do any of this.

There are many web hosting services out there, but honestly speaking Bluehost is one of the best. There is a reason why many bloggers and businesses start choose Bluehost for their web hosting needs.

If you plan on starting your blog on Bluehost and learning about how to start a blog on WordPress then keep reading. 🙂

Remember, if you sign up for Bluehost, but you are confused about anything, just drop me a message to my personal email and I’ll guide you advise you on how you can set it up, pricing, plans, how you can make your brand formidable, how to make money from your blog, the perfect SEO strategy, bullet proof content marketing strategy and so much more for free.

Click here to start the process.

You can click here to purchase a domain name and create a blog, then you can continue to follow the easy steps below.

The very first thing you will need to do when starting a WordPress blog on Bluehost is to decide on a domain name that your soon-to-be successful blog is going to have.

If I were you I would really think hard and give some serious thought to this.

I kinda remember the way I got the name Saint, haha.

I was where you are right now, in front of your Bluehost page where you choose the name that you want to start off your domain page. The cursor was endlessly blinking, and I was sitting there scratching my head trying to come up with every name I could think of.

I spent a good 2 weeks trying to think of a great name.

Until one Friday evening around 6 to 7pm , I was sitting outside my porch sipping on my hot chocolate staring across this beautiful twilight sky…

Then I realized to myself I should have a short, memorable and sweet name. Something that will get stuck in people’s minds.

The funny part was the whole twilight didn’t do much to spring up any ideas in my head.

Only when did I start to get up and go in because the mosquitoes were starting biting me, I tripped and I kinda fell haha.

That’s when it ‘hit my head’ (pun intended), that I should call it Saint. It was short (5 letters) and sweet and the most important part it was perfect and I liked it!

I couldn’t get the official saint.com but instead I opted for saintlad.com, other wise it would cost me a lot to get that but that didn’t really stop me from naming my brand after what I love.

Yes it is good if you are able to get your desired domain name, but if you can’t then it’s completely alright.

I am here with you and for the fact I know how you feel if you can’t get the domain that you wanted so badly. So I suggest you go for a simple variation for your domain like I did because in the end it is your brand that really matters the most, not some domain name.

That’s all there is to finding your perfect brand and domain name. If you need help you can always send me a email,  you and I can  always spend some time brainstorming some ideas together for your blog/site for anytime. 🙂

Alright let’s go back to your Bluehost.

You can get your domain name directly through Bluehost and it’s much simpler this way. If you do this, then you can also get the domain for free, as long as you buy 12 months worth of Bluehost web hosting.

This is why it’s better to sign up for at least 12 months of hosting since you will be saving a good amount of your money this way.

Not only that, you will also get a much cheaper monthly price when you go for at least 12 months of hosting, so the free domain that you are getting just makes everything even better.

 If you decide to get your free domain then all you have to do is just continue to the next step to buy your hosting and get the free domain, all in, just one simple step. 🙂

Setting up a WordPress blog on Bluehost is very easy. First, both of us will talk about the costs of blogging:

I’ll explain why you should purchase at least a 12 month hosting plan.

The problem with month-to-month hosting is that it is less effective and I highly recommend that you sign up with or a minimum of 12 months for many reasons. By signing up for a minimum of 12 months

You will receive a free domain, free, lower pricing and you won’t have to deal with an expired website after each

 month.

 I’ll give you a simple example. If let’s say your hosting was not renewed or if your card expires then your website will be down and you risk losing business (visitors/traffic) when you pay on a month to month basis.

It’s also exceptionally more expensive to pay month-to-month rather than in one lump sum. Basically the more years you sign up with, the less you pay.

Blog hosting will only cost around $59 on average or $99 for 3 years, which is a great deal! If you purchase 12 month plan, you total price is only going to be $59 a year, which is a great price!

When you are ready to create your blog, follow the steps below to buy hosting for your blog.

1. Head over to Bluehost and click Get Started link.

2. Click the package that you are interested in.

3. You can enter your domain name here if you’ve purchased one before, or you can sign up for a new domain name.

5. After that, you will be asked to enter a password. Make sure that it is secure, since this information is very important.

Note: You can skip this step (Step 3) if you buy your domain directly through Bluehost

If you already have purchased your domain through GoDaddy, then you will need to connect your domain to your hosting account.

I recommend that you take a look at GoDaddy’s helpful instructions page which can guide you step by step on setting name servers for your domain names. Here’s a snippet 🙂

1.  Go ahead and log into your GoDaddy.com Account Manager.

2.  Then select Manage Domains from the Domain Names drop-down menu or the Manage Your Account list.

3.  Now select the domain name that you wish to modify using the checkboxes and then once you have chosen click on Set Name Servers.

4.  Almost there! Now enter your updated name server information into the spaces provided under the blue Name Servers heading that you see to the right hand side of your page and then click Save Changes at the bottom. Your entries should look like this: ns1.bluehost.com; ns2.bluehost.com

5.  Finally, you will need to add the domain that you bought through GoDaddy as an add on domain onto your Bluehost web hosting. It’s super easy! All you have to is just select Domains when you’re logged into your Bluehost web hosting account and then just click on Assign.

Yeah you have been itching to get to this step haven’t you? 🙂

If you want to start a WordPress blog on Bluehost then keep reading.

This part is very easy. Bluehost makes it very create a blog on WordPress and it is FREE.

There you go!

You now have your very own blog.

You will have to work on the design of your blog and providing it the highest of quality content there is so that you .

Just email me (once you are done starting your blog on WordPress using Bluehost) and I’ll be with you throughout the whole journey.

I’ll help you search and find what you’re looking for based on your design preferences and ideas. If you also want the case studies, income reports, high quality eBooks from what has helped me grow Saint, then just ask when you need them. I’ll sent them over to you for free.

Will talk to you soon.|||

Here's a quick and simple step-by-step guide on how to start a Wordpress Blog on Bluehost in just 4 simple steps (+Screenshots and tons of Free...