Picture a new founder consulting with an experienced founder. Fifteen minutes into that conversation, you might be hearing “Quit Your Job.” This is typically followed by two minutes of silence... Which is then followed by... “So, good coffee, huh?” (LOLs). Well, that exchange seems natural. When one's action has already proven the words, less words are needed. When one has nothing to offer in return, he has no right to ask for more. When one has risked much and gained more, there is reason to be proud. And when one is about to plunge into entrepreneurship, there is reason to fear.

The Day Job: Quit or Keep?

If the brevity of words leads you to think that quitting your job is a dare to test your grit for things that are yet to come, you are partially correct. But more importantly, the immediate benefit behind the “Quit Your Job” play is that it buys you face time with your venture (8 hours per day at least). The more focused you are, the likelier you are to create value. However, the execution of the “Quit Your Job” play is not one size, fits all. I've sat down with founders who have made an impact on their target market regardless of the decisions they took on the job front. I've met someone who, with his mentor's support, took the leap very early. He was on a Sky Flakes crackers diet for some time. But in the big scheme of things, leaving his job worked for him. I remember him saying that having his back on the wall really pushed him outside his comfort zone and pushed him to make things work. However, I've also met several founders who did NOT leave their day job and are raking in money from their venture. These founders, generally, have someone to take care of - a mom, a wife, a child. The one's I've met (at least) were not scared to leave their job. Rather, they were unselfish. They were calculating. They were realistic. Take care of your family.

The Day Job: Should You Leave, Make It Count

Unlike the other things in your bootstrap back pack, quitting your job is a one way trip. So if you decide to give up a five digit salary, you best hit the ground running. Most founders I've met have read Eric Ries' Lean Start Up. Read that book and learn how to execute lean. From personal experience, you do not want to be the guy who has all the time in the world, but can't execute lean. Sometime back, I met a younger founder who could execute lean. Compared to me at the time (someone who could not execute lean), this founder was getting more done part time than I could full time. Some plays, like the "Quit Your Job" play, have very hard to find bullets. Make them count! Take what you learn from that book and combine it with the time you get from the “Quit Your Job” play. This way, you have a higher likelihood of making those daily twelve hour shifts count.

I took the leap 4 years (3 small businesses) ago. It didn't take long for the difficulties of my reality to sink in. During my immature days, I would wake up asking: “What am I supposed to do today?” And when I had no answer to myself, I would experience a new kind of fear. The reality of your difficulties will hit you often - before you sleep, when you wake up. You will likely find yourself looking for something to make things a bit more bearable. For some, it might be coffee. For some, it might be to google some “stress release” (LOLs). For some, it might be (God forbid) quit their journey because of a day's worth of emotionally polarized judgment. But really, a simple yet good go to response to all these negative stimuli is simply: learn more, iterate, then try again. To survive the solo phase, stretch yourself and be amazed at how much you can learn and how far you can go. Learn something new every day. If not every day, then at the very least, learn something new with each mistake you make. And before you even realize it, you've already made progress.

Co-Founding: Have Something to Show

Stretch yourself and from my experience, the closer you are to releasing your minimum viable product, the easier it is to get a “yes” from co-founder prospects. The opposite is true. If you have nothing to show, you are not going to get a “yes” from anyone. So don't be the person who doesn't do anything because he doesn't have a team. Start somewhere. Start with verifying market fit. For a new venture (exponentially more so in a startup), the path to market fit may take a long time (with some exceptions, I've met two so far). In this seemingly hopeless period, a jack of all trades (hopefully you) is sometimes more practical than a team with specialized skills. Fast (solo) is sometimes more practical than perfect.

And when you do get that “yes” from your co-founder prospect(s), be aware that a gun just fired and a race just kicked off. It's a race against (1) your co-founders' deteriorating runway and (2) your sprint to your first dollar. Like it or not, common vision can only take a partnership so far. A business relationship by definition requires profit. And each day that goes by with no profit decreases your co-founders' personal runways. And when that hits zero, you're on your own. When your co-founders' runways burn out before you could figure out the right direction for your startup, you're on your own. Let's say that you did manage to bootstrap a good team from day zero. What happens if you don't have market fit? They will likely lose interest. And if you're an average Joe founder (where everyone inevitably starts), your co-founders' runways are likely to burn before you are able to execute that one pivot plan that could have turned everything around. The co-founder card, is undoubtedly a good hand to play. From my experience, you maximize this card's impact when you bring in your co-founders at the right time. And in some circumstances, there is wisdom in delaying the formation of your founding team. Looking at the teams I've met so far, it was optimal to bring in a team after market fit was verified. Like the “Quit Your Job” play, you have a set number of cards with this play. Know when to play this card.

What Every Founder Needs: Resilience

The start is real ugly (for most with some exceptions - I've met one exception so far). To make things worse, you're bound to fail sooner or later. To make things worse, 90% fail. To make things worse, sometimes failure can take years. I've failed thrice (small business, not really startups) in four years. I've met someone who's 6 years in, but still has a lot of will power left to figure things out and execute. I've met someone who has failed thrice in 9 years. And he's currently building another startup (not a small business, a startup). Then there's this old businessman who tried 30 times, failed 28 times, and succeeded 2 times. Build your resilience. You will need it. I sh*t thee not. If there's one take away I'd like you to remember from this article, it's this - you are likely to go through the same level of difficulty. Start building your resilience. Some founders meditate. Some founders pray. Some founders exercise. Find your thing and build yourself.|||

Reflection on Entrepreneurship: Aspiring Founder, Consider This