After the great success of our introductory Angular workshop “The Future is Now with Angular”, we are now offering you an extended workshop on the subject. This workshop will cover some of the advanced topics when writing modern web applications.

While books and online articles can be an effective medium to convey information, they are mostly providing you with partial solutions. This workshop is offering you a rather holistic view on building web applications using Angular. It will boost your productivity by providing the key insights into tackling issues like application design, structural organization, maintainability and much more.

With Gion Kunz, who is the author of the “Mastering Angular 2 Components” Book and Francisco Silva, you will have the perfect guides through your journey into the future of user interface development.

Together we’ll look into the anatomy of application user interfaces and exercise by dissecting them into meaningful components. We’ll learn about different approaches when designing UI and component architecture. Focused on maintainability, we’ll look at different approaches to structure your application while keeping things simple. Using some advanced Angular techniques, we’ll learn how to master modern front-end application development.

The workshop program includes but is not limited to the following topics:

You’ll have a strong insight into Angular and component based UI architectures. You’ll establish a common understanding on how to approach web projects using Angular. After this workshop, you’ll have an idea on how to build solutions for complex problems arising in modern web applications.

You should bring a solid knowledge on HTML and JavaScript including ES6. Also a good foundation in TypeScript is assumed and you’ve already worked with the latest version of Angular. You are looking for a holistic learning experience on how to build front-end applications in a maintainable and scaleable way using Angular.

Workshop is in English, but both instructors also speak German for questions.

You will need your own notebook for this workshop.|||

