If Martin Shkreli, massive Twitter troll, was actually hoping to get banned from the social media platform for life, it's time to offer him your congratulations: He has succeeded.

On Wednesday, the pharma bro announced on Facebook that he's been permanently banned from Twitter, a result of his account being suspended back in January after he posted a straight-up creepy photo collage of Teen Vogue editor Lauren Duca, violating Twitter's harassment policy.

Duca publicly rejected Shkreli's invite to President-elect Donald Trump's inauguration on Jan. 20 as well as his additional online advances towards her. That apparently inspired him to update his profile to this eerie redesign.

Shortly after, Shkreli's account was temporarily suspended, which Twitter confirmed was a result of the harassment.

After several attempts to restore his original account and create new handles, the 34-year-old discovered he was "permanently" suspended and shared on Facebook that his account will not be restored.

No further details pertaining to how Shkreli learned this news were shared with his Facebook followers, but Mashable reached out to Twitter for comment on the announcement.

On Thursday, Shkreli attempted to create two new Twitter profiles: and  ; both were suspended within hours. The Verge reported that Shkreli used @TrashyTheCat to follow a few "hackers, tech figures, politicians, and reporters," including Duca.

Suspiciously, on Friday afternoon Shkreli shared a link to an "interesting new Twitter account" he allegedly has "nothing to do with." The account, @ban_republicans, was created around 24 hours ago and features about 10 tweets, most of which are extremely offensive.

Though the latest account promoted by Shkreli has yet to be linked to him, it does follow a Martin Shkreli news account, which raises a few questions — as does pretty much everything related to Shkreli.

Mashable reached out to Twitter for additional comment.|||

If expert Twitter troll, Martin Shkreli's New Year's resolution was to get banned from the social media platform for life, he has succeeded.