Let’s say you’re busy at your desk and don’t want to be interrupted. How do you let your colleagues know? In the old days, back when people worked in offices that contained actual offices, you could close your door. But in the modern, open office, the physical barrier needs to be more conceptual—headphones, maybe, or earbuds. Put them on, tune out your co-workers, and get stuff done, or at least disguise yourself as a person who is getting stuff done and should not be interrupted.

Many of the people who dislike being interrupted in open-office situations are technologically minded types—“knowledge workers”—and one thing they’re busy thinking about is a better solution to the interruption problem. Wristbands that measure your skin conductivity, chest straps that measure your heart rate, sensors that measure the pressure you place on your keypad and mouse, all working to devise an “automatic interruptibility measure”—a metric of how busy (or not) you are from moment to moment and how available you are for conversation. This information can then be advertised to your co-workers, typically through an app on their computers.

But people forget to check apps, and biosensors “are still a little bit too invasive,” Thomas Fritz, a professor of computer science at the University of British Columbia, told me. “Wearing a headband all day is not something most people want to do.” Recently, Fritz and his colleagues came up with a hybrid solution. Called the FlowLight, it gathers basic information about your keyboard and mouse activity and feeds that to a physical device, a light that sits at your workstation or atop your cubicle wall and changes color according to your interruptibility: red (busy), pulsing red (super busy), yellow (wishing you were busier), and green (checking Facebook). It’s a semi-intelligent stoplight that enables you to disappear, fully or partly, into the office woodwork and so evade those temporal predators.

A biologist might classify this need to recede as a particularly human form of crypsis—the ability of an animal to camouflage itself and elude detection. Examples are everywhere in plain sight, and new ones are turning up all the time. Last year, scientists reported that sand fleas, like chameleons, can change their coloration to match a wide array of backgrounds. Ghost crabs, in the Solomon Islands, can’t alter their color; they’re pallid, or dark, or something in between. But last week Floria Mora-Kepfer Uy, a biologist at the University of Miami, reported that the crabs seem to actively choose to live in sand that matches their appearance, rendering them invisible. A zebra’s stripes deter blood-sucking flies—a finding that Tim Caro, a biologist at the University of California, Davis, confirmed in part by trudging around the Tanzanian veldt wearing a zebra pelt. Puff adders can suppress their own odor to avoid detection by keen-nosed dogs and meerkats. In a journal article published last year, researchers described the adder as the first (and doubtless not the last) known example of chemical crypsis in a terrestrial species and as “additional evidence for the existence of an ongoing chemically mediated arms race between predator and prey species.”

Typically, crypsis is a defense that one species wields against another. We humans are the rare species that mainly deploys it against ourselves. (We aren’t entirely alone; Rassim Khelifa, a biologist at the University of Zurich, just discovered that female moorland hawker dragonflies will fall to the ground and play dead when pursued by overly ardent males.) It’s social camouflage—to avoid standing out, to dodge awkward interactions, maybe even to get work done. By mowing your lawn, you blend in with your suburban neighbors. Sunglasses and tinted windows obscure celebrity. If I cower behind my newspaper, the subway panhandler will overlook me. Someone I know once set up a kind of bookcase maze in his office that his co-workers had to walk through to get to him, to ever so slightly raise the cost of interrupting him.

But we aren’t nearly as good at escaping notice as we think we are. Last week, Erica Boothby, a social psychologist at Yale, and her colleagues described what they called the invisibility-cloak illusion—our tendency to underestimate the extent to which we’re being observed by people nearby. In one version of Boothby’s experiment, a pair of subjects sat in a room, across from each other, for several minutes as they waited for the study to begin. (How is it that these volunteers still don’t realize that, as often as not, the science starts the moment they walk in the door?) Afterward, in private, one subject was asked to list her observations about the other person, and the other subject was asked to list what he thought the first subject had noticed about him. The observer’s list was typically longer than the target’s.

This held true even when the target was instructed to wear a T-shirt with the very conspicuous image of Pablo Escobar on it. The shirt was noticeable (though not as much as the wearer thought), but it didn’t diminish the wearer’s confidence that the observer wouldn’t notice anything else about him. In effect, we believe that we are better social observers, and better hiders, than the people around us. The thing we literally don’t observe is that people are indeed watching us—most likely, Boothby notes, because we avoid making eye contact, so we can’t tell.

Maybe it’s no surprise, then, that your headphone disguise never works quite as well as you’d like; just because you can’t hear your co-workers doesn’t mean they can’t see you. The FlowLight promises to warn them off. The device runs on an algorithm that tracks keyboard activity, mouse clicks, and mouse movement. If the sum total in the past three minutes is between the top nine per cent and four per cent of your average, you are considered “busy” and the light turns red; above four per cent and you’re “very busy.” The researchers originally used lower thresholds, but users complained that the light switched to the busy state too readily. The FlowLight is essentially an anti-beacon, or a sort of lighthouse, that announces your unavailability all by itself. Because it’s fed with real-time data, and everyone in the office knows it, your co-workers are less likely to think you’re faking it in an effort to avoid them.

Fritz and two doctoral students developed the FlowLight in collaboration with a software-development company, and they recently conducted a study of the light’s efficacy. The results were encouraging: participants found that they experienced forty-six per cent fewer interruptions, and nearly sixty per cent felt more productive while using the light. Fritz noted that about fifty employees initially signed up for the study, but the device quickly proved so popular that more than four hundred subjects eventually signed on. A commercial version is “in the works,” Fritz said.

The study mentions that the device took some getting used to. For a while, it prompted more conversations than it dissuaded. As one subject told the researchers, “People walk by, they see it, they ask me questions: ‘What’s that? How does it work? What’s going on?’ ” Fritz conceded that there are ways to game the device, to make you look busy when you aren’t, but his bigger concern was the opposite: preventing managers from using the FlowLight to track their employees’ productivity, which might trigger a red-light arms race among workers. So the device is programmed to be red for no more than nine per cent of the user’s workday, based on another study that found that workers are in the uninterruptible zone for only eighteen per cent of their workday anyway. “We wanted to avoid creating any competition between people,” Fritz said. Because, you know, despite the invisibility cloak you think you’re wearing, the boss is always watching.|||

Alan Burdick discusses the FlowLight, a device for signalling to your co-workers when you’re busy, and what it tells us about the human need to hide.