The process of taking existing technology and re-branding it into something different is becoming increasingly popular among startups. Smart phones and tablets are now forever ingrained into our society, and during the last two decades alone, have given birth to the application industry, which is now worth $77 billion. While the process of programming and app development is becoming more accessible and cheaper than ever before, there is also more competition to contend with. While utilizing ready-made applications may seem counter-productive when starting a new business, if executed correctly, this approach can be a viable way to get a foothold in the marketplace.

Take a look at a few of today's most popular applications: Telegram is a clone of Whatsapp, Vimeo is a clone of YouTube, Alibaba is a clone of Amazon, and the list goes on... None of these couplings are doing anything different from each other, they simply have alternative branding – the originals are broad while the clones (2nd tier) are niche. For example, YouTube is an all rounder, while Vimeo is geared towards filmmakers.

If you can address the branding of your clone app properly, there's no reason why you can't launch a successful 2nd tier application of your own.

You simply cannot compete with some of the big players on a broad scale, but you can certainly compete with them on a niche scale. It's all about finding an untapped opportunity that the larger corporations aren't covering, and then filling the gap. For example, Uber may have a worldwide presence, particularly in big cities, but what if you could take the platform and set up a local Uber clone in your own town?

Services such as Appoets make this entire process extremely simple. Just look at how many clones of Tinder have popped up since it took the helm as the world's most active dating app. Applications that use the same “swipe right” platform are becoming a universal standard; however, there are still plenty of niche groups out there that are yet to acquire their own platform. Find one and you'll start your business half way down the sales funnel from the get-go.

App cloning is faster than outright creation, often taking just a matter of weeks (sometimes days) to launch. In addition, there are less unknowns. You simply use a template that has already located and solved any problems. Beyond changing the color scheme, logos and logistical elements (prices, terms and conditions, etc.) you'll need to do very little.

Cloning is an excellent way to get started, but it's not a shortcut to the big leagues as you will always be number two to the original. But you should never go into business with the intention of completing with the creators anyway as they are not your prime competition – the other clones are. In fact, many developers regard the niche clones of their broad app as a benefit as it's a way for them to test new markets for free, and then buy-out the successes.

For example, in 1999 the Samwer Brothers from Germany created the first Ebay clone (Alando.de). Within 100 days of launching its popularity soared and it was sold to Ebay for $50 million. A similar situation occurred in Sweden with a website called Tradera, which also sold to Ebay for $50 million in 2006. In both instances it was a win-win for all involved parties: the clone developers used an existing platform to build a sustainable business model and Ebay managed to break into new territories as a dominant force without having to undertake a marketing campaign or battle the competition.

App cloning may sound simple – and the process is – but just like any other business, it still requires diligence and hard work. While it can certainly ease pressure in the early stages of development, it's the marketing plan that will have the biggest impact on the app's success.|||

The process of taking existing technology and re-branding it into something different is becoming increasingly popular among startups. Smart phones and t...