Learning to code has slowly become a valuable asset. Regardless of your profession, understanding coding and technology is a valuable asset.

Technology and coding are the base for innovation in almost all industries.

Today’s marketplace is looking for multidisciplinary people. Place yourself in the next 5 years. Nobody is looking just for a skill, but for a complex person who will know how to apply cross-domain knowledge.

Opportunity and learning start from curiosity. When you follow your curiosities, you will bring passion which will leave you more fulfilled. And by doing more than one job, you may end up doing all of them better. Nothing works without being a bit nosy. It makes you want to make things happen, examine, refine and repeat the process. Risk being curious and take action!

So, with that in mind, let’s run through 50 of the best resources when learning to code.

Their online courses offer tons of subjects (as their front page says, “You can learn anything”), including many on computer programming. A few courses are offered for younger kids, too.

Entirely free, though you have the option to donate. Based on interactive tutorials, where you read a lesson and type in code. Lastly, “run” it. RubyMonk has one beginner course option, two intermediate, and one advanced.

CodeAcademy is where most people who are new to coding get their start. The platform revolves around interactive learning; that is, you read a little, type you code right into the browser, and see results immediately.

Topics taught: HTML & CSS, JavaScript, PHP, Python, Ruby, Angularjs, The Command Line, and more

It teaches coding first through an established curriculum (approx. 800 hours total). Then, it gives you a hands-on experience working on projects for nonprofits.

CodeWars offers a fun way to learn coding. With a martial-arts theme, the program is based on challenges called “kata.” Complete them to earn honors and get to higher ranks.

An interactive way to learn Ruby on Rails right in your browser. (This is a better choice for people who know some Ruby already.) Created by Code School.

CodeBar’s goal is to enable underrepresented groups to learn how to code. They do this by offering free weekly workshops and events. Keep in mind that Codebar events are based in UK.

Their aim is to provide women with tools and a community where they can better understand how technology works and how they can build their ideas. They do this by providing great tutorials about building things and by making technology more approachable.

Learn sketching, prototyping, basic programming and get introduced to the world of technology!

Udemy is an online learning platform. It is aimed at professional adults who want to add new skills to their resumes, or explore their passions. They have paid and free courses on a variety of subjects including coding.

Large online course library, where classes are taught by real university professors. All courses are free of charge, but you have the option to pay for a “Coursera Verified Certificate” to prove course completion.

A good way for you to start learning to code is going to events & conferences. Here are some offline things you can do:

This is one of the most interesting ways to learn. Reach out to valuable people in your area and get some of them to mentor you. A mentor can help you with knowledge and intro to other professionals.

Use Meetup app to find events and groups of people interested in same subjects as you.

Hackathons provide a venue for self-expression and creativity through technology. People with technical backgrounds come together, form teams around a problem or idea, and code an unique solution from scratch — these generally take the shape of websites, mobile apps, and robots.

Just google TechHub or “coworking hub” and see what you’ve got in your area. It might be the ideal place to find and participate to interesting events, meet new people and, of course, learn to code.

The internship possibilities in this field are endless. Job portals posts a lot of offerings and there are specific groups on Facebook and LinkedIn where you can find all sorts of internships.

This is one of the largest open source community in the world. You can contribute to projects, track the progress and build on great ideas.

Gitter is a chat and networking platform that helps you manage, grow and connect communities through messaging, content and discovery.

Stack Overflow is the largest online community for programmers to learn, share their knowledge, and advance their careers.

Stack Exchange is a network of question-and-answer websites on topics in varied fields, each site covering a specific topic. Questions, answers, and users are subject to a reputation award process.

Twitter is an awesome resource for finding and approaching experts in your field. There are thousands of talented and insightful developers there. If you don’t know who to follow yet, no problem! You can find online lists with influencers (like this one) or you can make a search using tags like #developer.

My recommendation here would be to follow leaders in your niche and stay up-to-date about the latest technologies and practices.

Reddit is also a great community to find topics and interacting with people.

For example, /r/web_design is the place for exploration and discovery of all things web design, development and the life cycle of the web designer. They welcome beginners and veterans alike to contribute with useful and informative posts, ask questions or engage in discussion.

Hacker News is a social news website focusing on computer science and entrepreneurship. It is run by Paul Graham’s investment fund and startup incubator, Y Combinator. In general, content that can be submitted is defined as “anything that gratifies one’s intellectual curiosity”.

Designer News is a community of people working in design and technology. It’s been around since Dec 31, 2012 as a place to discuss and share interesting things in our industry.

Product Hunt surfaces the best new products, every day. It’s a place for product-loving enthusiasts to share and geek out about the latest mobile apps, websites, hardware projects, and tech creations.

Dribbble is a community of designers showing off their latest work. Web designers, graphic designers, illustrators, icon artists, typographers, logo designers, and other creative types share small screenshots (shots) that show their work, process, and current projects.

The leading online platform to showcase & discover creative work. The creative world updates their work in one place to broadcast it widely and efficiently. Companies explore the work and access talent on a global scale.

Quora is a place to gain and share knowledge. It’s a platform to ask questions and connect with people who contribute with unique insights and quality answers.

Don’t forget to read. Read about what a sprint means, what a lean startup is, how to make lean development.

If you’re planning on taking part in one of the coolest projects you’ll just have to get the big picture first.

Keeping strong relationships with those around will make your life easier. Below you’ll find a list of books which I consider very useful for understanding the business environment and also tips on how to relate to people:

37. Zero to One

With many awesome online resources, especially video tutorials, learning to code has never been easier.

Learn how to build websites and apps, write code, or start a business. Learn from over 1,000 videos created by expert teachers on web design, coding, business, and much more.

The Google Developers channel offers lessons, talks, the latest news & best practices. Learn Android, Chrome, Web Development, Polymer, Performance, iOS & more!

This is the home for Android Developers Live videos from live events, as well as for videos containing demos, tutorials, and anything else related to Android development.

They publish “creative coding” video tutorials every week. Subjects covered range from the basics of programming languages like JavaScript (with p5.js) and Java (with Processing) to generative algorithms like physics simulation, computer vision, and data visualization.

Here is a a collection of TED Talks (and more) on the topic of programming:

When you don’t know where to start, open-source projects are a great way to begin. Searching for open-source projects is great because you’ll have to opportunity to interact with huge developers and learn how to write code in the right way.

Fun Fact: The whole code for Gov.UK and Rails is open-sourced on Github. Here are some places with open-source projects:|||

Learning to code has slowly become a valuable asset. Regardless of your profession, understanding coding and technology is a valuable asset. Today’s marketplace is looking for multidisciplinary…