NASA has announced a public challenge for anyone interested in vintage computer programming. The agency wants to award anyone who can quicken the software it uses to design experimental aircraft, known as X-planes. Just beware, the code is in Fortran, which dates back to 1950s.

The agency is hoping that someone can manipulate its FUN3D design software—which was born in the 1980s—so it runs ten to 10,000 times faster on the Pleiades supercomputer without any decrease in accuracy. The Pleiades was recently crucial to the mapping of a massive wave of hot gas twice the size of our galaxy, the Milky Way.

NASA is looking to improve its handling of computational fluid dynamics, which involves applied mathematics, physics and computational software to visualize how a gas or liquid flows."This challenge is specifically targeted to speed up the CFD portion of our aerospace research," said Michael Hetle, program executive at NASA's Transformative Aeronautics Concepts Program. "Some concepts are just so complex, it's difficult for even the fastest supercomputers to analyze these models in real time."

In a press release, the agency describes "simplifying a single subroutine so that it runs a few milliseconds faster" as one ideal outcome. Performed millions of times over and over again, those miliseconds would end up shaving a noticeable amount of time off calculations.

There are two specific competitions: one for ideation and another for architecture. There's a purse of $55,000 to be distributed among first and second finishers in the two categories. The FUN3D design software is written predominately in Modern Fortran, which refers to one of the various updated versions of the otherwise ancient language. NASA is no stranger to needing programmers with specialties in aging languages, a skill that's also crucial for keeping craft like Voyager 1 and 2 going.

The code owned by the U.S government, limiting the competition to U.S. citizens over the age of 18. You can watch the agency's introductory video for the competition below.|||

A public coding competition for a supercomputer trying to shed milliseconds.