Hello there. Let me begin by saying you’ve probably heard of Webpack by now and chances are you might know how to configure Webpack, you sir, are doing excellent. Good job, keep fighting! For the rest of us something like this might scare us off.

What the fuzz is a proxyTable anyway? Why we do need so much junk in there just to compile our stuff? We’ll don’t worry, we will start from the very beginning.

This guide is for people who might have used Webpack before, heard of it or just curious of “new” edgy web tech. Without further ado, let’s begin!

Webpack is just another evolving step in the tooling ecosystem. First there was Grunt. Compiling SCSS into CSS looked like this:

Pretty verbose. Suddenly Grunt dropped the momentum ball and Gulp picked it up thanks to easier configuration. It looks like this.

Gulp is pretty good. It’s a good choice for easier projects no doubt.

Here we are. We have a tough choice and we cannot delay learning Webpack any longer. Currently most of employers expect you to know Webpack if you’re aiming for a mid/senior Single page application frontend developer position. I will try to make this as easy as possible.

Things we are going to need for Webpack are the following:

Basic knowledge of Nodejs

NPM

Basic knowledge of terminal

Text editor. (Any will do)

*nix type of operating system (Mac or Linux)

After your installation, head over to your terminal and type:

Congratulations, you have Nodejs installed! Now wasn’t that easy?

NPM comes with Nodejs. NPM stands for Node Package Manager. NPM basically allows you to use existing code people wrote for you!

Lets start by making a new project. You can name it anything you wish.

Alright. So we made our project. What next? Navigate to the project and let’s initialise (fancy word for starting) a brand new Nodejs project.

So what’s this? First of all we navigated to the project folder/directory. After that we started up a Nodejs project. This is the basic configuration file.

Read more about package.json if you feel curious — and you should, don’t be shy!

The reason why I’m not typing the commands out is because I want you to think along and write out every command yourself! :)

We also need our index.html, webpack.conf.js and index.js file(s). So let’s make them!

It’s time to bring out the big guns and open the project with your preferred text editor. Our project should look like this. If it does, alright take a coffee break, you deserved it. We will finally start make sense of all of this and work our way to Webpack.|||

Hello there. Let me begin by saying you’ve probably heard of Webpack by now and chances are you might know how to configure Webpack, you sir, are doing excellent. Good job, keep fighting! For the…