Most of the data here has been accumulated by the author as various problems relating to the operation of NT 4.0 Workstation were diagnosed and rectified. As such, much of the material presented primarily deals with NT 4.0 Workstation, although in most cases it would be equally relevant in a NT 4.0 Server environment.

I have primarily concentrated on the operation of the OS itself, so problems relating to interaction / performance of applications running on NT 4.0 are not extensively detailed here.

This site contains lots of links to specific files and pages on other web sites on the net. Whilst I attempt to ensure that all the links function correctly, as you can appreciate, the net is a dynamic place and files often get removed, renamed or relocated. If you encounter a 'dead link', have additional information, or believe you have found an error or omission in this site, please contact the author (Calvin) at info@zcm.com.au

Also be aware that ANY file downloaded from the internet poses a security risk to your system. Take all normal steps that you employ when dealing with material of unknown origin. The minimum expected safety procedure would be scanning the files with an up-to-date virus scanner before use. Click on the map above for a larger view - Courtesy of ClustrMaps. 1800+ site hits per month says Microsoft is WRONG and NT 4.0 is NOT obsolete !

NT4Ref has been viewed by users in over 100 countries worldwide ! NT 4.0 Service Pack and Hotfixes Reference.

Cleaning Up a System After Hotfixes / Service Packs.

Making the Latest Hotfixes Work on Workstation. Software Power Off on Windows NT 4.0

Power Management and Laptop PCs Running NT 4.0 Links to Other Useful NT 4.0 Sites, Software and Tools. All promotional photographs and advertising material, corporate names and logos, product names, trade names, trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners, and are acknowledged as such. This site is maintained by ZCM Services, Australia. Whilst every care is taken in the preparation of this information, I accept no responsibility for errors or omissions. Use the information presented on this site AT YOUR OWN RISK.|||

