A zero-config development setup is provided, but nwb also supports configuration and plugin modules which add extra functionality (e.g. Sass support), should you need them

Installing globally provides an command for working with projects and , and commands for quick development:

To use nwb's tooling in a project, install it as a and use commands in :

For quick development with React, Inferno or Preact, use the global , or commands.

See Quick Development with nwb for a more detailed guide.

Use to create a React app skeleton, preconfigured with npm scripts which use for development:

Open localhost:3000, start editing the code and changes will be hot-reloaded into the running app.

will run the app's tests and will create a production build.

See Developing React Apps with nwb for a more detailed guide.

npm scripts are as above for React apps.

Use to create an Inferno app skeleton:

npm scripts are as above for React apps.

will run a demo app you can use to develop your component or library against.

will run the project's tests and will create ES5, ES6 modules and UMD builds for publishing to npm.

See Developing React Components and Libraries with nwb for a more detailed guide.

will run the project's tests and will create ES5, ES6 modules and UMD builds for publishing to npm.

Get started quickly. Start developing from a single file or generate a project skeleton.

Covers the whole development cycle. Development tools, testing and production builds for projects work out of the box, no configuration required.

Flexible. While everything works out of the box, you can also use an optional configuration file to tweak things to your liking.

Manages key development dependencies and configuration for you. Check out an example of the effect using nwb had on the amount of and configuration to be managed in a real project it was dropped into.|||

nwb - A toolkit for React, Preact & Inferno apps, React libraries and other npm modules for the web, with no configuration (until you need it)