THE REAL ORIGINAL BATCAVE! – FIREBALL MALIBU VLOG 598 – Fireball, Ken and Kathie head to Bronson Canyon to visit the real original Batcave from the 1966 Batman TV Series. Also, climb to the peak of the Hollywood Sign!

From Wiki… The BATCAVE is a fictional subterranean location appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics. It is the secret headquarters of the superhero Batman, the alternate identity of playboy Bruce Wayne, consisting of a series of subterranean caves typically depicted as being beneath his residence, Wayne Manor.

The 1960s live-action Batman TV series featured the Batcave extensively, and portrayed it as a large but well-lit cavern containing an atomic power generator, a chemistry lab, punch-card computers, and other electronic crime-fighting devices, almost always prominently labeled with their function.

In this incarnation, it primarily served as a crime lab and garage for the Batmobile. Perhaps the most famous aspect of this Batcave is that it is accessed from Wayne Manor via two Bat-Poles (one marked BRUCE and the other marked DICK), which are hidden behind a bookcase that can be opened by turning a switch hidden inside a bust of Shakespeare.

The actual cave that the Batmobile is shown emerging from (and sometimes entering) in the TV show is located in the man-made filming location known as the “Bronson Caves,” in Griffith Park, below the Hollywood Sign.

The HOLLYWOOD SIGN (formerly the Hollywoodland Sign) is a landmark and American cultural icon located in Los Angeles, California. It is situated on Mount Lee, in the Hollywood Hills area of the Santa Monica Mountains. The sign overlooks Hollywood, Los Angeles.

“HOLLYWOOD” is spelled out in 45-foot (13.7 m)-tall white capital letters and is 350 feet (106.7 m) long. It was originally created in 1923 as an advertisement for a local real estate development, but it garnered increasing recognition after the sign was left up.

The sign was a frequent target of pranks and vandalism, but it has since undergone restoration, including the installation of a security system to deter vandalism. The sign is protected and promoted by The Trust For Public Land, a nonprofit organization, while its site and the surrounding land are part of Griffith Park.|||

THE REAL ORIGINAL BATCAVE REVEALED! - FIREBALL MALIBU VLOG