I recently saw a post on Hacker News: “Build yourself a Linux”, a cool project that guides you through building a simple Linux system. It’s similar to Linux from Scratch in that it helps you build a simple Linux system for personal use. I’d like to supplement this with some insight into my experience with a more difficult task: building a full blown Linux distribution. The result is agunix, the “silver unix” system.

For many years I’ve been frustrated with every distribution I’ve tried. Many of them have compelling features and design, but there’s always a catch. The popular distros are stable and portable, but cons include bloat, frequent use of GNU, systemd, and often apt. Some more niche distros generally have good points but often have some combination of GNU, an init system I don’t like, poor docs, dynamic linking, or an overall amateurish or incomplete design. Many of them are tolerable, but none have completely aligned with my desires.

I’ve also looked at not-Linux - I have plenty of beefs with the Linux kernel. I like the BSD kernels, but I dislike the userspaces (though NetBSD is pretty good) I like the microkernel design of Minix, but it’s too unstable and has shit hardware support. plan9/9front has the most elegant kernel and userspace design ever made, but it’s not POSIX and has shit hardware support. Though none of these userspaces are for me, I intend to attempt a port of the agunix userspace to all of their kernels at some point (a KFreeBSD port is underway).

After trying a great number of distros and coming away with a kind of dissatisfaction unique to each one, I resolved to make a distro that embodied my own principles about userspace design. It turns out this is a ton of work - here’s how it’s done.

Let’s distinguish a Linux “system” from a Linux “distribution”. A Linux system is anything that boots up from the Linux kernel. A Linux distribution, on the other hand, is a Linux system that can be distributed to end users. It’s this sort of system that I wanted to build. In my opinion, there are two core requirements for a Linux system to become a Linux distribution:

The first order of business in creating a Linux distro is to fulfill these two requirements. Getting to this stage is called bootstrapping your distribution - everything else can come later. To do this, you’ll need to port your package manager to your current system, and start building the base packages with it. If your new distro doesn’t use the same architecture or libc as your current system, you also need to build a cross compiler and use it for building your new packages.

My initial approach was different - I used my cross compiler to fill up a chroot with software without using my package manager, hoping to later bootstrap from it. I used this approach on my first 3 attempts before deciding to make base packages on the host system instead. With this approach, I started by building packages that weren’t necessarily self hosting - they used the host-specific cross compiler builds and such - but produced working packages for the new environment. I built packages for:

I also had to package all of the dependencies for these. Once I had a system that was reasonably capable of compiling arbitrary software, I transferred my PKGBUILDs (scripts used to build packages) to my chroot and started tweaking them to re-build packages from the new distro itself. This process took months to get completely right - there are tons of edge cases and corner cases. Simply getting this software to run in a new Linux system is only moderately difficult - getting a system that can build itself is much harder. I was successful on my 4th attempt, but threw it out and redid it to get a cleaner distribution with the benefit of hindsight. This became agunix.

Once you reach this stage you can go ham on making packages for your system. The next step for me was graduating from a chroot to dedicated hardware. I built out an init system with runit and agunix-init and various other packages that are useful on a proper install. I also compiled a kernel without support for loadable modules (on par with the static linking theme of agunix). If you make your own Linux distribution you will probably have to figure out modules yourself, likely implicating something like eudev. Eventually, I was able to get agunix running on my laptop, which has now become my primary agunix dev machine (often via SSH from my dev desktop).

The next stage for me was getting agunix.org up and running on agunix. I deliberately chose not to have a website until it could be hosted on agunix itself. I deployed agunix to a VPS, then ported nginx and put the website up. The rest of the infrastructure was a bit more difficult: cgit took me about 10 packages of work, and bugzilla was about 100 packages of work. Haven’t started working on mailman yet.

Then begins the eternal packaging phase. At this point you’ve successfully made a Linux distribution, and now you just need to fill it with packages. This takes forever. I have made 407 packages to date and I still don’t have a desktop to show for it (I’m almost there, just have to make a few dozen more packages before sway will run). At this point to have success you need others to buy into your ideas and start contributing - it’s impossible to package everything yourself. Speaking of which, check out agunix.org and see if you like it! I haven’t been doing much marketing for this distro yet, but I do have a little bit of help. If you’re interested in contributing in a new distro, we have lots of work for you to do!|||

I recently saw a post on Hacker News: “Build yourself a Linux”, a cool project that guides you through building a simple Linux system. It’s similar to Linux from Scratch in that it helps you build a simple Linux system for personal use. I’d like to supplement this with some insight into my experience with a more difficult task: building a full blown Linux distribution. The result is agunix, the “silver unix” system.