Miami, FL (Law Firm Newswire) May 3, 2017 – May is National Cystic Fibrosis Awareness Month, which is promoted by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF). The foundation raises funds for future research and provides people with information about any advancements that are being made toward a cure.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a life-threatening genetic disease that impacts the digestive and respiratory systems. Cystic fibrosis occurs in approximately one in 3,500 live births. About 30,000 people in the United States are afflicted with the illness. Although they exhibit no symptoms, more than 10 million people carry the defective gene.

Prominent South Florida personal injury attorneys Chalik & Chalik Injury Lawyers stated, “Cystic fibrosis can qualify as a birth injury if physicians neglect to perform screenings of the newborn for the disease and, as a result, they fail to provide medical treatment. It can also occur if a woman received eggs, sperm or an embryo that was not screened for cystic fibrosis. This is referred to as a wrongful pregnancy.”

At one time, CF was believed to affect children exclusively. However, due to medical breakthroughs in CF research and care, those who have the disease are living well into their 30s, 40s and beyond. The main symptom of CF is the creation of a thick, sticky mucus, which obstructs the lungs, causing constant coughing and recurrent lung infections, which can be lethal. The mucus can also block the pancreas, and prevent natural enzymes from breaking down.

As there is less absorption of food by the body, complications can emerge, such as deficient growth and weight gain. Stools are frequently greasy and heavy, and there can be issues concerning bowel movements. Since the majority of babies now undergo screenings for CF, the awareness campaigns mainly address providing support for treatments and discovering a cure.

The principal awareness and fund-raising event of cystic fibrosis is called “Great Strides.” This is where people walk at one of several organized events across the United States. At one such event in 2011, participants raised more than $38 million.

Given the prevalence of multimedia, the CFF has used the latest technologies to increase awareness of cystic fibrosis. The foundation provides a new iPhone app that can be downloaded from the iTunes App store. The app serves to inform those who have an interest in volunteering for the CFF as well as new donors, regarding cystic fibrosis and the foundation.

See other news sources publishing this article. BETA ||||

Chalik & Chalik Injury Lawyers Miami, FL (Law Firm Newswire) May 3, 2017 – May is National Cystic Fibrosis Awareness