The AI Optify data team writes about topics that we think modern software engineers will love. AI Optify has affiliate partnerships so we may get a share of the revenue from your purchase.- For this post, we have scraped various signals (e.g. reviews sentiments, online ratings, topics covered in the book, author influence in the field, year of publication, social media signals, etc.) from web for more than 50's Python books. We have fed all above signals to a trained Machine Learning algorithm to compute a score for each book and rank the top books.

The readers will love our list because it is Data-Driven & Objective. Enjoy the list:

Get a comprehensive, in-depth introduction to the core Python language with this hands-on book. Based on author Mark Lutz’s popular training course, this updated fifth edition will help you quickly write efficient, high-quality code with Python. It’s an ideal way to begin, whether you’re new to programming or a professional developer versed in other languages.

This is the second edition of John Zelle's Python Programming, updated for Python 3. This book is designed to be used as the primary textbook in a college-level first course in computing. It takes a fairly traditional approach, emphasizing problem solving, design, and programming as the core skills of computer science. However, these ideas are illustrated using a non-traditional language, namely Python.

3. Automate the Boring Stuff with Python: Practical Programming for Total Beginners 

 $25.45 In Automate the Boring Stuff with Python, you'll learn how to use Python to write programs that do in minutes what would take you hours to do by hand—no prior programming experience required. Once you've mastered the basics of programming, you'll create Python programs that effortlessly perform useful and impressive feats of automation

If you are new to programming with Python and are looking for a solid introduction, this is the book for you. Developed by computer science instructors, books in the "for the absolute beginner" series teach the principles of programming through simple game creation. You will acquire the skills that you need for practical Python programming applications and will learn how these skills can be put to use in real-world scenarios. Throughout the chapters, you will find code samples that illustrate concepts presented. At the end of each chapter, you will find a complete game that demonstrates the key ideas in the chapter, a summary of the chapter, and a set of challenges that tests your newfound knowledge.

5. Learn Python in One Day and Learn It Well 

 $11.67 The best way to learn Python is by doing. This book includes a complete project at the end of the book that requires the application of all the concepts taught previously. Working through the project will not only give you an immense sense of achievement, it"ll also help you retain the knowledge and master the language.

6. Python Programming for Beginners: An Introduction to the Python Computer Language and Computer Programming 

 $20.90 Python Programming for Beginners doesn't make any assumptions about your background or knowledge of Python or computer programming. You need no prior knowledge to benefit from this book. You will be guided step by step using a logical and systematic approach. As new concepts, commands, or jargon are encountered they are explained in plain language, making it easy for anyone to understand.

Updated for both Python 3.4 and 2.7, this convenient pocket guide is the perfect on-the-job quick reference. You’ll find concise, need-to-know information on Python types and statements, special method names, built-in functions and exceptions, commonly used standard library modules, and other prominent Python tools. The handy index lets you pinpoint exactly what you need.

Python – The Comprehensive Guide to Python Programming for Beginners is the book you’ve been waiting for! It includes thorough, complete instructions for all of the basic aspects of Python. You’ll undertake a variety of exercises, but don’t worry – the answers are in the back!

Python Essential Reference is the definitive reference guide to the Python programming language — the one authoritative handbook that reliably untangles and explains both the core Python language and the most essential parts of the Python library. Designed for the professional programmer, the book is concise, to the point, and highly accessible. It also includes detailed information on the Python library and many advanced subjects that is not available in either the official Python documentation or any other single reference source.

In Learn Python the Hard Way, Third Edition, you'll learn Python by working through 52 brilliantly crafted exercises. Read them. Type their code precisely. (No copying and pasting!) Fix your mistakes. Watch the programs run. As you do, you'll learn how software works; what good programs look like; how to read, write, and think about code; and how to find and fix your mistakes using tricks professional programmers use.

Python Crash Course is a fast-paced, thorough introduction to programming with Python that will have you writing programs, solving problems, and making things that work in no time. In the first half of the book, you'll learn about basic programming concepts, such as lists, dictionaries, classes, and loops, and practice writing clean and readable code with exercises for each topic. In the second half of the book, you'll put your new knowledge into practice with three substantial projects.

This book contains proven steps and strategies to learn the essentials of Python Programming. It highlights the important concepts that every beginner to intermediate programmer should know and presents relevant and practical examples. It aims to provide a solid foundation for people who want to start a career in Python Programming. This book is a must for programming enthusiasts or students who need to learn and understand Python easily, quickly, and methodically.

Are you ready to enhancing your computer experience? Learn how to hack into your windows computer! "HACKING: Learn Hacking FAST! Ultimate Coursebook for Beginners" provides hacking tutorials, resources, and brief in-depth hacking information that will take your computer usage experience to the next level.

Violent Python shows you how to move from a theoretical understanding of offensive computing concepts to a practical implementation. Instead of relying on another attacker’s tools, this book will teach you to forge your own weapons using the Python programming language. This book demonstrates how to write Python scripts to automate large-scale network attacks, extract metadata, and investigate forensic artifacts. It also shows how to write code to intercept and analyze network traffic using Python, craft and spoof wireless frames to attack wireless and Bluetooth devices, and how to data-mine popular social media websites and evade modern anti-virus.

If you need help writing programs in Python 3, or want to update older Python 2 code, this book is just the ticket. Packed with practical recipes written and tested with Python 3.3, this unique cookbook is for experienced Python programmers who want to focus on modern tools and idioms.

If you want to find out how to use Python to start answering critical questions of your data, pick up Python Machine Learning – whether you want to get started from scratch or want to extend your data science knowledge, this is an essential and unmissable resource.

It's easy to start writing code with Python: that's why the language is so immensely popular. However, Python has unique strengths, charms, and expressivity that can be hard to grasp at first -- as well as hidden pitfalls that can easily trip you up if you aren't aware of them. Effective Python will help you harness the full power of Python to write exceptionally robust, efficient, maintainable, and well-performing code. Utilizing the concise, scenario-driven style pioneered in Scott Meyers's best-selling Effective C++, Brett Slatkin brings together 59 Python best practices, tips, shortcuts, and realistic code examples from expert programmers.

When it comes to creating powerful and effective hacking tools, Python is the language of choice for most security analysts. But just how does the magic happen? In Black Hat Python, the latest from Justin Seitz (author of the best-selling Gray Hat Python), you'll explore the darker side of Python's capabilities—writing network sniffers, manipulating packets, infecting virtual machines, creating stealthy trojans, and more.

Did you know websites like YouTube and Dropbox use Python in their source code? Python is a vast language which is easy to understand and apply. You can develop almost anything using Python. Most of the operating systems (Mac, Linux, UNIX, etc.) other than windows have python installed by default. It is an open source and free language. In this book, you're going to learn this awesome code language and apply it in real life.

21. Python Programming: Learn Python Today! - Coding & Programming For Beginners (Java, Html, C++, Adwords, Programming C, , PHP, Website Design Book 1) 

 $11.47 In this Expanded 2nd Edition of Python Programming: Learn Python Today! - Coding & Programming for Beginners, you’ll discover how easy it is to use this popular and versatile language. Named after Monty Python, this software is used for everything from testing microchips to powering major websites and video games. The syntax of this language is easy-to-understand and it also features a large standard library.

22. PYTHON: Fundamental Hints and Tips to Kick Start Your Python Skills 

 $9.38 In the world of computer programming there is a fun programming language that is popular in many of the things that we use today. Its name is Python. And if you are considering learning this programming language, then this is a book you can’t afford to miss! In my newest book, Python: Fundamental hints and tips to kick start your Python skills, I will put you in line with any other seasoned programmer. I will show you the ins and outs of Python, take you through your first program, and then give you hints and tricks to keep you ahead of the game.|||

Top 25 Python Programming Books