I’m fascinated by the things humans choose to discuss. Even among close friends, there are topics to which we regularly return. I’ve taken note recently of a particular topic that’s a favorite among my friends who run startups. And, taken without context, it would make all of our investors collectively cringe.

In almost every conversation I have with another CEO or founder, at some point someone brings up thinking about leaving their company. The immediacy of the discussion ranges from ‘I’m so fucking burned out I don’t know if I can do this for another quarter’ to ‘when we hit [insert X milestone] I’m going to hire my replacement’.

Of course, it’s part of mature leadership to contemplate succession planning. And in most companies there comes a time when the natural evolution of leadership is the appropriate thing. But these conversations happen with such regularity I’m convinced there’s more to it than we might care to admit.

What I’ve been wondering about recently is the why. Why do we work so hard to build something from nothing, to against all odds after years of iteration get something out in the world that people actually love and use, only to spend a significant portion of our time daydreaming about getting the fuck out?

I’ve come up with two drivers for me:

1. Startups are fucking uncomfortable. 

2. Our identities are all wrapped up in the outcome.

Discomfort is a daily part of life running a startup. I’m not talking about the physical discomfort of long hours or daily stress. Contrary to popular myth, I see very few startups where the hours are any longer than any other businesses. I’m referring to the personal and collective existential strain of trying to keep something on life support for years. Even when a company is richly funded and ‘working,’ thoughtful leaders live with the knowledge the thing they’re working on is in mortal danger.

In my early years as a CEO, I thought this was unique to the early stage. I figured there was some milestone just around the next bend where I’d finally feel safe. As my company matured, and as I became friends with people running much later stage businesses, I learned this never goes away. 

Look at Uber today. You think Travis isn’t sweating the fear that the whole thing, his life’s great work, the company that’s thrust him into the international spotlight, could implode? You think the Pinterest founders aren’t worried the whole platform might not find it’s sustainable revenue engine and path to long-term financial stability? Even in the successful outliers, the angst is real. And permanent.

If you’re running one of these damned things, the result is you live your life with this ever-present discomfort. And humans dislike discomfort. We’ve evolved by avoiding things that cause us pain and pursuing things that cause us ease and pleasure. Of course, we do things in life that are long-term bets on a sustained increase in pleasure. But maintaining that perspective for years, while running a business ten hours a day, is fucking hard.

On my better days, I’ve learned like yogis do to use the discomfort as a source of personal growth. To accept that it’s there and not wish it away at every waking hour. To use my startup as a forcing function that gets me to put in the work to be present, healthy, and happy even with discomfort present. But, frequently, I’m not so aware. I just want the discomfort gone. So I daydream about the day it will be. And I watch all my friends do exactly the same thing.

The second reason relates more to identity.

I’d like to tell you I started a company because I had this undeniable vision for the future and the way the world might be and I just had to set out to make it happen. And yes, there was some altruism in my desire to leave a mark on the world. But I’ve also realized a lot of my reason for starting a company had more to do with my big fucking ego. And not the ‘I’m so great people should work for me’ kind of ego ; it was more the ‘I’m going to prove to [the world, my father, those kids who were mean to me in grade-school] that I’m [great, lovable, worthy of respect] .

There are dozens of problems with leading from a place of ego-search. Most I’ll leave for another time. The one I have in mind today is practical. If you’re going to prove it by the size of the outcome, building a real company is one long fucking road to proving your worth.

I have friends that have been running their businesses for 5–10 years. Some have raised tens of millions of dollars. And most still have no certainty the business will survive or that they’ll ever see a dime from it. This is one of the many unspoken realities of building venture-backed startups. If you’re waiting on the outcome to measure your self-worth, you’re waiting a long time and are likely pretty miserable much of the way. It’s not sustainable. When you tie your self-worth to the outcome and combine it with the uncertainty that’s core to the DNA of a startup, you will want out. And since most of us do that, most of us daydream about getting the fuck out.

Five years into doing this, I know full well how difficult and uncomfortable it is to run a startup. I know there are easier, more certain ways of accruing wealth. I’m aware I won’t know for years whether this company makes any lasting contribution to the question ‘who was Matt Munson’ that may or may not linger after I’m gone. I’m well past my initial four-year vesting schedule. I put in my time as a founding CEO and could hand over the reigns. My investors and board members wouldn’t love it — but they are amazing humans who care about me as a human first and me as CEO second (they’ve proven it repeatedly over the last few years). We could hire a professional CEO, someone with more experience in scaling a company, and I could be on my way. So why am I still here?

I think the answer to that question is different for every leader. But over the last year, particularly as we went through the pain of shifting our model from sales to self-service and laid off 80% of the company, I’ve thought a lot about the answer for me.

There’s the obvious answer of commitment and loyalty. I do feel a sense of obligation to the team and to our shareholders. I want to make damned sure this company is on firm, long-term footing before I ever think about leaving. But that’s not reason enough to stay. Staying in anything purely out of a sense of obligation, whether it’s a company, a marriage, or a friendship, isn’t good for any parties involved. So why stay?

For me, I’ve realized the existential discomfort, and the ever-present ‘not knowing’ around the eventual outcome — these are the opportunity. I don’t like it. It’s not easy. This part of the job is certainly not fun per se. But it’s an opportunity.

Fighters train by getting in the ring and getting their ass kicked. They may spend months learning the basics of throwing a punch, working a punching bag, or footwork. But in the end, to really learn how to fight, they have to get in the ring. Moreover, if all you love about being a boxer is fight night, you’re going to be a terrible boxer. There are hundreds of days in the practice ring for every one big fight. And while I’m not a boxer, I can imagine the daily grind is tough. I imagine you have great days where you feel you’ve made huge strides. And just when you get confident, your next time in the ring, your surprised by an errant jab that catches you in the jaw. 

There isn’t a single day running Twenty20 that I’m not caught in the jaw by something. My team and I have made enormous strides in leadership, in finding and exploiting market opportunities, in resourcing and operating a business. But this shit is hard. And it will routinely kick your ass.

The opportunity then is not mastery. It’s a ring you can climb into daily to learn how to fight. And more than to fight, to be present, healthy, human, adult. The practice of being a startup leaders is one of returning daily to a place you know is dangerous to your sense of safety, of self, of certainty. And to go there having internalized the lessons of all the prior days. To go there having taken the steps of self-care (for me therapy, writing, meditation, exercise) so that you aren’t entering the office in a continual state of anxiety. To learn, in the midst of the discomfort, to be thoughtful, present, mindful. To be there for your team, there for your family, there for your friends and your self. The discomfort and uncertainty provide one of the greatest opportunities for growth I’ve seen in the human experience.

That’s why I stay. For me, life is about growth, adventure, and intimacy with other humans. My craft, while it promises none of the things I first thought I was looking for, provides for these refined goals in spades.

Returning in my mind to these frequent conversations around quitting, the goal that I’m left with is to shift the conversation. From here forward, when I catch myself or other founders pontificating about the day they leave their company, I want to talk instead about the why. What is it in our lives we are looking for? What is it that ’s causing us pain in our current situations? Aside from leaving the ship we worked so hard to build, is there another path to receiving the comfort, peace, sense of identity, etc. that we are needing? Is there a way we might turn our businesses, our work, into a vehicle for the very things our fantasized departure is in search of?

Wishing you peace in your own questions.|||

I’m fascinated by the things humans choose to discuss. Even among close friends, there are topics to which we regularly return. I’ve taken note recently of a particular topic that’s a favorite among…