The AI Optify data team writes about topics that we think modern software engineers will love. AI Optify has affiliate partnerships so we may get a share of the revenue from your purchase.- For this post, we have scraped various signals (e.g. online ratings/reviews, topics covered, author social influence in the field, year of publication, social media mentions, etc.) for more than 10 Go programming books from web. We have fed all above signals to a trained Machine Learning algorithm to compute a score and rank the top books.

The readers will love our list because it is Data-Driven & Objective. Enjoy the list:

The Go Programming Language is the authoritative resource for any programmer who wants to learn Go. It shows how to write clear and idiomatic Go to solve real-world problems. The book does not assume prior knowledge of Go nor experience with any specific language, so you’ll find it accessible whether you’re most comfortable with JavaScript, Ruby, Python, Java, or C++. The book features hundreds of interesting and practical examples of well-written Go code that cover the whole language, its most important packages, and a wide range of applications.

Go in Action is for any intermediate-level developer who has experience with other programming languages and wants a jump-start in learning Go or a more thorough understanding of the language and its internals. This book provides an intensive, comprehensive, and idiomatic view of Go. It focuses on the specification and implementation of the language, including topics like language syntax, Go's type system, concurrency, channels, and testing.

Dive headfirst into solving actual enterprise problems and start cutting code from the word go. You will build complete applications around a variety of subjects using a range of different technologies and techniques, all of which are directly applicable to today's tech start-up world. Scale, performance, and high availability lie at the heart of the projects, and the lessons learned throughout this book will arm you with everything you need to build world-class solutions. Well-designed applications and sensible architectures can scale horizontally to cope with the demands of up to millions of users, while avoiding the prohibitive up-front investment that can bring a project to its knees.

Perfect for beginners familiar with programming basics, this hands-on guide provides an easy introduction to Go, the general-purpose programming language from Google. Author Caleb Doxsey covers the language’s core features with step-by-step instructions and exercises in each chapter to help you practice what you learn. Go is a general-purpose programming language with a clean syntax and advanced features, including concurrency. This book provides the one-on-one support you need to get started with the language, with short, easily digestible chapters that build on one another. By the time you finish this book, not only will you be able to write real Go programs, you'll be ready to tackle advanced techniques.

5. Level Up Your Web Apps With Go: Performance, Concurrency, Scalability 

 $35 Go is an open-source language from Google that's a bit like C. Designed for programmer productivity, it's got a clean syntax, and emphasizes concurrency. This book gives you all you need to use Go in your web applications. You'll learn the basic concepts - language structures, the standard library, and Go tools - then tackle more advanced features like concurrency concepts, testing methodologies, and package structures. At each step, you'll get advice for better coding in Go. You'll see how to structure projects, how to use concurrency effectively, and best practices for testing - as well as many valuable hints and tips gleaned from real world experience of developing web applications with Go.|||

Top 5 Golang Programming Books