You know you have to optimize your app and that ASO stuff is cool but… how to do it? How to do App Store Optimization the right way to boost visibility and get downloads? This is a challenge!

Picking the right app store keywords is crucial for Search success. You should target keywords with high relevance (related to your app or game business), high traffic and low difficulty or competition.

The app keyword research process is different for each app. For example, for new apps, it’s better to use mid and long-tail low competition keywords to gradually change them with keywords with more traffic and competition.

In order to get the maximum visibility, your app or game should be global (available worldwide) with all languages “ASOptimized”.

Already have your main app store keywords defined? Go to the next step. It’s time to optimize!

Add keywords in the app name (50 characters) and keywords field (100 characters). So, a total of 150 characters, although there is a “hack” that allows using much more than 100 characters in the keywords field…

Add app keywords in the title (30 char), short description (80 char), description (4000 char). Unlike Apple, Google indexes almost all text that appears in the store listing. Google Play ASO, when it comes to Search, is much more similar to SEO than App Store ASO.

A/B test listing elements like icon (to increase CTR in lists), feature image or screenshots to boost app conversion rate and get more installs with the same traffic.

Is your app store listing ASO ready? Let’s see it!

Track your app keywords rankings and your competitors’ keywords rankings, track Top Charts rankings, organic installs (by country), app conversion rate to install, revenue from organic installs (in-app, advertising…), track your competitors updates / changes in listings (on-metadata).

The higher the rankings and the higher app conversion rate, the more downloads.|||

App Store Optimization (ASO) is the process of improving the visibility of a mobile app in the app stores to get more downloads. Learn more!