We have done some predictions using machine learning but that is not what always wins in sports analytics. It’s data analytics that people usually do when it comes to sports. Today, we’ll also be doing some sports analytics to see if we can find some weak and strong spots for a batsman on a pitch. Lets dive right in.

We will be looking at three types of visualizations for each batsman. These visualizations will be score regions in a ground, hawk eye for wickets and hawk eye for pitch regions for a batsman’s runs, wickets and strike rate.

In this post, we will look at a few batsmen of team Pakistan and see if we can find their strengths and weaknesses by making some visualizations.

Why am I making this post? This post will be showing visualizations that can help bowlers bowl at areas where a batsman is weak. I have always been a fan of planning a strategy to make a batsman out and I think such visualizations can be of great help for bowlers.

We are including each player’s ODI and T20 data in our analysis. The analysis is being done on each ball.

First of all, we will take a look at Pakistan’s openers. You might be able to observe some discrepancy in wickets and scores. That is because not all the data for a player had pitch height and side values. So the data for pitch details was less than region details. Lets see if we can find some patterns.

From this figure, we can clearly see that Ahmed Shehzad gets out most of the time at gully and silly point. If someone has seen Ahmed Shehzad batting, he/she can certainly verify that the batsman indeed gets out at cover, gully and silly point most of the time. We can also see that his strike rate is very low at cover point. This can help bowlers bowl him in these areas and get him out.

The visualizations for Hafeez look similar to Ahmed Shehzad but we can see that Hafeez is very good at Fine leg and leg. His strike rate is great and he has not gotten out many times in these areas. This indicates that a bowler should bowl a lot at fine leg or leg gully to Hafeez. Hafeez also tends to play balls that are away from the wickets and this can be seen in the pitch spots image.

Babar azam is an emerging player for Pakistan. Lets see at his visualizations to find our why he is better than other players

We can see that his visualizations are different than others. His strike rate is great in almost all the regions. He is getting out in all the regions almost the same number of times. One thing we can see from the figure in above image is that he sometimes tends to play a ball that is very away from him.

Lets go for one more player. Umar Akmal has seen a lot of ups and downs in his career. He has been very inconsistent. Lets prove these things via looking at the data.

The wickets figure shows that Umar Akmal doesn’t just play balls that are coming to the wicket. He plays balls that are everywhere. Another good thing to note here is that he is not very good with short balls. Bowlers have got him out many times by bowling short balls.

That’s all from this post. I hope you liked the visualizations. These visualizations can be extended for whole teams and players of every nation. We can also apply filters for bowlers e.g visualizations for spin bowlers and fast bowlers. A lot of stuff can be done with such visualizations.

If you have any comments, feel free to post them.|||

Finding strengths and weaknesses of players by making visualizations of their runs and wickets.