From self driving cars and deep learning algorithms all the way to facial recognition security, once again artificial intelligence is pushing the boundaries of possibility in ways that will make lives easier.

Having already made strides in machine learning and artificial intelligence has proven to the innovation community that not only can these new technologies be reliable and affordable, but they can assist in increasingly difficult competitive climates when it comes to business.

 Machine learning and analytics have become key points in the retail environment. By utilizing these technologies companies are able to adapt and better assist customers in purchasing opportunities. The importance of machine learning online comes with enabling websites/ ecommerce portals to better assist customers and provide better products related to their needs.

 “For shopping specifically, improvements to online discovery means new ways to find products you’re interested in but may not have the words for”

 – Andrew Zhai, an engineer working on Pinterest’s visual search.

 Amazon is an excellent example of how deep learning algorithms are able to assist in

 online shopping. They are consistently updating algorithms to allow shoppers to receive  relevant product listings from searches even if they might not know exactly what it is that they are looking for. It also assists in bundling products that can be helpful, meaning that if you buy a frame for a photo then it will also display results that can assist you in the process of hanging the frame, nails, a hammer etc. All of this information comes from gathering data from other peoples purchases and tying

 relevant results to one another.

 One of the other key factors that AI is enabling a true experience of is Personalization, something that everybody wants. Being able to go online and shop within an online environment that is entirely catered to your personal needs, and provides helpful solutions is something that is greatly boosting ecommerce.

 Artificial intelligence is also helping with filtering results, preventing the end user from having to dig through an entire website to find a specific product that doesn’t fall under a specific category.

In short, it is enabling dynamic filtering.

 The largest benefit that is coming from AI and machine learning in the ecommerce

 realm is that it is making the entire experience much softer on the end user. People

 don’t have to see unwanted advertising that doesn’t pertain to them, and almost all

 advertising that they do see is meticulously compiled to the point that even if someone does see an advert, they don’t feel like they are having marketing campaigns forced before them.

 While there are many concerns regarding whether or not through these innovations

 companies will lose the plot and completely dehumanize the experience, if companies integrate these systems correctly with some good customer care and some AI chatbots (For example), the benefits could be incredible.|||

Online shopping is the future in terms of customer experience, and artificial intelligence is reshaping how we deliver an exceptional experience.