Application market grows day by day and a lot of people are looking for an answer on “How much does an Application development cost?”. While world uses apps for communication, games, lifestyle, business, food, sports – creating own app is becoming extra topical.

The good news is – it isn’t really so expensive as most of us can think.

How much Mobile App will cost?

Business, sport, lifestyle, game or whatever type it could be, your application may be native, or cross-platform. It’s very important to decide this at the beginning, because it has colossal influence on your budget.

Average cost to make an app highly depends on what type of app you choose to develop.

Cross-platform apps best suit for those who want to hit large range of audience as possible from the release. It costs much less to develop and maintain while there is one team, and the single code that works for all platforms.

Meantime cross-platform apps are less optimized, lack access to various device’s APIs and can’t provide native user experience.

It’s suitable for large and heavy apps that are looking for the best user experience, better optimization and fast work. Those apps may use various device’s APIs and process wide range of features at the same time.

Native apps would be as expensive as many platforms you want to support, because more people would be involved into the app development process as well as more work should be done.

Preference of the application type may change depending on how much content and features you want them to support.

It’s important, because you can get your desired app quicker if you know what exactly you want and what type it should be. Otherwise engaging into the developing process without a good plan, likely, may cost you time and money.

So, there are next categories of applications you can create:

This app is truly easy and fast to develop and it includes very few or even no features at all. Such kind of apps are mostly developed for personal use to work various personal information and optimize it. You probably won’t find something like this in any app store.

It’s so simple that it may be described in few words. Usually it’s made to display a list of topics – by clicking on one of them user can view info about it, or open a new list.

It’s more complex than simple interaction table apps. It has massive data to operate with that stores directly on device memory (native), or on web server (dynamic). To work as desired, additional features like camera, internet connection or access to the gallery may be required.

Examples of such native apps that use device memory to store data library are various dictionaries or encyclopedias.

Examples of dynamic apps that require internet connection to function are Twitter and WhatsApp.

These types of applications access device’s performance and try to enhance its functionality. It could be camera, flashlight, alarm clock or any other function.

AlarmMon allows users to customize alarm clock, while also adding different interesting functions, like simple puzzle that should be solved to disarm the alarm.

Ink Hunter augmented reality app gives access to camera to change the marker into the selected tattoo – it helps to decide if its design fits you.

Games may be simple and may be heavy with advanced 3D graphics and physics, including wide range of different features like game center integration, global ratings, AR support, even social media integration. Obviously, a more complex game would cost more, so it’s hard to tell exactly without estimate how much to make an app may cost.

Game app is the most popular category of application worldwide and usually the most profitable one, even if they stay in free-to-play form.

Famous Angry Birds by Rovio cost near $140,000, made $70 million in first year, and now it’s worth billions.

Apps that miss all categories above, or contain functions of two and more categories. It’s impossible to set average range of prizes to them before knowing what content and features it should include.

Surely, it seems to be the most expensive choice, but the reliability is at maximum. The developer team you hired would help you get the best app from your idea. Designers, programmers, project managers – all of them are skilled and professional, moreover they are used to work in team with each other.

Most of top-chart applications in Google Play Store and Apple AppStore are developed by such kind of companies. Of course, there are indie-developed projects that hit top, but they mostly stay as an exception.

Dealing with companies that makes apps you also may get more than you even expected and would pay for. Managers that work with you try to make from your idea proper stuff and build the concept from it. They help you think through and include each scenario possible.

But there are still some moments!

Hourly rates differ extremely around the globe, while the quality of end product may be still. So, if you have a brilliant idea, good concept and clear thoughts on what you really need, there is no need to pay more, because high price doesn’t meen high quality.

For example, famous Clash of Clans was built in Western Europe.

Good freelancers still may build superior apps not worse than developer companies. They would have same quality, while cost few times cheaper. The reason why software agencies charge is so high are taxes, employment payment, office rent etc.

But the risk to mess with freelancers is still high – cheap app developers may cost you even more. And be sure to meet many problems on your way to release app.

There are even more pitfalls that may wait for your project. But no one would say that a deal with freelancers is completely a safe decision. And in the end the application you desire to create may be not the same as you expected.

Modern freelance platforms obtain different ways to gauge the performance, like ratings, reviews and past projects portfolio. But it only helps top freelancers rise hourly rate, while other app developers still don’t become more disciplined and safe.

Average freelancer rates vary as well as companies’ in matter of their location. Good platforms to find some of them are Upwork and Toptal.

As usually, while something is getting popular, people create clones out of that. If you have an idea similar to any popular app in stores there is a high chance to find the source code of it for $25-200 per licence. To be honest, it’s almost nothing compared to coding it from scratch. But you still have to customize it to avoid problems with right owners. You need designers to change how things look in the app. Also if you want to change how things work, or add something new you need to find a programmer.

Freelancer problems and cost of hiring a company remain the same, while new pitfalls arise:

If you seek exact template, or just want to check list of available ones visit Chupamobile.

If you have skills in programing and designing you may try to manage the whole project by your own. But there might be some stuff you don’t know how to do by yourself. For small payment some agencies and freelancers can consult you on what you should do.

The app to make an app sounds wonderful, especially while it does not require any knowledge of programming. Still it requires some designer skills as well as knowledge about how builder works.

But to be honest, most apps of such kind are extremely limited in options, tools and even types and genres. Meantime, in the end your desirable app may be buggy, badly optimized and lack a wide range of features you’ve planned (because app makers don’t support those).

Subscription costs to use such tools start from $10 per month, or may cost $5,000 initially.

If you plan to try yourself at game creation visit Buildbox. If it’s a simple application – visit Como.

Mostly, it isn’t an option, despite you know the programmer and designer personally, or have good relationship with developer company. Otherwise they are likely to reject your offer while it’s too risky to work with a stranger and chances of success are small.

No project, even a good planned, is safe from wrecking apart. Such kind of situation may be caused by different reasons, such as an unclear idea, inexperienced current team, or low quality work. It’s a problem, but not the critical one.

Some companies, as well as our, provide services to solve problems and save projects. It may be a bit expensive, but it’s way better than just to abandon the project with all time and money funded into it.

Even a small application should be done by a team, not by one person, so it will provide better user experience. It would be much faster and much more qualitative in the end, because everyone is engaged and responsible for their own part of the project.

Surely, complex applications require more people to be involved into the development process.

Team leader that is responsible for making an app idea concept drive into reality. The main task of PM is to prevent any miscommunications in the team, avoid pitfalls and follow the deadlines. Good PM is competitive in all aspects of the project including UX, Tech and Business analysis.

Our rate of Project manager goes from $20 per hour, depending on project complexity.

A person that is responsible for tech architecture of the project. Programmer writes code of an app, integrates it with data source and fixes bugs. While everyone in team is important, programmer is critical. Moreover, he usually needs more time in comparison to others, because he does the largest part of work.

Our rate of Programmer varies from $25 per hour, depending on the project complexity.

He works on how application interface would be laid out and how it would be felt by user. Designers solve different tasks in measure to optimize the product interface for effective and enjoyable use. He is also responsible for how it looks and feels as well as its presentation and interactivity.

Our rate of UI/UX designers varies from $15 per hour, depending on project complexity.

Quality assurance engineer monitors each part of the app creation process and controls code and design quality. He ensures that the end-product will fit all requirements of the client. Also he is responsible for a correct work of the application before it would be released to public use.

Our rates of QA engineer varies from $20 per hour.

In few words, back-end developer ensures that application, database and server communicate with each other in a right way and the whole application works correctly. He uses server side languages as PHP, Ruby or Java, and tools like MySQL and ORACLE to find, save or change data.

Our rates of Back-end developer varies from $25 per hour.

Costs to make a game would be higher in connection with the larger team requirements to build it. While the visual part of the project becomes as major as the technical code is, more people would get involved into the development process, such kind as 2D/3D designers and artists.

Also, sound gets the third place of priority in the list of game development costs. Music, sound effects and voice are also required to create a good game. So sound engineers and artists are also needed in a team.

“How much does my app development cost?” – not an easy question to any development agency or freelancer. That’s why estimate is required, because every part of the app should be included before anyone said the answer.

Meantime, some companies that have experience in application development may give roughly answers with approximate numbers and prices. So, let’s divide apps into 3 categories:

Those don’t need anything special and require just basic functions.

Average work time is up to 400 hours.

Those apps have a wide content, APIs are supported and interactive.

It’s highly interactive and has advanced functionality with complex features. It has custom app development parts, like design and some unique features. Most top-charts applications in Stores are complex whatever they look like at first sight.

Most games are complex and require additional:

It takes more than 800 hours to develop an app and 1200 hours to develop a game. Average game development cost may be two times higher than average app.

Average cost of developing an app depends directly on time required for each part and how much do app developers charge for an hour. Let’s take a closer look on app development process.

This phase consists mostly of app complexity research and creation of app development timelines. Larger project size, obviously, would drive hours up for sure. Meantime, most common factors that should be included are:

The client may also ask about more time to solve some of his own factors, like market resarch.

Average time is from 8 to 40 hours, with maximum of 200 hours.

This phase is connected with previous (research and discovery), but is mainly composed from documentation and agreements as well as project plan creation. This phase length also depends on project size and complexity, but the main factor is customer’s experience and preparedness.

While customer is not sure yet about the application idea, all its features and doesn’t have a clear vision of it, it requires more time to resolve all issues. Prepared documentation and wireframes may boost scoping process time.

Average time is from 8 to 28 hours, with maximum of 160 hours.

This step is required for designing and approving with client wireframes. Its minimal sketch models are needed for structured and layouted app screens. Time lengths may significantly increase with such factors:

Meantime, if clients have own wireframes examples, or provide certain and details requests it also may buff this phase process.

Average number of app screens is 7, and time requirements for them is from 16 to 56 hours, with maximum of 140 hours.

This phase includes the process of designing, approving and creating different images, icons, layers, etc. All those elements would become a visual shell of app in future. So, the main factors that affect terms of that step are next:

Factors that may lower time-needs are examples of applications with the same design as needed, or simple design requirements.

Average time is from 16 to 88 hours, with maximum of 200 hours.

UX design requires to ensure that the application would be easy, intuitive and enjoyable to operate. It checks logic of screen layouts and architecture. Also UX design considers standards of design to exact operating system or device.

Usually UX design doesn’t exist as a separated phase from wireframe or UI design, and performs parallel with both of them. In some cases it may be used to plan wireframe and UI validity from scratch in terms of user experience.

Average time is from 8 to 24 hours, with maximum of 200 hours.

Quantity list isn’t fixed for application type or category and it may vary for each different app. Meantime, the features are also the main time-driver of most applications. In other words, complexity of features, its numbers and newness or unknown technologies fartors rise up the cost of building an app.

Here is the list of some key features that you might see in most of apps.

Those features are mainly used to interact with device hardware and software. Some of them may be simple, others may be complex to develop and require more time. New tech APIs require more time to be created.

Native device features mean those that operate with:

Average time is from 4 to 24 hours, with maximum of 100 hours.

Commonly, it’s about social sharing, e-mail, SMS and push notifications to stay users engaged with an app. More complex cases might use the third party API services, or even should be coded from scratch.

On the other hand, some paid services may be integrated into the app architecture to shorten the development hours.

Average time is from 6 to 32 hours, with maximum of 150 hours.

Common to any user feature that may also drive up your budget. Additional features, beside simple login function, obviously, increase time of development process. Most of them are simple, but each one needs time to be done:

Average time is from 4 to 24 hours, with maximum 70 hours.

The time requirements differ in each task significantly. Its depends on functionality that should be checked when data package is received. Also how this data would be used also matters much. Additional visualization or interaction would drive time of development process.

Average time is from 6 to 24 hours, with maximum 150 hours.

Adding in-app payments gateway may be done by standard solutions, or be fully customized for clients’ needs. Developers may integrate online services like Stripe and Authorize, or native device services such as Apple’s in-app purchase.

There is no unified method to integrate all payment gateway types. So each one of them requires time to be integrated. Moreover, recurring payment such as subscription needs different methods to be done, so, it would take additional time to be done.

Average time is from 20 to 40 hours, with maximum 200 hours.

This feature uses back-end system to sync different user’s devices between each other. This means, any data on one device is available on any other device. But sync of complex and heavy data, several custom APIs would increase cost of making an app.

Sometimes native cloud datastores may be used, for example iCloud. Using web platforms for such cases may be an option too. But mostly developers require an outer platform to sync data.

Average time is from 16 to 64 hours, with maximum 200 hours.

Time that is needed to build up setup is minimal. Surely, custom mobile application development is a way more complex, than a common project with standard solutions. Larger projects with applications, back-end system and payment integration would drive up time of development.

Average time is from 5 to 20 hours, with maximum 50 hours.

It highly depends on database complexity and the number of data types that need to be stored. Device storage is an easier solution, while both offline and online storage are complex and need more time to be developed. The method of storage and security level also influences cost.

Average time is from 6 to 40 hours, with maximum 200 hours.

It is a common practice, and most of apps use APIs to get access to some functions and database that they may provide. Popular and frequently used APIs are easier to integrate. Some APIs also have a framework that simplifies work with that system.

Otherwise new, client-owned and rarely used APIs take more time to integrate. Moreover, lack of documentation about API, or no technical support from the 3-rd party API owners can also become a problem.

Average time is from 8 to 40 hours, with maximum 120 hours.

It is hard to say even the exact number of hours that are needed to set access to data between application and APIs. It hardly depends on API availability, its documentation and structure as well as application itself.

Average time is from 24 to 100 hours, with maximum 400 hours.

In measures of security application data may need encryption, especially if it contains private or corporate information. Surely, time required to set encryption, depends on security level that must be reached and volumes of data that should be secured.

Average time is from 10 to 40 hours, with maximum 80 hours.

This phase applies to the server-side and back-end server support, than the application itself. It determines how easy and fast application will deal with heavy user activity. Application with a high number of active users requires more stable scalability.

Average time is from 20 to 120 hours, with maximum 800 hours.

Most of applications are developed with integrated analytics tools. It tracks user activity and assess performance. A wider range of data and specific details that require to be tracked, need more complex and larger tools to be integrated.

Integration of the 3-rd party APIs like Google Analytics for the same reasons may save time and money. But more complex and larger numbers of parameters to track will drive up cost.

Average time is from 8 to 20 hours, with maximum 80 hours.

Large apps, sometimes, may require additional Web application development to simplify management of app users, add and update content, etc. The more flexibility and custom CMS are needed the more time is required to set things up.

Average time is from 35 to 120 hours, with maximum 800 hours.

High number of application features, it’s complexity as well as quantity of screens influence testing time. Additional attention and time require game apps and apps with high security requirements. So it also drives up overall app development cost

Average time is from 30 to 150 hours, with maximum 300 hours. It also may set 20% or 30% of total hours required for app development.

The last step requires some time to get up things ready. Accounting app for administrative tasks and submitting it to the App Store if it is necessary.

Average time is from 4 to 12 hours, with maximum 40 hours.

Unfortunately, your expenses don’t end on application release. It’s always only the first step of a long journey. Many things should be done, and overall price of them may reach from 10% to 30% per year of total application cost.

This case is especially applied to native apps, while any change of main OS platform is critical to their performance. So, each platform update would require application update from your side, otherwise some bugs may appear.

Despite the fact how good, easy, stable and intuitive an app may be, there are always some people that keep asking things. Support services are extremely required if application is complex and have wide range of features, contain in-app purchases or are anyhow connected with real money.

Each of the third party APIs has own charges of usage, so, it better to take that fact before an app is released. Such kind of expenses may heavily impact on your budget and decrease your overall profit from an app.

Commonly, users want to see new features, services, good security and more to be sure application is alive. It especially applies to game and entertainment applications. New content, for sure, will keep your audience engaged but may be costly.

Rarely on release date an application is coming fully polished without any bug that may be found after. Most of them may appear while application falls into mass usage.

If you plan to get into App Stores shop you should get to know about its expenses and fee before you do. For example, one time fee of Google Play is $25 while Apple App Store is $99 per year. Meantime App Stores often take 30% of app cost before passing money from a purchase to a developer.

So, how much does it cost to build an app depends on many factors. Development charges, application size, complexity and newness of technologies are included. The cost of creating an app isn’t an easy question to answer.

We hope our little research will help you to find answers by your own. If not, we are always ready to help you estimate any of your app idea, to find cost to make an app for you.|||

Application market grows day by day and a lot of people are looking for an answer on “How much does an Application development cost?”. While world uses apps for communication, games, lifestyle, business, food, sports – creating own app is becoming extra topical. The good news is – it isn’t really so expensive as most of us can think. How much Mobile App will cost? Estimated price $0 Contact a specialist 9. Content management system 13. Ecommerce integration In-app coupons Loyalty coupons 14.