It is well known about the announcement delivered by the Magento® that they will completely stop providing support for Magento 1 by November 2018. They are more focusing on Magento 2. This intends that they will stop supplying the support for e-Commerce merchants using its version 1.x platforms.

This means the stores will no longer receive any kind of updates or patches, not even the security updates essential for keeping their sites safe. You can just say that it will be completely dead in couple of years.

Although, Magento 1 will be supported with the limited period of time with vital updates and with security issues patched until November 2018, but no new features will be added. Therefore, you will need to transition your store to either Magento 2, or a different platform. Thus, the ideal option is to move to Magento 2.

There are several functionalities that Magento 1 is still missing such as admin potentialities, User Interface, responsive web-design, performance optimization, front-end performance, speed, user-friendly, easy check-out process and so on. To overcome all these problems Magento 2 have been developed.

Magento 2 has the newly-designed interface and more improved features, developer tools and also the architecture is quite different from Magento 1.x versions. There are several reasons why you should switch your business to Magento 2. Among them few are listed here.

The fresh-designed Admin panel is more user-friendly, intuitive, and easy to navigate. Menus are well-organized and simple, so that you can easily navigate to the required page without any hazel. The new admin panel provides a quick access to the important business information of their companies. These betterments head towards a quicker productiveness for administrators. It decreases the time consumption to manage orders, categories, products and pages. It means, you can very easily modify your web store appearance and can built an extremely functional store within half a time than it requires in Magento 1.x versions.

Based on some survey research report, Magento 2 is capable of handling 39% more number of orders and capability of around 66% faster adding products to cart than Magento 1.x versions. With the excellent performance of Magento 2, the website load in Magento 2 is 30% to 50% faster than earlier Magento 1.x versions.

Magento 2 has cut down the shopping pain points that lead to desolated carts, especially when customers are using mobile devices for their online shopping.

Magento has made a big effort and launched Magento 2 with improved performance and new features that provides your customers with a faster, easier shopping experience. Thus, extending your store to increase the business opportunities and sales.

You can not only introduce your products amended with snaps and descriptions, but also you can provide different videos that really can express your products in a way you want to, and thus increase your product sale.

As the M-commerce is getting popular day-by-day, and the most of the customers moving towards the mobile devices for shopping, they want to browse Magento sites using any devices such as smartphones, PC, tablets, and phablets without problems.

Magento 2 platform is more focused to all these points. With the help of new responsive design reference themes, the developers can create sites that is supported by the devices with any screen resolutions.

You can easily download and install mobile apps based on Magento 2 such as MageNative App that can make your life easier and get more business opportunities, and hence increasing your sales.

Magento 2 enables website owners to control their web store more efficiently and helps their business grow even more faster. With the new admin panel, the administrators can spend less time for managing everyday tasks. Updated admin panel has one more essential feature, and that is touch-friendly, which can be more used while using mobile devices. With this advanced feature, you are not bounded to a particular place to track your sales, instead you can use your smartphones. Thus, improving your business opportunities and productivity.

The checkout process in Magento 2 is more efficient and easier for customers to follow the checkout process and place orders as it is highly customizable and requires a fewer steps and customer information. This reduces the checkout time, and thus reducing the emptied carts and improving transitions.

The new architecture is much more flexible and easily upgradable. For instance, moving from Magento 2.0 to Magento 2.x versions are much easier that moving from 1.0 to 1.x versions. In short, Magento 2 will be much better option in terms of upgrading for future use as compared to Magento 1.x.

For Magento 1.x users, there will be no upgrades in future. But for Magento 2.x users, there will be continuous process of making security improvements and providing patches to help Magento 2 merchants stay secure as and when new versions come out.

The first and most important reason for switching to Magento 2 is Magento 1.x will stop getting any support by the end of 2018. Therefore, if you are Magento 1.x user, it will be difficult for you to be stable on the platform where you will not be supported for any issues. In such conditions you will have a single option, and that is to migrate magento 1 to Magento 2.

Secondly, Magento 1.x is now providing only security upgrades through patches and that too will be providing until November 2018. No more features are added.

Even Magento team is more focused to Magento 2 and thus all improvements including feature upgrades to performance optimization will revolve around Magento 2.

According to the current circumstances, if you are Magento 1.x users, then better you should switch to new platform as soon as possible. On the other hand, if you are planning to startup a new business, then obviously it would be a better idea to opt for Magento 2.|||

It is well known about the announcement delivered by the Magento® that they will completely stop providing support for Magento 1 by November 2018. They are more focusing on Magento 2. This intends…