Amazon is installing Amazon Echo’s voice or simply can say digital assistant, Alexa on you Kindle. Many people are fine with this but many say Amazon can’t do this.

Shocked! Ready or not, love it or not, Amazon is installing Amazon Echo’s digital assistant, Amazon Alexa on your Kindle.  Many people are in the favor of this and many are not. Many users ask what provides Amazon permission to break faith with their users? What did Amazon do? They installed Alexa on her Kindle. Sounds innocuous, right> The issue is some people don’t want Alex. They don’t think Alexa is trustworthy.

People wants to uninstall it. Unluckily, she cannot figure out how to do that. So, people are stuck with it and steaming insane at Amazon for breaking the trust. And so, are potentially millions of other customers of Amazon. So why does Amazon think it’s fine to install Alexa and attack the privacy of their users, without asking permission and with no path to uninstall it?

Tempered customers say Amazon has crossed over the limit. Sure, some are fine with Echo’s voice. Understood. They can download this AI technology and use it to their heart’s content. The issue is the others who are not fine with Alexa are being compelled to accept it against their wish. They fear the loss of their confidentiality. Their view, however, does not seem to matter to Amazon.

The younger people are usually fine with the loss of privacy. Middle-aged and older category are usually doubtful of AI and don’t wish it in their lives, at least at this early stage. It will take them more time to get comfortable with AI. They understand the goof that AI brings to their lives.  However, they also understand the good comes at a great rate, loss of confidentiality.

SO, who owns your Kindle? You would think once you pay cash, you won the device. That thinking is so yesterday. Today, companies reserve the right to fiddle and update. To make matters worse, today companies continue to own their inventions. They only let you use their property when you purchase. Many say if this is not right. After all, you pay for it. So, it should be yours. But it’s not. Run your vision to the terms, Shock!

If you have been paying attention, there are growingly all sorts of stories in the news about brand name tech companies we all use, who are being charged with attacking the confidentiality of their users. Now add Amazon to the list. Think about the stories in the media about the legal system demanding organizations turn over the recordings, data and other information about assassination investigations, fraud, and other criminal activates stored on their networks.

There is already so much data on every one of us stored in servers from mixed companies and agencies of government. This is data that has been gathered since the 80’s and the issue is only getting inferior.

Yes, we have been losing our confidentiality, bit by bit over the last few decades. Now with AI, this invasion of privacy is being tuned up. Do not get us wrong, we like AI. We think AI is going to be one an essential growth in our history. However, with all that’s said, every coin holds two faces. The other side of the AI coin is the incursion of confidentiality.

At this early phase, when several users simply do not wish to lose their confidentiality, companies require being very careful not to cross over that line in the sand. Installing Echo’s digital assistant without permission crosses over that line or limit. This is an immense company like Amazon, which users love, suddenly hurting many of those users. Amazon needs to re-think about this.|||

Amazon is installing Amazon Echo’s voice i.e. Alexa on you Kindle. Many people are fine with this but many say Amazon can’t do this.