Hello /r/entrepreneurs, my name is Wonmin (1min) Lee. Long time lurker, first time poster here. I wanted to write up a post detailing the past 10 months of my life and how I went from quitting my job to pursue an idea and basically failing hard.

The idea was a domain name rental marketplace. Like Airbnb but for domain names. The main premise of the idea was that there are millions of great and memorable domain names out there currently not being utilized. We wanted to provide a marketplace that would let the owners of these domains rent them out to users to use for short term periods (days, weeks, months).

Sounds like a dumb idea? Maybe. A great deal of people voiced their doubts and concerns to us throughout the past 10 months. Our initial examples were domains such as the ones below:

You can see from the above domains how exactly users might be able to use them. Pay $X to send your mother a happy birthday e-card. Send your graduating niece a congratulatory note. Look for jobs with a unique domain and website. We certainly thought it was a unique idea.

We initially thought that this side of the market (the domain owners) would be really easy to market to. We thought, “hey, this is a new way to make money for the owners, why wouldn’t they sign up?” Boy were we wrong.

There were many things domain owners were worried about:

Here’s a link to our post on NamePros—a large domain name community

Some people loved the idea while others balked and told us we were wasting our time. It was clear that renting/leasing domains is a routine practice for some, but a completely new/esoteric concept for the overwhelming majority. Overall, it seemed that domain owners were completely content with the status quo.

We continued to build our product regardless based on the many positive comments and opinions we received. We were able to get several owners to list their domains on our platform at this time (20 or so users, 100+ domains).

Everybody we talked to or networked with understood the domain owners’ side of our business. They understood how it could potentially make money and how it was solving the problem of unused domains. But not a single person (including ourselves) could answer the question of “why would somebody want to rent a domain?”

We wanted to answer that question and started by purchasing three domain names to use as a market test.

The idea was, if we could get people to rent the above domains for whatever reason, then we could get feedback from those said users and improve on our idea.

We decided to see if there was a use case for Twitch streams when viewers send links in cheers/donations to streamers. These links are often really difficult to remember and type out. We believed that a memorable domain name that redirects or displays the content you’re linking to would be easier to remember for all viewers.

The user flow would be like this:

Perhaps this flow was too confusing or perhaps the market just wasn’t there because our results were depressing.

Our testing showed that across 758 views on the rentals only 75 made it to the listings page where only 17 checked for date/path availability and only 2 made it to the checkout page before finally stopping.

So that’s only 0.2% of people that made it to checkout. A horrendous number.

We narrowed our goal down to “making $1.” We wanted a single person to rent a single domain for even one day to try to prove that our product has actual demand. We narrowed our domain scope to a single domain—youretoxic.com.

We are avid gamers and play a lot of DOTA2. The goal was to see if anyone in the DOTA2 gaming community would potentially rent out youretoxic.com to use to flame their opponents in game.

We spent every day trying to get a single person to rent. We lowered the price. We made the UX flow better. We eventually made it free to rent. Yet nobody was renting. Hardly anyone seemed to care.

Here are some example listings pages that you can browse

First and foremost, the biggest mistake we made was not testing the market soon enough. Instead of focusing on trying to get users to rent our three domains, we focused on making our website look nice. We went through several major design changes and feature implementations before even making a single dollar or obtaining a single user. It took us 8 months to build our MVP when realistically, it should’ve taken 2. Here’s a picture of our git contributions We certainly worked hard at making our product look good.

We had no idea whether DomaHub had product market fit. We knew, just intuitively, that it could work, but we had no real evidence or data to support the claim. In startups as well as general business, if you don’t have revenue or users then you have no product - all you have is an idea (probably a shitty one at that).

We had convinced ourselves that we were solving a real problem with DomaHub. And perhaps, our product truly does solve a problem. But if you’re going to create a solution you have to first make sure that there are going to be people who:

Overall, we learned that building a two-sided marketplace is really fucking hard. We were focused too much on the domain owners’ side without thinking about whether people would actually pay for a service like this. You can’t build a marketplace with only one side of the transaction, especially if that one side is already shaky to begin with.

So where does that leave us? We don’t really know. It’s hard to abandon our project after having spent so much time on it, but we have to face reality as well. We can’t verify product market fit and cannot justify continuing to spend money on marketing efforts without any hint that these efforts will generate revenue.

Overall, though it was a tough and difficult 10 months, we learned a great deal from it. My motivation for writing this post is to get a single place where I can detail my journey and hopefully someone can get value from our mistakes.

If you have any questions, please feel free to ask in the comments below. Or shoot me a PM on Reddit or just email me at won2blee@gmail.com.

Thank you for reading|||

TL;DR - There are many success stories out there, just wanted to share my failure story. &nbsp; --- **INTRODUCTION** --- --- &nbsp; Hello...