The campaign for single-payer universal healthcare in the US took a big leap forward in February 2017 with the introduction in the California State Senate of the bill SB 562 by State Senators Ricardo Lara and Toni Atkins. The full content of the bill is here. I’m going to explain what the bill is, what the campaign to get it passed looks like, and how you can help. I’m an activist with the single-payer activist organization Health Care for All — California, as well as being on the communications committee for the “Healthy California” coalition working to get the bill passed. I’ve been working on single-payer healthcare in California since last June, almost immediately after the People’s Summit in Chicago last year.

What is this bill? SB 562 aims to create an independent public entity that would provide guaranteed comprehensive healthcare to all California residents with no premiums, no deductibles, and no co-pays. The financing details of the bill are not yet available, and won’t be written until the financial study is completed. That is under way now by economist Robert Pollin at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and is expected to be completed sometime in late May. He is known to Governor Jerry Brown and the hope is that a financial analysis of the bill from him will carry more weight with Gov Brown. The general idea is that the state would create an agency that would collect all the money currently being spent on health care into one pool: all the Medicare money that comes to state residents, all the Medicaid money (those two sources would comprise around 50% of the funding), all the money for insurance premiums people are currently paying, all the money employers are currently paying for their employees’ insurance premiums, plus a small progressive tax probably payroll but could be sales or any other kind of tax. This combined pool of money would be the fund for every resident’s healthcare. Those who currently qualify for Medicaid would not pay anything for their healthcare. Previous studies have shown that such a system would be able to provide comprehensive coverage to everyone, including mental health care and dental and vision care, with no premiums, deductibles, or co-pays.

The way the system would work for patients is expected to be much like how Medi-Cal works now, but with no income requirement, and it would pay doctors more and you’d have way more choices of providers. You prove you’re a resident and you are given a card. When you go to your doctor, you show the card, and that’s it, with no co-pays and no deductibles. The expectation is that the vast majority of providers will accept the program because so many people will be on it. The system would be available to everyone whether they’re a citizen or not, because healthcare needs to be treated as a public good. Much like how fire protection services used to be private, until everyone collectively realized that fire spreads, so letting one building burn because they hadn’t paid their fire protection premium would put other buildings in danger. Somebody with tuberculosis is going to spread it if they’re not treated and disease doesn’t care if you’re insured or not.

California is uniquely suited to be the major fight for guaranteed healthcare. California has the benefit of over twenty years of single-payer guaranteed healthcare activism as well as multiple campaigns for ballot measures and legislative bills, including two previous single-payer bills that passed both houses of the state legislature, in 2006 and 2008. This history has created a landscape with dozens of organizations supporting the guaranteed healthcare cause before the bill was even announced.

A week after Donald Trump was elected, nearly every major healthcare and progressive organization that’s every supported single-payer healthcare in California come together for a new working not-yet-named coalition. That coalition created the legislation that was introduced in the state senate. Now that the bill has been announced, the coalition is calling itself “Healthy California” and has launched a new branding and website. The Healthy California coalition includes three large groups that had already existed for years: the Campaign for a Healthy California, the AllCare Alliance, and Labor for Single Payer. The major organizations that are part of these groups are the California Nurses Assn (CNA), Health Care for All-California (HCA), Physicians for a National Health Program (PNHP), Democracy for America (DFA), the League of Women Voters (LWV), Courage Campaign, San Francisco Berniecrats, and dozens of other labor and progressive organizations. The coalition has several working committees as well as a regional structure with regional leaders, many of whom are the leaders of the Health Care for All-California chapter in that region. The name of the campaign to get SB 562 passed is also being called “Healthy California”.

How can you get involved?

Things you can do all the time and get other people to do:

Thank you for getting involved! There’s never been a better time for this so let’s make it happen.|||

The campaign for single-payer universal healthcare in the US took a big leap forward in February 2017 with the introduction in the California State Senate of the bill SB 562 by State Senators Ricardo…