Marketing Technology has transcended all previous frontiers of customer experience as we all know well by now. It has transformed the way businesses approach their customers, substantially. In an age where transactional decisions are increasingly being taken at the click of a button, businesses are becoming more dependent on technology to get the customer’s attention at their moments of intent. Here, the food services industry is not far behind either. Leading restaurant aggregators such as Dineout and Zomato have already adapted to the latest marketing technologies to maximize their sales, thereby giving them an edge over their competition.

Now, users can not only explore restaurants, cuisines, ambience and budgets from the comfort of their homes, offices or on their mobile devices on the go; they can also be offered suggestions, prompts and discounts from an individual merchant or the aggregator portal.

In this article, we will share a few examples of suggested personalized email/push message campaigns for specific target groups that the merchant portal can execute, based on pre-defined goals:

Based on the merchant’s update on special offers, send out email/push notifications/ SMS to segments of users who are most likely to visit the restaurant. The goal here is to increase footfalls into restaurants that are running on low capacity.

Using geo-fencing, send a push-notification with offers from that particular geo-location. The goal is to increase engagement for mobile app users.

Identify the category the user is interested in or the location the user visits regularly. Send email communicating the offers from that category/location. The goal here is to re-engage with dormant customers.

Collect feedback on the experience through a notification on their next visit. You can even ask them to review the restaurant. Once the user reviews, your team can generate a reward point based on the quality of the review. Once the reward points are credited, the data can be picked up from the CRM and an email/sms can be triggered saying “Congratulations! 100 points are added to your Rewards Bag”. The objective here is purely to increase customer satisfaction.

Viewed options, but did not reserve

Send a webpush directing the user to the same page he was checking hotels on. Show carousel notification displaying top hotels that the user has viewed. If there is no conversion, send an abandonment email listing the hotels that the user was checking. If the user has filtered his preferences, also send recommendations based on the filters applied by the user. This is a re-engagement campaign.

User is on his way to the restaurant or is waiting outside the restaurant

Use geo-fencing + user booking time information to send a push notification with a link to the restaurant menu. The goal here is to improve the dining experience.

User browses more than 10 restaurants but hasn’t yet clicked on “Book Now”

Enable proactive chat pop-up: “May we assist you in choosing a place to dine out?” The goal here is encouraging new visitors to make bookings.

User has downloaded the app, opened it more than twice but is yet to make a reservation

Send a push notification offering personalised promotions. The goal here is to encourage new visitors to make bookings.

Restaurant A, B and C are in the same locality, but C witnesses fewer bookings in comparison to A and B

Send Email/SMS/Push Notifications inviting users who had made reservations at restaurants A and B in the past and/or are in close proximity to C, to dine at restaurant C. The goal here is to drive reservations to restaurants that have been witnessing a low volume of reservations and may be a part of the aggregator portal’s responsibility.

Send push asking the user to use ‘SmartPay’ if applicable to be able to get the cashback. The objective here is to increase app usage.

Display in-page element with top recommendations based on the location/category the user is interested in. This is a re-engagement campaign.

There are many other use cases that can be addressed using Gamooga’s intuitive customer engagement solution. The bottomline is to enhance customer experience to retain them and consequently, to generate revenue for your business.

Get in touch with us to know more: www.gamooga.com|||

Marketing Technology has transcended all previous frontiers of customer experience as we all know well by now. It has transformed the way businesses approach their customers, substantially. In an age…