SpinaliS chairs are taking the North America, but more especially Canada by storm. If you want to get rid of the back pain or prevent it from happening look no further! SpinaliS chairs is THE SOLUTION! Thousands of business professionals and health conscious people have been using them for a reason.

Check out this awesome video review on SpinaliS Hacker Series Chair by Mr. Steve Meagher from Site Solutions.

Get yours at https://www.spinalis-chairs.ca/spinalis-chairs/hacker/

Need the flexibility of a ball and the support of a chair? This may be your answer!

It is a brand new chair SpinaliS Hacker in blue color, in the box, where the instalation is very simple, no tools are necessary, just the hands 🙂 There is a waranty label, where all the steps of installation are shown and described. The seat is adjustable and the backrest with great lumbar support is adjustable as well. The Hacker model is currently No1 office chair in Europe chosen by offices like Google, IBM, Sony, Volkswagen…

All SpinaliS chairs are certified as a medical device and have world-wide patent for the movable seat on the spring. This active sitting is great for the posture and very good prevention from any back pain, therefore recommended by chiropractors for people need to sit everyday or just want to stay fit. Just bear in mind that if you start sitting on it (especially when not using the back-rest) in first days you might feel sore muscles in core area, that is how this active sitting works, it is like kind of excersise in the gym, but I am sure you already know why is that good for our body 🙂

Usualy the second week is much easier even for people having week core or back muscles, when the muscles are adjusting and strenghtening day by day, more and more. Then it is a huge relief even for people having back surgery, or even after car accident suffering from previous back-pain. You can check our testimonials of the customers on our SpinaliS Canada Facebook, after we have sold just 200 chairs from the opening last year in October.



 How does active sitting work with SpinaliS chairs



 This is how SpinaliS chairs for active sitting differ from any other chair on the market



 How to adjust back of SpinaliS Hacker Series Chair

Order online at https://www.spinalis-chairs.ca/spinalis-chairs/ and we will deliver any of the SpinaliS chairs of your choice right to your door!

For more info call 844 777 0489

 or drop by any of our three stores

FREE Shipping Anywhere in Canada

 Alberta AB, British Columbia BC, Manitoba MN, New Brunswick NB, Newfoundland and Labrador NL, Northwest Territories NT, Nova Scotia NS, Nunavut NU, Ontario ON, Prince Edward Island PEI, Quebec QC, Saskatchewan SK, Yukon YT (Alberta, Colombie-Britannique, Nouveau-Brunswick, Terre-Neuve-et-Labrador, Territoires du Nord-Ouest, Nouvelle-Écosse, Nunavut, Ontario, Île-du-Prince-Édouard, Québec, Saskatchewan, Yukon)

Medical Device

 SpinaliS chairs were developed with a help of doctors and evaluated as a Class I medical device. Clinical evaluation of the medical device was processed by multiple clinics in Europe. However, in Canada, it is not possible to claim SpinaliS chairs to write your taxes off and they are not covered by any kind of medical insurance or health plan, yet.

Abs and Back Workout

 Work out while sitting on any of the SpinaliS chairs and performing your daily tasks at the office or home.

Back Pain Relief

 SpinaliS Chairs will work out your core muscles for you. Just sit, do your thing and leave everything else up to SpinaliS.

Stylish Office Chairs

 Design of the SpinaliS Chairs is an eye candy – your customers will definitely notice them!

Yoga Ball Alternative

 It is recommended not to sit longer than 2 hours on a yoga ball, but on the SpinaliS chairs you can sit all day long.

Standing Desk Alternative

 SpinaliS chairs will actually make your body to work out and get you into a great shape without the hard task of standing or exercising.

Who does use SpinaliS?

 Google, Dubai Airport, SONY, IBM, DELL, Skoda Auto, CSOB Bank, Unicredit Bank, Vodafone and many more.

Ness Op Media Ltd. offers powerful web marketing and marketing solutions for the medium size businesses and start-ups. We guarantee rapid growth of your company without spending money on expensive Google AdWords and Facebook Newsfeeds. Tell us what you want and see the difference within a month .. guaranteed!

Call us now at 778 938 9883 for a FREE CONSULTATION!|||

If you want to get rid of the back pain or prevent it from happening look no further! SpinaliS chairs is THE SOLUTION!