UPDATE: Amazon has now announced the Echo Show as rumoured. I've covered this news in full in a new article.

I love the Echo/Alexa combination at home. Just this morning my kids were arguing with my about the word "kids" coming from the name of young goats. Easily rectified with a quick yell of "Alexa - Define Kids" in the general direction of my Kitchen Echo. Boy, I sure showed those ignorant children of mine a lesson as the virtual assistant proved my extra 32 years on Earth have been spent learning only the best facts.

But according to ATFV News (image can be seen via that link) there might soon be Echo hardware on the way with a built in screen. This is exciting, not least because Alexa can show my kids a picture of a goat to really ram home just how smart daddy is. But of course, it's entirely possible that the video screen won't be used for that at all, but will instead offer ways to call family members on their mobiles, using video.

Rumours from various outlets have suggested that a new Echo, codenamed, Knight, will make an appearance within the next month or so. This could be that device, and from the tiny leaked image there's a vague chance that the device will feature a video camera built-in. Amazon has already attracted some controversy over its new Echo Look, which allows you to get fashion advice but also requires you have a camera in your bedroom. AFTV News claims to have used the same technique of scraping the Amazon site to uncover early news in the past.

Speaking personally, I think this could be a great product. I already love the flash news briefing from Echo, and to have access to a screen that displays weather, news updates and can help with the shopping process on Amazon can only be a good thing. The idea of the camera is, somewhat, of concern. But I don't think you can really own an Echo without putting some faith in Amazon as a company that's serious about security.

And because every Amazon Prime subscriber also has Amazon Video, it could be that this ends up as a nice way of delivering video to people while they make a meal. I currently use an iPad Pro for entertainment while I make chilli con carne, but I'd like something that's a little bit more splash proof, ideally. I'm a very clumsy cook.

As with most Amazon products I'd expect a US-only launch for this. While I've no doubt it will roll out globally, there's no sign yet of Echo Look on the UK site, and I suspect that we'll have as much as a year to wait - which is how the company handled the original Echo launch, totally re-working the hardware before launching in Europe.

Follow me on Twitter @IanMorris78 or Google+ and read all of my Forbes articles on my profile page. I also regularly appear on the Tech's Message Podcast which you can find on ACast.|||

Amazon may have a new Echo on the way, this one will feature a screen and perhaps also a camera.