AI recruitment platform provides a snapshot of this year’s ideal Silicon Valley job candidate, serving as a hiring resource for both job seekers and recruiters

CHANDLER, Ariz. – April 24, 2017 – HiringSolved, a technology company that leverages artificial intelligence and machine learning to solve problems for talent acquisition practitioners, applied this technology to identify the most in-demand skills required for the 2017 technology job market. As the industry becomes increasingly competitive due to a larger supply of qualified talent than available roles, recruiters are on the hunt for the idyllic candidate whose resume demonstrates they have the skills and background to help maintain the company’s competitive advantage.

The aim of the study was to identify which skills have the highest market value in the technology jobs market by analyzing the candidates who were hired or promoted to new roles in 2016 and early 2017. This provides a transparent look into what characteristics these hires possess – which is more telling for prospective job seekers than a standard employer job description. It offers a first-hand view into which specific skills are most in demand, what high-tech recruiters are looking for in applicants, and what schools these candidates typically hail from.

Using RAI, HiringSolved’s proprietary artificial intelligence software, the company aggregated data from over 10,000 public social profiles to paint this picture. Analyzing candidate backgrounds with varying levels of experience, from new-grads to experienced hires, HiringSolved has created a valuable guide for both new graduates and more experienced jobseekers in 2017, as well as a resource for enterprise recruiters who are looking for the best candidates for their organization.

The research suggests that if a recruiter could build the ideal technology job candidate for the 2017 hiring season, they would possess one or more of these top ten skills:

HiringSolved also compiled the leading alma maters based on volume (of all levels of hires) made by the top 25 Silicon Valley companies in the past year. The top ten include:

With graduation around the corner, aspiring applicants are brushing up their resumes and may not know which skills and internships to highlight that will make them stand out. HiringSolved examined which skills are the best indicators of successful entry-level job placement in 2017 tech:

HiringSolved predicted the most likely job titles for new graduate applicants entering the tech space:

“Our research suggests that in addition to specific skills and educational backgrounds, Silicon Valley is looking for a strong fundamental understanding of the basics of technology in their new hires” said HiringSolved co-founder and CEO Shon Burton. “Often what separates say, a good engineer from a great one, is a knack for understanding the baseline ‘how’s’ and ‘why’s’ of how things work – the physics of the technology. Having a deeper, more well-rounded comprehension makes a great engineer because they’re thinking creatively and when the technique fails, they have the ability to fix the issue. This is the key to a desirable Silicon Valley job candidate.”

HiringSolved makes it faster and easier to find the right person for any job. Our people aggregator gathers data from across the web and filters the most relevant information into a database of candidate profiles. With global coverage, all skill sets, the most advanced search capabilities on the market, and jaw-dropping speed, users are able to source the perfect candidate in seconds.|||

AI recruitment platform provides a snapshot of this year’s ideal Silicon Valley job candidate, serving as a hiring resource for job seekers and recruiters.