The power of Agile is that it leverages human behaviour as a means to achieve a goal. By understanding the theories behind the human behaviour you can better utilise them and make the most of Agile. In this article I have listed two key elements of Agile below, with a particular emphasis on Scrum, and linked them to the theories that have been noted in some observed cases.

In everyday life, we observe that for every plan and corresponding action there is a reaction, such as applying pressure on the accelerator of a car will result in the car going faster. The closer together that those two events occur, the easier it is to learn the outcome. For example pressure on the accelerator will cause the car to increase in speed.

In light of this, let's consider how Scrum works, see the diagram below (Scrum Sprint Cycle). The Scrum Team undertake Sprint Planning (planning to accelerate); they Test & Develop the plan (actually accelerate); they Demo that it was done (speed accelerated) and they review accordingly for the next Sprint (they know the level of pressure to apply to the accelerator in order to reach a certain speed).

Education theories such as Kolb, can be applied to Scrum to give us a better understanding of the process of learning within projects and how to maximise this learning of the Development Team. According to Kolb’s Experiential Learning Cycle (ELC), effective learning can be seen when the learner progresses through the cycle, we can see similarities to the Scrum Sprint Cycle where the Development Team learns as they progress through a Sprint. Activities are undertaken, observed, discussed and understood within this cycle or Sprint and then the cycle or a new Sprint continues.

Considering our earlier outline of the Scrum Sprint Cycle and as we can see in the above diagram: the Scrum team plan [Sprint Planning] an activity; they do [Test & Develop] it; they check [Demo] that it was done and they act [Retrospective] accordingly for the next Sprint. This plan-do-check-act process is key to Kolb’s Experiential Learning Cycle (ELC).

I have observed that the correct application of this theory to Scrum is the quickest path to increased velocity and productivity.

I want you to imagine the following scenario; As a naturally creative curious person, who loves to solve problems, you are presented with a set of different ideas and asked to choose your favourite one. You are to make it real for the rest of the world. You know that if you get stuck your friends will help you out. They, like you, have done this before. I suggest that this person is eager to complete the task. This is the world of Agile. A world where you are self (intrinsic) motivated to complete tasks.

It is the polar opposite to the situation where an autocratic manager gives you a task and tells you to complete it by a set date in order to earn your pay-check. The external (extrinsic) motivation will cause the job to be completed, but the pride, ownership and satisfaction is certainly lacking.

Intrinsic Motivation Theory demonstrates how a persons desire to do something is much stronger when it is felt that it is their desire and they were not dictated to do so. In Scrum, when team members select their own User Stories they create an internal Intrinsic motivation to complete that User Story as best they can. The User Story comes complete with its ‘Definition of Done’ (Principle #7) which creates an implied contract between the developer and the team, that the User Story will be delivered back conforming to that definition.

As per the example above, Scrum creates an environment that supports the team members experience of autonomy, competence, and relatedness. This results in teams enhanced performance, persistence, and creativity. This is the Self Determination Theory (Deci & Ryan). The author of 'Drive'; Daniel Pink (TED talk) differs slightly in his Motivation Theory by stating that the three key intrinsic elements are autonomy, mastery and purpose. Either of this definitions start to sound as if they are describing the Agile Generalising Specialist, who has the 'fire in their belly' to complete the task.

In my next article, I will focus on the driving forces behind the Scrum Ceremonies.|||

