Now Mizuno believes he might be able to use the same technologies to unravel criminal networks and track the business ties of terrorists. But his moment of insight came with an earthquake.

Mizuno is an econophysicist at Japan’s National Institute of Informatics, and an unlikely heir to Holmes’s deerstalker. His office overlooks the Imperial Palace in Tokyo, for centuries a symbol of stability and order. From it the young scientist surveys the world, applying the tools of physics to the study of economic and social systems. He has created a software to spot stock market bubbles , and a digital measuring stick for charting the progress of start-ups .

S herlock Holmes knew the power of illicit networks. As he told Dr. Watson, Holmes’s arch-enemy, Professor Moriarty, was “the organizer of half that is evil and of nearly all that is undetected in this great city…He sits motionless, like a spider in the center of its web, but that web has a thousand radiations, and he knows every quiver of each of them.”

The Tōhoku earthquake and subsequent tsunami in 2011 claimed over 18,000 lives and caused a meltdown at the Fukushima nuclear power plant. The magnitude 9.0 quake was so powerful that it rattled and shook the National Institute of Informatics hundreds of kilometers away, calved icebergs in Antarctica, and even shortened the length of a day by 2 microseconds.

It also had global economic effects that could be measured in years. Japan produces half of the world’s supply of silicon for semiconductors, a third of the glass for LCD screens, and more than three quarters of the resin that binds printed circuit boards together.

The aftershocks had scarcely faded away before quake-related shortages rippled around the planet. Automotive assembly lines went idle for lack of electronics, Lenovo warned that its tablet manufacturing would be hampered, and ZTE slashed production of cellphones. More than half the claims received by industrial insurance conglomerate Allianz Global Corporate & Specialty for Tōhoku were actually for supply chain disruptions rather than physical damage.

This got Takayuki Mizuno thinking. Everyone talks about globalization and interconnectedness. As a data scientist, Mizuno actually tries to measure it. If he could map exactly how businesses around the world interact with one another, perhaps he could predict — and even mitigate — the effect of the next natural disaster like Tōhoku.

For that, he needed data, and lots of it. Data on deals, earnings, mergers, and alliances is the bread and butter of the financial services community. S&P Capital IQ, for instance, is a New York-based financial information provider with data on nearly 425,000 companies in 217 countries, as well as their suppliers and customers. Hedge fund managers might dip into this trove to help them decide when to buy or sell a particular stock. For example, if a small electronics company suddenly acquired Apple as a customer, it might appear to be a good investment.

But Mizuno had a more ambitious idea. He would take every last byte of S&P Capital IQ’s data and crunch it to discover the relationship between every company in the world that had a customer or supplier — over 345,000 firms, including every publicly listed business on the planet.

Understandably, S&P Capital IQ guards such valuable information closely. There’s no way for a user to simply download its entire database. “So we made a web crawler,” says Mizuno. “It’s a tool that goes to their website, searches for a company, and downloads that one company’s business relationship list. Then it repeats the searching and downloading for all the other companies. It was difficult.”

After that, Mizuno faced an even more daunting task: analyzing and characterizing about 60 billion pairs of firms. This might take months or years on a typical high-end desktop computer. Luckily, Mizuno had access to something much faster.

The Information Technology Center at the University of Tokyo is home to a supercomputer called Oakleaf-FX10. FX10 is 50 refrigerator-sized cabinets containing 76,800 processing cores, able to perform over one quadrillion floating point operations per second (1.1 petaflops). Though that barely scrapes the top 100 list of supercomputers in terms of raw speed, FX10 is ranked 15th in the world for crunching complex data problems like 3D physics simulations and network analysis. It processed Mizuno’s entire dataset within three days.

Mizuno was surprised to find that companies behave rather like people. Like the urban myth of there being six degrees of separation between Kevin Bacon and any other actor, Mizuno found that 80% of the world’s firms could be connected to any other business via six customers or suppliers. For example, Elpitiya Plantations, a producer of fine teas in Sri Lanka, is linked to financial behemoth Western Union by hopping from a hotel chain to a fertilizer company to food giant Nestlé to bargain US retailer Dollar General.

Mizuno also found that companies naturally cluster together into communities, with stronger trading links within the community than without. Mizuno expected to see political and economic organizations, such as the EU or NAFTA, reflected in his data. Instead, he found nearly 3,500 communities with only loose geographic or industrial ties.

The largest, containing about a fifth of all firms in the world, revolves around a seemingly random selection of banks and internet, software, telecoms and consulting companies from the US, UK, Japan, France, and Taiwan. Another major group, focusing on construction, aerospace, utilities, oil, and gas, includes firms as far flung as India, Australia, Japan, and Germany.

“Mizuno is breaking new ground,” says Gerard Learmonth, director of the Center for Large-Scale Computational Modeling at the University of Virginia. “This opens up a whole area of data science applied at a very large scale. Imagine building a map of connectivity in and among firms in Europe, then anticipating what that network would look like after the UK’s exit from the EU. A picture of how the continent’s trading relationships are going to evolve would speak volumes to [UK Prime Minister] May as to the consequences of the Brexit.”

But if his network could reveal the costs of an economic mistake like Brexit, thought Mizuno, what if he applied it to a genuine, humanitarian disaster?

One of the world’s worst conflicts in recent decades has been the ongoing civil war in the Democratic Republic of Congo, which has claimed over 5 million lives, along with widespread rape, exploitation, and displacement of civilians. This devastation has been fueled by armed groups looting natural resources from mines, to the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

This might sound like a local problem, a perfect storm of geology, greed, and poor governance in a country far from the developed world. And perhaps it would be if virtually every gadget on earth did not rely on the “conflict minerals”— the gold, tin, tantalum, and tungsten — flowing from the Congo.

In the rivers and beneath the soil of the central African state lie at least 740 tonnes of gold, worth about $30 billion. Inside the processors of the phone you’re holding are approximately 25 micrograms of the same precious metal, worth a buck, give or take a few cents. Tantalum is used to make its capacitors, tungsten is in its vibration motor, and tin solder helps hold it all together.

Tracing the route of those minerals to one particular smartphone or laptop in San Francisco is virtually impossible. Vegetarians can consult packaging to tell which products contain meat and which don’t. But if you want a phone that hasn’t contributed to the exploitation of children or funded armed groups half a world away, there are usually no labels to consult. Notable exceptions include Intel, which calls its processors “conflict free,” and Fairphone, an ethical smartphone manufacturer based in the Netherlands that prides itself on avoiding conflict minerals. Apple is also leading the way among large technology companies in working toward whole “conflict-free” devices.

But the problem is bigger than any one company. Every car, every screen, and every gadget we own uses some or all of the conflict minerals, some of which are definitely mined in the Congo.|||

Sherlock Holmes knew the power of illicit networks. As he told Dr. Watson, Holmes’s arch-enemy, Professor Moriarty, was “the organizer of half that is evil and of nearly all that is undetected in…