With the 143rd Kentucky Derby scheduled for May 6, 2017; excitement is at an all-time high! This is the start of the horse racing season. As is tradition, the Triple Crown will be held at Churchill Downs in Louiseville, Kentucky. Held annually, the Kentucky Derby is a historical horse race dating back to 1875 when a group of horse racing enthusiasts started a club to raise money for building high quality facilities for horse racing. The Kentucky Derby is popularly known in the United States as “the fastest two minutes in sports”. It is also dubbed “the run for the roses” for the winning horse is draped in roses.

The Kentucky Derby race is a Grade I race of 3 year old thorough-bred colts. The distance for the Kentucky Derby is 1 and quarter miles (2 km). Although, every year the race had both colts and fillies, this year there are no female horses participating in the race. Perhaps this is because no fillies have won a race since 1990.

This year, the Kentucky Derby purse is set for $2 million and with the runner up taking away $600,000. Bets have been placed and Always Dreaming has an odds of 4-1, followed by McCracken with 5-1. Classic Empire who was initially the favorite is now down to 3rd place with Irish War Cry (both have odds of 6-1). However, gambling experts suggests as many as 7 different horses have a fair chance at winning and it is going to be a tough race!

Heavy rains last week and on Friday, May 4 2017 caused the tracks to become sloppy. However, forecast for May 6, 2017 suggests minimum rain and the tracks are expected to be fast around the race time of 6:36 pm Eastern Time. If not, the horses have experience running off-track as well, covering up for the sloppy track.

Horses and Jockey will reach the starting posts at Churchil Downs at 6:30 pm Eastern Time. Visit https://www.kentuckyderby.com/ for complete details about odds, bets, tickets and much more. If you are a fan, then here is how you can stream Kentucky Derby online:

NBC is the official television network for the Kentucky Derby live stream this year. The transmission will begin at 2:30 pm and end at 7:30 pm Eastern Time. If you are travelling and won’t be able to watch on your TV screens, then worry not. You can live stream the race at NBC Sports Live Extra at www.NBCsports.com/LiveExtra for your convenience.

The Live Extra App is also available on iTunes, Windows Store, Amazon Fire, Roku Channel Store and Google Play

· Fubo.tv will also be showing the live stream for Kentucky Derby

· You can also catch the live race and replays on Twinspires.com online and Twinspires TV

· Or see live updates direct from Churchill Downs on CBS sports at 12 pm Eastern Time

Have a great weekend and enjoy the run for the roses on Saturday 6:30 pm Eastern Time live on NBC sports. If you are not at home, make sure you have the Live Extra App downloaded on your mobiles and tablets for the first exciting race of the season! Don’t forget to catch the most exciting 2 minutes sports today on NBC Sports!

TV: NBC (Coverage will run from 2:30 p.m. until 7:20 p.m.)|||

Watch Kentucky Derby, Kentucky Derby 2017, Kentucky Derby Live, Kentucky Derby Live Stream, Post time, contenders, Kentucky derby odds, Free Streams