This week, Tech.eu tracked 15 technology M&A transactions and 60 tech funding deals totalling €389 million in Europe, Turkey and Israel.

Like every week, we listed every single one of them in our free weekly newsletter, along with interesting news regarding fledgling European startups, tech investors old and new, a number of good reads published elsewhere, government and policy news, as well as an overview of interesting lists, facts and figures from a wide variety of sources.

You can subscribe to our newsletter below to receive all this information in your inbox every Friday afternoon for free, but here’s an overview of the 10 biggest European tech news items for this week:

1) Alphabet’s Google has agreed to pay 306 million euros ($334 million) to settle a tax dispute with Italy, the company and the country’s tax authority said on Thursday.

2) Amazon is to more than triple its research and development team in Cambridge, UK, working on tech innovations such as its Alexa digital assistant, delivery drones and Echo smart speaker.

3) Swedish company Snow Software has raised $120 million from Sumeru Equity Partners (SEP) and the Ontario Pension Board.

4) In another bid to diversify its business, BlaBlaCar has launched a new beta app to assist drivers and riders with their commutes to work. The BlaBlaLines app differs from the company’s usual carpooling business model, which connects people for long distance journeys.

5) Swedish media group MTG is increasing its stake in InnoGames from 21 to 51%, investing 82.6 million euros for the additional shares at a valuation of 260 million euros.

6) Cornershop, a Latin American-focused online grocery delivery service, has raised $21 million in a funding round led by Accel with participation from Swedish VC firm Creandum alongside ALLVP from Mexico, and Jackson Square Ventures from San Francisco.

8) Ultrahaptics, the Bristol-based startup trying to bring mid-air haptics to applications like VR and AR, has raised £17.9 million in Series B funding. The round includes existing investors IP Group and Woodford Investment Management and new investors Cornes, as well as Dolby Family Ventures.

9) DJI partners with Israeli startup in first augmented reality game for drones.

10) Mail.ru has acquired Russian food delivery startup ZakaZaka in an all-cash deal that values the company at $20 million.

Bonus link: There could be up to 10.43 million people in Europe working in data-related jobs by 2020, according to a European Commission study.|||

