pandas is an open source, BSD-licensed library providing high-performance, easy-to-use data structures and data analysis tools for the Python programming language.

pandas is a NUMFocus sponsored project. This will help ensure the success of development of pandas as a world-class open-source project, and makes it possible to donate to the project.

This is a major release from 0.19.2 and includes a number of API changes, deprecations, new features, enhancements, and performance improvements along with a large number of bug fixes. We recommend that all users upgrade to this version. New API for Series/DataFrame similar to the groupby-rolling-resample API’s, see here Integration with the , including a new top-level and method, see here. The indexer has been deprecated, see here has been deprecated, see here Addition of an and scalar type, see here Improved user API when accessing levels in , see here Improved support for dtypes, see here A new orient for JSON serialization, that uses the Table Schema spec, see here Experimental support for exporting formats to Excel , see here Window Binary Corr/Cov operations now return a MultiIndexed rather than a , as is now deprecated, see here Support for S3 handling now uses , see here Google BigQuery support now uses the library, see here Switched the test framework to use pytest Pandas has changed the internal structure and layout of the codebase. This can affect imports that are not from the top-level namespace, please see the changes here. Check the API Changes and deprecations before updating. This is a combined release for 0.20.0 and and 0.20.1. Version 0.20.1 contains one additional change for backwards-compatibility with downstream projects using pandas’ hashing routines. See the Whatsnew overview for an extensive list of all enhancements, bug fixes, and breaking changes in 0.20.1. Please report any issues here

This is a minor bug-fix release in the 0.19.x series and includes some small regression fixes, bug fixes and performance improvements. See the v0.19.2 Whatsnew page for an overview of all bugs that have been fixed in 0.19.2.

Best way to Install¶ Best way to get pandas is to install via conda Builds for for are all available.

Python has long been great for data munging and preparation, but less so for data analysis and modeling. pandas helps fill this gap, enabling you to carry out your entire data analysis workflow in Python without having to switch to a more domain specific language like R. Combined with the excellent IPython toolkit and other libraries, the environment for doing data analysis in Python excels in performance, productivity, and the ability to collaborate. pandas does not implement significant modeling functionality outside of linear and panel regression; for this, look to statsmodels and scikit-learn. More work is still needed to make Python a first class statistical modeling environment, but we are well on our way toward that goal.|||

