Needless to say that I am a huge fan of system testing through Selenium WebDriver. You can find lots of useful information in my WebDriver Series. Usually, we use WebDriver to create GUI automated tests. However, we can go far beyond that and use our already created UI tests for load testing. In the article, I will show you how to do that using PhantomJS driver and Visual Studio. The tests will be executed in the Azure cloud using Visual Studio Team Services.

The scenario that I want to load test is pretty simple. I will open the home page of Automate The Planet and assert the main headline. After that, the test will click on the 'Got to the blog' button and navigate to the blog page. There we will wait for the subscribe widget to show up and assert the title of the page.

3. Click 'Go to the blog' button

4. Wait for the subscribe widget to show up

My code splits the logic into a couple of classes utilizing the Page Object Pattern. There is a page object for the home page and another for the blog. We have three files for each one of them- page, map and asserter.

Below you can find how the project's file structure should look like.

The test will be executed in a headless browser using PhantomJS.

To be able to run the above test you need to install three NuGet packages- Selenium.PhantomJS.WebDriver, Selenium.WebDriver and Selenium.Support.

We are going to use Visual Studio Team Services to create the load test.

2. Download and install Visual Studio Enterprise. You can get a free 90 days trial.

Usually, I use the free community edition of Visual Studio. However, the load testing is not included in it. With you free account for Visual Studio Team Service, you will get 20000 virtual user minutes.

5. Specify a location. You can use the default.

7. Select a think time profile. You can use the default one.

8. Select a load pattern. You can choose a constant or an increasing load.

9. Select a test mix model. You can use the default settings.

11. Open the load test file and run it.

You can add additional measurements into your tests through the usage of the MSTest TestContext. The context property will be populated automatically once the test is run.|||

Use Selenium WebDriver UI tests to create load tests executed in the Azure cloud. We will use PhantomJS and configure a load test through Visual Studio IDE.