The Braun Series 3 Shaver boasts being tough on beards with a close, perfect shave and faster results than ever before. Using MicroComb technology, this series of shaver can handle anything as tough as a three day old beard but leaves behind nothing but smooth skin. If you’re tired of disposable razors that rust after a few days in the shower, a Braun Series 3 Shaver should be your next purchase.

Superior. Efficient. Afordable. That’s how you can describe the Braun Series 3 Shaver. It delivers an outstanding shave whether wet or dry that won’t cost a big up front investment like some competitors. The shaver pays for itself in no time by saving you money on overpriced disposable razors that only last a week. The Braun Series 3 Shaver, however, will last shave after shave after shave with its limited warranty.

Braun series 3 3050’s MicroComb guides more hair into the cutting parts of the electric shaver for faster shaving. Three independently floating cutting elements adapt to facial contours. One hour charge lasts for one whole week of electric shaving. 100% waterproof razor for easy cleaning. Includes 3-action Clean&Charge station: hygienically cleans, charges and lubricates.

Braun 340s electric shaver performs in and out of the shower. The 340s works with shaving foams and gels letting you customize its performance for improved comfort in every shave. Designed to make short work of a three-day beard, the shaver’s SensoFoil technology glides across your skin for added comfort and control. Adaptable and versatile, the 340s easily integrates into any man’s shaving routine.

This Wet & Dry 3040 model can even be used in the shower with foam or gel for a more comfortable shaving experience. Read full review here.

If you’re tired of disposable razors that rust after a few days in the shower, a Braun Series 3 Shaver should be your next purchase. Designed to give you maximum comfort with a smooth, soft shave, this shaver delivers day after day, keeping your grooming and clean up time to a minimum with its fast blades and easy clean up station. For a close shave like you have never experienced before, try the Braun 3 Series Shaver this season. Or buy one as a gift for someone special in your life.|||

The Braun Series 3 Shaver boasts being tough on beards with a close, perfect shave and faster results than ever before.It using MicroComb technology.