TL;DR: Here’s what a day in the life of a successful Account Manager looks like.

Back in the Twitter sales heyday, when every team was expanding headcount and in need of training assistance from veteran team members, I was fortunate to be chosen to lead core trainings for many incoming classes (by my count: 6).

There were a handful of core topics that we emphasized as most important to training and development, which we can get into in a future post, but my favorite subject was teaching “A Day in the Life of an AM”, which allowed trainees to shadow a successful AM process, and most importantly, to emphasize the hyper-organized mentality and toolset needed to succeed every day, from the moment you’ve sat down with coffee in hand.

At Twitter, my process was broken down into tool setup, and then daily assessment. It looked like this:

Before moving into tool assessment, it’s important to note that each tool would be used or not, and in varying amounts of time, based primarily on the outcome of client needs. Those needs change in priority throughout the day, as more client and internal meetings are completed. A typical 9-5 would look something like this (DISCLAIMER: this is only an example. As you know, many people’s hours, updates and prep vary, and some internal/client meetings can go well over 1 hr):

Great! Now that we’ve established the general day, let’s see how it plays out based on a client need that occurs as a result of the 1:00 PM client call… Despite the outcome of that call, every day should more or less start the same way for you, the AM:

OK. So, assuming you’ve had a normal key-client meeting (and assuming nothing has broken today — haha, yeah right!), there will — at a minimum — be insights and optimizations requested by the client… THIS is where the best AMs are separated from the rest.

Similarly, with great account management, it’s required that the best AMs stay organized, and know exactly how to prioritize in order to maximize deliverables, particularly to key revenue stakeholders, within the same 8-or-so hours as the next AM. This is particular poignant, because the AM is the lifeline of the daily success between the company and the client, which explains why, when not in a meeting, most of the AM’s time is taken up doing tasks for key clients.

That said, here’s what that key client optimization/nurturing activity would look like:

Did you do all that? Good. Great. Happy client. Happy partner. Happy day(s).

The moral here is that organization, prioritization, and mapping out your day is key to success. I’ve taken that quite literally, and use this same mentality for my daily life. It’s a mentality and utility that is transferable to both work and life, therefore I’ve let the lines blur quite a bit! :)

While creating my travel sheet, I realized it was one of many tabs on what has become my “life ops” sheet (including financial projections, travel, networking, etc), and I realized I’m personally managing quite a large account in myself.

Below is a screenshot of the simplified travel planner (you can view/download here)

Prior to the explosion of project management solutions like Google’s app suite (and formal training at Twitter), I would stay as organized as possible by managing an Outlook calendar, white board calendar, physical planner, and post its.

… How far we’ve come since those days! :)|||

TL;DR: Here’s what a day in the life of a successful Account Manager looks like. Back in the Twitter sales heyday, when every team was expanding headcount and in need of training assistance from veteran team members, I was fortunate to be chosen to lead core trainings for many incoming classes (by my count: 6).…