Limbo is a reasoning system for a first-order logic of limited belief. Limited belief allows for decidable reasoning in first-order knowledge bases, and in the propositional case it is even tractable. See [1,2,3,4] for details on the theory, or click here to see some web demos.

Limbo provides a logical language to represent and reason about (possibly incomplete) knowledge and belief.

This logical language is a first-order modal dialect: it features functions and equality, standard names to designate distinct objects, first-order variables and quantification, sorts, and modal operators for knowledge and conditional belief. (Predicates are not built-in but can be simulated without overhead using boolean functions.)

An agent's knowledge and beliefs are encoded in this language. This knowledge base is subject to a syntactic restriction: it must be in clausal form, and all variables must be universally quantified; however, as existentially quantified variables can be simulated through Skolemization, this is no effective restriction. An example knowledge base might assume a birthday scenario and stipulate that that a certain gift box is known to contain an (unknown) gift.

Reasoning in such knowledge bases is done with queries expressed in this language. For example, we can say that we believe that something is in the box and that we have no idea what it is. A decision procedure evaluates such queries in a way that is sound but incomplete with respect to classical logic. That is, if the procedure says that the knowledge base entails the query, then this correct, but conversely the procedure may miss some true queries. Completeness is sacrificed for decidability, which means that the procedure actually terminates. (Soundness, completeness, decidability in first-order logic is one of those "pick any two" scenarios.)

How much effort (and time) is spend on evaluating a query is controlled through a parameter that specifies how many case splits the reasoner may investigate. Every modal operator is decorated with such an effort parameter. This effort parameter and its limiting effect on the reasoning capabilities is the key ingredient to achieve decidability without restricting the syntactical expressivity of queries. This sets this theory apart from decidable syntactical subclasses of first-order logic and from description logics.

For more theoretical background see the papers linked below.

The library is header-only and has no third-party dependencies. It suffices to have in the include path.

To compile and run the tests and demos, execute the following:|||

limbo - A Reasoning System for a First-Order Logic of Limited Belief