The AI Optify data team writes about topics that we think modern software engineers will love. AI Optify has affiliate partnerships so we may get a share of the revenue from your purchase.

Scala is an object-oriented programming language for the Java Virtual Machine. In addition to being object-oriented, Scala is also a functional language, and combines the best approaches to OO and functional programming.



 Top Scala Books - For this post, we have scraped various signals (e.g. reviews sentiments, online ratings, topics covered in the book, author influence in the field, year of publication, social media signals, etc.) from web for more than 40's Scala books. We have combined all signals to compute a score for each book using Machine Learning and rank the top books.

The readers will love our list because it is Data-Driven & Objective. Enjoy the list:

Artima is very pleased to publish a new edition of the best-selling book on Scala, written by the designer of the language, Martin Odersky. Co-authored by Lex Spoon and Bill Venners, this book takes a step-by-step tutorial approach to teaching you Scala. Starting with the fundamental elements of the language, Programming in Scala introduces functional programming from the practitioner's perspective, and describes advanced language features that can make you a better, more productive developer.

Scala for the Impatient concisely shows developers what Scala can do and how to do it. In this book, Cay Horstmann, the principal author of the international best-selling Core Java™, offers a rapid, code-based introduction that’s completely practical. Horstmann introduces Scala concepts and techniques in “blog-sized” chunks that you can quickly master and apply. Hands-on activities guide you through well-defined stages of competency, from basic to expert.

Functional Programming in Scala is a serious tutorial for programmers looking to learn FP and apply it to the everyday business of coding. The book guides readers from basic techniques to advanced topics in a logical, concise, and clear progression. In it, you'll find concrete examples and exercises that open up the world of functional programming.

ave time and trouble when using Scala to build object-oriented, functional, and concurrent applications. With more than 250 ready-to-use recipes and 700 code examples, this comprehensive cookbook covers the most common problems you’ll encounter when using the Scala language, libraries, and tools. It’s ideal not only for experienced Scala developers, but also for programmers learning to use this JVM language.

6. Advanced Analytics with Spark: Patterns for Learning from Data at Scale 

 $35.36 In this practical book, four Cloudera data scientists present a set of self-contained patterns for performing large-scale data analysis with Spark. The authors bring Spark, statistical methods, and real-world data sets together to teach you how to approach analytics problems by example. You’ll start with an introduction to Spark and its ecosystem, and then dive into patterns that apply common techniques—classification, collaborative filtering, and anomaly detection among others—to fields such as genomics, security, and finance.

Artima is very pleased to publish a new edition of the best-selling book on Scala, written by the designer of the language, Martin Odersky. Co-authored by Lex Spoon and Bill Venners, this book takes a step-by-step tutorial approach to teaching you Scala. Starting with the fundamental elements of the language, Programming in Scala introduces functional programming from the practitioner's perspective, and describes advanced language features that can make you a better, more productive developer.

Scala is a powerful JVM language that blends the functional and OO programming models. You'll have no trouble getting introductions to Scala in books or online, but it's hard to find great examples and insights from experienced practitioners. You'll find them in Scala in Depth. There's little heavy-handed theory here—just dozens of crisp, practical techniques for coding in Scala. Written for readers who know Java, Scala, or another OO language.

Get up to speed on Scala, the Jvm language that offers all the benefits of a modern object model, functional programming, and an advanced type system. Packed with code examples, this comprehensive book shows you how to be productive with the language and ecosystem right away, and explains why Scala is ideal for today's highly scalable, data-centric applications that support concurrency and distribution.

This book is a must-have tutorial for software developers aiming to write concurrent programs in Scala, or broaden their existing knowledge of concurrency. This book is intended for Scala programmers that have no prior knowledge about concurrent programming, as well as those seeking to broaden their existing knowledge about concurrency. Basic knowledge of the Scala programming language will be helpful. Readers with a solid knowledge in another programming language, such as Java, should find this book easily accessible.

If you are a Java developer or a Java architect working with Java EE-based solutions and want to start using Scala in your daily programming, then this book is ideal for you. This book will get you up and running quickly by adopting a pragmatic approach with real-world code samples. No prior knowledge of Scala is required.

This book is an exploration of the Scala programming language. It begins by explaining the language to the reader, including its origin, uses and benefits. The book then guides the reader through setting up an environment ready for programming in different operating systems including Windows, Linux, and Mac OS X. The syntax which is used in all the Scala programs is explored. You will understand the various parts which make up a Scala program.

Scala in Action is a comprehensive tutorial that introduces Scala through clear explanations and numerous hands-on examples. Because Scala is a rich and deep language, it can be daunting to absorb all the new concepts at once. This book takes a "how-to" approach, explaining language concepts as you explore familiar programming challenges that you face in your day-to-day work.

14. Introduction to the Art of Programming Using Scala 

 $68 With its flexibility for programming both small and large projects, Scala is an ideal language for teaching beginning programming. Yet there are no textbooks on Scala currently available for the CS1/CS2 levels. Introduction to the Art of Programming Using Scala presents many concepts from CS1 and CS2 using a modern, JVM-based language that works well for both programming in the small and programming in the large.|||

Top 16 Scala Programming Books