Intel announced on 1st May the discovery of a critical vulnerability in their Active Management Technology (AMT) family of chips. It could allow an “unprivileged attacker to gain control [of the machine]” over the Internet.

The list of potentially affected chips dates as far back as the first generation of the Intel Core processors. These were first released in January 2006, and extend all the way till the most recent 7th generation.

The problem was originally discovered by Embedi in February of this year, which worryingly detailed the vulnerability could be exploited as long as the target machine was plugged into an outlet… even if it were turned off. Due to the hardware-level nature of the security hole, an attacker could gain access to the mouse, keyboard, and monitor of the machine, and do everything including turning the power on and off.

As is the practice with security disclosures, Intel’s vulnerability report did not reveal the precise nature of the flaw, but security firm Tenable was quick to independently identify the issue.

In a blog published on May 5th, the Tenable team revealed that the issue was an authentication problem within the web interface created by Intel to allow administrators to remotely configure AMT. Once the attacker had gained system-level access via AMT, they could make modifications to the machine’s operating system to allow them to control it fully.

Surprisingly, the attack method was trivial to reproduce. A user only needed to login to the machine on port 16992 and 16993 as the “admin” user, and then leave the password field blank. As long as either port 16992 or 16993 were accessible via the Internet, anyone could do it.

Just three days following the Tenable report, over 8,500 affected machines have been discovered around the world, and many more are expected to be affected within private local networks.

Intel has released a discovery tool that determines your system’s vulnerability, although the most straightforward solution may be to simply update your firmware to the latest build.

Does this make you nervous, or can no system ever be 100% impenetrable? Let’s hear your thoughts.|||

Intel announced on 1st May the discovery of a critical vulnerability in their Active Management Technology (AMT) family of chips. It could allow an attacker