KTLA 5 MORNING NEWS BEHIND THE SCENES! – FIREBALL MALIBU VLOG 599 – Fireball heads to Hollywood to set up classic cars for a Behind the Scenes look at KTLA Channel 5 Morning News with Sam Rubin. Also featured is actor Djimon Hounsou.

KTLA, virtual channel 5 (UHF digital channel 31), is a CW-affiliated television station located in Los Angeles, California, United States. The station is owned by the Tribune Broadcasting subsidiary of Tribune Media. KTLA maintains studio facilities located at the Sunset Bronson Studios on Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood, and its transmitter is located atop Mount Wilson.

KTLA was the first commercially licensed television station in the western United States, having begun operations in 1947. Although not as widespread in national carriage as its Chicago sister station WGN-TV, KTLA is available as a superstation throughout North America via Dish Network (available only to grandfathered subscribers that had purchased its a la carte superstation tier before Dish halted sales of the package to new subscribers in September 2013), as well as on cable providers in select cities within the southwestern United States and throughout Canada.

Sam Rubin is an American journalist who serves as the entertainment reporter for the KTLA Morning News and as a correspondent for ReelzChannel production Hollywood Dailies. He hosts Live From the Academy Awards and the celebrity talk-show Hollywood Uncensored with Sam Rubin, also on ReelzChannel. Rubin has reported on the entertainment industry for over twenty years and has interviewed many Hollywood stars, including Tom Hanks, Mel Gibson, Jeff Bridges, Halle Berry, and Larry King. He is also the co-author of two biographies, one on the former first lady Jacqueline Onassis and another on actress Mia Farrow.

Djimon Hounsou – French: born April 24, 1964 is a Beninese-American actor and model. Hounsou began his career appearing in music videos. He made his film debut in the Sandra Bernhard film Without You I’m Nothing (1990) and gained widespread recognition for his role as Cinqué in the Steven Spielberg film Amistad (1997). He gained further recognition for his roles in Gladiator (2000), In America (2003), Blood Diamond (2006), receiving Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor nominations for both the latter films, as well as for his roles in Guardians of the Galaxy (2014) and Furious 7 (2015). He has been nominated for a Golden Globe Award, three Screen Actors Guild Awards and two Academy Awards.|||

