Raise your hand if you want to have your destination wedding in Lonavala. Only 82 kilometers away from the hustle and bustle of Mumbai, this calm hill station is an ideal place for a fun-filled wedding. While its serene nature and tranquil ambiance are sure to make your D-day a pleasant experience, the posh hotels lined up in its heart offer a breathtaking space for turning your wedding into a dream affair. Let's now take a look at some of those recommended venues in Lonavala for your dream wedding.

Do you want to make your D-Day unusual and exotic? Then, Della Adventure Resort is the right place for you. Owing to an impressive architecture and quirky ambiance, this resort is known for making any occasion a fun-filled event. Moreover, the panoramic view of nature around the resort adds a gentle touch to the occasion irrespective of its size and style. So, whether you hire this venue for your grand wedding or you hire for your intimate reception, this resort will turn your event into a dream affair. Their in-house team of vendors is also skilled and well-trained to take your wedding to a whole new level with their cordial and professional services.

Located at the landscape of mountains, Fariyas Resort at Lonavala is the perfect choice for a turning your wedding into a fairytale-like experience. With well-lit interior and modern decor, this resort is sure to give you and your guests one-of-a-kind memories. It has a lavish lawn where you can have a big fat wedding and also has banquet halls for the private receptions. Moreover, the decor and food are provided by the venue itself for customizing your wedding as per your choice and requirements.

Known for the opulence and grandness, Picaddle has established itself as one of the most top ranking luxury wedding venues in Lonavala. It is located atop the lush and serene Sahyadri ranges and offers a beautiful view of nature. While its calm and peaceful ambiance gives a romantic touch to the weddings, its lavish and fancy arrangements add drama. The venue has both indoor and outdoor wedding spaces with top-notch amenities and has in-house vendors for providing personalized services to you and your guests.

The Lagoona Resort is another splendid wedding venue in Lonavala that has been witnessing the weddings of different types and size for many years now. It offers customized wedding packages according to your needs and style and provides all kinds of marriage amenities for making the day a grand event. It has three banquet halls each with the posh decor and dazzling lights and boasts a huge lawn adorned with tropical trees. So, while you will enjoy the day with your friends and relatives in its beautiful ambiance, the vendors will take care of your needs by offering cordial services.|||

Find best Four wedding venues in lonawala for your dream wedding by Wedfine.India's best wedding company offers the best Wedding Venues at the best rates.