

 

 MTK51 is a single board computer that uses the ATEML 89S52 microcontroller as the CPU. The board provides a 32kB RAM (code memory) for user program and a 32KB ROM for monitor program. The board is designed for studying the microcontroller hardware and instruction coding. We can enter HEX code directly to the code memory and test the code with single step running, check the result of the operation with user registers. The kit also provides more devices interfacing, e.g. ADC, EEPROM, RTC, RELAY, Programmable Port, serial ports RS232, and RS485. The MCU can run both single chip or expand modes as well. Insert AJMP and ACALL hex code to the code memory, Simple program demos entering the machine code and execution with single step. 

 

 The code shown below will increment the accumulator content by one. The hex code for this simple program has only 3 bytes, i.e. 04 01 00. The video shows how to enter the hex code, how to insert the AJMP instruction and how to run it with key STEP. We will see the right-hand 8-bit LED (GPIO3) counting up. Running full speed with forever loop program

 

 Another sample is the forever loop running. The accumulator contents will write to GPIO3 using indirect mode through DPTR, then increment and the delay subroutine will be called. The program is repeated forever with AJMP MAIN instruction. The subroutine DELAY is simple delay code by counting two registers, R7 and R6. See the video, how to enter the hex code and run with key RUN. To end and get back to monitor program, press RESET key.

 

 

 

 

 Available now bare PCB of the MTK51 trainer. Double sides w/top/bottom solder mask and top overlay. 

 

 Pay now only $130 + free shipping.

 

 18 Available/ 2 sold 

 

 Contact: Wichit Sirichote 

 

 

 Download: 

 

 Monitor program 

 PLD's JEDEC file

 Hardware Schematic

 BOM

 Keypad Drawing SVG file (4 sheets on A4 size paper) using DrawFreely Inkscape Keypad label can be made easily with sticker paper covered with the clear one. (4 sheets on A4 size paper) using DrawFreelyKeypad label can be made easily with sticker paper covered with the clear one.|||

