The AI Optify data team writes about topics that we think data scientists and data engineers will love. AI Optify has affiliate partnerships so we may get a share of the revenue from your purchase.

Apache Spark is a fast and general-purpose cluster computing system. It provides high-level APIs in Java, Scala, Python and R, and an optimized engine that supports general execution graphs. It supports a rich set of higher-level tools including Spark SQL for SQL and structured data processing, MLlib for machine learning, GraphX for graph processing, and Spark Streaming. 



 Top Spark Books - For this post, we have scraped various signals (e.g. reviews sentiments, online ratings, topics covered in the book, author influence in the field, year of publication, social media signals, etc.) from web for more than 30's Spark books. We have combined all signals to compute a score for each book using Machine Learning and rank the top books.

The readers will love our list because it is Data-Driven & Objective. Enjoy the list:

Data in all domains is getting bigger. How can you work with it efficiently? Recently updated for Spark 1.3, this book introduces Apache Spark, the open source cluster computing system that makes data analytics fast to write and fast to run. With Spark, you can tackle big datasets quickly through simple APIs in Python, Java, and Scala. This edition includes new information on Spark SQL, Spark Streaming, setup, and Maven coordinates.

2. Big Data: Principles and best practices of scalable realtime data systems 

 $35.34 Big Data teaches you to build big data systems using an architecture designed specifically to capture and analyze web-scale data. This book presents the Lambda Architecture, a scalable, easy-to-understand approach that can be built and run by a small team. You'll explore the theory of big data systems and how to implement them in practice. In addition to discovering a general framework for processing big data, you'll learn specific technologies like Hadoop, Storm, and NoSQL databases.

3. Advanced Analytics with Spark: Patterns for Learning from Data at Scale 

 $35.36 n this practical book, four Cloudera data scientists present a set of self-contained patterns for performing large-scale data analysis with Spark. The authors bring Spark, statistical methods, and real-world data sets together to teach you how to approach analytics problems by example. You’ll start with an introduction to Spark and its ecosystem, and then dive into patterns that apply common techniques—classification, collaborative filtering, and anomaly detection among others—to fields such as genomics, security, and finance.

By introducing in-memory persistent storage, Apache Spark eliminates the need to store intermediate data in filesystems, thereby increasing processing speed by up to 100 times. This book will focus on how to analyze large and complex sets of data. Starting with installing and configuring Apache Spark with various cluster managers, you will cover setting up development environments. You will then cover various recipes to perform interactive queries using Spark SQL and real-time streaming with various sources such as Twitter Stream and Apache Kafka.

This book is an exploration of the Spark framework. The book begins by explaining what Spark is, including the people behind its development, as well as when it was developed. You will also learn where the framework is used. The Spark shell is very important when it comes to performing some computations with the framework. This has been explored in detail, and you will be taught how to use it for the purpose of performing an interactive analysis. Batch processing, which is very essential has also been discussed, with no detail being left out.

6. Big Data Analytics with Spark: A Practitioner's Guide to Using Spark for Large Scale Data Analysis 

 $29.75 Big Data Analytics with Spark is a step-by-step guide for learning Spark, which is an open-source fast and general-purpose cluster computing framework for large-scale data analysis. You will learn how to use Spark for different types of big data analytics projects, including batch, interactive, graph, and stream data analysis as well as machine learning. In addition, this book will help you become a much sought-after Spark expert.

Spark GraphX in Action begins with the big picture of what graphs can be used for. This example-based tutorial teaches you how to use GraphX interactively. You'll start with a crystal-clear introduction to building big data graphs from regular data, and then explore the problems and possibilities of implementing graph algorithms and architecting graph processing pipelines. Along the way, you'll collect practical techniques for enhancing applications and applying machine learning algorithms to graph data.

Apache Spark is an in-memory cluster based parallel processing system that provides a wide range of functionality like graph processing, machine learning, stream processing and SQL. It operates at unprecedented speeds, is easy to use and offers a rich set of data transformations. This book aims to take your limited knowledge of Spark to the next level by teaching you how to expand Spark functionality. The book commences with an overview of the Spark eco-system. You will learn how to use MLlib to create a fully working neural net for handwriting recognition. You will then discover how stream processing can be tuned for optimal performance and to ensure parallel processing.|||

Top 8 Apache Spark Books