I was born in the late 70’s. Well, I am still young and have achieved some successes and failures as well. I did not get a nice education but I got the English language at a very tender age. In one of my articles “remember” I thank my nursery school teacher for introducing me to education but more precisely to the English language.

What I learnt in great detail back then has made me into who I am today. I can travel the whole world and not get lost, I can have a phone call with Obama, in fact I am writing a book and truly I am confident about myself. I believe that education is important but is not an end in itself rather it’s a means to an end and definitely as google is driven by content,education is driven by language.

Over the years, I have realized that my successes came from understanding and using the English language in the right way and my failures came partly due to the lack of education. I say education because i came across job adverts that needed higher qualifications than what I had achieved.

This made me feel so bad but I had to soldier on. I have come to the realization that indeed our kids will not be successful because they have PhD’s but they will succeed because they know their language and can express themselves with confidence and authority.

With that being said, let me jump straight on to the reasons you should give your child a nice language background.

Children who have a nice language back ground have confidence, they are able to articulate their problems  and any other issues with ease and demand for answers. They can face any one if not under duress and explain themselves in a simple understandable way.

They can face any situation with so much courage. If they get lost , they will be able to talk to strangers and ask for their way home. When in class, they have the courage to answer questions and can even ask their teachers how a certain answer was arrived at.

3.Independent.

 When this children grow up, they tend to adapt to any situation. They can be sent by their parents abroad to study and for a fact they will do it with much ease. They feel good being on their own and are not cry babies. They can live in a shack and laugh about it.

4.self starters.

 Well, they will wake up early in the morning to study and prepare for school. They will finish their home work and park their school books after they finish ensuring that all is in place. In school, they tend to be disciplined and well mannered. They end up becoming responsible all rounded adults.

 5.Great communicators.

 They are the best marketers and sales guys. These children because of the self belief they have in themselves, make very nice sales guys. They can market anything and everything and be on top of the game. They will convince even their parents to buy for them the most expensive toys and give a justifiable reason for that.

 Last but not least, this kids are not afraid of failure and they are inventors and great leaders. Bill gates of Microsoft and Winston Churchill fall under this category.|||

I was born in the late 70’s. Well, I am still young but have achieved some successes and failures as well. Language got me my successes.