Are you thinking about learning about React Native? Do you already know React Native, and you’re looking to meet the best of the best? Maybe you are the best, and that’s why you’re going.

By popular demand, here’s the sneak preview of the two-day, single-track conference focused purely on React Native.

Portland, awesome tech hub and largest city in Oregon. Walmart Labs and New Relic have offices here, among several other notable companies. A mere three-hour drive from Seattle or even shorter flight, and being along both the Willamette and Columbia rivers, it has one of the most beautiful cityscapes in the U.S.

Another reason we’ve chosen Portland is for its perfect summer weather with temperatures around 77–84ºF (25–29ºC) and with all the attractions near the venue, we wanted excellent walking weather.

Organizing the ideal React Native conference requires a lot of planning and expert timing. As an attendee you’ll never have to worry about the details, our magical team will be handling those in the background. Venue choice sets a critical tone for the event, so we did not choose a hotel in the middle of nowhere — we chose a beautiful & centrally located venue to provide you with the best possible Portland experience.

The crown jewel of the Brewery Blocks, the event is held in the Armory; a classic building that has been re-engineered to fuse classic with new. There are lots of simpler options for venues, but that’s just not how we roll.

We’re a strange group at Infinite Red. We reallllllly care about the food. We flew our resident chef Derek from the Bay Area to meet and taste test with several caterers in Portland. The focus was to find the caterer who could make food everyone loves, but with care and attention to be top-notch. No frozen food, no cutting corners. And we made sure to accommodate for vegans and gluten-free eaters.

Our guests are going to be surrounded by amazing food options, and we want them to be happy with the food we provided as part of the experience.

We’ve had an amazing response to our CFP. Our resulting speakers and guests are from all over the world. We announced quite a few high profile speakers back in January:

Since those announcements, we’ve finished our CFP and with amazing results. During our blind ranking selection process, we now have people from Netflix, SalesForce, Eventbrite and more! Our full and updated listing is on the conference site: https://infinite.red/ChainReactConf

Besides speakers, we’re excited about our numerous attendees, and even our sponsors who will be helping us to make the event even better! Where else could you meet so many great companies looking to extend their knowledge and presence in React Native?

Allocating time for our designers to come up with products was hard… okay, I’m lying. Making conference materials is crazy fun!

Planning meetings can be pretty effortless, when you have the right people.

We hope that you enjoy the conference as much as we enjoyed being a part of creating it.

For company sponsorships, group purchasing, and media inquiries, please email us at conf@infinite.red to discuss.

We just announced our discussion panel!

Our good friends at Callstack.io are putting on the React Native EU conference in Poland! We’ll be attending! Be sure to get your ticket now.|||

Are you thinking about learning about React Native? Do you already know React Native, and you’re looking to meet the best of the best? Maybe you are the best, and that’s why you’re going. By popular…