Microsoft has confirmed that there is a bug causing Skype messages to appear out of order in the main desktop app.

This bug was discovered earlier this week and now, Microsoft-owned Skype has confirmed that their developers are working on quick ways of fixing the problem.

Skype 7.17.0.105 for Desktops is the only affected version

Skype allows users to download and install its application on PCs, tablets as well as smartphones. This app can also be used on other platforms such as Smart TVs, wearables as well as web browsers. According to the latest reports, it is the desktop version 7.17.0.105 that has been affected by this issue.

Usually, Microsoft releases new versions of Skype chat app twice a month or sometimes even once. The latest version 7.17 was availed to the public in mid-December and as such, having a bug at such, a time is shouldn’t be a huge concern for many. It is normal for new versions of apps to have bugs and performance issues immediately they are released; however, the issues are often dealt with as time flies by. This is the same thing that is expected from Microsoft in the coming few weeks.

There is no doubt that Microsoft is looking at all possible ways to make Skype for Windows the best communication software around. The same is also happening when it comes to Android and iOS, among other platforms. Well, it is true to say that a lot is going on at Microsoft’s Skype camp; however, this is no reason to allow this weird change in the arrangement of chat messages.

There is a way out

As mentioned, there is a way out of this problem. One thing you need to understand is that there many others with the same problem and since the problem seems to be associated with Skype 7.17.0.105, the best recommendation here, and the most obvious fix now is to downgrade to the previous version of the app.

The previous version available without this jumbled up chat messages is 7.17.0.104 and as usual, it is available for free download from the official website of the app. Microsoft also advises the affected users to try and use the Skype for Web version just in case they still feel the need of using the application on their desktops.|||

Skype Bug that Makes Messages Look Out of Order Now has a Fix