From startup to business success, there are tales of failure and regret to tell. Building a business is never easy. There are just so many things to think about and so many decisions to make. Mistakes are bound to be made. While some mistakes are unavoidable, others are made as a result of inexperience. These business mistakes might look common but its effect on any small business startup can be deadly.

Wait a minute…don’t allow them discourage you from taking that brilliant idea and turning it into a thriving business. See, while there isn’t a fool-proof plan to reach small business startup success yet, keeping in mind these small business mistakes would help increase your potential for success. See 11 (eleven) of them below.

This is one common small business mistake new business owners make. It should be handled with great caution because the success of your business might depend on it. How do you avoid this mistake? Simply access you partner. Start by asking yourself the following questions.

These questions will help you decide if to accept your proposed business partner or not. Got one already? Then re-assess him and decide if you’d want to go on with the partnership or not.

Many new business owners make the mistake of being in a haste to hire employees. They end up hiring people who don’t understand the company or her vision but are just looking for jobs. Smart entrepreneurs are very choosy when it comes to hiring employees. You must make sure the hired employee perfectly fits job description. If you hire hastily, you will get a bad taste and your business will bleed.

This is another deadly small business mistake you must avoid. Most business owners get too attached emotionally to their employees to the extent that their employees become very arrogant and disrespectful. A good rule of thumb is that you must get rid of the bad eggs among your employees very fast.

A lot of people shy away from building a business because of the risks involved. Many business owners fail to take their businesses to the next level simply because they are afraid of taking risks. They think avoiding risk is cautiousness. When you avoid risks, you avoid opportunities. If you want your business to grow, you have to take risks. I know it’s hard but instead of avoiding it, put in place a risk management system that will help you access and effectively manage the risks involved in any business opportunity you find.

Of all who dare to start the process of building their own business, only a few make it to the end of the process. This is usually a common trend with most new entrepreneurs. They give their businesses everything they’ve got and just when the breakthrough is about to come, they give up. I can’t convince you to never give up. Infact, no one can. It’s up to you. Just know that “quitters never win” and “winners never give-up”.

6. Relying Too Much on External Advisers

When you’re first starting out, you may not have many people to consult regarding your business issues, so you rely on the few people you think can help. For instance, you bring on investors not just because you need money but because you also need advice. This can be a very smart business move because their advice will strengthen your business but always make sure you do your own research, regardless of what investors tell you is the right path for your company. You’re the chief decision maker of your team and when the time comes for you to take a decision that might contradict professional ethics and advice, don’t hesitate to do it.

This is another small business mistake most small business startup owners make. Serving the customer on assumption can break your business. Most entrepreneurs serve the customers based on what they think the customers need instead of what the customer actually needs. To avoid this critical mistake, you have to dedicate a little budget to market research. Market research is simply the process of getting to know your customers, their want, need, taste and how they want their desires fulfilled.

This is also another small business mistake commonly made by entrepreneurs. When a business is experiencing recession, most entrepreneurs and managers will cut back on their budget and one of such will be the marketing budget. I think cutting back on the marketing budget is insane. Instead, I will advise you spend more on marketing because it’s the best way your business can survive a recession.

As unimportant as this may sound, building a business without a mission statement is just like setting out on a journey without a purpose. I have seen a lot of businesses operate without a mission statement and this is utterly wrong. Without a mission statement, your business will not stand the test of time. Your entrepreneurial spirit is found in the mission and the mission is the bond binding you, your employees and the customers together. Get a mission statement.

Before ever starting a business, you probably had a personal objective. As an entrepreneur, you must find a way to leverage your business towards the actualization of your personal objective. If your business will add nothing to your personal life, then that business is not worth the stress and effort.

This is another common small business mistake made by new and established entrepreneurs. Most entrepreneurs put their personal need ahead of the business need. Many make the mistake of spending business capital on luxurious office space and equipment. They throw expensive parties and declare bonuses to the peril of the business. As a smart entrepreneur, you must spend money shrewdly. Any money expended must be justified by an increase in sales or value addition to the business.

We all make mistakes. The key is being aware of them and consistently working to make smart, well-informed decisions in our businesses. If you can do that, and remain resilient, when you do make a mistake, success will be within your reach.

Thanks for reading this article but before you go, what’s the biggest mistake you’ve made with your startup? Share with me in the comments below.|||

