Not only do those new to the industry have to learn specialized language such as “Lean project management” and “Agile software development,” but they also have to navigate how to manage a team to deliver projects on time, on budget, and with quality.

When I started to specialize in reviewing project management software a few years ago, I began the onboarding process as many new hires do: with online research. I quickly discovered that sorting through the hundreds—yes, hundreds!—of online project management resources to find quality advice is exhausting.

I needed to learn industry jargon, navigate different project management certifications, and memorize workflows. I did not need to read about a once-prolific retired project manager’s daily life or scroll through a project management tool’s blog that only contained company updates.

So I began to filter through all the online project management resources to search for regularly updated, premium-quality content. Less than 20% of reviewed content made it to my RSS feed.

And now I’m ready to share these resources with you.

I don’t use the term “best” lightly, but the qualifications to get on this list were stringent. I’m confident that the sites reviewed in this post represent the most useful project management blogs available. Period.

I used the following qualifications:

With all these filters in place, my research guided me to these 58 project management blogs. I hope you enjoy them as much as I do.

They are organized by Moz score within each category.

Please note that unlike other sections, free sites were permitted here. The first few entries do not have a domain score.

Brief description: Kailash Awati takes a data-driven approach to project management, and explains how to solve complex problems that arise in large organizations taking a collaborative approach.

Start with this article: “Six ways in which project estimates go wrong”

Brief description: Kiron Bondale explores how to balance pragmatism with people-first project management.

Start with this article: “What they weren’t telling you when you took over that project…”

Start with this article: “Warning Signs Your Sponsor Doesn’t Care About the Project—and How to Change That”

Brief description: If you’re a team lead or Agile developer, check out Glen Alleman’s take on project management, along with his book, “Performance-Based Project Management.”

Start with this article: “Principles, Processes, and Practices of Project Success”

Brief description: In spite of the name, David Prior takes a helpful and direct approach to exploring Scrum and Agile project management, on both his blog and podcast.

Brief description: If you’re into Agile, leadership, and beautiful images from the Canadian wilderness, take a look at Mike Griffiths’s blog.

Start with this article: “‘When Will This Software Project Ever Be Done?’”

Brief description: John Carroll, a retired project management consultant, explores the intersection between project management and Taoism. He published a book on the subject called “The Way of the Project Manager” in 2014.

Brief description: Mike Cohn’s blog is dedicated to teamwork and project success. While his site is entitled “Mountain Goat Software,” most of Mike’s services derive from coaching and from his three books: “Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum,” “Agile Estimating and Planning,” and “User Stories Applied.”

Brief description: Julie Lerman is the recognized leading expert on Microsoft’s data access technology: Entity Framework. She uses this blog to share her “how-tos” from decades of programming with the Microsoft team. Julie Lerman has also published many books, including “Programming Entity Framework: Building Data Centric Apps with the ADO.NET Entity Framework.”

Start with this article: “Is Visual Studio Code Bugging You For Your User Name and E-Mail Address?”

Brief description: Recognizing a lack of female project management influencers, Elizabeth Harrin started A Girl’s Guide to Project Management to attract women to the field.

Start with this article: “The Ultimate Guide to Getting People to Take Responsibility at Work”

Brief description: Bertrand Duperrin investigates how organizational performance and social structures intersect to create business value. His blog is available both in English and in French.

Start with this article: “Digital Transformation and the key role of middle managers”

Brief description: Lisa Crispin is the co-author of “Agile Testing: A Practical Guide for Testers and Agile Teams” and “More Agile Testing: Learning Journeys for the Whole Team.” She uses her blog to impart practical skills and musings from 35 years in the programming and project management fields.

Start with this article: “Pairing For Learning – Across the Team”

Brief description: Soma Bhattacharya, author of “Stepping into Project Management,” is a results-driven Agile project manager who uses her blog to follow the latest project management trends.

Brief description: Corinna Baldauf, Lean and Agile project management expert, writes about how to identify and fix broken business processes.

Start with this article: “Retrospective fatigue? How to increase follow-through on action items”

Brief description: Want a project manager who’s honest about their life experiences? Natalie Warnert understands that project management isn’t always serious. Her posts offer a healthy injection of humor and self-awareness to Agile project management.

Start with this article: “Agile Conference Proposal Submissions – tips to get them accepted”

Brief description: Gina Abudi is the co-author of “The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Best Practices for Small Business” and blogs about projects, processes, and people.

She is the author of several project management books, which she offers for free download on her site.

Start with this article: “Does Your Organization Have a Clear Definition of Diversity?”

Brief description: With over 25 years of IT and business management experience, Brad Egeland delights his readership with actionable tips for becoming better project managers. His blog aggregates all of his favorite publications—most links to “read the full article” will redirect you to outside sites—and he has not authored everything he links to on his blog feed.

He is the author of several project management books, which he offers for free download on his site.

Start with this article: “5 Things to Consider When Invoicing Questionable Customers”

Brief description: Ron Rosenhead, a U.K.-based project manager with over 15-years’ experience, mixes reflection, theory, and detailed guides in his prolific project management blog.

Start with this article: “How good is project sponsorship in your company?”

Brief description: Susanne Madsen has a simple project management philosophy that is complicated to execute: Project leadership is more important than workflows and tasks. Learn how she makes the case on her blog, and check out her books, “The Project Management Workbook” and “The Power of Project Leadership,” for further reading.

Start with this article: “How to become a more engaging facilitator of project workshops”

Brief description: How does Agile apply to team culture, and what does Em Campbell-Pretty, author of “Tribal Unity: Getting from Teams to Tribes by Creating a One Team Culture,” have to say about it? You’ll just have to read her blog to find out.

Start with this article: “How I Fell in Love With Impact Mapping…”

Brief description: Want to make the business case for a product and guide it to completion? Melissa Perri uses her background in product management and user experience to guide project managers toward deeper reflection and project analysis.

Start with this article: “Stop Blaming the User”



Who better to write insightful tips on project management than those who do it for a living?

Brief description: Scrum.org provides Scrum Masters with community insights to succeed in software delivery.

Start with this article: “The Scrum Master as an Impediment Remover”

Brief description: Johanna Rothman writes for Rothman Consulting Group with frank advice, cutting humor, and excellent project management tips.

Brief description: How, exactly, does Scrum work? Scrum Inc. investigates in this practical, no-nonsense blog.

Start with this article: “How does a Scrum Master actually facilitate anything?”

Brief description: Want to learn about IT project management or PMO leadership? Margaret Meloni, along with her staff, provides useful, free advice to her readers.

Start with this article: “What to do When a Team Member Needs to Rant”

Brief description: Looking for insights into the newest project management techniques? Check out pmsolutions’ blog, which both flaunts the consulting firm’s expertise and provides actionable insights into the latest project management trends.

Start with this article: “Get Serious: What’s the Role of Happiness in the Workplace?”

Brief description: TwentyEighty uses this blog to illuminate best practices for projects, contracts, and requirements.

Start with this article: “The PMO – What Does it Stand For?”

Brief description: Just getting started with project management? Parallel Project Training offers lots of great advice that anyone new to the field can easily understand.

Start with this article: “Do Project Managers Need Technical Knowledge?”

Brief description: Threon’s magazine centers on the most important “soft” project management skill for organizations: communication.

Start with this article: “Three Key Factors to Improve Project Management Performance”

Brief description: Watermark Learning is a training company that focuses on business skills such as project management, business processes, and leadership skills. Their instructive blog reflects their expertise in these cornerstone topics.

Start with this article: “Agile Retrospectives in 5 Steps”



Want to be the best in your field? Check out where the software is headed.

If you’ve used CA Technologies’ project portfolio management software, please leave a review.

Brief description: CA Technologies, best known for their now retired tool called “Rally,” explores issues relating to enterprise-level IT project management.

Start with this article: “Are Chatbots the Tip of the Artificial Intelligence Iceberg?”

If you’ve used Trello, please leave a review.

Brief description: Trello’s lighthearted blog focuses on Agile, teamwork, and productivity. Anyone interested in working smarter will enjoy their articles, Kanban guru or not.

Start with this article: “Say Yes To Less Stress: Using Trello To Plan A Wedding”

Brief description: How could we leave ourselves off the list? Capterra’s project management blog centers on how technology can help project managers simplify their processes. The blog also publishes pop-culture influenced articles, including roundup lists of the best project management movies and project management books.

Start with this article: “7 of the Best Microsoft Project Alternatives”

If you’ve used Wrike, please leave a review.

Brief description: Are you all about collaboration? So is Wrike. Check out their articles to learn about how to be the best team member possible.

Start with this article: “3 Crucial Keys to Creative Project Management”

If you’ve used Active Collab, please leave a review.

Brief description: Active Collab’s blog is aimed at new project managers and growing businesses. If you’re a startup or looking to start up your PM career, Active Collab has you covered.

Start with this article: “The Real Reason Why Developers and Designers Hate Meetings”

If you’ve used VersionOne, please leave a review.

Brief description: VersionOne is a huge name in the Agile community, so it’s no surprise that their blog exclusively focuses on the iterative project management process. If you’re in Agile, bookmark this site for VersionOne’s expertise and long-form guides.

Start with this article: “8 Reasons Why Agile Projects Fail”

If you’ve used Redbooth, please leave a review.

Brief description: Redbooth’s blog has three major buckets: project management, workplace culture, and personal productivity. If you’re interested in any of these topics, give their blog a few hours of your time.

Start with this article: “7 Components of an Actionable Team Charter”

Brief description: Like Capterra, GetApp helps match businesses with the right software. Its project management blog centers on project management tools and tricks to keep your PMO running smoothly.

Start with this article: “How to Choose Kanban Project Management Software: A Handy Checklist”

If you’ve used Teamwork, please leave a review.

Brief description: Teamwork’s blog is aimed at small teams looking for insights into achieving outstanding productivity and collaboration.

Start with this article: “8 Key Skills Every Project Manager Needs”

If you’ve used Clarizen, please leave a review.

Brief description: Primarily written for more experienced project managers, Clarizen’s blog provides specific tips to further one’s PM processes and personal career.

Start with this article: “What to Include in a Project Scope Statement”

If you’ve used LiquidPlanner, please leave a review.

Brief description: LiquidPlanner’s helpful how-to articles guide their readers to being more productive, technically savvy project managers.

Start with this article: “8 Best Practices for Prioritizing Project Work for Your Team”

If you’ve used Replicon, please leave a review.

Brief description: Replicon’s prolific blog centers around the intricacies of human resources and project management.

Start with this article: “‘Use it or lose it’ vacation: how to do it right”

If you’ve used ProjectManager.com, please leave a review.

Brief description: ProjectManager.com’s blog focuses on practical leadership tips to guide your project team to success.

Start with this article: “How to Manage Project Scope”

If you’ve used Nutcache, please leave a review.

Brief description: Nutcache provides straightforward business advice that centers on project management, teamwork, and leadership.

Start with this article: “21 Best Project Management Books for Beginner and Advanced Project Managers”

If you’ve used Celoxis, please leave a review.

Brief description: From the psychology of leadership to tips on boosting your company’s profits with project management software, Celoxis’s in-depth blog is one not to miss.

Start with this article: “Organization Culture: The stepping stone to Project Success”

If you’ve used Easy Projects, please leave a review.

Brief description: Easy Projects’ blog is a straightforward portal to expert video tutorials and tips and strategies for managing projects more efficiently.

Start with this article: “3 funny team-building exercises for your team members”

If you’ve used Genius Project, please leave a review.

Brief description: PM Box investigates successfully completed projects to deliver case-driven insights to its audience, along with helpful tutorials and guides for newer project managers.

Start with this article: “The Three Gorges Dam: Expert Opinions Matter”



Once you’re done looking at dedicated project management blogs, move on to industry forums. These dedicated project management communities are filled with articles and advice, and they typically aren’t trying to sell you anything.

Start with this discussion: “Need Insights. I’m a PM and I feel like I’m an overpaid glorified secretary”

Intended audience: People who want more information on a career in project management

Start with this article: “Agile Project Management for Dummies Cheat Sheet”

Start with this discussion: “How much technical experience is required to be a software project manager?”

Intended audience: Agile Alliance members and anyone interested in Agile software development

Start with this article: “What is Waste?”

Start with this article: “Ethics: A Means to an End?”

Intended audience: Association for Project Management members and project managers interested in theory-level analysis and advice

Start with this article: “How to make project management more ‘SME-friendly’”

Intended audience: Project managers looking for advice in specific niches, such as computer-based information systems, integration management, and procurement.

Start with this article: “Key Performance Indicators for the PMO: Metrics for Success”

Intended audience: Project managers looking to share, write, and read project management reference material

Start with this article: “Managing Stress In Project Management”

Intended audience: Project management practitioners who want to improve their portfolio and team management techniques

Intended audience: Project managers interested in success stories and instructional articles from their peers

Start with this article: “What Does RAG Status Mean?”

Intended audience: Project managers looking for quick answers to their career-related questions

Start with this forum: “Productivity rates and resource loading for team work”



While I’m confident that everything on this page reflects the best of the web, I’m sure that some project management blogs might qualify in the future, or that I missed one or two.

Let me know what you like to read in the comments, and be sure to keep coming back to Capterra’s project management blog for the latest tools, tips, and trend analysis for your project management career.|||

Looking for the best project management blogs from around the web that are actually helpful? Check out these 58.