Welcome to our guide to the best laptops under $200 based on value for money, hardware performance, ease of use, design and consumer feedback.

For those of you that are shopping for a new laptop on a very limited budget, finding a cheap or refurbished laptop might be the best option for you.  In this list you will find some of the best deals on new, used and refurbished laptops all priced under the $200 mark. The second hand laptop market has exploded over the years and not everyone needs a fancy laptop to achieve what they are after and there are also many brand new netbooks and Chromebooks with some seriously attractive designs on offer. These budget laptops will work perfectly fine for browsing the web, MS Office applications (except for Chromebooks), and basic programs. Note: The main drawback of buying a laptop under $200 is that to get the best performance out of your machine you will need to run either an older operating system (usually Windows XP) or Chrome OS, Google’s custom operating system that is based on the cloud and is fully browser orientated (no standard Windows apps). We’d strongly recommending checking out our guide to laptops under $300 if you can afford it for a lot more solid options or more of our cheap laptop guides to fit every budget.

Those with a keen eye for detail will one to checkout LaptopMag’s laptop buying guide to get clued up on all the technical jargon before viewing our buying guides in order to prevent you from getting the wrong laptop.

 Top Picks >> Under $200 >> Chromebooks >> Under $250 >> Used and Refurbished >>

These are our current top picks for the sub-$200 laptop market and anyone looking for budget laptop that can handle your day to day tasks.

If you are looking for a strong and sturdy Chromebook that can handle the abuses of the classroom, then the ASUS Chromebook C202SA-YS02 is well worth considering. It has been specially designed with nano-molding technology to ensure that it is tough as nails and the rubber bumpers help to protect this Chromebook from impact in unforeseen accidents. It has even been tested by ASAS to endure a 3.9 foot drop. ASUS have also given the Chromebook C202SA-YS02 a spill-resistant keyboard to ensure that this Chromebook will still function in the event of an unforeseen spillage while it is being used. The 180-degree hinged display allows for easier viewing while in group discussions and gives the ASUS Chromebook C202SA-YS02 a bit more flexibility when relaxing with your feet up on the sofa. Powering the ASUS Chromebook C202SA-YS02 is an Intel Celeron N3060 processor and 4GB of RAM, which combined are more than powerful enough for most Chrome OS tasks. While the standard Microsoft Office cannot be installed on Chrome OS, you will be able to use Google Docs, QuickOffice and Microsoft Office Online for all of your word processing needs. The 16GB of storage will allow for a handful of applications and documents to be stored on the ASUS Chromebook C202SA-YS02, however, it has been designed to be used in conjunction with Google’s Drive cloud storage. You get 100GB of cloud storage space for 2 years from Google, thereafter it will cost $1.99 a month to keep the same amount of storage. If you would prefer an offline solution, then we recommend purchasing a 128GB MicroSD card and installing it into the MicroSD slot for a more permanent storage solution.



If you are looking for a small laptop for basic tasks such as web browsing, Skype and word processing, then the HP 14-an013nr might be right for you. The HP 14-an013nr is an updated version of the HP 14-an010nr and you now get a Full-HD IPS display. While the HP 14-an010nr only offers a 1366 x 768 TN display, the new and improved display on the HP 14-an013nr offers richer colors and wider viewing angles. You now get a maximum resolution of 1920 x 1080, which is a vast improvement over its predecessor. The AMD Qaud Core E2-7110 and 4GB of DDR3L RAM will not win any awards, but it will easily cope with everyday basic tasks. While it does have an eMMC solid state drive, it is tiny and only offers 32GB of storage space. With Windows 10 installed, you will only have about 15GB of internal storage space to use. We recommend at looking at a Cloud based storage option or an external drive to store your multimedia files. The entry level Radeon R2 graphics is by no means a gaming GPU, but you will be able to play Sims 4, World of Warcraft and Counter Strike: Go on the lowest of settings. The battery life is not as good as we had hoped and users have reported an average battery life of around 5 hours, which will mean carrying your power cord around with you.



Not everyone needs a top of the line laptop which can cost several hundred dollars or more for their basic needs. Instead it makes more sense to look at the affordable options such as the Dell Inspiron i3162-0003BLU. Priced at under $200, this laptop will not break the bank and will allow you to use popular applications such as Microsoft Word and Skype. You will also be able to browse the web for interesting articles or catch up on the latest news from around the world. However the entry-level Intel Celeron N3060 processor and the 4GB of RAM are a big limiting factor for this budget friendly laptop. While you won’t be editing videos or using high-end design applications, it will still be useful for some very basic photo editing if you intend on running a blog or you just want to edit those holiday snaps. Both the memory and the processor will also struggle with the popular Google Chrome web browser and we recommend using a web browser that is less taxing on your system. The Dell Inspiron i3162-0003BLU also doesn’t offer much when it comes to storage space and the tiny 32GB is far too small for modern standards. Furthermore, with Windows 10 installed you are only left with about 20GB of usable storage space. We recommend using the laptops MicroSD slot to extent the laptop’s storage with a good Class 10 MicroSD card.



The Lenovo Ideapad 110s 80WG0001US is an updated version of the Lenovo IdeaPad 100s and now features a more powerful Intel Pentium processor. At a light 2.53-pounds and with its compact 11.6-inch display, this laptop is great for students or for those who are constantly on the go. While the older 100s offered an impressive 9 hour battery life, the new 110s only manages 7 hours off of a single charge. This might have to do with the Pentium processor that has replaced the Atom processor on the 100s. While the Intel Pentium N3060 processor is an improvement over the older Atom processor, it is still not suited for more intensive applications. However, if sending emails, using Skype and browsing the web are all you need it for, then this PC will be more than enough for you. The 2GB of RAM will allow you to use most applications, however it cannot be upgraded and it will struggle with resource hungry applications such as Google Chrome. The 32GB of eMMC flash memory is limited to only 17GB with Windows 10 installed, but users can install a MicroSD card to expand the 110’s storage space. We recommend a high speed 128GB MicroSD card or a good cloud-based storage solution. Like most Windows laptops in this category, you will get a 1 year subscription to Office 365 Personal, which includes Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook and OneNote. The display is not the brightest or the most vivid, however at under $200 dollars we can’t expect a Full-HD display.



The Stream range of laptops have been extremely popular with users who are after a reliable laptop that won’t break the bank. Designed for the everyday user, the HP Stream 11-y010nr will easily cope with tasks such as web browsing, emails and Skype, but its entry level processor will struggle with more intensive tasks. Designed for streaming and working online, the HP Stream 11-y010nr only features a tiny 32GB of storage space. However with Windows 10 installed you are only left with around 20GB of usable storage space. While the SSD will allow you to start up Windows in seconds, it is far too small to store any larger media collections or large amounts of photos. Luckily HP have fitted the HP Stream 11-y010nr with a microSD card slot and you can use a large 128GB microSD card to increase the internal storage of the laptop. Don’t forget to format the card to NTFS to allow Windows to copy larger files. You can also look at an external hard drive or a cloud based storage option if you would prefer even more space. An Intel Celeron N3060 processor and 4GB of RAM power the HP Stream 11-y010nr, but neither the RAM nor the storage drive can be removed or upgraded, so you will have to make do with the 4GB of RAM. You get an 11.6-inch display that offers impressive colors and image quality for its attractive price. However, to keep costs down, HP have used an entry level TN display that offers far narrower viewing angles than laptops with an IPS displays. You also get a fairly large bezel around the display which is noticeable and makes the overall display area look a lot smaller than it really is. Overall if you are looking for a cheap entry level laptop for basic tasks, then the HP Stream 11-y010nr is well worth considering. Alternatively you can also look at the slightly larger HP Stream 14-ax010nr if you would prefer a 14-inch laptop.



At first glance the ASUS L402SA-WH02-OFCE does not look like a laptop that would be priced at under $200. Its compact size and rounded edges give it a far more elegant look and feel than many of its competitors in the same price bracket. Designed for home or school use, the ASUS L402SA-WH02-OFCE is not overly powerful and is more suited for basic tasks. The Dual Core Intel Celeron N3060 processor and 4GB of RAM will easily cope with browsing the web, sending emails and chatting to friends and family via Skype. However, more RAM hungry applications such as Google Chrome will feel sluggish if you have loads of tabs open. If you prefer using Windows 10’s Edge browser, then you will be better off. If you are looking to play the latest games, then this laptop is not for you as it is only suited for basic browser games or less demanding classic titles from yesteryear. The biggest issue with the ASUS L402SA-WH02-OFCE is the tiny 32GB storage drive which will fill up extremely quickly. We recommend looking at a good external hard drive, or even using a good Cloud-based storage solution such as Google Drive. While the display is fairly average, the sound is rather good for a budget laptop and you even get the world renowned ASUS SonicMaster application to fine tune your audio. However, don’t expect high-end sound quality as this is still an affordable laptop. As a bonus, you get 1 year subscription to Microsoft Office 365, allowing you to use applications such as Word, Excel and Outlook.



If you are after a compact laptop that won’t break the bank, then the Lenovo N22 80S6 is well worth looking at. The long battery life means that you will be able work or browse the web for up to 10 hours, making the Lenovo N22 80S6 great for college students and travellers alike. One of the Lenovo N22 80S6’s unique features is its rotational camera, which can rotate 180 degrees. The Lenovo N22 80S6 was designed for the K-12 education market and has been designed to be extremely sturdy and even features a water-resistant keyboard just in case you spill liquid on it. The hardware won’t win any awards, but the Dual-Core Intel Celeron N3050 processor and 4GB of DDR3 RAM will easily cope with basic tasks. However, the processor will struggle with heavier multitasking and this will leave the laptop feeling very sluggish. The superfast SSD allows Windows to boot up in seconds, but with only 64GB of storage space it severely limits the amount of apps that you can install and the amount of files that you can store. Both the 4GB of RAM and the installed SSD cannot be upgraded, but you can add a large microSD card to extend the laptop’s storage. A big plus for business users is that the Lenovo N22 80S6 comes preinstalled with Windows 10 Professional, which offers far more options than the Home edition.



Users looking for a light basic machine that will be primarily used for email, Skype, browsing and word processing should definitely check out the ASUS E402MA. With an Intel N2840 and 2GB of RAM, it’s by no means a powerful machine. While technically able to play HD video content the low resolution screen and low amount of storage very much hinder the media experience. Where this machine does shine is thanks to the SSD the bootup and load times of basic applications are very fast and the Celeron N2840 handles most, if not all, day to day applications provided not too much multitasking is involved. At under $300, the E402MA offers users who would otherwise not be able to afford a laptop a foot in the door to the computing world. ASUS is also known for their good build quality so while cheap in price these laptops do tend to last a bit longer than some of their rivals.



The Acer Aspire One Cloudbook 11 AO1-131-C9PM is a great alternative to budget Chromebooks and entry level tablets. Looking at its specs, you can say it is a Windows tablet with a permanently attached keyboard. As expected at this price, it has a very basic design made of plastic. It still feels sturdy, has little flex and weighs only 2.5 pounds. Having a 0.70-inch body means it lacks a DVD drive, but its compact frame houses adequate connectivity options including a USB 3.0 port, a USB 2.0 port, a full-size HDMI port and even fast 802.11a/c Wi-Fi connectivity. It also has a full-size keyboard and a large touchpad providing smooth typing and fluid navigation. Its 11.6-inch anti-glare display is bright and sharp, and supports a native resolution of 1366 x 768. The Cloudbook is a fanless system with a power efficient Dual-Core Intel N3050 processor that is backed by 2GB of RAM for fluid mainstream computing such as social networking, editing spreadsheets, web browsing and video playback. It has rather weak integrated graphics that cannot handle any latest desktop games. The laptop only has 32GB of storage because Acer wants you to save your files in the Cloud and offers 1TB of free cloud storage for a year along with a free Office 365 subscription. The Cloudbook comes with a large number of useful cloud-enabled apps like abPhoto, ab Music, abFiles, and abDocs. The laptop can run for 8 hours on battery, and gets adequately loud despite its tiny speakers. All in all, the One Cloudbook 11 could be a reliable second laptop for travel and a super cheap option for users who just want a fast enough machine for typing and web browsing.



If you are looking for a small laptop for basic tasks such as web browsing, Skype and word processing, then the HP 14-an010nr might be right for you. Powered by an AMD Qaud Core E2-7110 and 4GB of LPDDR3 RAM, the HP 14-an010nr will handle all your day-to-day tasks, but the processor is slightly underpowered for more intensive multitasking. While it does have an eMMC solid state drive, it is tiny and only offers 32GB of storage space. With Windows 10 installed, users will only have about 15GB of storage space to use. We recommend purchasing an external hard drive or using a cloud based storage service to extend the laptop’s storage capabilities. The Radeon R2 graphics are very disappointing and is mainly there to run the Windows apps. This is in no way a gaming laptop and at its price we don’t expect it to be. The display is exactly what we expect from a budget laptop and users can expect average image quality. With a maximum resolution of 1366 x 768, users can still enjoy video streaming at 720p. Luckily the HP 14-an010nr features an HDMI and VGA port so that it can be connected to a TV or monitor for Full-HD video streaming. While the battery life is not terrible, it won’t last an entire work or school day, so make sure you have your power cord with you.

 The HP 14-an010nr is a budget friendly laptop for basic tasks at school and at home. But the tiny SSD offers very limited storage space and will mean using a cloud service or external drive. Dell has a large range of budget laptops that are tailored to suit users’ needs and their budgets. The Dell Inspiron i3542-602BLK is an entry level netbook that features many of the sleek black design elements of its more powerful siblings, but at a fraction of the price. Sporting a 5th generation Intel Celeron N3050 processor and 2GB of RAM, the Dell Inspiron i3542-602BLK is designed for users who need a laptop for basic tasks. The Celeron processor is slightly underpowered for more intensive apps and multitasking has its limits with the onboard 2GB of RAM. While the eMMC flash storage device offers fast boot and app loading times, the total amount of storage space is limited to 32GB. This is not ideal for users who want to store large amounts of multimedia on their laptops as the 32GB is largely taken up by Windows 10 and the preinstalled apps. Many of its competitors offer MicroSD slots for the expansion of the storage space, but Dell has opted for a full size SD card slot that is only suited for temporary storage while users are not on the move. Users will have to look at Cloud based and external USB storage options for extended storage. The Dell Inspiron i3542-602BLK is in no way a gaming laptop with its Braswell Graphics chip, but it will run 720p HD videos on its 14-inch display. The display offers vibrant colors and a maximum resolution of 1366 x 768 which offers less pixilation that 15.6-inch displays. While it is not the most powerful laptop on the market, it does offers great value for money.

 The Dell Inspiron i3542-602BLK is a small and light netbook that offers great value for money, but its small storage drive is not ideal for multimedia storage.

Acer has started to make a name for itself in the Chromebook market as of late. With multiple additions to their chromebook lineup the CB3-131-C3SZ is one of the most popular. Don’t let the 2.16Ghz Celeron processor and 2GB DDR3L RAM fool you, the CB3-131-C3SZ is lightning fast thanks to Google’s lightweight Chrome OS. Boot up times are around 7 seconds thanks to the 16GB SSD drive and with around 8 and a half hours of battery life this couldn’t be more suited for a on-the-go professional or student. There are a few limitations due to Chrome OS such as only being able to install apps off the Chrome web store as well as a lack of a file browser, however the tech savvy user will easily be able to install Linux to turn this Chromebook into a fully fledged laptop computer.



If you are in the market for a sleek, ultra-portable laptop that is very stylish yet functional but you don’t want to spend a fortune then the ASUS 11.6 Chromebook might just be the choice for you. Powered by the Baytrail line of processors from Intel, it offers quick and steady performance through most tasks although some heavier duty applications might see slower processing times. With it’s incredible 11 hour battery you are easily free to take with you wherever you go without worrying about running low on power and the 16 GB solid state drive gives you a fair amount of storage while speeding up load times while you work. Running the ChromeOS, you will gain access to the vast library of apps from the Chrome Web Store but, like many Chromebooks, you need to be online in order to fully take advantage of the features. The ASUS 11.6 Chromebook is the perfect budget Chromebook for users who don’t want to spend a lot of money but need a fast laptop to take with them wherever they go.



The HP Chromebook 11 G4 is another great addition in the Chromebook line of low cost, well-built laptops. The competition is tough in this price range, but the G4 tries to stand out with a better than average design and a well-built keyboard that offers a superior typing experience compared to many of run-of-the-mill budget laptops. The G4 has a minimalistic design but it has a slightly sophisticated look thanks to its matte black lid, curved edges and textured bottom. Inside, it has a black Chiclet style keyboard resting on a silver finished base. The keys are sufficiently spaced and are matte finished for a satisfying typing experience. The 11.6-inch 1366 x 768 pixel resolution display offers similar clarity as other budget screens, and its colors are accurate but get slightly washed out at wider viewing angles. The display doesn’t get as bright as the Lenovo N21’s screen, but its anti-glare coating does help in brighter settings. The small chassis houses all of the necessary ports that includes a USB 2.0 port, 1 USB 3.0 port, an HDMI port and a SD card reader. This base model G4 features an Intel Celeron N2840 processor coupled with 2GB of RAM and 16GB flash storage. Tasks like typing on Google Docs, YouTube video streaming and web browsing, all can be done at once without any significant performance drops. However, if you plan on opening more than 15 tabs on the browser, the pricier 4GB version is better equipped for such intense web browsing sessions.



The ASUS C201PA-DS02 is an entry level Chromebook built for basic users who want a workable laptop for a very low price. With an attractive blue chassis with silver accented surfaces surrounding the keyboard, it mimics the design of the latest ultraportable. There is no inbuilt optical drive which helps keep the profile stay thin and the weight low. The construction is primarily plastic but it’s sturdy and feels well-made. The 11-inch screen is a glossy one with adequate pixels and a reasonably wide viewing angle for comfortable viewing. The keyboard has ample sized keys that are properly spaced to prevent accidental strokes. The trackpad is smooth and responsive. With over 10 hours of battery life, you won’t need to carry your charger with you all the time. ASUS has included a decent amount of ports by including two USB 2.0 ports, a micro HDMi, an SD Card reader and Bluetooth 4.0. Equipped with a Rockchip 1.8 GHz Processor and 2 GB DDR3 RAM, it is clearly meant for the most basic of tasks and not hardcore gaming and designing. The hardware adequately handles document editing, video playback and web browsing on Chrome. However, the system might slow down when working with complex files such as multiple large PDFs. The storage of 16 GB SSD is only enough if you plan on uploading most of your content in the cloud, but it’s better to purchase a large capacity SDcard for your media files. If you want an easy to use laptop for documents and basic multimedia, the C201PA-DS02 is one of the cheapest Chromebooks available.



HP has been releasing its Stream series for a number of years and the HP Stream 14-ax010nr is one of their latest offerings. Its compact size and light weight make it a great laptop as an everyday carrier, but the tiny hard drive will mean that you will need a connection to the internet or an external hard drive. The fast 32GB solid state drive allows Windows 10 to boot up in seconds and will allow you to launch your apps much faster than a traditional 5400rpm mechanical hard drive. But with just under 20GB free with Windows 10 installed, you are not left with much space to store your work or personal files. But you do get a year’s subscription to Office 365 and 1TB of OneDrive storage. However if want a good offline solution then we recommend a 1TB Seagate external hard drive. Powering the HP Stream 14-ax010nr is an Intel Celeron N3060 Dual Core processor and 4GB of RAM. While its entry level hardware is underpowered for the power user, it is sufficient for basic home and office use. The same goes with the display, like most budget laptops you get an entry level 1366 x 768 display panel. However the BrightView panel does offer brilliant image quality and a bright visual experience for indoor use.



Lenovo is known across the globe for their budget laptop solutions, the Ideapad 100s is an 11.6-inch laptop that boasts a sleek and thin design and is priced well under $200. With a 9-hour battery life and weighing in at 2.2lbs, the 100s is the perfect travel companion for users who only require a laptop for basic tasks such as web browsing and word processing. The Quad Core Intel Atom Z3735F processor is backed by 2GB of RAM, which is a configuration that is commonly found on Windows 10 based tablets. The 32GB of eMMC flash memory is limited to only 17GB with Windows 10 installed, but users can install a microSD card to expand the 100s’ storage space. We recommend a high speed 64GB or 128GB microSD card. Like most Windows based tablets, Lenovo offers the 100s with a 1 year subscription to Office 365 Personal, which includes Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook and OneNote. The display offers good viewing angles with average colors and has a maximum resolution of 1366×768. The display is powered by Intel Bay Trail graphics chip and is in no way a gaming laptop. Classic games will run, but more modern titles will not run at all. While the keyboard offers large keys for typing, it does suffer from a large amount of flex which can annoy some users. The trackpad offers responsive navigation, but lacks gesture support. Available in four brilliant colors, red, blue, white and silver, you can pick one that matches your style.



The Dell Latitude D630 has been a trusted favorite for years and was one of the most successful original dual core laptops to enter the market. It is perfect for anyone looking for a portable laptop that is cost effective with a 14.1-Inch display who doesn’t mind being a few years behind in terms of software. The D630 ships with Windows XP installed and while it is possible to install and run Windows 7 and even Windows 8 for best performance it is best to stick with Windows XP. Performance wise it is on par with most of the other modern laptops in this category and has a solid full size LCD display. On the downside the batter life is only 2 hours (a lot less than the modern equivalent) and the on-board sound isn’t great. All in all this laptop is a classic and perfect for light business use and if you can find one in decent condition one of the cheapest sub $300 laptops available.



As you can see, with a little digging you can easily find laptops available for under $200 if you are shopping on an extremely tight budget.  However, for best performance, we recommend that you spend just a little more to truly get the best bang for your buck.  To help you, consider visiting our other guides including our weekly list of laptops under $300 and under $400 articles to find some of the best budget laptops available.|||

A modest budget doesn't mean you can't afford a kickass laptop. Start your search here with our weekly updated guide to the best cheap laptops under $200.