This irrefutable fact of nature cascades from dairy farms – where each cow typically produces six gallons of milk every day – to food-processing companies funneling that white gold into cartons.

But when one part fails on a milk-packaging line, it can take the entire operation offline for days, leaving a plant unable to store thousands of soon-to-spoil gallons. And there’s no stopping the cows on the farm or the milk that must be harvested.

It’s an urgent reality in the dairy world – and in many factories that process and package perishables bound for grocery aisles.

To prevent such disruptions across the food industry, packaging pioneer Tetra Pak is employing new, digital tools that enable its cloud-connected machines to predict exactly when equipment needs maintenance, averting many breakdowns. And when repairs are needed, Tetra Pak service engineers use HoloLens headsets to more quickly diagnose and fix machine issues, even in the most remote locations.

The Swedish company, which last year sold 188 billion packages and produced $12.2 billion in net sales, is transforming the services it offers to food and beverage manufacturers in more than 175 countries.

“We will take over a lot of risk on behalf of our customers. To do that, we need cutting-edge technologies to control and minimize these risks,” says Johan Nilsson, vice president of Tetra Pak Services. “When you have plants around the world, the service knowledge we gain from one plant comes to benefit another. This prevents issues from happening.”

In short, Tetra Pak can now foresee machine problems – or quickly spot breakdowns – reducing plant downtimes and the high costs they carry, Nilsson says.

This work is particularly vital to companies that process and package aseptic, or sterile, products. In the aseptic process, short heating and cooling times (275 degrees Fahrenheit for up to 15 seconds) ensure food is absent of harmful microorganisms while retaining its taste and nutritional benefits. The food is then packed in pre-sterilized cartons. An unopened aseptic package can be stored without refrigeration or preservatives for up to six months.

It’s a long-proven process, described by the Institute of Food Technologists as “the most significant food science innovation of the last 50 years.” Tetra Pak holds a central place in that history. At a 1961 press conference in Switzerland, the company presented the first machine for aseptically filled bacteria-free milk.|||

Packaging pioneer Tetra Pak is employing new, digital tools that enable its cloud-connected machines to predict exactly when equipment needs maintenance.