A single trip to the make up store can easily set you back hundreds of dollars. So it’s important to invest on the best  products for you, that can truly make a positive difference in your look! It will be more than money well spent.

 A single trip to the make up store can easily set you back hundreds (for some of us thousands) of dollars! If you invest on quality products that will truly make a positive difference in your look (that don’t necessarily have to cost a arm and a leg!) you will see a HUGE difference in the money you save in cosmetics and the overall improvement of the look you’re trying to achieve.  The problem is when stocking up on beauty products that you don’t use because you realize you don’t need them or they’re the wrong beauty products for you, it’s ends up being a overall waste of time and money!

 Here is a list of the eight must-have items for your beauty kit.  The specific brand you will choose will depend on your budget, your preferences and your skin type. But this should  serve as a good  guideline  to what you really need and what will work best for you!  Following this list will save you from making unnecessary make-up purchases and help you score the right beauty products for everyday or that special night out!

 1. Tinted moisturizer/BB Cream- unless you’re going to a dinner party or a photo shoot, you don’t really need to pile on the make-up! Instead of using foundation (liquid or powder), you can purchase a good tinted moisturizer or BB Cream to give your skin the perfect coverage for the day! Tinted moisturizers give your skin an even, clean, natural look. While also giving you the added benefit of youthful looking moisturized skin. BB Creams are also another great alternative to foundation! The name is short for beauty balms or blemish balms. First formulated by a man in germany who wanted just one overall cream to even out skin tone after laser surgery, BB Cream is taking over the place of our old foundations! Although pretty new on the beauty market, BB Creams have had great results with purchasers and have become an extremely popular beauty item! BB Creams tend to have a much lighter texture than a foundation and are formulated to even out your skin tone, giving very natural looking results. Perfect for beauty lovers on the go or when you just want to wear only one product for your face today!



 2. Mascara- applying mascara can make a person look extra glamorous with very little effort! A Investment in a good mascara is one of the best investments in cosmetics you can make! There are so many brands and types of mascara, it can be hard to find a good quality mascara at a good price! It is one of the cosmetics you don’t want to skimp on! I have payed hundreds trying to find the perfect mascara that works for me! But once found, it makes such an extreme difference in your look that you won’t want to try any other brand then the one you fell in love with! (I still use the same 2 mascaras I found in highschool! I’m a beauty blogger-vlogger and get tons of product to try and out of the many mascaras that have gone on these eyeballs, my true blues have always been the best!) Mascaras will give your eyes an instant ‘pop and are also great for when you want the more dramatic effect of smoky eyes and everything in between! All a girl needs for a rushed day is to slap on some lip gloss or stick and mascara!

$5.99     (One of the most affordable brands with the best quality ever! You should never pay over 7.00 dollars for it though!!!! 5.99 is pretty average so its good!!!!)

BOTH OF THESE MASCARS I HAVE USED FROM HIGH SCHOOL SO I COMPLETELY VOUCH FOR THEM!!!!

CLINIQUE

 Lash Doubling Mascara

 ITEM 502641 SIZE 0.28 oz/ 8 mL    17.50    (Reg around 22.00 so this is a good price!)

3.  Blush- Healthy flushed cheeks have been a staple of health and beauty in our society for decades! Blush can literally make a person look 10 years younger and absolutely gorgeous! It is also a staple makeup product for if you’re going for a “natural” type makeup look. Rosey cheeks bring out the shape of your face and when applied the right way, can even make you look 5 pounds skinnier in your face! (One of the many reasons contouring has become so extremely popular.) There are a number of types of blushes available in the market in tons of different forms to chose from! Gel, Powder, Pencil and many others to check out! To save you money, finding the best color and brand that’s your favorite is key! Some products even work as both cheek and lip tints, so you can kill 2 birds with one stone! To find the right shade of blush for you read this comprehensive guide and article:

GET THE RIGHT SHADE OF BLUSH FOR YOU

Size: 6g/0.21oz            (Reg 24.00)       6.00       YOU CAN STEAL THIS KORRES BLUSH FOR ONLY 6.00 DOLLARS RIGHT NOW!!!! THAT’S A INSANE GOOD DEAL!!!! YOU SAVE A WHOLE 75% OFF!!!!

Summer Blush Palette 2016      Perfect for beauty lovers that need a quality blush or if you have blemish or dry skin problems. Wonderful palette of colors to chose from! Rated 5 out of 5 stars, this blush is super high quality and well worth it!!!!

4. Lipstick- Find the perfect shade of lipstick that can take you can wear both day and night!  You can always get tons of different shades of lipstick because there are plenty of inexpensive brands available but you must have one lipstick shade that can work for all your outfits-looks, and for different occasions ranging from work to date night and everything in between! Basically, find your one true love lipstick!  Once you find a shade that works for your skin tone and your looks, make sure to keep up on where it sells for at the best price and if it’s going to discontinue, that way you are sure to get a fresh tube as soon as it runs out! (Because I’m tellin you from experience, it sucks so bad when your favorite lipstick is gone forever and you had no idea the end was coming!) This lipstick is going to be your signature shade! Something you never even have to think twice about putting on when you’re in a rush or just can’t decide on what lip color you want for the look you’re trying to achieve. The “No Worries-no brainer” lipstick look!

Ilia

 Ilia Lip Trio

 Organic essential oils hydrate and nourish lips, while buildable color takes you from day to dinner with ease.

 $48.00     Perfect for us “Green Lovers”! Plus you get huge value!!!! Normally these 3 would go for 78.00 dollars!!!! HUGE SAVINGS! Plus tons of variety!

Lightweight formula glides onto lips leaving super intense color with a bold, ultra matte finish. Long wearing and completely kiss proof. Bomb formulation helps to combat dryness and nourish your lips during wear.

Over 40 reviews at 5 OUT OF 5 STARS!

12 colors to chose from and free shipping!!!!

I absolutely adore REAL HER brand!!!!! Get it for only 18.00!!!!

5. Eyeliner- eyeliners can be used to line eyelids, define eyebrows, fill in beauty marks and tons more!  It can make your eyes look bigger or smaller depending on what look you’re trying to go for and also your particular preference.  Pencil eyeliners are great because they are inexpensive, don’t drip, travel well, are easily cleaned off if you mess up or when it’s the end of your day, plus so much more! Liquid is usually used for a more dramatic look and take more practice to use but are just as beautiful and accessible!

Special Purchase

 ONLY 10.00!!!! (REG 22.00) YOU GET INCREDIBLE SAVINGS AND I HAVE NEVER SEEN URBAN DECAY THIS CHEAP!!!! ITS GOING FAST THOUGH!!!!

 Share this product:

 URBAN DECAY

 24/7 Waterproof Liquid Eyeliner

Artliner Precision Point Liquid Eyeliner

 Noir      30.50 (Price is pretty much the same every where but really really well worth it!!!! One of my faves since high school!!!!!!)

 6. Lip gloss- for days when you don’t feel like wearing makeup but can not step out of the house looking without just a little sumptin-sumptin, lip gloss can add an instant “POW!”’ to your look.  Lip glosses are great when you need to do quick touch ups or when you are super busy and need to travel light! Lip gloss tends to keep your lips well moisturized and also tend to taste super yummy! They are extremely popular with “Tweens” and younger aged kids that are just starting to gain interest in makeup and cosmetics, making this the perfect product for the beginner! Lipgloss is generally clear, (but you can get all sorts of different kinds that are tinted or have full blown color) so it’s the best for if you mess up! Just wipe away with no worries!

Our fan-fave lip gloss! Stock up on subtle color, unstoppable shine, and luscious hydration in four colors. Boosted by the nourishing benefits of Power Cell Complex™, a Julep-exclusive blend of age-defying, skin-loving, ultra-hydrating ingredients.

 Set includes:

ON SALE FOR ONLY 56.00 DOLLARS!!!! NORMALLY 80.00!!!! Fan Fave! Rated 5 out of 5 stars!!!!!!

7. Eyelash curler- Bright, clear, open eyes can make a big difference in your look and get you more noticed! Curled lashes help in showcasing your gorgeous eyes by bringing the eye lashes not just out, but out and up! Beauty lovers are spending millions on eyelash extensions, when you can achieve the same look with a eyelash curler and falsies! Sometimes if you’re satisfied with the length of your lashes, just a good mascara and curler can do the trick!

She Uemure Eye Lash Curler on sale for only 22.00 plus free shipping!!!!!!

Eyelashes Curler Eye Curling Clip Beauty Makeup Cosmetic Tool Kit (Reg 6.31) ON SALE FOR ONLY 3.41!!!!!!

8. Perfume- a beautiful scent will always get you noticed! It’s a sign of good hygiene and can make you feel sexy and strong! People tend to notice the way you smell before the way you look if you are wearing a good scent! It’s also something people never forget! Once you find the right scent for your body chemistry you will know it! People will give you compliments all day! Aromatherapy can affect our mood and health, so try to find a uplifting, clean scent like a citrus or rose to keep you in a overall healthy state of being! Want to see what the top selling perfumes of 2017 have been so far???? Read this article:

Britney Spears Fantasy Three Piece Gift Set for Women 

 Britney Spears 26.65 (Reg 47.05) PLUS FREE SHIPPING!!!!!! HUGE SAVINGS!!!!!!

I have used this since high school and i adore the box sets and how amazing it smells!!!! Still get compliments every day I wear it!!!!!!

Beautiful scent!!!!!! ON SALE FOR ONLY 52.00 DOLLARS!!!!! A WHOLE 10% OFF PLUS FREE SHIPPING!!!!!!

9. Tweezers- there is nothing like clean brows to change the overall look and structure of the face and give yourself an instant face-lift! With the right brow shape, your face can look younger and much more clean! You can literally make your eyes instantly smile when you have figured out the right brow shape for your facial structure!. Good tweezers can last you years, and save you tons of money on waxing and eye makeup! Because of the way that brow shaping gives you so much more eye lid to cover and makes light hit your eyes differently, you will notice a complete change of the way you do your eye makeup! Saving you money on not only eye concealer, but eye shadow as well! To figure out how to shape your eyebrows the perfect way, check out this article:

BEST EYEBROW SHAPING GUIDE FOR YOUR UNIQUE BROWS

Marks Gouger Black Slanted, White Straight and Red Pointed Tweezers with Case, Set of 3

PRICE TO GOOD TO BE TRUE!!!!!! ONLY 12.99 NORMALLY 49.00!!!!!!

RATED 4.5 OUT OF 5 STARS FOR PERCESION! THATS WHAT WE WANT FOR OUR BROWS AND UNWANTED HAIR!!!!!!

Size: – (reg 15.00) ONLY 13.50!!!!!! YOU SAVE 10% ! RATED 5 OUT OF 5 STARS! TWEEZERMAN BRAND IS CONSIDERED SOME OF THE BEST IN THE BEAUTY INDUSTRY AND IS LOVED AND USED BY BEAUTY PROFESSIONALS AND LOVERS ALL AROUND THE WORLD!!!!!!

Plus Free Shipping!!!!

 10. Makeup Remover- having a quality makeup remover is key to any girl’s beauty kit! How are we supposed to get all these products off that are waterproof and feel like you need to have a sandblaster to the face in order to remove them all!!? With products that are waterproof and long lasting becoming in such high demand, it’s a necessity to have a quality makeup remover! Sleeping in your makeup has been scientifically proven to age and dry your skin as well as cause acne plus much more! Invest in a good makeup remover so that you can get all your product off easily. Plus, who wants it to be a hard process to remove your makeup?! When Im done, Im done! We want it off easily, and without makeup remover it’s hard to remove and not nearly as quick!

Take The Day Off Make Up Remover    (Reg 29.50) ON SALE FOR 25.00 DOLLARS AND GET IT SHIPPED FREE! THIS IS THE BEST MAKEUP REMOVER I HAVE EVER USED! MY MOMMY SHOWED IT TO ME IN HIGH SCHOOL AND I HAVE NEVER STOPPED USEING IT SINCE! THIS IS A PRETTY GOOD DEAL (ITS NORMALLY A LITTLE MORE EXPENSIVE!) SO I GIVE IT 2 THUMBS UP AND THE CHEAP BEAUTY DEAL APPROVAL!!!!!!

Argan Oil Makeup Removing Wipes      Buy 2 Get 1 One ‘n Only Argan Oil Skincare Free. Limit one per order, offer expires 5/14/17.      5.99     Rated 4.6 out of 5 stars!!!!!!

I personally search for every single product to find the best deals and quality of products! I only feature products that I would use, I want the best for myself and I want it for you too!!!!!! Best value and best quality!

This list of 10 is the perfect guide for any beauty beginner and perfect list of beauty essentials that every girl should have in her makeup kit! Using just these products alone will give you a beautiful look and the perfect tools to achieve it! For articles on shopping guides and more, check out:

Any beauty lover should have these 10 items in reach for the perfect beauty day! THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR READING!!!!!!|||

