

using by favorite tools of the moment. 

 

There GNU Guile in the backend using the new guile-fibers to run the http server 

workers. 

 

In the frontend I use BiwaScheme with snabbdom library for interacting with the 

browser. 

 

BiwaScheme is a Scheme interpreter written in JavaScript. 

 

Snabbdom is library that implement a diff+patch algorithm which allows to declare 

how the page will look and it make it happen. It also handles bindings events to 

callbacks. The use of snabbdom is bound to scheme and its use is transparent. 

 

The first video, I try to explain what tools I will use and sort of why. It's not 

very interesting 

 

The second video, I tackle an issue in forward.scm, basically I am bug hunting in 

the browser: 

 

The last is the most interesing, it restart where I left it in the previous video 

with basically a minimal frontend (so you might want to look at the 20 last minutes 

of the second video). Anyway, then it goes on to allow the frontend (client side) 

to communicate with the backend (server side) using HTTP: 

 

The code can be found @ 

 

azul means "hello" in amazigh. 

 I made a screencast explaining how I would start building a poll applicationusing by favorite tools of the moment.There GNU Guile in the backend using the new guile-fibers to run the http serverworkers.In the frontend I use BiwaScheme with snabbdom library for interacting with thebrowser.BiwaScheme is a Scheme interpreter written in JavaScript.Snabbdom is library that implement a diff+patch algorithm which allows to declarehow the page will look and it make it happen. It also handles bindings events tocallbacks. The use of snabbdom is bound to scheme and its use is transparent.The first video, I try to explain what tools I will use and sort of why. It's notvery interesting https://youtu.be/i47QgE0ihSw The second video, I tackle an issue in forward.scm, basically I am bug hunting inthe browser: https://youtu.be/to8vdri82_E The last is the most interesing, it restart where I left it in the previous videowith basically a minimal frontend (so you might want to look at the 20 last minutesof the second video). Anyway, then it goes on to allow the frontend (client side)to communicate with the backend (server side) using HTTP: https://youtu.be/ePiHp1lgbas The code can be found @ https://framagit.org/a-guile-mind/azul azul means "hello" in amazigh.|||

