This is a very rough first draft of a piece I’m writing about angel investing. I welcome criticism and feedback!

Over the past few days I’ve been rereading two excellent articles by Dave McClure and Matt Lerner of 500 Startups, in which they put forward convincing, data-backed arguments that most early stage investors have too small a portfolio of startups to achieve optimal returns.

Matt does such a great job of explaining exactly why a portfolio of 50 startups is the absolute minimum size an early stage investor should consider, that I’ll ask you read his brilliant argument here instead of repeating a garbled version of my own. If you don’t have time to read the article right now and are happy taking my word for it, then the really key piece of information to remember is that investors’ returns are dictated by outlier startups which perform amazingly well.

A very skilled investor with a great network of startups can expect that just 1–2% of the startups they invest in will be such an outlier startup. This means that even the very, very best investors are only likely to have one such startup in a portfolio of 50–100 companies. Furthermore, since these outlier startups are the difference between great and terrible portfolio performances, an investor with fewer than 50 portfolio startups will likely experience a suboptimal return on investment overall.

Now I don’t know a lot about venture capital, however I do have some firsthand experience with angel investors and seed/pre-seed startups. It seems to me that if it is so difficult to predict an outlier at the VC stage, then it must be even more difficult at the much earlier (and noisier) angel stage of investing. Indeed from my experience there are three key factors which make it much more difficult for angel investors to pick an outlier than the VCs discussed in Matt’s article:

Even if we are exceedingly generous and assume that an angel’s chance of picking outlier startups is as high as that of a VC, it still seems terribly shortsighted to me that very few angels have a portfolio size approaching anywhere near 50–100 startups.

At first sight, this may not seem to concern me directly as an entrepreneur. However the suboptimal angel investing market does have a direct impact on my chances of building a successful startup — due to inefficient angel investing, not only do fewer startups receive angel funding, but there is a tendency to minimise risk by selecting new (and stifling current- ) portfolio startups which appear to be outliers. As such, it is firmly in my interest that angel investing improves.

So what can we do?

I’m glad you asked. The main improvement is obvious — angel investors should be investing in 50–100 startups, not 1–10.

Unfortunately, however, this is not practical. As mentioned above, a single angel has neither the capacity, the deal pipeline of quality startups nor the necessary experience to invest in so many startups over a short period of time. Crucially, the capital necessary to invest in 50 startups ($2m–$10m) at an acceptable ticket size is beyond the means of most angel investors.

Yet this is also no insurmountable problem. There are many more angel investors than VC firms and, as the angels are investing their own money instead of competing with each other for capital as the VC firms do, there is no reason the angels shouldn’t work together. My suggestion would be that instead of 20 angels separately investing $100k into 5 startups each, the expected outcome for each angel would be much higher if they created a vehicle whereby the same 20 angels each invest $5k into the same 100 startups.

This may sound complicated yet would save time for the angels and, by investing as a single entity with one ‘lead’ investor chosen from the group to be the contact person, would be acceptable for (and beneficial to) the startups.

There are also further benefits — while it is common knowledge that many angel investors pride themselves on the quality of their advice, in reality the most significant value add they provide (after capital) is access to their contacts and network of potential customers/partners/employees. Having 20x as many investors (and sibling portfolio startups) should make hiring, finding initial customers and being able to get in touch with an important partner 20x easier. More than a few founders I know who have been accelerated by 500 Startups and Y Combinator were quick to impress on me that this was perhaps the most significant advantage they felt their acceleration had given them (‘supporting us and not getting in the way’ was a close second).

A much larger portfolio with smaller ticket sizes should help angel investors get into the growth mindset as well. Whereas angels currently spend time worrying about whether an ambitious growth strategy will lose them$50k and reduce their portfolio size by 20%, with our new model it is much easier to support the kind of risky ideas necessary to produce an outlier. After all, ‘if it works out then my $5k will be worth over $250k and if it goes bad then there are still 99 shots left in the barrel.’

As far as I can tell, this model of angel investing would be much better for everyone involved, yet it doesn’t seem to have taken off yet.

In the US, organisations like YC, 500 startups and Angellist are making great strides in this direction. In Switzerland (where I am based), as is often the case when it comes to changing ingrained behaviour, we are lagging behind for no good reason. Two organisations in Switzerland who are closest to solving this problem are investiere and the Swiss Startup Factory, and I applaud their efforts. In both cases, there is significant work and scaling to be done if we are build a better angel ecosystem for startups.

It will be a difficult task to convince angels that collaboration not competition is the key to success, and an even more difficult task to reverse the deeply-held mindset that minimising failure is more important than maximising the chance of an outlier.

Perhaps the biggest change necessary is that of angel investors’ self perception. Angels need to stop thinking of themselves as cofounders on a shared mission and start acting more like professional investors. Startups should be assets, not passion projects. If building a startup is a war, then investors should never be in the trenches.

Am I off the mark? Did I miss a key point or misunderstand/misrepresent the importance of a factor? Please reach out to me and let me know, I’d love to hear your opinions.|||

This is a very rough first draft of a piece I’m writing about angel investing. I welcome criticism and feedback! Over the past few days I’ve been rereading two excellent articles by Dave McClure and…