OKR is a popular goal management framework that drove organizations like Intel, Oracle, and Google to great success.

Objectives & Key Results (OKR) help focus work and make success measurable by using two simple but powerful concepts: (1) an Objective —tells you where to go; (2) a Key Result — measures progress towards your Objective.

When someone refers to “an OKR”, they refer to an Objective with one or a few Key Results. When someone refers to “OKR”, they usually refer to the framework.

An OKR is almost the same as a goal, with a few small differences.

For example, a natural way for people to come up with goals is to say: “Grow revenue to $1 million”. Here we can spot 2 main components: a direction (Grow revenue) and a target ($1 million).

The OKR framework prescribes that you split such a goal into 2 parts: an Objective and a Key Result. The Objective always answers the question Where do I want to go?, the Key Results answer the question How will I know I’m getting there? Hence, the goal Grow revenue to $1 million translates into the Objective Grow revenue and the Key Result $1 million in revenues. It really is that simple.

Surely, you could improve the quality of the Objective Grow revenue (see our eBook How to write great OKRs), but you’ve just successfully converted a goal into an OKR. This really is the only hard requirement for working with OKRs: splitting your goals into Objectives and Key Results.

Converting goals into OKRs happens for a few reasons. First of all, it helps to increase company-wide transparency as everyone will understand the Objective. Key Results are often more technical and don’t appeal to, or aren’t understood by, everyone. For instance, if your Engineering team has all sorts of crazy metrics they use to measure your app’s performance (such as API response times or API error rates), most people outside of the Engineering team probably have no clue what that means. But if these are Key Results for an Objective to Have an enterprise-grade app performance, everybody will understand what the team is working on.

Another benefit is the ability to add multiple Key Results. Making your app performance enterprise-grade probably requires you influence more than just one metric. With an OKR, your Key Results can reflect a number of important metrics that you’ll be setting targets for in order to achieve your Objective.

Objectives also represent key focus points for an organization or team. They should therefore be inspiring and easy to remember so your team are clear on what to focus on. Not everybody is moved by numbers or targets and remembering Objectives is much simpler if they don’t contain any difficult metrics or targets.

As a framework for goal management, OKR means a lot more than Objectives & Key Results. At Perdoo, we look at OKR as a set of best practices — collected ever since goal management made its first serious intro into the corporate world with the introduction of Management by Objectives (MBO) in the 1950s.

If you’d like to learn more about these best practices and where they come from, I recommend reading Goals gone wild from Harvard Business School. The authors realized that—according to most academic research—goals and goal management have a clear advantage for businesses. They, therefore, researched the pitfalls and risks. You’ll find that most of the rules that belong to the OKR framework (such as transparency, alignment, frequency) are safeguards against these risks.|||

OKR is a popular goal management framework that drove organizations like Intel, Oracle, and Google to great success. OKR stands for Objectives & Key Results. An Objective tells you where to go, a Key…