You and me are happy people to live now, in the 21st century. The world is full of great opportunities – if you want to travel – go for it. If you want to be a fashion designer – no problem, there are lots of educational videos on how to do it. Or maybe you want to gain world recognition and popularity – you are welcome to register an account on YouTube and just make videos demonstrating your talent.

The problem is that only small part of people use these opportunities. Most people cannot reach success because of the fear to fail and lack of knowledge.

Stop doing this! Everyone can be successful. Barriers are in our heads.

A lack of self-confidence is the very first thing that stops us from trying something new. We are watching other people’s successful stories on social media and thinking that we fail. The same was with me.

If you want it, work for it!

But you never know how much time and efforts successful people spent to reach such great results. And when I realized it I started doing real steps towards my dream and it worked.

Create your own story. Just try it and you’ll be surprised.

People play crucial role in what we do. Find people who lift you up when you are almost down. Depressed people radiate negative energy and block you from making crucial decisions. Press “delete” button and avoid such individuals in your everyday life.

You become like the five people you spend most time with.

Find people who are smarter than you, people who are inspired and motivated. They will help you to feel that any dream can become a reality.

There are unlimited opportunities for free education if you have just Internet connection and any device. I am always trying to find some interesting courses, even if they are not connected with my professional sphere.

It is so interesting that people all around the world are ready to share their knowledge and experience.

Education helps to develop creativity and generate new ideas. Education is power and you should find 30 minutes a day for it.

There are some useful resources where you can find free online courses:

At school we are taught that everyone must be punished for making a mistake. ‘Making mistakes is very bad’ – my teacher told me. But I think that mistakes should be your motivation.

Read also: 6 basic steps to start a startup that will change your life

Once I had an experience of public event organization. It was a festival for illustrators and designers, but I wanted it to be interesting for everyone. So we planned entertainment, market, illustration exhibition and lots of fun. We found a location that was very cool in terms of city infrastructure. But a week before the start the government didn’t approve our event and we had to search for another place. Fortunately, we managed to find a beautiful park, but our advertising campaign was ruined. This case helped to understand my mistakes and motivated me for making one more successful event.

Success is impossible without health. Remember about your lifestyle. Healthy food, sport, sleeping should be a part of your everyday activities. Drink more water and forget about alcohol and smoking. Try to have some rest during the day. Reading, drawing, music listening – do all things that inspire you and help to relax.

I strongly believe that everything is possible in our life. If you can dream it you can do it. Just love yourself, be more confident in what you are doing, keep on working and you will succeed.|||

The problem is that only small part of people use these opportunities. Most people cannot reach success because of the fear to fail and lack of knowledge.