In this article you will learn how to convert 3D Blu-ray movies to 3D MP4 format using Pavtube 3D Blu-ray Ripper and then you can play 3D Blu-ray movies on any playable devices, just read it.

MP4 video is one of the most popular video formats we see, and nearly 90% of the devices capable of playing videos set MP4 video as their primary supported video format. Are you considering converting a 3D Blu-ray into 3D MP4 video to playback on your 3D TV, Samsung Gear VR, PS VR, Daydream View, Oculus Rift? Check this 3D Blu-ray to 3D MP4 guide to learn the way.

Step 2: Load your source 3D Blu-ray movie by click “File” > “Load from Disc”. From the “Format” drop-down list, you are suggested to follow the path “3D Video > MP4 Side-by-Side 3D Video(*.mp4)” for ripping Blu-ray to side-by-side 3D MP4 video for VR Headsets/3D TVs.

Video resolution is important for 3D video, which has an important influence on 3D effect to some degree. Sometimes, the video size is determined by your smartphone screen resolution so when you choose the video size, you should consider about your VR-ready phone. When you don’t know the best video settings, I suggest you to get a lower video resolution instead of a high resolution cause too high video resolution doesn’t mean more immersive 3D effect and it will waste charge and lead vertigo. You can refer to the chart below to set your video resolution according to your VR Headsets.

Step 4: Finally, click the “Convert” button on program interface to start ripping 3D Blu-ray to side-by-side 3D MP4 video. After it finished, open output file destination, locate the created SBS 3D MP4 video.

Then you can transfer the 3D MP4 files to smartphone to view 3D Blu-ray movies on Daydream View, Oculus Rift CV1, Samsung Gear VR, Homido VR or play 3D video on PS4 with PS VR via USB.

Please sign in before you comment.|||

In this article you will learn how to convert 3D Blu-ray movies to 3D  MP4  format using Pavtube 3D Blu-ray Ripper and then you can play 3D Blu-ray movies on any playable devices, just read it.
MP4 v...