In the era of Internet revolution, E-commerce industry is the brightest star! According to Statista.com in 2015, retail e-commerce sales amounted to 342.96 billion US dollars and are projected to surpass 600 billion US dollars in 2019. Retail e-commerce in the U.S. is projected to generate a hundred billion U.S. dollars in revenue by 2019. The figures clearly explain the power of ecommerce industry.

This doesn’t mean all the E-commerce companies are consistently making money. The small as well as big companies have to face various challenges. Developing the business in ecommerce is hard part. You have to take care of everything, from website maintenance to customer service.

Below are the major problems that are faces by most of the ecommerce companies:

No matter how attractive or fancy your website looks, if you would not be able build the customer trust and loyalty, the business has to struggle another day!

It’s the work of lots of efforts for companies to make a new a customer and maintain the same customer for long time. One of the reason why ecommerce companies face the struggle while building trust and loyalty with customer, is because a seller and a buyer doesn’t know each other nor they can see each other while making a transaction unlike street-shopping. It takes few transactions, time and plenty of efforts by the company to build the customer trust and loyalty.

To earn the customer loyalty, you must provide is excellent customer service. You must make sure from ordering online to shipping, the customer is satisfied with your service. There are plenty of online retailers that might be the selling the same product like yours, so you must identify your competitive advantage and nurture your customers accordingly.

The few simple ways to increase the trust with visitors are as follow:

In a survey by comScore and UPS, 63% of American consumers check the return policy before making a purchase and 48% would shop more with retailers that offer hassle-free returns. This clearly shows how conscious consumers are for the return and refund policy.

Once a customer signs up in an e-commerce portal, the company is unaware about his details except the information he entered. The trustworthiness of the customer is questionable. Therefore, there is a chance some customers might opt for Cash-On-Delivery (COD) option, and refuse to accept the product. These results in huge revenue losses for many e-commerce companies.

When the product is returned, due to whatsoever reason, whether a customer was dissatisfied or the product was damaged, the business suffers heavy loss of shipment and reputation. Cost of logistics and shipping have always been scary for those e-commerce sellers who deliver the product for free.

Return and refund are also part of great customer services, there for it will be the big mistake to underestimate them. The best thing you can do is build a strong returns policy. Below consideration should be kept on mind while designing returns policy.:

Online merchants frequently compete on price. Plenty of sellers may list equal products on their sites. The product is same but the only difference here is price. They are vying to sell the product to increase their market share.

The price competition affects the small ecommerce business badly. Because the mid-sized or large competitors often offers products for less price and free shipping on nearly every order, while they couldn’t afford to offer the same with competitive price.

Online sellers like Amazon and Walmart generally have the shipping amenities around the country. Their distributed warehouses allow large ecommerce businesses to ship orders from the closest facility, approximately 60 percent of orders is in the same area the customer is in. As the orders are shipped from the nearby warehouses, the cost to send the order decreases and the order arrives in a day or two.

Ultimately every online shopper expects fast and frees shipping that too in lowest price.

To survive in the competitive market, ecommerce companies need to distribute their own inventory to fulfilment warehouses, become extremely resourceful shippers, or find some unique products to minimize this problem. Because ultimately every online shopper expects fast and free shipping that too in lowest price.

Many online stores bulk buy products wholesale from manufacturers or distributors to sell that in retail from their online store. This is the basic business model for online stores.

Unfortunately, because of ecommerce’s low barrier to entry and other reasons, many product manufacturers and retailers to start selling directly to consumers.

This means that the same company that sells your products may also be your competitor. For an example, ABC Garments, sells not just your online marketplace, but also directly to consumers on its website. Even some of manufactures builds distributers that makes the scenario worse.

Though, it is not completely possible to stop manufacturer to sell products to customers directly, but few tactics may help to minimise the problem. Below are the tactics that might help the online seller:

Surviving in the Ecommerce competition, which is no less than war, requires the outstanding strategies. If you don't want to struggle, then give extra efforts on your every aspect of business. You must be prepared for challenges and growth at every stage of your business, and ultimately it will have a better chance to bloom.|||

