2017/04/05: I run my primary Internet servers at home, which includes my main mail server and the Web site that serves this page for example. Noticeable effort goes into fighting off attempts to SPAM me (~10,000 attempts per day on that server) and hack me.

I use plenty of services hosted outside my home, such as DNS, mail and Web alternatives/secondaries, never mind the entire network infrastructure that is the Internet, but I wondered if I could estimate how much of my carbon footprint at home could be attributed to fighting off unsolicited and unwanted offers of sexy photos, guaranteed penis pills and even cheap banner ads in the Daily Mail.

A slight complication is that my server is powered year-round off-grid, and when there's anough left over even my Internet connection (FTTC box and router) are pulled off-grid too, and my laptop can run off-grid.

Even when back on grid, my home grid-tie solar PV system generates about double our house's actual electricity consumption, thus covering the carbon for that and the natural gas that still heats our home and our hot water.

Also, the carbon cost of keeping out the bad guys isn't just in my router and firewall and wasted network bandwidth: SPAM that makes it past those defences that I have to waste brainpower on uses energy from food, which is some of the most carbon intense going.

Let's keep things simple and pretend that the carbon cost of the power to run my services is something like the GB grid's probable 2017/05 ~400gCO2e/kWh and falling, and that no more that that is fighting SPAM etc at home. (Since that local solar PV energy might otherwise have displaced carbon elsewhere on the grid.)

I'll also ignore the climate change impact of my lentil-powered fury when SPAM gets through all of that anyway...

The obvious energy costs per day are:

So a little under 0.5kWh/day or ~200gCO2e/day or ~73kgCO2e/y tops.

Maybe it would be fair to attribute a few kg of CO2 per year directly to the on-going costs of fighting SPAM (OPEX) for me at home, but that does ignore the amortised enormous infrastructure effort and complication (CAPEX) to design and maintain good filters for my mail client's filters, sendmail rules, SPAMHAUS RBL, Linux OS security, yadda, yadda, ...|||

SPAMs Carbon Footprint @Home: Earth Notes: Domestic Energy Efficiency