Yes, and unfortunately this discrimination is legal. But what is even more sickening —at least to me as a left leaning person — is that the proponents of this racism are the very hypocrites who pretend to be champions of a color blind society — the far left.

He is Vijay, brother of comedian Mindy Kaling. He was rejected by med schools around the country. Not the one to give up, he tried again but this time he changed his looks, and in admission applications, he checked ‘black’ as his race.

Despite having exactly the same profile, he was offered admission by the very med schools that had earlier rejected him. To those med schools, it did not matter that he came from a privileged background. All that mattered was his race.

And quite frankly, I don’t think there is anything unethical about gaming the system to fight discrimination.

Stereotyping is bad. When you stereotype a race — whether as criminals or over-achievers— it is the weakest members of the race that suffer. In this case, people fleeing poverty and war from countries like Sri Lanka have to meet a higher bar, just because they are Asians.

How is it any different from the shop keepers allegedly being more watchful when blacks go shopping?

University of Texas denied admission to one Abby Fisher, effectively because she was white. She sued, but unfortunately lost her case (and ended up being mocked on the internet by the far left hypocrites for standing up against racial discrimination). After the 1944 Supreme Court verdict upholding internment of Japanese Americans, the Supreme Court in Fisher vs. Univ of Texas once again gave its nod to racism in the name of affirmative action.

In response to the court’s misguided verdict that made racism a part of Ivy League admissions for generations to come, I wrote the piece below for The Boston Herald.

In 1963 Martin Luther King said his most famous words, “I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character”. Over five decades later, the Supreme Court’s decision in the Fisher v. University of Texas that universities may consider the race of an applicant in admission decisions has made it clear that King’s dream of a color-blind society is far from reality. In what is perhaps the greatest irony of this day, the high court’s verdict was greeted with open arms by the very social activists fighting against racial discrimination. Striving for equal opportunities for the disadvantaged is a very righteous goal but the idea that “good racism” can make up for the country’s racially discriminatory past is Orwellian. During the early 20th century, Ivy league schools, most notably Harvard, infamously discriminated against Jews by placing a quota on the maximum number of Jews admitted to the university. The Jews of today are Asians. A study by Princeton University researchers found that Asian-American applicants need 140 SAT points out of 1600 more than their white counterparts to be admitted at private universities. In response to a lawsuit filed against Harvard on behalf of Asian American applicants, the university, using a language very similar to its former President, Lawrence Lowell’s justification of quotas to restrict what he called as “Jewish invasion”, emphasized the need for a diverse class but did not deny discriminating against Asians. Applicants belonging to a particular race are not a monolithic group; they are individuals with unique and disparate experiences. Stereotyping applicants by race, despite its noble intentions to provide equal opportunities for the disadvantaged, hurts applicants from the most vulnerable and the most marginalized communities. Asian American applicants who have to meet an unfairly high bar for admission than their counterparts of other races are not only Indians or Chinese with highly educated and well to do parents, but also include those fleeing war and poverty from places like Sri Lanka and Cambodia. Setting a higher bar for admission for the weakest of the minorities goes against the basic goals of affirmative action! According to social psychologists Jonathan Haidt and Lee Jussium, poor academic performance by beneficiaries of affirmative action may lead to a racially polarized campus and negative stereotypes about minorities. The most conspicuous example of the negative stereotyping of minorities is the deluge of hateful remarks that followed Malia Obama’s announcement that she will be going to Harvard, suggesting that she of secured a spot at the prestigious university only because of affirmative action. The United States is not the only country struggling grappling with providing equal opportunities to all its citizens. In India, an affirmative action policy based on caste, known locally as “reservation”, has been put in place to provide better educational and employment opportunities for historically discriminated groups. A study on the effect of reservation on poverty levels of the disadvantaged castes concludes that the effect, if any, has been very little. In the mid 2000’s, four major universities in Israel introduced race neutral affirmative action policies. The result was a diverse classroom in which the beneficiaries of affirmative action, unlike their American counterparts, did not academically underperform. A study finds that Israel’s race-blind policy has more potential for economic and social mobility than other race based affirmative action policies like that of India and the United States. The backbone of affirmative action as it stands today is racial discrimination. As Justice Clarence Thomas noted, “I think the lesson of history is clear enough: Racial discrimination is never benign. The University’s professed good intentions cannot excuse its outright racial discrimination any more than such intentions justified the now denounced arguments of slaveholders and segregationists.” University presidents must consider an affirmative action policy that provides equal opportunities to the truly disadvantaged, such as policies to help applicants at the bottom of the economic ladder, instead of resorting to populist methods that hurt the weakest of the very people the universities want to help.

Edit: One interesting comment from Stephanie Wu that deserves a better place than being hidden in the comments section.

Does anyone think the NBA would be more lenient in accepting Asians and Whites? Should it be easier for Asians to get welfare payments just because there are fewer Asians on welfare?

Check me out for posts on programming interviews, and social issues.

Donate a dollar a day: For today, join me in helping this single (widowed) dad pay for blood cancer treatment.|||

