This is more or less a continuation of

What hardware device eats up 1.4GB of my 4GB RAM?

While I have more or less accepted the solution there that for some mysterious reason, after a BIOS upgrade my graphics adapter suddenly reserved 1.4GB of memory (instead of reserving it dynamically), now (2 weeks after my notebook's warranty expired), after doing nothing special except perhaps trying out a few Linux live CDs (some of them loopback booted from a USB key) and a few times changing the boot options from UEFI to BIOS CSM and back, suddenly 800MB more are reserved.

And just to make it clear, this is not a Windows issue - both memtest and Linux also see that amount of memory. Only Lenovo Diagnostics still sees the full 4GB of memory (and it tested it and found no errors)

Here are screenshots from graphics driver diagnostics tool and from resource monitor:

(For reference, before 1435MB were reserved for hardware, and max graphics memory was 1138 MB).

Which obviously makes the problem much more urgent, since now half of my memory is "reserved by hardware".

Output of did not change much (the 4th memory range shrunk by almost 800MB):

As I don't trust UEFI any more after the previous stories with Samsung and Lenovo, I went into EFI shell - and dumped a few more info. I don't really know what this is all about, but perhaps this helps somebody:

Any ideas or any other ways to reclaim this memory (does anybody know if there is a working way to reset the UEFI NVRAM completely without making the machine unbootable?) are very much appreciated...

When booting Linux up in UEFI mode, most of the memory is usable.

But when booting it in Compatibility BIOS mode (via CSM) it is not:

So probably a bug in the CSM? (But still surprising that it suddenly comes up...)

As my primary OS is Windows (7), I guess I'd have to upgrade to 8(.1) and perform a full reinstall on a GPT partition to make use of UEFI. And considering the problems that UEFI is (still) causing regularly, I'm not sure if I want to go that route...

I also posted a thread on Lenovo Forums about this, but no responses so far: http://forums.lenovo.com/t5/R-and-L-Series-ThinkPad-Laptops/L530-2481-3SG-First-1-4-GB-RAM-of-4-GB-reserved-by-hardware-and/td-p/1539272

I also (just to exclude this cause) removed the CMOS battery, but except some dark fingerprints I found on the "bottom door" (lid behind which the hard disk and RAM is hidden) it did not make me any wiser.

Not much news, some guy from Lenovo followed up to my post on the forum and said some engineer will have a look on it. Let's hope for the best.

Another 21MB have bitten the dust, this time for trying to boot a Linux distro via UEFI Secure Boot... More details in the above mentioned thread in Lenovo forums.|||

