This article was originally published in 2013 and it supplies a very scary history of how Corporate America has taken over the FCC, with the help of Chairman Ajit Pai and Commissioner O’Rielly. This shows the direct correlation between the FCC’s current 2017 plans and how they were handed to then-Commissioner Pai by AT&T way back in time. More importantly, it is clear that Pai and O’Rielly are using this AT&T-ALEC play book to erase consumer protections, stop oversight of AT&T, Verizon, CenturyLink and the cable companies, block competition and remove any obligations to have to offer service, even though these companies are still state utilities.

However, besides the history, on May 5th, 2017, Commissioner O’Rielly spoke at ALEC’s Communications & Technology Task Force, asking for ALEC to help bring down Net Neutrality, claiming it is about Internet Freedom— a euphemism for ‘freedom’ for the phone and cable companies, with the government protecting them from competitors or any public obligations..

In 2009, AT&T et al got the FCC to create a group within the FCC’s Technological Advisory Council (TAC) to start the process of “sunsetting” — i.e., closing down America’s utility networks — the Public Switched Telephone Networks (PSTN). As we discussed, TAC is as model of regulatory capture. AT&T and Verizon, (two of the largest incumbent phone companies who control the PSTN in their states) are not only on the committee but the majority of the TAC members have direct financial ties to either AT&T or Verizon or both.

In November 2012, AT&T followed up with a petition to the FCC to start the process to close down the networks, claiming that this was done because of the aging copper networks and that they were moving toward using Internet protocol services — such as VOIP.

The irony of all of this: AT&T’s entire U-Verse broadband and cable service is based almost entirely on the PSTN and uses the old copper wire that was already in place. And U-Verse already offers VOIP-based service over these old wires as AT&T’s digital voice service.

In Part 1 we detailed the ALEC bills including the ALEC Regulatory Modernization Act from 2009 which strip-mines almost all regulations and oversight. Here is the exact language from their model legislation. It says, after the first year, the state commission shall not exercise jurisdiction over phone service. It can’t examine the rates being charged, the terms and the condition of the service; it can’t examine quality of service or most importantly can’t do anything if the company decides to ‘exit’ the business — i.e.; stop providing service.

In 2009, AT&T’s started the federal ball rolling with comments outlining that the states should not have jurisdiction over broadband and it should be the exclusive purview of the FCC — read federal law. Moreover, regulations should be removed on virtually all aspects of their business that would be applied by either the FCC or the commission — including removing service quality requirements.

AT&T and the telcos keep talking about free markets and competition, when, in fact, one of the goals of this transition is to close down the rights of all competitors currently using the networks. In fact, AT&T’s plan has been to get the government to protect their business by writing laws to block competitors.

CODA: In 2017, the FCC is pushing to have the FCC, not the states, take control and allow the companies to ‘shut off the copper’ at will. It is also in the process of erasing the telco accounting rules, and it is doing exactly what AT&T (and ALEC) have wanted. In short, this is the corporate takeover of the FCC. This is just one more reason to take the FCC to court— now.|||

How did we get into this mess? 
 This article was originally published in 2013 and it supplies a very scary history of how Corporate America h...