When I was 41 there was a moment when I was day trading and I lost a ton of money.

I called my new wife into the room. “I can’t take it,” I said. I don’t like my life.

We took a walk. I lived right on the banks of the Hudson River. We found a path and a trail and walked along it. Eventually we came to this beach through the woods.

I went into the water. I went underwater and just stayed there. Floating with all my clothes on. I didn’t want to go. The sun was setting. I felt the water become colder.

Eventually, she called me to come back on shore.

The next day I started blogging about my personal issues. About everything I had done wrong in the prior twenty years. Particularly what I did wrong in my 30s.

Did I write about everything? No. Not yet. But I wrote about many things.

Losing money. Losing friends. Losing my feeling that I wanted to live. Being depressed for years.

Even at age 40, having no sense of where my life was. Not even realizing that I needed to find out.

I felt I needed money first. I was so scared about money and what people thought about me that I didn’t even want to consider what my “real” code was. The values that I wanted to live by.

I’ve been writing every day about my stories since then. And those stories have given me so many opportunities that it changed my life into what it is today and I am so grateful.

It turns out that having that code comes first. And then all life is a side effect of that.

A code to live by, values to stand by, creativity to fuel my heart’s desires…this is what goes into a good life.

And then the output is stronger relationships, stronger possibilities, more certainty, more creativity, and eventually success.

Every year is hard. Life is hard. No year is easy. No business is easy. No relationship is easy.

This past year is one of my hardest ever in relationships and in business.

But I’m more creative than ever. And I live by my code described above. So now things get solved faster than when I was 40. Faster than when I was 30. Faster than when I was 20.

I’m up to about 50 times a day. Maybe more.

Every day we have about 10,000 choices to make. Small and big. My goal each day is that more and more of my choices are made because I WANT them. Not because someone else wants me to make those choices.

That is how I laugh more. That’s how I enjoy more. That’s how 40 was just a starting point for me. That’s why even today is a starting point for me. I am so looking forward to the rest of my day.

I’m going to do a podcast with one of my heroes and I’m scared to death of it.

Then I’m going to read to prepare for more podcasts. Then tonight I’m going to try standup comedy and I am terrified. I’ve been going over my jokes all morning.

The other day a friend of mine, a great artist and photographer, passed away in his sleep. I’ve known him for 22 years and we worked together for three of those in some of the most creative years of my life.

He was younger than me, but had AIDS and maybe his death was related to that.

I remember when we worked together on a project. He took a beautiful photo of a transvestite prostitute working in the meat packing district.

He captured her sadness, her despair at her life situation, the lights barely highlighting her surgical beauty, her shadow looming large behind her.

He is dead. I am still alive.|||

And I was ashamed. I didn’t want to tell people my wife had left. I didn’t want to tell people my home was for sale. And the website I had been writing for for seven years, had bought a company I had…