Why it’s so hard for freelancers to force clients to pay them I spent 15 months trying to collect money from a client. Here’s why I still came up short.

It’s probably pretty difficult for the average worker to comprehend the sheer amount of vulnerability a freelance, self-employed person must face. If you have a full-time, salaried position, your money gets delivered like clockwork once every two weeks. Your health insurance premium, mostly paid for by your employer, only commands your attention once a year during the open enrollment period. Your taxes are automatically deducted. If you encounter any conflicts with fellow employees, you have a dedicated HR staff to handle the situation. If one of your employer’s clients doesn’t pay on time, your company has several income streams, and the delinquent payment won’t impact its ability to make payroll. To collect on the delinquent invoice from a client, your company employs an accountant charged with sending regular reminders. If that client still doesn’t pay up, then the company lawyer gets sent after them — first with sternly-worded, threatening letters, and then, if non-payment continues, a lawsuit.

None of these benefits I’ve listed is afforded to your average freelancer. Your health insurance bill comes every month regardless of whether you have the money to pay it. You must put aside a percentage of your pay for taxes and track all your expenses. And if a client decides not to pay you, you have very little recourse to force their hand.

It’s this last issue I want to address in this article. Anyone who’s worked as a freelancer long enough has experienced late payment from a client. If you’re lucky, in most cases a gentle nudge by email will be all it takes to elicit an apology and prompt payment.

But ask many freelancers and they’ll be able to tell you about a completely different kind of client. This client probably won’t respond to your initial invoice, and when, 30 days later, you send them a reminder, they’ll promise to send it posthaste. But then a month goes by, and here you are with no check. So you nudge them again, and again, and again. Soon, they start offering excuses for why payment is stalled — usually with some vague references to cash flow issues that are on the verge of being solved, if only you’ll just wait another month. Eventually, they just tire of this charade and stop replying to your emails all together.

A salaried worker reading this is probably wondering why the freelancer doesn’t adopt a scorched earth approach to collecting payment. “Just threaten to publicly expose the client!” they might say. “Or, better yet, sue them for the money they owe you!”

Ha! If only it were that simple. Most freelancers can’t take the scorched earth route, often because they’re hoping for more work from the client. This might seem like some demented form of workplace Stockholm syndrome, but freelancers don’t always have the luxury of choosing their clients. In many cases they’ll continue working for a client long after the first invoice is overdue with the hope that if they gently prod, then payment will come. It’s a strategy of good cop, good cop. It’s all carrot and no stick.

Even if the freelancer decides to scorch the earth, there’s often little benefit. Publicly exposing the delinquent will merely anger them, and depending on their power and connections, they could poison the waters with other potential clients. You might also be signaling to other future clients that you’re difficult to work with.

A lawsuit is pretty much a nonstarter, especially if the client resides in a different state. A lawyer’s fees will quickly eclipse any payment you can drag out of them, and small claims court, in my experience, is fairly useless. I once tried to collect payment via small claims. After spending most of a day compiling all the paperwork and traveling all the way to the courthouse, I had to pay a hefty court fee in addition to shelling out money for certified mailing of the subpoena to ensure that it was properly served. A week before the court date, I was notified that it had been canceled due to the postal service’s inability to get the client to sign for it.

That all being said, I’m writing this article about a client who never paid me. Why, when I just spent all that time detailing the potential blowback? Well, at this point in my career I feel secure enough that any reputational damage will be minimal and I’ll continue to get work. I’ve also given up on the notion that I’ll ever receive payment from this person, so the least I can do is warn off any other freelancers who might consider working for her. I might even teach a few future freelancers some valuable lessons along the way.

In the summer of 2015, I was connected by email to a woman named Leslie Sanchez. She was looking for someone with a strong journalism and writing background. If you’re already aware of Sanchez, it’s likely because she’s a regular guest on network and cable news. She appeared frequently on CNN, often brought on to discuss Latino voters and issues. According to her LinkedIn profile, she was hired in 2015 as a regular contributor to CBS News and was a frequent guest during its election broadcasts. She’s also the founder of Impacto Group LLC, a “ leading data-driven product and market research consultancy specializing in Latino and women’s markets.”

I was put in touch with Sanchez because of my journalism experience. She was on the verge of launching a new digital media company. Called Lelly, it would be geared toward American Latino Millennials. More than a year has passed and my memory is a little fuzzy, but I remember it was pitched as a kind of Upworthy-meets-Univision. It would publish its own content, license that content out to media outlets with large Latino markets, serve as an ad market for those Latino markets, and also license out its proprietary CMS.

Why was I needed? Well, Sanchez had lined up a number of investors who were all geared up to write her checks. As a formality, she needed a business plan, and I would be the one to write it. But that was pitched as just the initial engagement; after the funding came in, I would take on a larger role in recruiting content creators and guiding the direction of the site. I think the title of “managing editor” got floated at one point.

At the time, this seemed like the perfect opportunity for me. I had recently quit my job and was beginning to amass a freelance client base, but I was still awash with the fear and anxiety any new entrepreneur faces — the kind that leaves you awake at night wondering if you were an idiot for leaving that cushy job. Lelly sounded like it would serve as a strong anchor client, and Sanchez seemed like the kind of person who was well-connected and could open a lot of doors.

So I quoted her my hourly rate and gave her an estimate for the number of hours the project would take. After she agreed to it, I set about writing the business plan.

But almost from the beginning I noticed red flags, the kind you eventually learn to look out for as a freelancer. I’d schedule phone calls with Sanchez and she wouldn’t show up to them. Sometimes she’d ghost me for weeks at a time, not even answering emails. When I’d finally get her on the phone, it was clear she hadn’t read any of my work product. She promised to deliver me materials I needed to include in the business plan, but they never seemed to materialize.

Still, the work was steady, and even though Sanchez was erratic, she seemed like a nice person and often praised my work. I chalked her behavior up as that of a successful entrepreneur who was pulled in a thousand different directions.

After I completed what I could of the business plan (she never ended up sending me the financial information I needed in order to finish it), Sanchez connected me to other collaborators on Lelly who were helping out on the editorial, design, and technology aspects. I was set up with my own login and tasked with securing Lelly social media accounts and populating the website with content. The investors and potential media partners, it was explained, needed a proof of concept of what the site would look like.

By this point, however, I was growing increasingly worried. Sanchez would disappear without any email communication for weeks at a time. I had turned in two invoices and neither had been acknowledged. Sometimes I received emails from other Lelly collaborators who asked if I’d seen or heard from her.

The breaking point came when two of those collaborators reached out to me and requested that I join them on a conference call. I won’t recount the entirety of that call here, especially since I didn’t obtain their permission to do so, but suffice it to say that they confirmed my worst fears about the project — that Sanchez had been stringing them along for some time and made lots of promises that never seemed to materialize.

[LIKE THIS ARTICLE SO FAR? THEN YOU’LL REALLY WANT TO SIGN UP FOR MY NEWSLETTER. IT’S DELIVERED ONCE A WEEK AND PACKED WITH MY TECH AND MEDIA ANALYSIS. SUBSCRIBE OVER HERE]

After that call, I decided it was time to wind down my work with Lelly. I sent a diplomatically-worded email saying that I needed to focus on other client projects, but I’d pick back up again once she’d finalized her business deals and was ready to launch the site in earnest. I sent her the final of three invoices. They totaled $2,662.

Thus began a monthly ritual in which I’d try to cajole Sanchez for the money she owed me. After sending out invoices for all my other clients, I’d shoot her a line saying, “I wanted to check in again on these invoices.” At first, these inquiries were always met with assurances that the checks would be mailed right away. “Your invoices will absolutely be taken care of within 30 days,” she wrote on October 7, 2015. Those 30 days came and went. “Thanks again for your patience,” she wrote on December 4, 2015. “Trying to get budget and this resolved before year end. It’s a top priority.”

It wasn’t until February 2016 when the narrative suddenly changed. Now there were supposed cash flow issues:|||

It’s probably pretty difficult for the average worker to comprehend the sheer amount of vulnerability a freelance, self-employed person must face. If you have a full-time, salaried position, your…