If you've enjoyed coding in Scratch , but find yourself bumping up against its limitations and would like to take the next step in programming Javascript, then S2JS is for you. You'll be able to write Scratch-like games that run anywhere, including on your friends smartphones.

We reserve the right to make amendments to this Policy at any time. If you have objections to the Privacy Policy, you should not access or use the Site.You have a right to access your personal information, subject to exceptions allowed by law.We welcome your comments or questions regarding this Policy, please contact us by email:

From time to time, we may use customer information for new, unanticipated uses not previously disclosed in our privacy notice. If our information practices change at some time in the future we will only use data collected from the time of the change for these new purposes.

For each visitor to reach the site, we use Google to collect non-personally identifiable information, including but not limited to browser type, version and language, operating system, pages viewed while browsing the Site, page access times and referring website address. This collected information is used internally solely for the purpose of gauging visitor traffic and trends.

We do not share your information with other organisations. We do not transmit or store your password in plain text.We require your email address solely for the purpose of recovering your account should you forget your password. We may use your email address to notify you of changes to the website.

However, to create your own programs you are required to create a unique username and password.

You can access all the tutorial portions of this site without providing personal information.

S2JS may modify this agreement at any time, and such modifications shall be effective immediately.

Access to this website is limited to reasonable use for non-commercial educational purposes. You may choose to charge a fee for your personal tuition services related to S2JS, but may not charge for access to S2JS itself. Any disruptive or offensive use may be restricted, subject to the sole discretion of S2JS.

The website is provided "AS IS". Your use of this website is at your own risk. S2JS disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, including without limitation, warranties of merchantability and fitness of a particular purpose. S2JS disclaims liability for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, consequential, exemplary, punitive or other damages, or lost profits, that may result directly or indirectly from the use of the website. This includes, without limitation, any damage to computer systems, hardware or software, loss of data, or any other performance failures, any errors, bugs, viruses or other defects that result from, or are associated with the use of this website.

The website HTML, software and courseware made available on this website are the property of S2JS. You are welcome to display on your computer, download, and print pages from this website for personal and educational use only.

In order to use the Site, you must accept the terms set forth below. If you are a minor, your parent or guardian must accept the terms and full responsibility for your use of the website. BY USING THE WEBSITE, YOU AGREE TO THESE TERMS.

Scratch is awesome. It's certainly possible to use S2JS is you haven't done coding in Scratch as long as you've used other ('proper') programming tools that involve "loops" and "if-then-else" and "variables". If you've never heard of these things, then head on over to and start learning how to code. When Scratch is starting to feel a little tight around the armpits, come back here.S2JS is free - free like a free lunch, but with less food.

Free for reasonable, non-commercial educational use. More details under Terms of Use.

It's not so much about age, but about how much Scratching you've done. You need to be very comfortable making sprites move around and using variables. You should be a master of repeat and if-then-else blocks, and it would be great (but not essential) if you know about cloning and "make a block".Pretty much does. The sections are constructed with a careful flow - the coding introduced in one section will be used in the next section as a basis to introduce another new thing. If you skip around, you may find yourself feeling a bit lost.

Even if you've done some Javascript before, we'd recommend you follow the lesson flow. You might want to go through fairly quickly, but that's better than diving into the middle and not fully understanding.

As many until it gets unwieldy for you - which is possibly a dozen or so. This is by design - S2JS is an education tool to help Scratchers get fired up about Javascript. If you're developing something massive, then it's time to go find a proper IDE, and S2JS will have happily done it's job.Yes, please do. In fact, that seems to be where S2JS works best.

Many providers use a approach, where kids work through the S2JS tutorials, and the teacher roams the room providing custom one-on-one assistance as required.

Many teachers will also periodically set a group goal or challenge, to establish a checkpoint and ensure everyone is achieving proper comprehension and not just click click clicking ahead. You decide what you want the kids to achieve, and they do their work in their private S2JS project area.

As a teacher, you can also use our Teacher Console to monitor students progress and work.

If you're a school teacher or club organizer, the Teacher Console lets you keep track of your students, see what tutition modules they've been through and how long they spent on each one, as well as seeing the programs they've been working on -- source and execution.

You create a teacher group, and are then provided with a special S2JS url. Any student accessing S2JS via that url becomes a permanent member of your group.

Kids can be members of more than one group, groups can have more than one owner, and owners can have more than one group.

The Teacher Console is a great place to keep an eye on your kids progress.

We have no problem with you using S2JS as part of an educational service for which you charge a fee. You can't charge for access to S2JS, but you can charge for your resources and tuition.We're not Google, you know. We're not made of money so they've got to be limited to something. The goal was to provide a simple place for private image storage that isn't likely to be blocked by your school firewall. If you can access S2JS, you can access its image storage.

You can always store your larger images on a separate image-sharing website (whatever your firewall allows), and just reference those urls in the programs you store on S2JS.

Many educators head towards Python as the natural progression after coding in Scratch. Python is a fine language with many good features as well as one or two horrendous ones. The problem with Python is it doesn't achieve the goal of running in a browser without installation and providing proper game-quality graphics you can immediately share with your friends on their own diverse devices.

Javascript certainly has its shortcomings, but we feel the advantages listed above combined with its real-world applicability makes it a good next step in kids coding careers.

Yeah, maybe we did. Frequently we'll do something in several steps when it could be done in one.

The goal is for users to see how to build up complex things from simple things, rather than present them with a lengthy nested expression and have their mind boggle. Far better to do it over three lines, and have them follow every step.

We also try to be mindful of what subset of Javascript they've actually been introduced to. Hopefully, in due course, they'll snort with derision and recode it as a single statement - having totally understood why.

But if you see something where you think we've missed a simpler path, notwithstanding the preceding comments, then please do let us know.

Similar to above. Our goal is not to teach people how to write industrial-strength webpages that will run on every browser since IE 1.0. Our goal is to provide a path to enthusiasm for things beyond Scratch, and to sidestep as many hurdles as possible along the way. Inserting a hundred calls to getElementById would not enhance enthusiasm.We use Australian spelling for words like "colour". Eventually we'll get around to providing appropriate spelling depending on your location.Please let us know. Bugs and typos do not besmirch one's honour, but unfixed bugs and typos most certainly will.Text, Javascript source code, HTML and courseware is (c) Copyright 2014-2017 S2JS and Ian Davies.

Scratch, the Scratch Cat, and portions of certain screenshots are copyright MIT Media Lab.

Scratch is a project of the Lifelong Kindergarten group at the MIT Media Lab. It is available for free at http://scratch.mit.edu.|||

An educational tool that teaches Javascript coding to kids who have programmed in Scratch.