Skiplit is a beautifully simple yet awesomely complex puzzle game all about colors meeting. You'll soon learn that simple doesn't mean easy. Just swipe the ball to shoot it in the direction you want, bouncing it off of walls and around obstacles to get it into the correctly colored goal. Be careful, though — you can only bounce the ball a few times each level! Almost every level can be completed in more than one way. Skiplit can be played anywhere! No internet connection is needed, making it perfect for plane rides, road trips, or whenever you just want to solve puzzles. As you progress, you'll quickly discover that levels get more and more challenging when you are faced with • Different colored balls and goals • Different types of balls • Walls and goals that move just like balls • Dangerous walls and balls • Even more complications to discover! Build, play, and share your own unique levels using the level designer, and play endless levels from anyone else around the world in the Skiplit Community! Skiplit — the beautifully simple yet impossibly complex puzzle game for iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch.

Oops! In version 2.0.4, there was a bug where we accidentally asked you to share Skiplit with your friends way too often. Although we really would like you to share Skiplit, asking you after so often probably isn't the best way to do it. Because this was a bug and bugs never make any sense at all, you only saw this bug if you aren't on iOS 10.3. I love it when nothing makes any sense.



We also made the new alerts look slightly better on smaller screens, and made a cool new way of laying them out. The new way of laying them out is in the background, though, and you probably won't notice it at all, but now that you know about it maybe you'll appreciate how much work it took. Or maybe not. I'll pretend like it doesn't hurt.



Anyways, that's about it for this update. We were planning on adding more stuff, but we kind of have to fix that share bug right now because it could get really annoying, so stay tuned for future updates!



Remember to follow us on Twitter @SkiplitApp for tips, tricks, updates, and more! Found a bug? Tell us at skiplit.com/support!



Happy Skipping!|||

Read reviews, compare customer ratings, see screenshots, and learn more about Skiplit. Download Skiplit and enjoy it on your iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch.