Isaiah Wolfe, who goes by the name Orange, spends his nights under a bush outside Golden Gate park and his days on the corner of Haight and Ashbury streets, soaking up the love. Love from his wife, his dogs, his buddies and everyone else who calls this part of San Francisco home.

“We’ve come here to experience the love this place has,” said Orange, 20, sporting a beard, piercings and multi-coloured sweater. “I heard the summer of love was the best thing to ever happen.”

It happened in 1967 but Orange, a Minnesotan who has criss-crossed the United States sleeping rough for three years, could feel the glow 50 years later. “People here treat you as an actual human being unlike anywhere else in the country.”

Sunshine Powers, an artist with a passion for glitter, also sensed the ethos of that summer, when 100,000 hippies turned this neighbourhood into a counter-culture citadel. “We’re bringing back the colour, the creativity, the consciousness. What happened here 50 years ago transformed who we are as a society.”

Stroll around Haight-Ashbury this week and it was easy to believe that. Young people with backpacks lounged on benches, some holding flowers. Stores selling handmade jewelry, vintage clothing and Tibetan-themed knick-knacks lined the streets. The aroma of pot mingled with incense. Across the city posters with psychedelic swirls proclaimed a summer of love. The perpetual bay area fog lifted, bathing it all in sunshine.

It resembled a minor miracle, or time capsule. The spirit of the Beat poets and flower children who gathered here to create a new paradigm of sharing and community, alive in 2017.

It was an illusion.

If you’re going to San Francisco by all means wear some flowers in your hair but be sure to bring a credit card and acceptance that the summer of love is history. The bohemian idyll of Allen Ginsberg, Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters no longer exists.

The Bay Area today is the global headquarters of big tech. Here community is a euphemism for customers, disruption means starting your own company and free love means Tinder or Grindr. The San Francisco sound, which once referred to psychedelic rock groups, is now “ka-ching” – money.

This is one of the world’s most expensive, unequal cities where billionaires step over sleeping shapes on the sidewalks. An evicted 100-year-old woman recently became a symbol of gentrification. Artists, writers and musicians are leaving for cheaper cities. Even techies with six-figure salaries complain about rents. Companies like Uber and Airbnb have appropriated the word sharing for the gig economy, itself a euphemism for perpetual work.

In place of hippies subsisting on acid and food handouts there are hipsters with bowls of organic acai and yoga studio subscriptions. In place of Timothy Leary’s “turn on, tune in, drop out” the modern mantra is click, swipe, update.

“It’s not the same city. It has lost its soul,” said Jim Siegel, 61, who attended the summer of love and later helped run the Haight-Ashbury Switchboard, a volunteer group that succeeded the Diggers, a guerrilla theatre group which organised free concerts, free food, free medical care, free housing – even free shops, which gave away everything.

Siegel has run his own store, Distractions, on Haight street for 41 years. It sells Burning Man-type regalia. As he spoke to the Observer, Siegel politely rebuffed a walk-in vendor hawking a bag of clothes. “Sorry man, I’ve not made enough money lately.”

It is, of course, no surprise that the city has changed in half a century. But the summer of love cast a mystique that enchanted San Francisco, baby boomers and succeeding generations around the world – a swirl of art, politics, music and revolt that others have never managed to fully replicate. No wonder San Francisco clings to 1967.

The city is holding dozens of concerts, tours and exhibitions with archive and retro imagery, including an authentic Volkswagen “love bus” with beaded curtains, shag carpet and neon blue seats, to commemorate it. “Not just a sightseeing tour, it’s a trip!” promises one slogan. “Lavender-tinted glasses: a groovy gay look at the summer of love,” says another.

The de Young, a fine arts museum in Golden Gate park, is hosting a show called the Summer of Love Experience: Art, Fashion, and Rock & Roll. Its mix of music, posters, outfits, textiles and lighting make it feel like you’ve stepped back in time.

“It’s still living history because so many of the influencers and progenitors are still alive and their ideology has not changed,” said Jill D’Alessandro, a curator. “I’d like to think that the ethos is still here, still alive. San Francisco is still an intellectually curious city that supports the arts.”

Tech workers are not philistines and do engage with arts and culture, said D’Alessandro. The trouble is that others cannot afford to live in the city. “It basically comes down to money.”

Emily Duffy, 59, a stained glass artist and self-described hippy, gave a harsher verdict. “It’s a totally different city. It has been Google-ised. All my artist friends have left.” The summer of love’s spirit had been extinguished, she said. “It’s been calcified and put in a museum.”

Steve Dickison, a prominent local poet, detected enduring traces, such as the City Lights book store. “But it’s hard to see it under all the glare and the acceleration of everything.” Musical innovation is no more, he rued. “If the city is lacking music something is really gone.”

This was heresy to those still feeling the love in Haight-Ashbury.

“Peace and love used to be a hippy thing, now it’s for everyone, ” said Powers, the glitter-adorned artist. She has set up the Council of Love, a non-profit, to raise funds for clinics and shelters which date from 1967. She cited the city’s progressive politics – defending the rights of women, immigrants and the LGBT community – plus its passion for yoga. “The summer of love has oozed into becoming a norm.”

Powers said artists could survive in San Francisco. “I’m an artist and I live here.” Asked how, she gave a reply more in tune with the era of Trump than Timothy Leary: “I have four or five businesses.”

Down the street, Orange and his homeless friends acknowledged that money troubles overshadowed their 2017 summer of love.

Sunshine Autrey, 18, a recent arrival, stood out with his non-hippy attire. “I’m trying to get some tie-dye,” he said. “But I don’t have any money. A T-shirt is, like, $25.” Another youth, who requested anonymity, said he was a former software coder fallen on hard times. “You think I want to be sleeping rough?”

Overcrowding, homelessness, drug addiction and crime, including sexual assaults, soured the original summer of love. By October much of the influx left. Some of the remainder held a mock funeral for the “death of the hippy”.

Yet many stayed on in San Francisco and bequeathed a little known legacy, one omitted from the flower power myth. They settled in poor neighbourhoods and ended up inadvertently displacing African-American residents, who today comprise just 5% of the population.

“Hippies were a gentrification wave. Jazz clubs disappeared,” said Dickison, the poet. San Francisco continually erased aspects of its past, he said. “That’s something that happens over and over again in this place.”|||

Nostalgia runs high as the city approached 50th anniversary, but residents say free love has given way to wealth and individualism