As with anything we build, nowadays we encourage people to limit their cognitive thinking with too simple interfaces. Performing action without making a decision is trendy. While striving for beauty, we’ve created obscure gestures that are beyond even the developer’s ability to remember and also have built great features within products that most people don’t realize exist.

Design is a way of thinking, of determining people’s true, underlying needs, and then delivering products and services that help them. But if you remove all “thinking” parts you encourage mediocre users to use the product without thinking about it.

We need to ask ourselves how does universally simple/easy design affects us (humans and society). By pushing visually simple designs we have encouraged people to be mediocre users. From Website to furniture everything is prototypical. We all have the mental image of how things should look and feel and if it doesn’t fit the prototypical definition we tend to reject them.

While designers tend to admire the beauty and elegance, sometimes they underestimate the quality of work that goes into truly complex designs.

Don’t Confuse complex design with bad design, if the product is complex by nature, eliminating it’s feature set with too simple visual design cripples it’s Unique Selling Point.

We love to seek happiness by mastering our skills. When you design the possibility of mastery into an object, you’re designing a happier path for your users.While designing we shouldn’t be motivated to make things universally easy.

Instead, we can make the designs more difficult and stimulate people to think harder and expand their cognitive capabilities. If we made people think harder to solve their information needs, we will educate them and encourage them to grow.

If exploring (or navigating) a product while on boarding was too easy, people don’t get the chance to put their own models and theories to organize the information about the product.

A challenging task to utilize their working memory will lead for a better experience by using their motor skills and the sense of accomplishment and job well done that users will experience after successfully finishing a task.

Working memory is the part of your brain that temporarily stores and processes information in the course of a few seconds. It’s what allows you to focus attention, resist distractions, and most importantly, guides your decision making.

Guided complex flow helps people to focus on each task. For example Banking or Payment systems takes few steps while making decisions while user goes through the context and decides. Complex interface makes it feel worthy of paying attention and people don’t need to feel threatened while performing tasks around it.

Fear is a great motivator of action. People have a fairly consistent attitude to danger. If you make an activity safer, people push the limits of that activity to bring the risk back up to a level they find accessible.

According to the Protection Motivation Theory, which is developed by the world’s top advertisers, people are motivated to protect themselves from physical, psychological, and social threats. When faced with a threat, people are directed to respond, depending on:

Too many messages in one space equals no message. Try to disclose little to zero information upfront; make users dig deeper in your product to find more.

For example, when a list of products hides important details users will certainly be intrigued, will engage in guessing and hypothesizing, and will then click on each of the features to verify their guesses. You can only imagine their overwhelming satisfaction when they finally discover that their hypotheses were right.

Today’s iPhones and iPads are a study in visual simplicity. Beautiful fonts. A clean appearance, uncluttered by extraneous words, symbols, or menus. So what if many people can’t read the text?

Designers try to accommodate user’s scanning behavior and repair the damages done by lack of reading through clever keyword formatting. Instead we need to design the way people can improve their attention span and focus on each element of the product.

Above all, text must be legible. If users can’t read the words in your app, it doesn’t matter how beautiful the typography is. This is why it’s important when designing a product to remember every element — typography, imagery, logo, and color selection —to communicate subtle information about the brand.

Don’t get me wrong. I’m not against making User-Friendly things. Simplicity in branding and smart marketing campaigns helps people to pick up your product. But the promise of mastery ensures that they will never want to put it down.|||

As with anything we build, nowadays we encourage people to limit their cognitive thinking with too simple interfaces. Performing action without making a decision is trendy. While striving for beauty…