

On an average, I think that the approach begins by looking at the job profile. Experience, skills, and leverage are looked upon. Then the search begins with relevant keywords, mostly on LinkedIn, Monster or Naukri and then profiles are shortlisted. They individually message/connect with the candidates, interact to find out the needs and then finally set up the call with the prospect client. No doubt the method is effective but often I get such job postings which are remotely relevant to me and at times I feel they spam the candidates. Hence I sometimes feel the method which is employed is not efficient or good. At times the candidates also face issues due to this which ultimately leads to waste of time and relations with HR and company.



 What to look out in a candidate's profile before approaching



 Understand the what the client needs Basic Requirements - It starts with what they are trying to build and how much of talent they expect. You need to understand the severity of the client and his expectations. Few clients have very strict conditions like Tier A college only or five-year experience only. You need to negotiate and in fact clearly understand the requirements. Budget - Clarify on the budget. There are many tools/websites available which can tell you round figure salary of candidates you are going to approach and recruit. Discuss it with your client, set the expectations right and keep a little margin(which I guess is already done). Many times, I get opportunities with very low budget. I feel bad for the HR and company but still can't proceed. Technology Requirements - Understand the technology requirements. Java or Javascript? Ruby or RoR? Python or NodeJS. Relevant experience in each technology, Github/StackOverflow profile and open source contributions also come into the picture. There are many untold requirements. For example, a two python experience partially matches with 3 year Java experience. It is because concepts are similar, design is OOPs based and both technologies faces similar difficulties. So you must figure such combinations. Candidates to be put on low priority if Debut experience is too low. For candidates in their first job, unless they complete a year of work, it is kind of useless to approach them due to lack of skill development. Trust me, one year is a less experience. Candidates with close to a year and a half are appropriate. Even then a lot of aspects are to be looked upon before making an approach. Current experience is of less than six months. I got into my new stint last year and quite clearly mentioned it on my LinkedIn but HRs even then approached me with offers. It told me two things about the HR. First, they neither care about my career, second, they just want to fulfill client's needs without looking at long term consequences. One of my friends once accepted such a deal only to be questioned by the client about the problems he was facing in his current job. He couldn't answer. His motivation was purely financial benefits. He was not only rejected but blacklisted too by the client. So such things should be looked upon or client should be well informed about the candidate's current position. Candidates with too many job switches. Either they could not do it or they simply switched for money. Research about companies which they switched should also be done. I have worked at four companies and three of them shut down. Skills do not match. I have been asked tons of times to code in JAVA for the client. Most of the HRs got confused with Javascript in my profile. So please, try to understand that Java is not Javascript, Ruby is not Rails, Python doesn't mean Django and PHP has hundreds of frameworks with low resemblance with each other. Despite all of the technologies I mentioned are MVC based ones, but they are still different in terms of implementation. Hunting the special skill needs a little research into the technologies. Candidates proficient with Zend might pick up CodeIgniter or CakePHP but not ExpressJS. Such things only come from experience and field work. Talk to the client. Discuss your research about the candidates in depth before making the first call. The candidate is not a culture fit. Although very difficult to judge at one go, but each company has a different culture. Giants have a liberal culture. Startups have slightly rugged culture. Service companies have relaxed ones mostly. Now you cannot expect a three-year freelancer to fit to a startup culture all in one day. You need to think about the candidate and his experience and nature of work he has been doing. I have seen few very talented people moving out of the companies because they were not used to the culture. They felt lonely, especially in startups. Bulk Email - Stop it altogether. No matter how huge the requirement is, please don't mass email. Any good candidate would never reply to that. Never CC/BCC your emails to everyone. Blunt Behaviour - It is ok to be straightforward, but not blunt. It is not ok to ask about current CTC or compensation and expected CTC. We know you are looking for your commission and you will not hesitate to screw our careers. Instead, write a personalized email to everyone with exact requirements, company details. You can also mention why you are approaching the candidate by mentioning his relevant experience. Misinform - Stop lying or misinforming. SDE and SDET are roles mile apart. I have faced this issue in past. Also, stop forcing or asking candidates to try the interview against a better compensation. It doesn't work. Keep the CTC facts clear, whether it is basic pay, variable pay or equity options. Do not keep anyone in dark. It makes a very bad impression. Apart from these issues, I have a huge respect for this profession as it involves searching people without Google. A quick look at the profile and the HR makes an informed decision shaping the career and future of the company and candidate. I think this is really tough to do and I am really thankful to all of them whom I have worked with. This is the part where most of the HRs fail to look through. They often target under/over qualified people and hence do not get an appropriate response. At times, right candidates are left out because of unawareness among HRs. Like candidates do a lot of research about the company before joining, HRs too need to research about the requirements and about candidates before everything else. It will not only improve the chance to find the right candidate but will also equip you with field knowledge and you will sound impressive with the technical know-hows. But first start with the right requirements.Apart from these issues, I have a huge respect for this profession as it involves searching people without Google. A quick look at the profile and the HR makes an informed decision shaping the career and future of the company and candidate. I think this is really tough to do and I am really thankful to all of them whom I have worked with.



Huge thumbs up to all HRs.



HRs or talent hunters they call themselves are of various kinds. New, experienced, well mannered, focused, desperate and lean are few of the types. It is easy to figure out right from the first message which category one falls into. It is bad to look desperate or too lean. It is one of the most important roles in the industry as it shapes the future of the company. Margin of error is quiet high when it comes to startups as the time and funding is too low. One wrong fit and it sinks the rest of company.|||

basic mistakes hr makes, important rules for hr, how to look for a candidate, What to look in a candidate, how to approach a candidate