The layout and styling of the PDF is driven by a YAML configuration file. To learn how the theming system works and how to create and apply custom themes, refer to the Asciidoctor PDF Theme Guide . You can use the built-in theme files, which you can find in the data/themes directory, as examples.

Asciidoctor can process the full range of characters in the UTF-8 character set. That means you can write your document in any language, save the file with UTF-8 encoding, and expect Asciidoctor to convert the text properly. However, you may notice that certain characters for certain languages, such as Chinese, are missing in the PDF. Read on to find out why and how to address it.

If you’re writing in a non-Latin language, you need to use a dedicated theme that provides the necessary fonts. For example, to produce a PDF from a document written in a CJK language such as Chinese, you need to use a CJK theme. You can get such a theme by installing the gem. See the asciidoctor-pdf-cjk-kai_gen_gothic project for detailed instructions.

Using a dedicated theme is necessary because PDF is a “bring your own font” kind of system. In other words, the font you provide must provide glyphs for all the characters. There’s no one font that supports all the worlds languages (though some, like Noto Serif, certainly come close). Even if there were such a font, bundling that font with the main gem would make the package enormous. It would also severely limit the style choices in the default theme, which targets Latin-based languages.

Therefore, we’re taking the strategy of creating separate dedicated theme gems that target each language family, such as CJK. The base theme for CJK languages is provided by the asciidoctro-pdf-cjk project and a concrete implementation provided by the asciidoctor-pdf-cjk-kai_gen_gothic project that’s based on the kai_gen_gothic font. Of course, you’re free to follow this model and create your own theme gem that uses fonts of your choice.|||

asciidoctor-pdf - :page_with_curl: Asciidoctor PDF: A native PDF converter for AsciiDoc based on Asciidoctor and Prawn, written entirely in Ruby.