We generally buy our devices—phones, laptops, desktops, tablets, cameras, etc. But it would be better, in many ways, to rent them by the month. You’ll be able to stop paying the rent and return the device any time you want, with no contract or lock-in. Rents decrease over time, to reflect the lower value of devices. The first month’s rent may be particularly high, to reflect the decline in the value of a new product when you open the box [1].

There are many advantages to this model.

First, you don’t lock yourself in to a form factor, configuration, or company. For example, I bought a desktop, because I’m an independent developer who always works from home. But I now realise that I should’ve bought a laptop, so that I have the flexibility to use the device in any room in my house. Or if I need to work out of a coworking space or my partner’s house.

As a second example, I bought a 13-inch iPad “Pro”, but found it useless to get work done [2]. I would have been better off with the Surface Pro. If I were renting my iPad, I’d simply stop paying the rent and return the device, and get a Surface instead [3].

As a third example, I ended up buying some devices that had insufficient storage or memory. Since many devices are not upgradeable, it would have made sense to rent them, since that lets me easily switch models. We’re stuck nowadays with many devices are not upgradeable — phones, tablets, laptops, even desktop Macs, and so on. If we were renting them, they would all be upgradeable. When the upgrade happens by replacing one component or the entire device is an implementation detail — it doesn’t matter.

When you realise that the device you bought isn’t right for you, you could return it and buy another one, but returns aren’t usually allowed in India. Even if they are, they’re allowed only for a short time like 10 days, which isn’t enough at all to realise that you bought the wrong product. It sometimes takes months to understand how you use the device, what the tradeoffs are, and whether the pros outweigh the cons.

Second, we all have some unused devices, like a smartphone in my case. If I were renting it, I’d return it so that someone else can get some value out of it, rather than letting it go waste, slowly becoming obsolete, sitting in my cupboard. That’s sad.

Third, renting means that you don’t suffer a financial loss when the device breaks. Besides, you don’t have to buy costly add-ons like AppleCare to cover what should have been included, like onsite service or a three-year warranty [4]. Before I had AppleCare, Apple told me that they expect me to carry my 10kg 27-inch iMac to their service center. And multiple times, when the first service center turned out to be incompetent (they couldn’t install macOS properly). To fix these problems, I had to buy AppleCare, though I felt like Apple was ripping me off. If I were renting, I’d have none of these problems. If the device has hardware defects, I’d just return it and rent a new one, instead of suffering weeks and months with faulty hardware, hurting my business while I run after the service center guys. Or even if I suspect that it has, and want to waste no more time troubleshooting it.

For example, I won’t have to reinstall my OS. It wastes half a day of my time to do that, reinstall and configure all my apps, sync lots of data from the cloud, update system settings, and so on [5]. If I’m wasting that much time, I might as well get a new device, to rule out the possibility of a hardware defect, which would otherwise require me to go through this cycle again.

Fourth, when you rent, you don’t have to worry about “Is now the right time to buy?” You don’t have to read the tea leaves to find out when updated hardware might come along, or discuss online to find that out. I sometimes went months without buying a device, eventually losing interest and not buying it at all. I went without the device, and the manufacturer went without my money, which they’d have gotten if they had an alternative payment method.

Fifth, when you rent, you can save money by renting a second-hand device, again with no financial risk. If it breaks, just return it and get another one — you won’t be wasting any money. Whereas, if you bought it outright, and it breaks, you’ve wasted your money.

Refurbished devices aren’t usually available in India, and even if they were, they usually come with only a one-year warranty, after which you take the risk of the device failing, causing you a loss. I’d confidently rent a second-hand Macbook Pro, for example, knowing I’m not taking any risk. If it breaks after the one-year warranty, I just get a new one, losing no money in the process.

Sixth is cash flow. Even if costs more in the long-term, some people wouldn’t have the money to buy a costly device like a Macbook Pro outright [6].

Seventh, buyers hesitate to invest a large amount of money, particularly in a product they didn’t use before, like a first-time laptop buyer, or a Windows user buying their first Mac. They’d be more willing to pay a small amount of money renting it, because they lose less if they device turns out to be bad. Companies spend $500 billion a year on advertising, trying to persuade customers to buy their products, only to have customers ignore the ads or react skeptically to them. Or they build gimmicky features that sound cool in theory and draw customers in to showrooms, but are useless in practice. All this money would be better spent letting customers try the product without risk, instead of trying to fool them via advertising or gimmicks.

Renting will disproportionately benefit companies that make products that have higher customer satisfaction ratings, which is again exactly the right incentive to put in place. It can even be used as a marketing strategy by such companies, knowing that it’s to their advantage. If that becomes popular, a company that chooses not to rent may be perceived as not being confident of its own products.

Eighth, renting may persuade companies to design long-lasting products, since if they don’t, the loss will be theirs. As opposed to companies being incented to not make it too reliable, in the hope that customers buy a replacement. This will save us money, and help the environment.

Ninth is compatibility, like ever-changing ports, which is particularly fashionable in the Apple world. For example, the LG Ultrafine 5K monitor works only with Thunderbolt-equipped computers, not with computers that have a USB-C port (like the 12-inch Macbook) or a plain DisplayPort, like many Windows laptops [5]. Since I don’t want my choice of monitor dictating what laptop I use, and since I can’t throw away a monitor when I change laptops, certainly not a $1300 monitor, I won’t buy this monitor [6]. But I would happily rent this monitor since, if my needs change, I can return it without losing money.

Tenth is products that are outright defective, like a monitor that doesn’t work properly when placed near a Wifi router. Especially in countries like India that haven’t evolved strong customer protection culture and laws, and where defective products aren’t usually recalled. If I’d rented the LG Ultrafine display and found it to be defective, LG would suffer the loss and not me, which is exactly how it should be.

When we rent devices, we derive many benefits that we’re currently denied when we buy them outright. Renting should be the norm, or at least available to everyone who wants it, for all the devices we buy.

[1] An alternative to renting is to buy the device outright, but with a guaranteed buy-back price. The buy-back offer would be valid for three years, and the price would decrease based on a schedule published at the time of purchase, which the seller won’t be able to change later.

[2] I can’t build an iOS or Android app on it. Lightroom on the iPad isn’t as powerful as on the PC. When I return from a holiday and want to upload 20GB of data from my SD card to Google Drive, I can’t do that on the iPad, since it has neither an SD card slot nor full multitasking. I have a lot of movies on my external hard disc, which the iPad can’t connect to. When I’m scanning a couple of dozen pages on my scanner, it’s faster and more reliable to plug a USB cable into a laptop, particularly the scanner is in a room with flaky Wifi connectivity. And so on. Maybe your use cases are different. Maybe you won’t face these specific problems, but you’ll likely face different ones that you won’t face with a real computer.

That doesn’t mean that iPads are content consumption devices for everybody, just that they are for the majority. It also doesn’t mean that they’ll forever be content consumption devices, just that they are today.

[3] I don’t know if I’ll be happy with the Surface, but I’m certainly not happy with the iPad “Pro”.

[4] I wouldn’t mind if this three-year warranty says that if the machine fails and the manufacturer has to replace it, the replacement will only be a loan for the rest of the warranty period. What I care about is all my needs being taken care of for three years, not owning old models of hardware. I’m not a museum.

[5] Time Machine isn’t a solution to the problem—the Apple technician recommended I not restore from a Time Machine backup, since it runs the risk of reintroducing the problem I’m trying to fix.

[6] EMIs are another solution to this problem, though usually at the cost of paying interest. Manufacturers could choose to absorb the cost of interest if they make more profit from the additional sale.

[5] A dongle would have been an acceptable solution, but there’s no dongle that converts USB-C or DisplayPort to Thunderbolt.

[6] Put differently, if I already owned this monitor, I wouldn’t buy a laptop that doesn’t have a Thunderbolt 3 port.|||

We generally buy our devices—phones, laptops, desktops, tablets, cameras, etc. But it would be better, in many ways, to rent them by the month. You’ll be able to stop paying the rent and return the…