With skills shortages and budget cuts, the healthcare sector has seen significant changes in its delivery model in the last few years.

A new initiative wants to solve this problem by building an intelligent and responsive virtual reality training application with real-life emergency trauma situations.

Rather than using mannequins — the traditional method for such training — students can now don VR headsets and experience emergency care scenarios in a virtual environment that looks and feels like a real-life scenario.

The VR simulation is compatible with Oculus Rift headset and Touch controllers. It is designed not only for consumer applications but also for social and enterprise training for healthcare and beyond.

The idea is that the medical students will be able to practice under realistic workplace pressures and conditions within the virtual world so that they are better prepared in real-life situations.

The project is sponsored by Facebook Oculus, designed and delivered by AiSolve and Bioflight VR in collaboration with doctors at Children’s Hospital Los Angeles.

“Through our collaboration with Oculus, Facebook and BioflightVR, we feel we’ve created the most realistic and immersive educational tool for healthcare providers that’s ever been developed,” said Devi Kolli, AiSolve CEO, in an official statement.

Shauna Heller, an Oculus alum who served as executive director of the program, said “The true promise of VR is to solve problems, share knowledge and save lives and this Children’s Hospital Los Angeles pilot will deliver on all three. AiSolve’s participation was pivotal and its VR Sims platform was crucial to the success of the pilot.”

According to Dr Todd Chang of the Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, it takes one hour to prepare a 30 minute, mannequin-based simulation, and another 30 minutes to clean up. On average, this operation costs around $430,000 annually. “Experiential learning is among the best way to practice paediatric emergencies,” Chang says.

“VR allows for the first-time experiential learning where not all the people are in the same room at the same time. It is far more flexible and students can perform the training far more often.”|||

With skills shortages and budget cuts, the healthcare sector has seen significant changes in its delivery model in the last few years. A new initiative wants to solve this problem by building an…