Beyond the effects to the economy that unemployment causes, unemployment has serious physical and psychological impact on the well-being of earnest yet unsuccessful job seekers. Being unable to find a job can be devastating to the job seeker and those around them.

Rebecca J. Rosen’s article for The Atlantic, “The Mental-Health Consequences of Unemployment,” cites a recent Gallup poll that concludes that “unemployed Americans are more than twice as likely as those with full-time jobs to say they currently have or are being treated for depression—12.4 percent vs. 5.6 percent, respectively.”

If you’re looking for employment, you know the isolation and desperation that comes from not working. Beyond the economics of unemployment, the emotional and mental strain that comes from feeling unsuccessful is a boulder on our shoulders. Many of us have been there before.

The solution is to keep your head straight, look for ways to apply to jobs more efficiently, and use the time you have between jobs productively.

So, let’s find a job, and shed that boulder!

Let’s begin our search by first doing a little searching of ourselves. In her book Mindset: The New Psychology of Success, Dr. Carol S. Dweck details what she calls the two common mindsets people live with. The Fixed Mindset leads us to believe that we are who we are, for good and for bad. Our success was based on our inherent talent, and we can never move beyond our given blessings our boundaries. For people with a fixed mindset, failure and loss is devastating because they believe failures are a reflection of their own insurmountable inadequacies. Worse yet, fixed mindset folks are quick to blame failure and loss on outside factors. (Special thank’s to Bookcelerator where we found this amazing book!)

A Growth Mindset person sees each mistake or failure as an opportunity for change and learning. It’s especially important to take that approach when you’re embroiled in a job hunt. Instead of each job we don’t get, we should see each attempt as a point of growth. What would have made us a more attractive candidate for that job? How can we improve our application materials? What did I learn from this attempt that I can apply to the next application?

These are questions meant to be obsessive for job-seekers. These are growth questions, and the answers make us better candidates for that next job opportunity.

Approaching your job search from this psychological perspective not only improves your chances of landing that next job, but it means you grow from the process, too.

How is your resume these days?

Depending on when you last updated it, your resume may need some sprucing up. It goes without saying—but let’s say it, anyway—that you need to spell check and grammar check that resume until you’ve squeezed out all the errors you can.

Check your verbs. Are they all clear and active? Are you using the same tense all the way through? The hiring manager might not have a PhD in English, but they’ve seen enough resumes to “hear” when a resume is consistent and when it’s not.

Are you writing job descriptions in a way where a hiring manager can tell what you did specifically? In her book #Girlboss, Sophia Amorusa recommends you avoid statements like “Built brand relationships within the creative community.” That’s not nearly specific enough. What did you actually do?

Focus on the skills you’ve learned along your professional journey. Skills that you can apply to your new position are more attractive, even, than school, according to Hannah Morgan writing for U.S. News and World Report.

Do your resume and cover letter translate well across different media? How does it look on a screen, and how does it look on paper? If you’re sending resumes and cover letters electronically, send them as pdfs. Just about every computer can read a pdf, but going back and forth from Word to Pages to Google Docs to Writer can ruin your formatting. A pdf should stay the way you want it.

Where do you find a job? In a recent article for the Huffington Post, Sherri Thomas recommended several job-seeking apps and job sites. LinkedIn is one of the most popular and most used, and for many employers, not having an account at LinkedIn could be a sign that your job search is not as dedicated as it should be.

LinkedInJobs is a job posting board you can use to search for jobs, and its connection to your LinkedIn profile makes it easier to match with jobs that might fit your needs and skills.

Indeed is a website that works like Google, but exclusively for jobs. You can zero in on job types and locations.

If your skills are really specific, SmartRecruiters.com recommends that you try a niche job board. These boards are more focused than Indeed or just Googling, and it’s easier to find people who speak your professional language.

All The Best

The number one piece of advice for job-seekers (beyond spellchecking that resume, of course)? Avoid the stagnation that comes from unemployment.

Don’t see unemployment as a complete waste of time. Use it to learn new skills, read a book you’ve always meant to read, or get out and walk.

These are all productive, and inexpensive, ways to occupy your time between job interviews that can provide positive answers when hiring managers ask what you’ve been doing lately.

Best of luck on your job search. Now spellcheck your resume one last time!|||

Today's Sponsor is a.i. RESUME - "The worlds first Artificially Intelligent Resume" Get one FREE for a limited time. Click here to sign up... Job Seeking Tips and Tools for 2017 Beyond the effects to the economy that unemployment causes, unemployment has serious physical and psychological impact on the well-being of earnest yet unsuccessful job seekers.…