Rachel was a smart kid with good grades, but was also fascinated with the world of taboos and outcasts. She wanted to know more about the world that many others judged, but didn’t take a part in.

Rachel was getting into trouble while at school. She was curious about boys, psychedelic mushrooms, and all kinds of taboo things. She told her parents she wanted to go to a self-paced school so she could start working ASAP and make money. She graduated high school when she was 16.

Rachel was determined to save more and more money; her hard work ethic originated from her dad. She was raised by the principles that you need to work for everything, and to always be ready for anything. After high school, she took on three jobs, just so she could make as much money as possible. Rachel lives her entire life according to this mantra:

Rachel called her dad one evening, asking for his advice on how to make time for college while working three jobs. Her dad always replied: “If you want it bad enough, you will figure it out.” But later on said (as a joke): “You can always work in an adult cabaret. You like music; you’re always dancing around.” Rachel wasn’t even 18 at the time, and didn’t even know what a cabaret or strip club meant.

Rachel was always bicurious. The first girl she fell in love with was someone her high school sweetheart was cheating on her with. Eventually, Rachel moved in with her, and suggested they take on Rachel’s dad’s advice of working at a strip club to make money. They decided to work as waitresses in the strip club however, not dancers.

Rachel made only $1 over her first two hours waiting tables. She was looking around and saw strippers making at least $20 from tips, dancing to one song! She scanned the room and looked for the girl with the most money in her g-string. Once she found her, she tipped her, asked the girl to teach her a few dance moves and lend her something to wear in-exchange for 50% of her earnings that night. Less than an hour later, Rachel was on stage with this girl’s shoes and outfit. That night, Rachel made over $700! What she would make over one week working three jobs (keep in mind, this was 15 years ago).

When Rachel told her dad she was on the road to becoming a stripper, he asked her to make one promise, which turned out to be incredibly important to her throughout 5.5 years of stripping: “don’t ever drink while you’re working.”

Rachel got scouted and pitched at the strip club she was working at. A random guy told Rachel at her club he’s a porn star and director for a company, and he could make Rachel rich AF. Rachel didn’t believe the guy, but eventually was convinced to meet him for breakfast.

The next morning they met at IHOP, where the guy presented Rachel with DVDs to show her he’s the real deal. Rachel and the guy got to know one another very intimately. The guy took several videos of Rachel and sent them to an agent, who said she’s perfect. A few weeks later, Rachel was in LA shooting her first porn with that same guy, Jack Venice. Her first porn is from 2007 — My Sister’s Hot Friend, by Naughty America.|||

Rachel Starr is a 10 year veteran of the adult industry who ranked consistently top 10 porn stars on PornHub. More info: Scroll to the bottom for more info on Where to Listen, The Bledsoe Show, and…