In 2014, TechCrunch wrote one of the most negative and scathing software reviews in the history of TechCrunch about Rebump, a Gmail email productivity tool. In their article TechCrunch made Rebump seem like it was the most vile and disgusting email productivity tool ever developed. The headline for their Rebump review was, “Meet Rebump, The New Worst Thing About Email.” Ouch! https://techcrunch.com/2014/02/28/meet-rebump-the-new-worst-thing-about-email/

As an email productivity tool, Rebump makes it easy for you to completely automate your email follow-up, so you can focus on other more important work projects instead of having to manually write and send follow-up emails. Rebump does this by sending automated email follow-up messages called “bumps” to a person you send an important email to, to remind them to respond to your email message. Once the person responds to your email message, Rebump automatically stops sending follow-up bumps to that person.

For Rebump users, this has worked incredibly well for helping them get responses to the important emails they send to their customers, sales prospects, and other important business contacts.

As it turns out, Rebump received thousands of new customers who signed up for Rebump after reading the negative TechCrunch review of Rebump. Even to this day Rebump gets many new customers thanks to that negative article. In the end, “The worst new thing about email” is actually a pretty darn good email productivity tool that people love because it does such a great job of getting your important emails answered.

So, we at Rebump would like to thank TechCrunch for their horrible review of Rebump. Your horrible review helped build our company. Thank you!

If you want to see what all the fuss is about with Rebump, download the Rebump Google Chrome extension for free at https://www.rebump.cc.|||

In 2014, TechCrunch wrote one of the most negative and scathing software reviews in the history of TechCrunch about Rebump, a Gmail email productivity tool. In their article TechCrunch made Rebump…