Re: A hotel reservation appeared on my calendar I did not make Welcome to the Google Calendar forum! Are you able to delete the event?  Also, in Gmail please check All Mail to see if you received any email about this reservation, it's possible they sent it to the wrong email address.  Events from Gmail are automatically added to your calendar, so if Gmail receives reservations it will automatically add it to your calendar.  You could change the settings if you don't want this feature.

Re: A hotel reservation appeared on my calendar I did not make It appears that I received a spam email from the hotel offering a "deal" for the weekend.  Somehow, even though I did not make a reservation or even respond to the email, it showed up on my calendar.  Likely a glitch in the system.  Caused me a lot of angst. I thought someone made a reservation under my identity.  A call to the otel and a review of my credit card bill seem to confirm that no one made a reservation. I do not want to disable this feature because I generally do like reservations and appointments I make to appear on my calendar.  But perhaps Google could fix it so that spam emails do not show up as events?  Thank you!

Re: A hotel reservation appeared on my calendar I did not make You are receiving this email at the account been...@googlemail.com because you set a notification for this event on the calendar Sachi Thomas. You can change your notifications for specific events in the event details page in https://www.google.com/calendar/. Forwarding this invitation could allow any recipient to modify your RSVP response. Learn More. I had a hotel booking notification for Dubai International hotel (at Dubai airport). I have never stayed, booked or even spoken to anyone from this hotel. I received a notification looks like an invite, asking response (going - yes/maybe/no). The source email is an email confirming my Emirates flight from Jakarta and then leaving for Delhi the next day. Is this a case of Dubai International airport hotel, suggesting me to stay there? Can someone please explain this?

Re: A hotel reservation appeared on my calendar I did not make I got an google calendar notification for a "Stay at Sheraton Towers Singapore" when I have absolutely NO CLUE where it came from. It was apparently "automatically created from an email" and when I clicked on it I was redirected to my main inbox, not the particular email. I can't find the email anywhere even Spam/Trash. I called the hotel and they never had a booking under my name. Is there anyway I can retrieve any evidence about it? I really hope someone can help!  



Re: A hotel reservation appeared on my calendar I did not make I just want to point out that regardless of whether or not it is functioning correctly for a given Gmail user this "feature" of Google Calendar is totally EVIL and should be discontinued. It is EVIL because no matter what you do as a user THESE EVENTS WILL BE CREATED REGARDLESS AND STORED ON GOOGLE SERVERS. All you can control is whether or not you SEE the events—not whether or not they are created.  Case in point: Monica J. suggests that if you don't want these events in your calendar you can "delete" them and that you can "change your settings if you don't want this feature." But to be clear: You cannot ACTUALLY delete these events—you can only "Remove" them from your calendar, not actually delete them. And when you go to setting to de-select the "Add automatically" checkbox for "Events from Gmail" the alert simply says you will "no longer see" these events. Consider: Google does this for all Gmail users, whether or not they ever touch or view their Google Calendars. It happens automatically for everyone, always. No opt-in. No opt-out. And deliberately misleading alert language about it. The result is that Google is scraping Gmail users' email and creating databases that track their movements and whereabouts, often without their knowledge, let alone permission, and with no way for them to opt out. This is EVIL on its face, not to mention dangerous. No "privacy" "controls" or business rationale could justify this. It is EVIL and must be discontinued.  Either discontinue this feature altogether or at the very least a) require users to opt into it and b) allow users to opt out—by permanently deleting these events rather than simply removing them from users' view. Hey, Google: All of you? Every single one of you? Should be effing ashamed of yourselves.

Re: A hotel reservation appeared on my calendar I did not make I wonder would Google be liable for compensation, if I'd draft my travel plans according to their faulty reservations? Google, will you buy me the flights to make your reservation? Possibly some american Google users could try this in court.  I really have no *nice* words for how bad this is. Please fix this or remove immediately. So I got one as well. The email that generated it had no reservation, only references, to a meeting happening with a larger audience (not me). Let me make it clear, the email in question had NO PERSONAL RESERVATION details for me. I think this a HUGE error on Google's part. My first reaction was an awful shock for an apparent id theft. But fortunately, it seems, it was just Google making reservations for me. So not cancelling my credit cards yet.

Re: A hotel reservation appeared on my calendar I did not make Total pain. I get dozens and it says the source is me. Not an email. I called a few hotels cited initially to warn them of a potentially fraudulent booking and now highlight these red to remember to check my cards/bank on the day of arrival/departure. Deleting them seems like a very stupid idea when they take up no space and can be tagged as "free" and colored.

Re: A hotel reservation appeared on my calendar I did not make It happened to me right now and it is going to cost me money. I booked a guesthouse in Ho Chi Minh with Booking.com and got confirmation. The accommodation usually appears in Google calendar. In this case a different guesthouse name and address appeared with the same dates of stay. I never booked it, got no mail from them, it was just one of the guesthouses I looked at at the time of choosing the accommodation. It was months ago and the spam box has already been deleted several times. What happened is that I, as usually, went to the accommodation that appeared in the calendar /months after the booking was  made I had no idea about the vietnamese name of the place/. When I appeared there, they said: eyes eyes ... obviously... and gave me the room. Next day, when Booking.com wrote me that I was no show in the place I booked, I found my mistake meaning that I am going to pay both accommodations. My question is: Why  the confirmed accommodation didn appear in the calendar this time, next to the /probably/ spammed one??? This situation lookes like a scam!!! I know it is my fault I didnt double check it with the Booking.com app :(.

Re: A hotel reservation appeared on my calendar I did not make " f you believe the reservation is Spam mail, you can change your  Settings and make sure that "Automatically add invitations to my calendar" is set to No."



 It is set to no, and I keep receiving fake hotel reservations from the Cuba.



 How do we stop this kinds of spam?



 I never received any kind of message, is it possible that it's coming from Google+?

|||

