After blowing several circuits in the office, and for some sembelance of safely, we added this fuse box. Circuit breakers would be much better. Allright, truth be told this only got used a few times and a bunch of devices in the office just got real used to being rebooted. Why not use a power strip? I don't remember, but for some reason that didn't sound as challenging. Oh, now I remember, it normally wouldn't trip fast enough. So we took this device to plug into the power strip to power it.

This poor thing once was a TP to AUI tranciever until one day... Those trancievers are really hard to get open too. Now you can fry all that AUI gear that should have been gone by now anyway.

"BNC-killer" makes the center pin hot. For added fun, connect to any remaining thinnet in the building to make sure everyone has switched over to twisted-pair like we told them to. Next time they will listen. Here is a picture of bnc-killer in 10base2 kill mode. Obviously an adapter for BNC to N would let you blow up thicknet. And who the hell wouldn't want to do that?

Then we thought... what else has BNC connectors on it? Those old RGB video cables sure do, so we slapped on some T's and connected it to an old video cable. The cable pictured was for a sync on green system, but RGBHV would work with a few more T's. Tired of that crazy 13W3 on suns and sgis? Get an adaptor. A co-worker, lets call him E., had a video card going to be shipped back to a major PC supplier because it had some video interference/ghosting problems. Well, I took the card and with a loud SNAP and a bright flash the ghosting problems were gone. A good 1/2" radius was charred on the card, by far the most impressive distruction at that time. E. was kinda pissed since it was under his name the card was getting shipped back.

Use the above drive killer in a power strip at the same time with this one. We wouldn't want data to still get through, would we? Add flavorful scsi adapters to this killer to suit taste.

This one is the real pride and joy of the department. It started as PCI Killer, but now in version 2, fits PCI, ISA, and AGP. This incorporates 4 back slot covers with some epoxy to a front bay cover and a blank electrical outlet plate. Who knew they all could be so versitile? Unclear how it works? Here is an action shot.|||

