Online shopping is convenient, often lets you find the best prices, and lets you enjoy delivery to your doorstep. But the most important thing is to stay safe    



It is important to protect yourself while shopping online. And by that you have protect anything that is connected to internet, including laptops, desktop, smartphone, tablets and even smart TV – especially during holiday sales. Scammers and hackers can target shoppers as well.

You should be alert of emails that is their favorite means of attacking, normally via click through links and mail attachments. Be informed of emails about problems with your credit/debit cards, an online account or status of online order.

These bad guys know we are price sensitive when shopping on internet. Their mean of attack is ads: offering you a ridiculous discount on expensive items, don’t ever click those.

Being a safe and secure shopper you have to STOP, THINK, CONNECT.

In the virtual world, it can be really hard to distinguish reputable retailers from criminals, as just about anyone can set up fraudulent a web site that appears to be a legitimate business.

Protect yourself from being invaded!

You may inadvertently download a spyware program on your computer that allows hackers and cybercriminals access to your personal sensitive information and even passwords. Sophisticated hackers can breach online business databases to harvest customer payment information.

Before you plug in your credit card number and click “Buy.” Remember the following nifty tips during shopping online:

When visiting a new website for products, read reviews from shoppers and see if other customers have a positive or negative experience with them.

2.       When in doubt, opt out

Links in emails, promotional posts from unknown users and texts are often the ways cyber criminals try to steal your personal information or most probably infect your system with viruses.

When shopping online, be very alert to kind of information being collected to complete your online transaction. Provide the information only necessary to make a transaction like your name and shipping address and that’s it. Remember, you only need to fill out mandatory fields to checkout.

Your credit card is usually the safest option because they allow buyers to seek a credit from issuer if the desired product is not delivered or is not in stock.

5.       Be safe rather than sorry

Don’t be disappointed, read return policies so you know beforehand what to expect if that purchase does not go as planned.

Shopping on the go:

1.       You see me, Now you don’t

Some (not every) stores look for devices with wireless connectivity turned ON, e.g. Bluetooth or WIFI tracks your movement when within range. Be smart, turn OFF Bluetooth and WIFI when not in use.

Limit your online surfing over open public internet connection. You have to no protection at all, that is why it is called ‘open’ your system is ‘open’ to other online users regardless of your system passwords, they can breach your system via open internet connection.

Keep all of your online devices clean from viruses, always keep your anti-virus software updated. For smartphones and tabs keep your apps updated, also keep an eye on unwanted and unused apps.

Restrict your online accounts by enabling the strongest authentication tool available like: biometrics, security keys or a unique one time code generated an app or your mobile network. Be super protective! Your usernames and password are not enough to protect key accounts like: banking, emails, and social media.

A strong password is combination of lowercase, uppercase, numbers and special characters. It is recommended to keep at least 12 character in password. On many sites, you can even use spaces! Means you have a sentence for password, great!

Having a separate username and passwords for every account helps to thwart hackers and cybercriminals. At the best, separate your work and personal accounts and make sure that your most important accounts have the strongest and uncrackable passcodes.|||

