This talk is about the Honor 6X. The Honor 6X is the latest affordable mid-range smartphone from Huawei’s Honor line and it is the successor to last year’s Honor 5X. The Honor 6X do share some similarities with Honor 5X, For better or worse? You will know soon enough.

Huawei has made quite a few hardware improvements and refined the design to make this phone in even better bargain. The Honor 6X still retains the composite metal design from the last year model The Honor 5X. Which means there is metal on this phone too, but it is not entirely wrapped in metal nor is a unibody design.

The Back plate is made of metal, which is surrounded by plastic windows on the top and bottom, but the metal doesn’t wrap around to the front, you will find a plastic frame that goes around the outer edges of the glass instead.

The Honor 6X doesn’t feel quite as high quality or premium as a full unibody model smartphone, but the build quality is still pretty top notch and there isn’t much you can really complain about considering the phone’s price.

Well, Huawei has also given The Honor 6X much curvier design, the backside tapers down along the edges and the corners have been rounded off to allow this phone to hold much more comfortably in the hand.

The buttons and ports are all in pretty typical locations, the left side houses the power and volume keys and they are both pretty easy to reach. But they aren’t very tactile and don’t provide a very satisfying click.

It does indeed have a headphone jack, which lives up top and on the right side is the SIM card tray that supports dual-SIM or a MicroSD card in the second SIM slot, if you would rather have that expandable storage.

On the bottom is a microUSB port, there is no USB Type-c here, which is kind of unfortunate considering how many phones made the lead to USB type-c this year. But if you haven’t transitioned USB type C yet, then this may not be that big of an issue.

Besides the microUSB port, there are two speaker grills with one being a microphone and the other being the actual speaker itself. Just like all single bottom fire speakers, it is very easy to muffle with your hand when using the phone in landscape.

Actually, I found The Honor 6X speaker to be a lot quieter than most other phones that I have used with Single speakers.

The other unfortunate part about The Honor 6X aside from the weak speaker is the lack of NFC. This means no tap to transfer or using mobile payment services like android pay. So, if you use those type of services on your smartphone, you are simply out of luck with the Honor 6X.

Around the back is the fingerprint sensor sitting right below the camera and in my experience the fingerprint sensor has been great. It is very accurate and fast unlock and I really ran into issues with misreading my fingerprint. I would even go as far as saying that this is just as good as a lot of other fingerprint sensors found on the flagship smartphones.

The fingerprint sensor can also be used to take photos or videos, answer the phone calls, to stop the alarms and bring down the notification menu by swiping down or browse through photos in your gallery by swiping left to right. With all this it is easy to use in one hand.

Switching to the front of the phone, you have got a 5.5 inch LCD display with 1080p resolution and overall it is a fine display. It is plenty sharp and gets bright enough to comfortably see outdoors, but the colours are pretty washed out. Which is my real gripe with the screen.

It is still perfectly usable and the large size still provides a good experience with browsing the web, playing games or watching Videos and considering this is a rather inexpensive smartphone, the flaws on the display are much more easily forgivable.

In The Honor 6X, you get 3 GB or 4 GB of RAM with Huawei’s own in-house chip the Kirin 655. It is pretty significant upgrade over the last year’s Honor 5X. Both in terms of RAM and processor. Performance is plenty good for a mid-range phone, it is fluid and responsive in regular day usage.

It has no problems running graphically demanding games with smooth frame rates. I would say performance is probably one of the biggest strength of the Honor 6X, especially when you consider the price to performance ratio.

Another strong point for the Honor 6X is battery life. It is a very respectable size at 3340 mAh and it is even bigger than some batteries we have seen in the flagship smartphones.

Well, Huawei claims that the Honor 6X can last a little over two days with regular usage and one and a half day with heavy usage. Which is really bold claim and well I never hit the two day mark with this phone. I did get one and a half days. Pretty consistently or at least close to it.

I do play a lot of games and watch a fair amount of Videos on my phone, which does qualify as heavy usage. So, it does look like the Honor 6X’s battery life is living up to its promise and a phone’s battery life living up to a manufacturers claim isn’t something to say for many smartphones.

So, I have to say I have been pretty impressed with this phone’s battery life. It consumes very little of battery life when it is on stand by. Which has a lot to do with Kirin 655 efficiency.

But even with constant use, this phone can still lasts a long time. I would usually end the day with at least 50% battery life left. It was a pretty nice feeling to only have to recharge phone every other day instead of every day.

Even if I did charge this phone every night, I was always comfortably making it through the entire day and never found myself frantically searching for charger.

We have seen a lot of phones come out then last year with dual cameras, but we get to see a dual camera setup on a more affordable smartphone until now. And what we claim that the Honor 6X  is the first dual camera smartphone in it’s price range.

Every dual camera smartphone use a second camera a little bit differently and in the case of the Honor 6X, you have a 12 MP primary camera and 2 MP secondary camera. The 2 MP sensor is used purely for capturing depth information which can be taken advantage of when using the camera’s wide aperture mode.

The wide aperture mode, let’s you dial in the aperture from f/16 down to as wide as a f/0.95 for a very large bokeh effect. Well, changing the quote-unquote aperture does give you more or less depth of field.

It doesn’t allow to enter the camera. So, it’s not a true aperture change in that sense of the word. But the bokeh effect does work quite well and looks very convincing.

You are also not tied to the original settings and focus point and you can change it after to any image taken in this mode, but for the best results it is better to keep the focus point on subjects in the foreground. As switching the focus point to subjects in the background can make the bokeh effect looks a little artificial.

The rest of the camera app is pretty easy to navigate. Swiping the left takes you the general camera settings and swiping to the right will give you access to a good selection of different shooting modes, including a beauty mode, night shot, manual mode and a mode for scanning documents.

The overall camera experience has been quite impressive. It is fast focus and capture photos and the photos are surprisingly very pleasant. Especially for a mid range phone. The photos have great colour or well detailed and does a great job with balancing highlights and shadows, Which I didn’t expect on a phone of this caliber.

It also performs fairly well in low light, highlights are mostly kept in check with only a few rare occasions, where they would appear overly gloomy or overly exposed. It is only in the worst of low light situations that the camera completely fall apart. But most likely, shots are perfectly usable with a fair amount of detail and noise being kept to minimum.

Moving to the software, always use EMUI skin that currently sits on top of Android 6.0 marshmallow. Although an update to Nougat is supposedly coming soon, it is very bright colourful, somewhat cartoonish.

And everything else would normally be expected from EMUI, like transparency effects and the lack of an app drawer. The notification panel is still split into two tabs with One for notifications and the other for toggles. Which doesn’t feel as easy to use as stock Android.

When you have a long list of notifications, it becomes nearly impossible to swipe over to the quick toggles panel without accidentally clearing out your notifications. For unlocked phone it comes with quite a few pre-installed applications.

If you are used to EMUI, this will all feel very familiar. But may not be an experience that you enjoy, if you prefer something closer to stock android.

If you are considering picking up it, the Honor 6X is going for 13K INR, which is low enough of a price that doesn’t step on the toes. That means the most budget flagships like the OnePlus 3T, Samsung C7 Pro or even its own Honor 8. Because those are battles that this phone simply can not win.

The Honor 6X knows exactly what its meant to be and it is a smartphone that offers a lot without asking a lot with dual cameras, a long lasting battery, excellent fingerprint sensor and it is asking price of only 13K INR for 3GB variant and 15K for 4GB variant. The Honor 6X is going to win the most competitive phones that you will be able to find in this particular price bracket.|||

This talk is about the Honor 6X. The Honor 6X is the latest affordable mid-range smartphone from Huawei's Honor line and it is the successor to last year's Honor 5X. The Honor 6X do share some…