The semantic technology will be enough to kick start a new era featuring a smarter and more structured web of data. It's supported more widely by companies like Facebook, Google, Best Buy and etc. Web crawling as a core of data analysis has come a long way from being an emerging technology to become an integral part of many industries. The first crawlers to crawl websites were developed for a much smaller web (about 100,000 web pages), but today some of the popular sites alone have millions of pages. Till now, wealth of info can be crawled and transformed into valuable data sets, then used in different industries. Enterprises explored user data for business analysis, scholars explored data for scientific research. Thus, where and how we can fetch the data, apart from some official public data sets provided by some companies? Actually, we can also build our customized web crawlers to crawl from websites.

Web crawling refers to extracting specific HTML data from certain websites. Simply put, we can perceive a web crawler as a particular program designed to crawl websites in orientation and glean data. However, we are unable to get the URL address of all web pages within a website containing many web pages in advance. Thus, what concerned us is how to fetch all the HTML web pages from a website.

To build a web crawler, one must-do step is to download the web pages. This is not easy, since many factors should be taken into consideration, like how to better leverage the local band width, how to optimize DNS queries, and how to release the traffic in the server by assigning web requests reasonably.

After we fetch the web pages, the HTML pages complexity analysis is followed by. In fact, we can’t get all of HTML web pages straight. And here also comes another issue about how to retrieve the content generated by Javascript when AJAX is used everywhere for dynamic websites. Plus, the Spider Trap occurring frequently on the Internet would make an infinite number of requests or cause a poorly constructed crawler to crash.

While there are many things we should be aware when building a web crawler, however, in most cases, we just want to create a crawler for a specific website, rather than to build a general one, like Google crawler. Thus, we’d better do a deep research on the structure of target websites and pick up some valuable links to keep track of, in order to prevent from extra cost on redundant or junk URLs. What’s more, we could try to only crawl what we are interested from the target website by following a predefined sequence if we could find out a proper crawling path concerning about the web structure.

For example, if we’d like to crawl the content from mindhack.cn, and we have found two types of pages that we’re interested:

1. Article List, such as the main page, or the URL with /page/\d+/ and etc.

By inspecting Firebug, we could find out that the link of each article is an “a Tag” under h1.

2. Article Content, such as /2008/09/11/machine-learning-and-ai-resources/, which has included complete article content.

Thus, we could start with the main page, and retrieve other links from the entry page - wp-pagenavi. Specifically, we need to define a path: We only follow next page, by which mean we could traverse all the pages from start to end, and be set free from a repetitive judgment. Then, the concrete article links within the list page will be the URLs we’d like to store.

In most cases, a depth of 5 is enough for crawling from most websites.

The faster you set the crawler, the harder it will be on the server. At least 5-10 seconds between page clicks.

It is used for debugging and prevent from crawling a visited site repeatedly.

Significant tactical challenges exist today in the world coming along with web crawling:

To tackle with all of the issues is not an easy task, it may be even troublesome and could possibly time costly. Fortunately, now you needn’t crawl a website the way it used to be and get stuck in a technical problem, since a new method to crawl data from target websites is proposed alternatively. Users will not be required to deal with complex configurations or coding to build a crawler by themselves, instead they could concentrate more on data analysis in their respective business domains.

This method I’d mention is an automated web crawler - Octoparse, which can make crawling available for any one. Users could use the built-in tools and APIs to crawl data using a user-friendly point&click UI. Many other extensions are offered in this application to deal with the rising issues within a few configuring steps, troubles could be wrestled with in a much efficient way with its powerful utilities including:

To learn more about this web crawler software, you may check out the video below to learn how to get started with Octoparse and begin with your crawling.

More resources for web crawling study applied in different cases:

Check out some features you may feel interested in:

Web Scraping Feature Study | Scraping from multi-pages: pagination with "Next" button

Web Scraping - Modify X Path For "Load More" Button with Octoparse

Which Language is Better for Writing a Web Crawler? PHP, Python or Node.js?

Or read more about how a web scraper is applied in various industries:|||

Web crawling refers to extracting specific HTML data from certain websites. Simply put, we can perceive a web crawler as a particular program designed to crawl websites in orientation and glean data.