How much does it cost to design an application ?

We already get an idea that how much it costs to make a mobile app. Today we will cover what is an an average cost of application’s design – a thing that will be promoting your business and attracting people 24 hrs a day, a thing that is a powerful marketing tool.

When we ask ourselves: “How much does it cost to design an app for my firm?” we want to have all unrevealed points considered and the price estimated adequately.



So, what shall we start with when we are setting feet on the path of custom application’s creation? Just like planning a journey, it starts with a plan! A project design, a concept development.

The cost to design an app made up of plenty of variation, and there at every stage of design creation, should be considered individually and each of them influences the final app design price.

We provide a mixed bag approach to tell the issue of app design cost or app designers cost and to make sure that we do everything right so that our customers understand what they are paying their money for. This is a mandate of our company, to produce complex things but explain everything in simple terms.

When you plan a strategy for a very important objective of your application, then on its own it decides the needs of UX/UI design that are going to be implemented.

Hours spent. There are case where we need to use the fixed budget scheme, but on the other hand, while working at complex design projects, it is reasonable to have regard to the number of screens rendered. We tend to discuss all cases on individual basis, so that all benefits of this or that type of payment can be availed.

Choosing mobile platforms and devices. There are cases where you find that Android app design cost would be a bit higher, because it often takes more time (15-20%) to be developed in comparison with iPhone ones. Consequently, you would need to be ready to pay more for designers’ time in this case. All the benefits and dis benefits of platforms available are described in the article, for example How to Choose a Mobile Development Platform?

That is when we able to know that what customer actually need and make all essential preparations in order to start satisfying his or her request.

Influencing factor #3: We need to rely on not so complex concept that is more the screens, the higher is the cost.

Influencing factor #4: You may want to design different interfaces for various screen sizes or set a limit and stick to one specific screen size for a smartphone or tablet.

Influencing factor #5: Native, web or hybrid application. We got to know the variation in our Mobile app Development: Native vs Cross Platform App article

What do we get at this stage? Prototyping is about taking your idea and embedding it into application with some basic functionality. A prototype is very important factor as it allows your major customers to see substantial pros of your product instead of getting meager visualization and product description. A good prototype supplies half of the progress to your project design, which we discussed in details in our article about importance about prototyping

The formation and repetition of prototypes may take more time than it is expected at initial stage. However, good prototyping in fact is able to save your budget. How’s that? To be informed with prototyping, the team already has all the required structure needed to start working on important features, by the time the project moves to the development stage. This also leads to less risk of changing user requirements that may occur in the life cycle of a project.

We at BRSoftech always work as a team player and one unit with the client to avoid and eliminate all possible misunderstandings. And this is how we save time and budget, so that final products exceeds our mutual expectations.

In case the previous stages frankly answers the question “Why we are doing this ?” then form answers to the question “How we are doing this (but still not the app UI design cost) ?”

What do we get at this stage? We get the essence, feel and look of the product. This in turn would mean that sampling out the right colors, shapes, fonts, frames etc.

The cost of a mobile app design cost depends on a global location?

It is in fact an influencing factor #6.

The following are hourly rates for design services in various countries:

The objective of the article was to let you know that how much does a mobile app design costs in BR Softech. We believe that by such a small paragraph, we have tried to let you know the design development in our company. Please be informed that what could be better than a business relationship and understanding the practicality of internal processes or attitudes of the partner company, is it right?|||

We already get an idea that how much it costs to make a mobile app. Now know How much does it cost to design an application development ?