I am going to cover basic workflow for how to deploy Django application on Nginx using Fabric. Fabric is a fantastic tool perfectly suited to our deployment needs.

Here are few common issue we face during manual deployment.

In order to deploy Django application using fab we need to do some modifications in settings. Best way is to create the file called local_settings.py which will contains SECRET_KEY, NEVERCACHE_KEY, DATABASES and FABRIC configuration.

The deployment mechanism used is a Fabric script and configuration templates for supervisor and nginx checkout deployment directory. Each time I run “fab deploy” from my local system, Fabric script does the following on the remote host:

Let’s take a look towards the fab.py file.

Fab file contains the code to create the entire environment for project on server starts from the installing system packages, creating configuration files, creating virtual environment, fetching the project, installing the all requirement, creating the database and making the project live. Let’s walk through the fab file step by step.

This template contains the certain file names, their paths and reload command which will get created on server when you run the fab script.

Let’s go through the fabric commands one by one.

fab all command is responsible for creating the entire project environment on server from installing packages, creating the virtual environment, fetching the project from the git, creating the database and making project live.

fab install command is responsible for installing the system packages, installing the python, pip, virtual environment .

take a look at this line “nginx libjpeg-dev python-dev python-setuptools git-core nodejs-legacy npm build-essential postgresql libpq-dev memcached supervisor tcl8.5 redis-server” these are package which we are installing on system. If you want add more packages you can add that to this line.

fab create command is responsible for creating virtual environment, cloning the project from repository, creating the database and installing the pip requirements.

fab deploy command is responsible for pulling the project from repository, migrating the database, restarting the server and reloading the supervisor.

fab remove command is responsible for removing the project environment, dropping the database and deleting the user.

fab restart command is responsible for restarting the nginx webserver and reloading the supervisor.

fab remove command is responsible for reverting the project state to the last deploy. When a deploy is performed, the current state of the project is

backed up. This includes the last commit checked out, the database,

and all static files. Calling rollback will revert all of these to

their state prior to the last deploy.

whenever we run the fab script it will take required credentials from this file.

Lets move towards the CELERY and REDIS-SERVER:

Celery is a task processing system. It is useful in a lot of web applications. To do any network call in a request-response cycle. Server should respond immediately to any web request it receives. If some network call is required during a request-response cycle, it should be done outside of request-response cycle. eg: An activation email needs to be sent when user signs up on a site. Sending the email is a network call and might take 2–3 seconds. User should not be made to wait for these 2–3 seconds. So sending activation email should be done outside of request-response cycle. It can be achieved using celery.

Redis is an open source (BSD licensed), in-memory data structure store, used as database, cache and message broker. It supports data structures such as strings, hashes, lists, sets, sorted sets with range queries, bitmaps, hyperloglogs and geospatial indexes with radius queries.

Celery is python package which can be installed using pip.

redis-server is database so we need to install it on system.

Celery.conf file is getting created on server using template from deploy directory.|||

I am going to cover basic workflow for how to deploy Django application on Nginx using Fabric. Fabric is a fantastic tool perfectly suited to our deployment needs. In order to deploy Django…