At last, we've gotten a good look at the cast and plot of Blade Runner 2049, the sequel we never knew we wanted to Ridley Scott's iconic cyberpunk thriller. In this trailer, we can see that director Denis Villeneuve (Arrival) is developing his own style and expanding the universe of the first film far beyond its original boundaries.

The original Blade Runner from 1982 is deliberately claustrophic, keeping our point of view tightly encased in the rainy, polluted urban landscape of Los Angeles. We only see broad vistas when we ascend the gleaming pyramid occupied by Tyrell Corporation founder Eldon Tyrell.

Immediately, the trailer for Blade Runner 2049 gives us a much different view of the world. Yes, there are the cityscapes with holographic ladies, as well as a giant Atari logo that looks like it's about to eat the universe. But there are also dramatic deserts, perhaps signs of profound climate change. We even see Officer K (Ryan Gosling) uncovering a date inscribed on a buried tree branch, and later he's in some kind of forest gunfight (though that forest might be a hologram). Director Villeneuve made excellent use of landscape in Arrival, so it's great to see that he's doing that here, too.

We also get a clear signal that Blade Runner 2049 is going to take up an issue that ultimately fell by the wayside in the first film: the political horror that is replicant slavery. Though this is a big issue in Blade Runner, the film wound up focusing more on philosophical issues of what it means to be human. But Blade Runner 2049 puts slavery front and center, at least in this trailer.

"Every civilization was built off the back of a disposable workforce," says Wallace (Jared Leto) in the trailer's opening. We're not entirely sure who he is, but he has strange (biotech?) eyes and is clearly making a new replicant. He also says that he can't make very many replicants, which hints at either a collapsing slave economy or major resource depletion. The replicant-making scene also reminds us that these creatures are fully biological, not cyborgs.

So what else do we learn from this trailer? Well, Mackenzie Davis (the best thing about Halt and Catch Fire) is there, looking very Pris-like. Officer K seems to have come to former blade runner Deckard (Harrison Ford) with some bad guys hot on his trail, based on the explosions that follow him. K is trying to unbury something about the past, possibly with help from the goopy replicant that Wallace made, Joi (Ana de Armas). Villeneuve has already let slip that part of the plot will deal with whether Deckard is a replicant.

The trailer makes the new film look like it will have a visual language all its own. It also appears to have a plot that will take us in a new direction, expanding on the world of the original. Obviously, trailers can be deceiving, but this one gave me hope.

Blade Runner 2049 hits theaters in the US on October 6.|||

This film looks like a genuinely novel approach to the world established by Ridley Scott.