It is my great honor to attend the prestigious event and three-day conference and I made sure that I never missed any opportunity brought by The World Arabian Horse Racing Conference: A three days of convention and roundtable discussion in Marrakesh, Morocco under the patronage of the Deputy Prime Minister of the UAE and Minister of Presidential Affairs, Sheikh Mansoor Bin Zayed Al Nahyan.

The Festival is a major factor in the increased diversity of the activities of pure-bred Arabian racing horses. This year, over 400 delegates from 86 countries attended the 3-day event, followed by the ‘UAE Abu Dhabi Day’ racing at the Hippodrome Marrakesh.

At the press conference at Adam Park Hotel on Wednesday, HE Mohammed Al Yamahi, The UAE’s Charge D’ Affairs to Morocco, acknowledge HH Sheikh Mansoor Bin Zayed Al Nahyan for bringing this great event to Morocco.

Ms. Lara Sawaya, Executive Director of the HH Sheikh Mansoor Bin Zayed Al Nahyan Global Arabian Horse Flat Racing Festival, Chairperson of the Int’l Federation of Horse Racing Academies (IFHRA) and Chairperson of Ladies & Apprentice Racing Committees, also acknowledged HH Sheikh Mansoor Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, for the first time in the history of Marrakesh, the World’s latest racecourse being inaugurated yesterday and highlighted the Festival’s four inaugural races.

The three-day event started when the guests arrived at Adam Park and Le Jardin d’Agdal on 2nd May, followed by General Assembly of IFHRA members. During the General Assembly, Ms Lara Sawaya proclaimed that the International Federation of Horse Racing Academies (IFHRA) has decided to carry on to classify between amateur and apprentice jockeys, as it has been disorienting in the equine fraternity. This step was needed because many countries have different guidelines which administer their amateur/apprentice races. The executive board of directors will meet in London on August 11 to outline the rules and regulations for the amateurs and apprentices, as their main agenda.

The World Arabian Horse Racing Conference took place at the Four Season Marrakesh Ballroom on 4th May and attended by the distinguished speakers: HE Dr. Abdulla Alraisi – Director General of National Archive, Mr. Ahmad Al Qubaisi- Director of Marketing & Communications of Abu Dhabi Sports Council, Emirates Racing Authority, HE Sami Al Boenain-Chairman IFAHR, Mubarak Alnuaimi – Director of Overseas Promotion TCA Abu Dhabi, Mr. Omar Skalli – Director of General Sorec, Miss Khalid Al Nuaimi from National Feed and Flour Production and Marketing Co. LLC.

Seven different­­­­ topics were discussed per session as follows: Breeding Session, Racing and Training Session, Jockeys’ Weight Control and Nutrition, Social Media, PR & Communication Session, Rules,Conditions and Regulations, Women in Racing, Future in Arabian Racing and a Workshop conducted by Lara Sawaya and Derek Thompson.

The night was delighted as Gala Dinner followed at Palais Namaskar. The Fe­stival and the confer­ence have succeeded in­ bring all horse raci­ng officials of Pureb­red Racing under on o­ne stage.

The Conference and activities were also attended by HE Saqr Al Raisi, UAE Ambassador to Italy, HE Mohammed Sultan Saif Al-Suwaidi, UAE Ambassador to the Sultanate of Oman and many other important officials, sponsors’ representatives along with Moroccan officials.

WAHRC 2017 was made possible because of the support of Abu Dhabi Tourism and Culture Authority and co-ordinated by Abu Dhabi Sports Council, National Feed and Flour Production and Marketing Co. LLC, who said are please to be a partner for two successive years.

Associated by the National Archives as the official partner and Emirates airline as the official carriers. In cooperation with Emirates Racing Authority, IFAHR, Emirates Arabian Horse Society, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, General Authority of Youth and Sports Welfare

Mohamed Bin Zayed Falconry and Desert Physiognomy School, Abu Dhabi National Exhibition Centre (ADNEC), YAS Channel,Al Wathba Centre, Dr Nader Saab Switzerland, Al Awani General Enterprises, the UAE’s General Women’s Union, Kabale, Omeir Travels, Karam Cosmetics, Racing Post,  Abu Dhabi International Hunting and Equestrian Exhibition 2017, Paris Turf, The Supreme Council for Motherhood and Childhood, Abu Dhabi Equestrian Club,

I am extending my deepest gratitude to: His Highness Mansour Bin Zayed Al Nahyan – The Deputy Prime Minister of the UAE and Minister of Presidential Affairs, Her Highness Sheikha Fatima Bint Mubarak –  Chairwoman of the General Women’s Union (GWU), Supreme Chairwoman of the Family Development Foundation (FDF), and President of the Supreme Council for Motherhood and Childhood, Ms Lara Sawaya – Executive Director of the HH Sheikh Mansoor Bin Zayed Al Nahyan Global Arabian Horse Flat Racing Festival, Chairperson of the Int’l Federation of Horse Racing Academies (IFHRA) and Chairperson of Ladies & Apprentice Racing Committees, and all the sponsors for giving me the privilege and welcoming me to this prestigious event. With my great pride to be honored and to be awarded during The Fusion Grand Orient Gala Dinner at Palais Namaskar, I am very grateful and I hope that it would ultimately result in an even larger success due to collaboration and high potential of this event.|||

