The following list covers some of the topics to be presented at SUSI 2018. Papers on other subjects related to the objectives of the conference are also welcome.

The papers presented at the Risk Conferences cover a variety of topics related to risk analysis and hazard mitigation. They are published as volumes of Transactions of Information and Communications Technologies, which is widely disseminated around the world in both hard cover and digital formats. Furthermore all the papers are also archived in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com/elibrary), where they are freely and permanently available to the international scientific community.

Current events help to emphasise the importance of the analysis and management of risk to planners and researchers around the world. Natural hazards such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, fires and others have always affected human societies. The more recent emergence of the importance of man-made hazards is a consequence of the rapid technological advances made in the last few centuries. The interaction of natural and anthropogenic risks adds to the complexity of the problems.

The conference covers a series of important topics of current research interests and many practical applications. It is concerned with all aspects of risk management and hazard mitigation, associated with both natural and anthropogenic hazards.

Risk Analysis 2018 is the 11th International Conference on Computer Simulation in Risk Analysis and Hazard Mitigation. Risk Analysis 2018 follows on from the other successful meetings in this series, which first started in Valencia, Spain (1998) and continued in Bologna, Italy (2000); Sintra, Portugal (2002); Rhodes, Greece (2004); Malta (2006); Cephalonia, Greece (2008); Algarve, Portugal (2010); the island of Brac in Croatia (2012), the New Forest, home of the Wessex Institute of Technology (2014) and Crete, Greece (2016).

Publication of Papers

Papers presented at Risk Analysis 2018 are to be published by WIT Press in a Volume of WIT Transactions. Selected papers will appear in an issue of the International Journal of Safety and Security Engineering instead.

Reviews

To ensure the quality of our publications, abstracts and papers are peer reviewed by members of the International Scientific Advisory Committee and other experts, with manuscripts processed through CrossRef Similarity Check.

Open Access

WIT Press is an advocate of Open Access which offers maximum dissemination of your work. All WIT Transactions and Journal papers can be downloaded for free from the wit elibrary (www.witpress.com/elibrary).

Indexing and Archiving

Papers presented at Wessex Institute conferences are referenced by CrossRef and have appeared in notable reviews and databases. Papers are submitted to various indexing services such as Web of Science, Google Scholar and Scopus. All conference books are listed in the British Library and American Library of Congress.

Conference Proceedings

 At registration delegates will be given copies of the papers presented at the Conference on a USB Flash drive. Following the Conference, delegates will receive an electronic copy of the final publication in which their paper has been published.

Digital Archive

All conference papers are archived online in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com/elibrary) where they are permanently and freely available to the International Scientific Community.

Networking

Participants can present their research and interact with experts from around the world, as part of a unique community.

Reduced Fee for PhD Students

The Wessex Institute believes in the importance of encouraging PhD students to present and publish innovative research at its conferences. As a result, the Institute offers PhD students a much reduced conference fee.

*Google Scholar Indexation  WIT Press has made all its conference and journal papers open access in an effort to help its dissemination within the scientific and technical community.

This means that you are now able to download any paper in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com/elibrary) totally free and without having to pre-register.

This major development has the added benefit of allowing the Google Scholar search engines to fully index all WIT papers.

Google Scholar is a search engine created specifically for researchers to facilitate the indexation and citation of academic papers free of charge. This service is becoming the most accepted comprehensive benchmark and quality standard.

In Google Scholar you will be able to see the number of citations of your articles as well as the ‘h-index’ ranking for both author and publications. The h-index is the largest number h such that at least h articles (by the author or in a publication) were cited at least h times each.

The impact of your work is given by the ‘i10 index’ which refers to the number of publications within the last 10 years that have at least 10 citations.

You can also easily create within the system an Author’s Profile which helps to highlight your achievements.

Google Scholar is becoming the most popular system in the world and its metrics are independent and unbiased. Unlike other ranking systems, it is free.|||

The Wessex Institute (WIT) is a research and advanced training centre with an international reputation for excellence in engineering and physical sciences.  It organises the well established programme of international WIT Conferences published by WIT Press.