I am getting older and metabolism is not the nuclear reactor that it used to be. Sometimes I need a flint and takes 5 mins to get that fire started.

Even Arnold couldn’t keep his Conan body forever. And us, mere mortals, forgettaboutit.

Going to gym 3 times a week for 2 hours is one way to stay in shape. Unfortunately that requires going to the gym 3 times a week for 2 hours. We have all tried it, usually after Christmas.

It almost never works for many reasons, so after 2–3 weeks, we revert to just buying the latest exercise gadget from shopping network to join that dust pile of 20 other gadgets in the attic.

So do you want to learn a secret to doing exercise and persisting? I am not talking about getting into shape that you see advertised on TV and in Magazines:

I am talking about looking your age, but healthy and energetic. Like the unshaved guy with the belt on the left in the next photo (not the guy on the right who somehow has 2 hours to work out with fitness instructor 2 times a day):

So now that we got the unrealistic expectations out of the way, let’s get down to business.

The 7 minute workout originated from a paper written in 2013, with name that just rolls of the tongue:

This paper talks about using body weight to maximize exercise benefits within minimal time. There are 12 exercises which take 30s each with 10s breaks in between. This way workout is high intensity, but still short enough to easily fit into most people’s busy lives.

Here are the 12 exercises in beautiful 2-D gif animation and techni-color:

You would think that finding 7 minutes a day and doing these exercises would be super easy.

Think again. I have tried starting this workout about 10 times, but after two weeks max, I would stop due to all kinda excuses:

This time I just finished my first month of doing it every day and I don’t see myself stopping anytime soon. I don’t look like Zack Efron just yet, but I feel much stronger, have a lot more energy and have been sleeping better.

Here is what I do to keep doing workout every day:

7 minutes. That’s all you need. I mean it takes 7 minutes for a good hearty yawn for god’s sake. It takes 7 minutes just to get trough half of the commercial break when watching latest Walking Dead episode. It takes 7 minutes to convince your kid to get into the bath tub (and 7 minutes to get them out).

If you don’t have 7 minutes for the exercise, then you either are working for a Silicon Valley startup, in which case you probably haven’t eaten in several days and have an odor of a fresh Morbier cheese that is described as “Sweetness on the edge of decay” and also “Baby poo. Seriously, it’s just like baby poo.”. The cheese looks like this if you were wondering:|||

I am getting older and metabolism is not the nuclear reactor that it used to be. Sometimes I need a flint and takes 5 mins to get that fire started. Going to gym 3 times a week for 2 hours is one way…