The race toward building the next-generation supply chain has been heavily affected by a trend of digitization driven by exponential gains in computing power. The next-generation of supply chain is digital, on-demand, and always-on. Yet, it's difficult to think of an industry that has been impacted more than logistics.

The world's urban population is expected to rise to 70% by 2050. This means an increase from four billion to eight billion people living in urban areas using 75% of the planet's natural resources. Urban activities are responsible for all carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions.

The rapid increase in freight deliveries that result from the continuing growth of e-commerce and online shopping will lead to unsustainable traffic congestion, CO2 emissions, noise, and unhealthy air pollution levels within urban areas.

One of the biggest challenges that this increasing urbanization brings is how to provide for last-mile logistics.

Smart city logistics proposes that logistics providers must leverage various innovations and technologies currently used in the digital transformation of the supply chain to find solutions for the challenges.

The Institute for Sustainability in the UK has been working with partner organizations to find solutions to manage the last-mile of deliveries that could work the best for government, businesses, consumers, and the environment.

Logistics is directly interconnected with smart city initiatives and smart city developments. A smart city could be defined as an urban area that uses information to design policies and procedures that benefit citizens.

LaMiLo (Last-Mile Logistics) is a project part-funded by the European Development Region Fund (ERDF) created to ensure that the last mile of a supply chain was fully considered when planning a freight logistics journey.|||

Here is how innovations and technologies are being leveraged to help cities address the growing challenges of congestion, noise, and pollution associated with last-mile deliveries within their increasing populations.