Adobe Premiere is an excellent video editor to professional video editing man. Many user like to take the video and want to edit the video for better, for example: Record the wedding video. Most people are lay and pay money for editing video in Premiere or ask friends for help to edit wedding record in Premiere. If you get the video and are a little unsatisfied with the video editing effects, how to do? You can choose to edit the Premiere video in Windows Movie Maker by yourself, sometimes, a perfect video editing is similar to a excellent hair style, you need to adjust by yourself when you go home.

Simplicity, Windows Movie Maker ease-of-use and essentially zero-cost are the features people most enjoy. As most of the computers in the company run Windows, it makes sharing much easier than having to make different videos to suit different platforms. Edit Premiere video in Windows Movie Maker seems to be easy, but most user even can't import Premiere video to Windows Movie Maker. Why? this issue is related to 2 main video editing tool import and export video formats: Premiere export video formats and Windows Movie Maker support video formats.

Most Premiere video formats are H.264, H.265, MPEG-2, MPEG-4, etc. Some can be supported by Windows Movie Maker, like: MPEG-2, MPEG-4, some can't be supported, like: H.264, H.265. If you take a perfect DJI 4K video,I am afraid you can't import Premiere video to Windows Movie Maker, most drone video is 4K H.265 format. Thankfully, here, you can find the best answer to solve this trouble.

There is a magic software: Pavtube Video Converter for Windows which allows user to import any Premiere video and at the same time, this software can output any video formats that Windows Movie Maker can support. This programme is the the bridge between Premiere video with Windows Movie Maker Converter.

This Premiere Video to Windows Movie Maker Converter stand out by the user-friendly, safe, clean interface, easy installation steps. User can convert any Premiere video to any Windows Movie Maker supported video format without any quality loss, such as: WMV, AVI, MPEG, etc.

This Premiere video converter have preinstalled all the video parameters well, in addition, users still have the free video editing and setting ability. At the video setting world, what can you do? You can adjust the Premiere video codec, video frames, video resolution, etc. Waht can you do in video setting? You can hange the video effecs at the editing menu, such as: video background color, brightness, replace audio, etc. More features war waiting for you to explore. This article can help you to know more about the excellent Premiere video to Windows Movie Maker Converter.

Install and launch videos to Premiere Video Converter on your computer, click "File" > "Add Video/Audio" to load Premiere video files to the program. Due to the high stability and advanced technology, this software allows you to do batch video conversion, you must put all the video in a file, then you can click the "Folder" button to batch load multiple Premiere video files into the program.

The most important step is here: Click "Format" bar, from its drop-down list, select Windows Movie Maker supported format, here, WMV is the best format for Windows Movie Maker, MPEG-1 or AVI is also a good selection too.

This WMM video converter provides user the basic video editing features, such as: add subtitles, add watermark, replace audio and so on. User can edit the video for fun. If you want to edit Premiere video in Windows Movie Maker finally, you can skip this tip.

Exciting steps is coming, go back to main interface, hit right-bottom "Convert" button to start Premiere video to Windows Movie Maker supported format process. Just wait for a while, you can get a brand new video file.

When you get the new converted Premiere video, you can import it to Windows Movie Maker for editing. If you still can't edit the video in WMM well, most reason is the video and audio codec issue, relax, just import video to this software, click "Setting", you can choose any video and audio codec, change video and audio related parameters. Good luck to you.|||

Edit Premiere video in Windows Movie Maker is not a easy thing, this article will tell you the way to edit Premiere video in WMM.