Crass is one of only a handful of CSS minifiers that creates a full parse tree of the CSS. Most other CSS minifiers operate on the string source instead, which makes it impossible to perform all types of optimizations.

Crass 0.8 is built with ES2015 and requires Node 4.6.2 or higher.

crass ( ); parsed . ( ); parsed . (); . ( . ()); . ( . ()); The constructors for the AST nodes used to represent the parsed CSS are available on `crass.objects`.

Improvements on the API will be made in the future.

If you , you'll get on your PATH.

If you don't specify , crass will automatically default to the latest browser version from two years ago. At the time of writing, this is Chrome 39, Firefox 31, IE 11, and Opera 26.

Outputting a crass object as a string will perform the equivalent of most CSS minification tools. The corresponding styles are output in the minimum amount of CSS possible, without any whitespace.

Some minifiers also perform basic replacement and removal operations to replace certain patterns with other patterns. Using the and flags on the command line and and in the API will perform many of these operations along with additional optimizations that are not possible with traditional minification tools.

For example, since most minification tools do not truly parse CSS, they cannot perform any reordering or transformation. Crass, on the other hand, will rewrite code like this:

into something that looks like:

Reordering selectors and declarations significantly improves minified code sizes. Colors can be translated between HSL/RGB/hex/etc. to use the smallest form.

Crass performs very well in many CSS minification benchmarks. See goalsmashers' css minification benchmark for more.

You can import Crass into your project using any appropriate build tool, like browserify or Webpack. Crass's importable modules have no dependencies on anything browser-incompatible.

Check out the Github pages for Crass for a simple browser-ready version:

All comments are ignored at the moment. Support for storing comment data may be added in the future, and contributions to add this support are welcome.

Crass does not follow statements. You should use another CSS processing tool to resolve and inline them appropriately, then use Crass to minify the result.|||

crass - A CSS minifier and utility library for JavaScript