USB Type-C is the newly introduced and powerful interconnect standard for USB. When paired with the new Power Delivery (PD) specification, Type-C offers enhancements to the existing USB 3.1 interconnect that lower the cost and simplify the implementation of power delivery over USB.  From a form factor perspective, the USB Type-C connector combines multiple USB connectors – Micro-B, Type-A, and Type-B – in a reversible connector measuring only 2.4 mm in height (see Figure 1).  Type-C allows developers to also combine multiple protocols in a single cable, including DisplayPort, PCIe or Thunderbolt.  Bandwidth is double that of USB 3.0, increasing to 10 Gbps with SuperSpeed+ USB3.1.  Finally, the USB Type-C connector can deliver up to 100 W.  This enables a wider range of applications to operate using USB (see Figure 2).  For more details, watch An Introduction to USB Type-C video and Type-C Basics.

In this two part series, we describe power delivery with USB Type-C, starting with ports and connectors in this article, followed by the power delivery protocol in part two.

Figure 3 show the USB Type-C Receptacle and Plug signals. Table 1 and Table 2 summarize the list of signals used on the USB Type-C interface (receptacle and plug) as defined by USB Type-C specifications.

The USB Type-C Receptacle functionally delivers both USB 3.1 (TX and RX pairs) and USB 2.0 (D+ and D−) data buses, USB power (VBUS), ground (GND), Configuration Channel signals (CC1 and CC2), and two Sideband Use (SBU) signal pins.

To enable Type-C cables to be reversible, the Type-C receptacle is fully symmetrical. All power, ground, and signal pins are duplicated about the symmetry axis, which allows the Type-C plug to be flipped with respect to the Type-C receptacle. The Type-C plug offers only one CC pin, which is connected to one of the CC pins of the Type-C receptacle, to establish the Type-C orientation. The other CC pin is repurposed as VCONN (abbreviation for V ) for powering the electronics in the USB Type-C plug.

When the Type-C plug is rotated (as shown in Figure 3):|||

When paired with the new Power Delivery (PD) specification, Type-C offers enhancements to the existing USB 3.1 interconnect that lower the cost...