Grml is a Debian based live system focusing on the needs of system administrators. This Grml release provides fresh software packages from Debian testing (AKA stretch) and is the first Grml release using systemd as its init system. As usual it also incorporates up to date hardware support and fixes known bugs from the previous Grml release.

Highlighting the most relevant changes only:

Details about shipped packages and their versions in Grml are available in the Debian section. Visit dpkg_list for a detailed list of packages shipped with Grml 2017.05(-rc1).

Packages are taken from Debian testing as of 7th of May 2017. 63 packages have been removed, and these 64 new packages have been added (excluding lib* and kernel image):

These Debian packages have been removed/replaced (excluding lib* and kernel image):

Please visit the known bugs web page.

Grml 2017.05-rc1 can be downloaded from grml.org/download/prerelease/.

Your comments, bug reports, patches, and suggestions will help fixing bugs and improving future releases. If you find a problem with the release please check the known bugs list and report problems using information on grml.org/bugs/. Please send your feedback and feature requests to the Grml team!

Many thanks in this release go to (alphabetically) Andras Korn, Andreas "Jimmy" Gredler, Andrey Borzenkov, Antoine Beaupré, Axel Beckert, Ben Finney, Bernd Zeimetz, Bernhard Tittelbach, Brian M. Carlson, Carsten Hey, Christian Hesse, Christian Hofstaedtler, Christian Sturm, Christoph Berg, Daniel Hahler, Darshaka Pathirana, Dmitri Vereshchagin, Eric Keller, Felipe Sateler, Gregor Zattler, Guillem Jover, Haudegen, Karl Voit, Laurent Bigonville, Michael Vetter, Nicolas Braud-Santoni, Patrick Schleizer, Paul Menzel, Philip Hands, Sebastian Boehm, Sebastian Pipping, Stefan Schlesinger, Tamas Csillag, Thiago Perrotta, Thilo Six, Thomas Berger and Yves-Alexis Perez for their contributions.

You can find out more about Grml on our website, IRC channel, and wiki.

To sign up for future Grml announcements, please subscribe to Grml's announcement list.|||

