NVIDIA GVDB is a GPU-based framework for VBD data structures inspired by the award-winning software library OpenVDB used for motion picture visual effects and modelling.

Volume rendering of a water surface in NVIDIA GVDB with data from How to Train Your Dragon 2. Data property of DreamWorks Animation.

To create realistic renderings of liquids, smoke, clouds and fire effects with a high level of detail, visual effects and animation studios make use of volumetric data consisting of trillions of small voxels - pixel elements in 3D. Voxels allows effects artists to simulate and manipulate large visual effects while keeping minute details. Although easier to simulate than polygons the classic pitfalls of volumetric data are both huge file sizes and demanding computations. In this field the Academy Award winning OpenVDB library was created by Dr. Ken Museth to help reduce the impact of these limitations and provide tools for software rendering and operations for management of voxel data for visual effects.

To promote open source GPU volume rendering and compute, NVIDIA researcher Dr. Rama Hoetzlein developed GVDB to take advantage of GPU cores which are ideally suited for parallel processing huge numbers of voxels. The GVDB data structure allows sparse data to reside entirely on the GPU. The new GVDB Library also integrates with NVIDIA OptiX for ray-traced renderings to deliver high quality, multi-bounce illumination running 10x-30x faster than CPU based voxel rendering.

GPU-accelerated tools in GVDB provide data manipulation and compute tasks such as full volume smoothing, hole filling and user-defined operations. A disk format compatible with the OpenVDB layout further improves load and save times for more efficient I/O.

To explore the performance and quality of GPU-based GVDB, NVIDIA worked with the principal developer of OpenVDB to experiment with production data from How to Train Your Dragon 2, a feature film from DreamWorks Animation. We brought a large, production quality, 5.5 GB voxel dataset (3300 ) from a key moment in the film into NVIDIA GVDB and stored the entire volume with topology on a single NVIDIA Quadro M6000 GPU. Data smoothing was performed on the GPU using CUDA in NVIDIA GVDB. With the NVIDIA(R) OptiX integration in GVDB, real-time interaction enabled pre-visualization of lighting and materials. A high quality animation was then rendered with interactive raytracing, scattering and soft shadows with 96 rays/frame at 5 seconds per frame.|||

NVIDIA GVDB Voxels is a new framework for simulation, compute and rendering of sparse voxels on the GPU.