Up until today I could only look up to Russia (whether I agree with them or not) for conducting advanced information operations in cyber. Now, I can look up to Macron and the anonymous security professionals behind him and admire them. Finally, someone uses cyber deception to beat attackers at their own game. I am not alone, and Cymmetria’s ideas have been vindicated yet again.

Let’s quickly go over what happened, and then analyze the operation and why it is so… well, cool.

Important: We don’t know much at this stage, so I will assume a lot. While reading the story please consider it could all be an elaborate deception, and never happened.

But remember, regardless of what actually happened, one of the major lessons of cyber security, as learned in Estonia a decade ago and endless times since, is that what people perceive matters as much if not more so than what the technical details of any attack may have actually been.

And that further, attacks serve a purpose. The motivation can be political or otherwise, but they must be analyzed in context.

Further, as shown in this analysis, the power of cyber deception is in increasing the attackers’ costs. The burden of anomaly detection, figuring out what’s real and what’s not — is now on them. A few fake docs killed the election hack. Future attackers will have to sift through data. Cyber deception inflicts economic costs on attackers.

NOTE: Significant updates to this post will be marked with [Updated].

Just before the French elections, the long anticipated news hit. Emmanuel Macron, candidate for president of France, suffered a data breach and the data was dumped for the public to download.

According to this article which I’ll quote:

Macron learned the lessons of the Hillary Clinton campaign, and immediately took control of the messaging and PR:

Wikileaks in their own statement doubted Macron’s ability to go over the documents so fast, but it didn’t matter. That narrative controlled the short news cycle. Macron cast doubt on the reports and showed leadership, actually providing reporters data which they could use to write their stories. That by itself is a lesson for the future.

If all Macron did was throw doubt on the validity of the leaks, that’s already a powerful win. Wikileaks themselves cast a doubt on the source:

There were few such marked documents, all from a limited time period. Regardless — they served their purpose in timelines to assist Macron in his PR crisis response.

Marine Le Pen’s supporters started to make PR use of “all these damning emails”, although many of them looked like bots using Google translated messages, When a few of the documents were displayed as ridiculous, which stopped them short. Some of the documents in the data dump were obvious fakes, and started popping up over French social media.

Creating fake documents that look real, at scale is hard. This case shows us we don’t necessarily need to.

Effectively, the next time a threat actor attempts this, they may have to sift through all the data first. Cyber deception increases the cost of the attacker, shifting the economics of cyber security and thus changing the asymmetry between attacker and defender.

This analysis however misses a critical aspect of what might have happened. A possible false flag operation possibly by Macron, possibly by someone else.

This is where it gets really interesting.

So Macron’s people, and specifically Mounir Mahjoubi, who I want to make sure and meet one day, claim to have fed APT28 false data in a “counteroffensive”. Maybe they have’ maybe they haven’t. Maybe they did something else entirely. Maybe it wasn’t them.

Regardless, their PR win as shown above — planned or not — with or without cyber, was in the bag.

Assuming that there was an attack, and that this was actually APT28, and then that this comment by Mr. Mahjoubi (or who knows who) didn’t plant a false flag by himself to make Macron’s PR look more authentic by blaming the now infamous Fancy Bear, then under this assumption we can see that Macron prepared for this in advance, studied the adversary attacking his systems, and proceeded to feed it the fake documents. Well then, AWESOME!

The comment about phishing is a bit odd technically. I’d have expected them to feed the exfiltration itself, or run the phishing emails on computers they prepared. But hey, it’s a mainstream news article so let’s give them the benefit of the doubt — for now. We can’t expect technical accuracy.

Some further technical information can be found in this article (quoted below), which sheds more light on what was done. Similar, you may note, to the technique some banks use to counter regular phishing attacks (as opposed to sprearphishing), seeding the phishing sites with fake credentials they could monitor for access.

This tells us one thing clearly, even though we do not fully understand what the team has done to feed APT28 / Fancy Bear disinformation, it is clear they attempted to slow them down by feeding them fake credentials. This could potentially also tip the defenders’ hand, depending on their strategic goal. Do you deny the attackers data? Do you disrupt their ability to conduct operations? Do you perhaps degrade their trustworthiness? These do not all necessarily support one another.

Taking the disinformation activity into account, one thing Wikileaks misses in their tweet above, is that if Macron’s people seeded APT28’s exfiltration with their own documents, that could mean they also planted false flags with Cyrillic, and that this wasn’t just an OPSEC failure on the supposed Russian threat actor’s part (someone planned badly, or simply made a mistake), or an employee of Macron’s who uses a Cyrillic keyboard.

Regardless, the obvious fakes in the data dump were enough to achieve the strategic goal of reducing the data dump’s success.

Cyber deception inflicts costs on the attacker, shifting the economics of cyber security and thus changing the asymmetry between attacker and defender. The burden of anomaly detection, figuring out what’s real and what’s not, is now on them.

Remember: We don’t know much at this stage, so this post has a lot of assumptions.

One thing remains clear. Cyber security, much like any other tool or weapon, servers a policy or strategic purpose. It does not often stand as a motivation by itself, and needs to be analyzed in this context. In upcoming elections, think — who may have an interest in disrupting them, and why?

Much like recently for M&A acquisitions cyber security has now become a due diligence issues, election budgets will now include a cyber security clause.

Information operations are as old as history. Why then do I rank this incident so highly?

When the APT1 report came out, it shook the world. An entire cyber security industry was “created” to combat the threat. It gave public and concrete proof. The same applies here.

There is nothing worse as a cyber security professional than going to work every morning knowing you’re going to lose. It’s a defeatist industry. Seeing a live and public example of successful resistance, which is complex and interesting, show that not only can we win, but it is as interesting, if not more so, than the attacking side.

Lastly, some of us have been discussing this subject for a while now on Facebook in a tiny group. Join if you’re interested: https://www.facebook.com/groups/949960748352854/|||

Up until today I could only look up to Russia (whether I agree with them or not) for conducting advanced information operations in cyber. Now, I can look up to Macron and the anonymous security…