I’m sure many people currently trading cryptocurrencies catch their minds drifting off into a scenario in which they land on the winning side of a blockchain token. Investors already have a tangible example to look back to — bitcoin. There’s plenty of folklore within the community of people getting into bitcoin ($BTC) at $5 USD and seeing their wealth skyrocket.

Ethereum ($ETH) has been one the most rewarding tokens in April’s crypto boom, up nearly 50%. Ethereum is the second most developed and discussed crypto asset in the industry and its generating a lot of excitement as a better iteration of bitcoin. Supporters call a speculative negative correlation in their prices, “The Flippening.”

Without a doubt, the most notable event in the cryptocurrency space we’ve seen this year was the growth of Ethereum. Seeing an $18 dollar coin turn into a $50 one in a few days brought back a lot of bullish exuberance akin to the first bitcoin bubble. Investors once again saw a path to riches and online communities and discussions showed it.

The rise of Ethereum catalyzed an explosion in the market share of altcoins. An altcoin is an alternative blockchain asset that is tied to a protocol or application. There are over 700 blockchain assets currently being traded on exchanges. Bitcoin’s market share of the total market capitalization of all blockchain tokens has decreased 35% since March, from 85% to just above 50%. Many compelling projects drew in attention and capital, April alone saw $15 billion added in market cap.

It isn’t quite clear what’s driving this accelerating growth. The former star child of the cryptocurrency world, bitcoin, has been inundated with political battles and systemic conflicts of interest. Bitcoin’s scaling debate has slowly started to recede away from headlines as there is still time to test out possible solutions. Litecoin ($LTC) activating Segregated Witness is a step in the right direction as it can filter out any problems associated with the software before forking the bitcoin blockchain. These types of small movements have resulted in huge jumps in price.

Japan legally recognized bitcoin as a payment method in the beginning of April. Volume in Japanese exchanges has hit record highs as their consumer base warms up to digital currency. Don’t forget that Japan and China will always be entangled in some sort of political/power battle. As China is the world’s bitcoin leader in terms of influence, it will be interesting to see if they feel pressure to expand it within their society.

Lastly, the SEC has agreed to hear an appeal of the bitcoin ETF rejection. Speculators don’t want to be on the wrong side even if the chances of any change are extremely slim.

Many investors should be asking themselves if this magnitude of price appreciation is justified or if we’re witnessing a crypto bubble. I personally think we’re sitting somewhere in the middle and that we’ll see some type of correction in the near future. For one, Bitfinex has halted USD withdrawals which has created a price premium on their exchange. There is more demand for bitcoins and other cryptocurrencies because they offer the only mechanism to get their USD back into their bank accounts. It could be that new investors are entering the market because they see these price multiples and immediately assume they’re going to get rich. Second, a large majority of these blockchain assets are all in the pre-product stage. There is little information available to base investment decisions off of except speculation. This inevitably leads to vicious boom-bust cycles.

Despite a bit of uncertainty, there is still a lot to be excited about. Ethereum catching the attention of the mainstream is helping disperse the possibilities of decentralization and projects with long term potential are getting a lot of funding. Similarly, evangelists are being rewarded for their early due diligence and promotional efforts. This is simply crypto-economics working by design.

Blockchain tokens have given rise to a new business model in which creators are incentivized to innovate at the protocol level. Individuals can now create software protocols and monetize their efforts through a blockchain token. This is important because software protocols provide the framework for the entire digital economy. We could not surf the web without HTTP, we could not use email without SMTP, and we could not purchase things on the internet without SSL. These protocols are not as glamorous as the empires that utilize them to capture value. Google, Amazon, Facebook and Microsoft would be nothing without software protocols.

Software protocols are a set of rules or standards that define how entities communicate and behave. For example, the bitcoin protocol defines how transactions are verified and how new bitcoins are created. Applications can utilize the bitcoin protocol because it’s a new rule set for an accepted form of money.

Blockchain tokens can be thought of as protocol tokens. The term blockchain refers to the decentralized governing structures of the protocols as blockchain technology eliminates the need for a single ruling body. Protocol tokens have a few basic characteristics:

Blockchain tokens solve the chicken and egg problem that network’s face in terms of acquiring their initial user base. Individuals are incentivized to join the network early in the hopes that the protocol token will appreciate in value. What’s even more interesting is that users joining the network accomplishes the same function as users strengthening the network. These protocols are able to stay decentralized because there is a profit motive for help keeping them secure. Similarly, this profit mechanism is freely available to everyone so there is a large pool of people who could take ownership.

Another crucial aspect of blockchain tokens is that they act as an initial funding mechanism for developers similar to a regular venture capital deals. It will be interesting to see how public funding affects the incentives of hyper growth tech startups.

It is not enough to create a network and issue a token on top of it with the hopes that people will buy it based off of marketing and speculation alone. Although this is happening a lot in today’s ICO market, I believe that as weak hands falter and investors lose real money, there will be an increased focus on proper due diligence before making any purchases.

Right now, there are only two legitimate types of blockchain tokens: Usage tokens and Work tokens. Usage tokens are tokens that are required to use the network. Think Bitcoin, you need bitcoins to use the bitcoin payment network. Work tokens are tokens that allow owners to contribute directly to the protocol to strengthen it. REP holders vote on the outcome of events in Augur’s decentralized prediction markets.

With all of the hype and capital surrounding blockchain tokens, it may be difficult to discern real value from pump and dump ploys. This type of investing is usually reserved for venture capital firms for good reason, there is a lot of due diligence necessary before making investment decisions and access to information is still controlled at the top. Don’t forget that there is very scant regulation on trading blockchain assets which makes insider trading rampant and legal.

A valuable blockchain token should not be perceived as merely a fundraising mechanism. If a company is using a token for the sole purpose of bootstrapping operations, there is most likely a reason they couldn’t secure funding in the first place. Firms that raise money for anything other than development purposes should be scrutinized carefully.

Another important aspect to consider is what role does decentralization play within the network. Many tokens will promise to achieve decentralization when there isn’t strong need for it. Compelling blockchain tokens will be only be able to scale networks in which intermediaries capture a disproportionate amount of value. It is also important to examine what incentive the token provides for prospective users. Successful networks will provide a strong incentive to strengthen it and to onboard new users.

Be aware of aesthetically pleasing websites with little text on what their protocol actually accomplishes. It is a lot easier to find a well designed wordpress or bootstrap template than it is to conceptualize a decentralized protocol. These networks are also extremely difficult to explain even for the teams building them so make sure their documentation has substance and isn’t filled with buzzwords and catchy phrases. A great place to start your research is by reading the protocol whitepaper and joining online communities like slack channels and subreddits. While spending a lot of time on research may make you feel like you’re missing out on serious gains, remember that these assets can just as easily depreciate in value. When holes are found in a pre-product protocol, there isn’t a lot of deliberation within the community on how this affects it’s value. These scenarios often result in panic sells that remind investors of the fickle nature of blockchain tokens.

The good news is that there will be protocols that produce venture style returns for evangelists. Conduct proper due diligence, join community discussions, and stay humble throughout the process. I’ll see you all on the moon.|||

I’m sure many people currently trading cryptocurrencies catch their minds drifting off into a scenario in which they land on the winning side of a blockchain token. Investors already have a tangible…