A good offer alone is not enough to guarantee success. You also need to communicate that offer to your target audience. Typically in the form of a landing page.

If you’ve ever stared at a blank page trying to sort out the thousands of design and copy options for your landing page, you’re not alone.

But you don’t need to start from scratch. You can base your landing page on proven landing page examples.

That’s where this post comes in.

We combed through hundreds of landing pages in order to find the best across many categories. And since I know you care most about the landing pages relevant to your use case or industry, you can use the filters just below to only see the examples that are likely to provide you with inspiration.

Finally, there’s a score out of 100 for each landing page. You can click each score for a more detailed breakdown. Note that this is far from a robust score, and is subjective, but it should give you a quick indication if there’s any obvious room for improvement for each page.

I want landing pages that have:

I want landing pages that are:

Hide the analysis, just show the landing page images

Sorry, no results match your filters

Clarity of what is being offered: Considering Unbounce is all about landing pages and conversion rates, this landing page better be good! In all honesty, it’s the best event landing page I found, and there are no obvious mistakes or questionable decisions. So let me point out some of the good. Show attendees what the event is like – Conferences can take many forms. Some are worthless, others are amazing experiences. This landing page is littered with past video and photos of speakers and attendees enjoying themselves. You get a clear sense of what the conference is going to be like, and for most, it’s a positive sense. Not just any speakers – Displaying any speaker at an event is better than nothing, but in this case, they have some of the most recognisable names in digital marketing. Multiple CTAs at all times – The top menu is sticky, meaning that the CTA to get tickets is always showing, even when you scroll down. On top of that, there’s always at least one more CTA either in the content, or on the footer menu that pops up as you scroll down. If a visitor wants to buy a ticket at any time, it’s easy to do so.|||

A good offer alone is not enough to guarantee success. You also need to push that offer to your target audience. Typically in the form of a landing page.