A month ago, on April 4th, Apple does something unusual.

Three senior execs sit down with five reliable (meaning no clickbait) bloggers to discuss the state of the Mac. On the Apple side are Phil Schiller (Sr. VP Worldwide Marketing), Craig Federighi (Sr. VP Software), and John Ternus (VP Hardware). The web writers are Ina Fried (Axios), John Gruber (Daring Fireball), John Paczkowski (BuzzFeed), Matthew Panzarino (Tech Crunch) and Lance Ulanoff (Mashable). A Tech Crunch transcript of the exchange is here.

Tempting as it was, I postponed commenting on the event because I wanted to add the perspective afforded by Apple’s latest quarterly numbers, released on May 4th. As it turned out, Microsoft latest financials have also added useful context.

The most interesting part of the discussion centered on the Mac Pro “mystery”: Why has Apple seemingly abandoned the device? As John Gruber put it:

John Gruber doesn’t buy that theory, nor do I, but Apple’s actions haven’t made faith in the Mac’s future an easy stance.

Turning to the confab, three things stand out from from the 8,000 words transcript.

First, we have the Jimmy Swaggart confession: Indeed, we have sinned against thee, thou Mac Pro faithful. The top-of-the-line Mac was announced in June 2013 — and won’t have a successor until 2018.

Then there’s the contorted explanation for Apple’s puzzling failure to come up with a Mac Pro successor: “We designed ourselves into a bit of a thermal corner”, “We were boxed by a circle.”

Mostly, we have vague reassurances to Mac users who have been kept on hold:

Apple’s commitment to the Mac is restated for the umpteenth time, with an unsubtle You Ain’t Seen Nothin’ Yet tease (particularly regarding the iMac and an inexplicably absent Apple large external screen). But how long must we wait for our eyes to be opened? Without any hard details on future Macs, Pro or not, the Apple execs’ attempt to console their flock was a mission impossible, a Dance of The Seven Veils meant to arouse without actual contact.

In the meantime, Microsoft has smartly positioned itself as the home of creators with its new Surface devices, particularly the striking Surface Studio. To drive the point home, the company released a Windows iteration called the Creators Update. (As an amateur kremlinologist, my hat is off to Microsoft, CEO Satya Nadella, and especially to chief propagandist Frank X. Shaw.)

Fortunately for Apple, reality just came to the rescue.

Microsoft’s quarterly numbers paint a sobering picture for the Redmond company: Surface sales dropped 26% compared to the same quarter a year ago. Meanwhile, Mac units grew 4%, revenue 14%, and Average System Price (ASP), went from $1.27K to $1.39K:

Apple’s Developer’s Conference (WWDC) will be held in four weeks. We’ll be treated to the usual discussion of whether the iPad is a laptop replacement, of course, but Mac talk could prove to be even more interesting. In particular, will Apple announce an ARM-based Mac?

A Mac laptop that’s powered by a home grown A11 or A12 processor is technically feasible. The A10 processor inside my iPhone is no less powerful than the Intel processor inside my MacBook. But in practical terms, unfortunately, it might not make sense. Considering the continued decline of classical PCs, I don’t think Apple can go all the way and design an Ax processor for high-end Macs. Further, bifurcating the Mac line with, one the one hand, Ax-based MacBooks and, on the other, Intel-based iMacs/Mac Pros doesn’t make a sensible picture.

To borrow from our dearly departed Steve Jobs, Mac PCs — whether late 2017 iMacs or Mac Pros in 2018 — will continue to be trucks. The “open” Mac Pro design will easily accommodate bigger, faster everything with its multiple Intel processors and GPUs, near-infinite storage, easy hardware updates and, ahem, a motley crew of heathen non USB-C connectors. I’m ready to print more OPEN MAC t-shirts and dig up my old license plate:

The cars in Steve’s metaphors are Mac laptops, destined to be progressively cannibalized by iPads. Such cars are tightly integrated, no lifting the hood and tinkering with the engine or suspension. Trucks, Mac Pros, are modular, welcoming computer age shade-tree mechanics.

Muting the noise, it’s a simple to understand future. Solidified, if in smaller numbers, at the high end; unclear at the shifting border between Mac laptops and iPads.

This week, nothing on yesterday's presidential election in France. Well, not quite, there was repeated imbibing in French Valley houselholds, celebrating Macron's 95% of votes here vs. 5% for Le Pen. This is a stunning, reassuring success for openmindedness and hope for rejuvenating the beloved Old Country. Said imbibing an excuse for a more disheveled Monday Note above.|||

Three senior execs sit down with five reliable (meaning no clickbait) bloggers to discuss the state of the Mac. On the Apple side are Phil Schiller (Sr. VP Worldwide Marketing), Craig Federighi (Sr…