So you’ve got this great business idea but you’re finding it hard to raise start-up capital. A lot of entrepreneurs face this problem every time. While it’s true that a team of investors or a family member with deep pockets can make starting a business easier, not having money shouldn’t be an excuse. If you have the drive to start a business, coupled with a great idea and an unbelievable drive to succeed, you can start a business with little or no capital. You don’t need a miracle, but you need to follow certain steps to successfully start a business with little or no capital.

One thing you should always keep in mind is that if your idea and plan of execution aren’t well thought out from the beginning, no amount of money can turn it into a winner. If you are confident that you have a product or service people want, don’t allow the lack of capital to deter you from your business goals. By pivoting, grinding it out, getting creative, and differentiating yourself, you can bootstrap your way to a successful business. Funding isn’t always necessary. Following the few basic rules in this article makes starting a business with almost no money entirely possible. This start a business with little or no capital tips can help you get your idea off the ground with limited funds.

Alongside that awesome business idea of yours, you can start a service business. The money you earn can then be used to finance your dream business. You can start a service business with practically no money. What you need is the ability to knock on doors and make sales. Even if you ultimately want a product business, owning a service business can help you get there. To start with, here are 23 service businesses.

2. If you have a Job, don’t quit it

Start your business in your spare time and only give up your day job once your venture is able to pay you a wage. If the venture doesn’t work out, you still have your job. If it does, the transition to being your own boss will be a lot less risky.

3. Get customers to pay you upfront or at worse, half upfront, half later

This way, your costs are always covered. When you start a business with little or no money, getting paid fast is crucial. Nothing will help your cash flow more than getting paid up front. You can get paid fast several ways:

4. Build your business round the skills you already possess

Instead of venturing off into uncharted territory, make sure that you build your business around your skills and knowledge. The less you have to rely on outside sources, the better. When your business is built around your own personal expertise you can eliminate consultants and outside assistance. What can you do that someone else might be prepared to pay for? Can you make clothes, paint and decorate, programme a computer, speak Italian? Do you have a hobby you could turn into a business? If you possess a skill that other people don’t, or would need to invest time and money learning, that immediately puts you at a big advantage.

You can’t do it all alone. Nobody can. If you are starting a business with no money, you will need all the help you can get. Asking for help can help you in several ways.

6. Do all the work yourself

Do everything yourself. Return all income earned straight back into the business. This way, you will be able to build up enough cash reserves to invest in new equipment or premises, and so grow the business.

7. Use the free tools around you

Build a website for nothing using an online website builder such as moonfruit.com, wix.com or basekit.com. Get social and promote your business spending very little. Try signing up for Twitter, or create a Facebook page, and join LinkedIn.

Success in business is not about starting out with lots of money. It is about adopting the right attitude, thinking your way around problems, and having the determination to put the effort in and give it your best shot. So what are you waiting for? Don’t let limited capital prevent you from taking a great idea and running with it. Will it be difficult and will you have some stressful situations? Of course, but that is part of entrepreneurship. Have you started a business with little or no capital? Then, let me know about your experiences in the comments section below.|||

