Improving the quality of customer-agent communication while managing call center volume is one of the primary challenges for every support operation. Failure to minimize hold times and maximize first call resolutions directly affects customer satisfaction and retention. According to a Consumer Reports survey across 22 industries, 75% percent of respondents were frustrated when they had a less than stellar call center experience.

As good service starts with good communication, call centers are increasingly turning to multi-channel technology to deepen their level of customer engagement. Queue management solutions including self-service, hierarchy routing and virtual hold have each been proven to reduce call abandonment rates and improve agent productivity. Despite these enhancements, modern support centers recognize the need for continuous development and adaptability in order to meet (and anticipate) the omni-channel needs of their customers.

With over 6.1 billion people projected to utilize their smartphones on a daily basis by 2020[1], visual support is quickly gaining momentum and is bound to revolutionize the customer experience in today’s digitized world. Visual support technology allows agents to see and understand the customer’s physical environment via their smartphone, enabling simpler resolutions to the majority of support issues that require extended time to resolve due to customer-agent miscommunication. Delivered through smart and interactive technology, visual support drives quality communication, builds customer confidence in the agent, and makes the overall call center experience more efficient and enjoyable. It shortens agent calls, increases first call resolution, reduces technician dispatches, and most importantly, increases customer satisfaction and reduces churn.

And with 73% of US adults in a recent Forrester report relating that valuing their time is the most important thing a company can do to provide them with good customer service, opening a visual communication channel will go a long way in transforming the customer care experience into a better, faster, more intuitive process. When implemented as part of an organization’s omni-channel experience, visual support serves as the differentiating factor between customer care and killer customer care.

TechSee is the category leader in Intelligent Visual Support, leveraging the ubiquity of smartphones, the visual elegance of Augmented Reality technologies, and the automating power of artificial intelligence (AI) for enterprises to deliver a fundamentally new way of providing technical support to their customers. For more information or to schedule a demo, visit TechSee.|||

Visual Support is quickly becoming instrumental to Tech Support Call Centers. Your Omnichannel strategy is not complete without it.