The cliche answer is that I started BASIC when I was six with the help of my

dad, and spent my teens writing graphics code and BBS software. I can provide a better answer by describing how I started programming on open source projects. The radio station at my university lost its license several times and weren’t getting a new one, so they were forced to broadcast only within the student union building. As all the dorms were wired for internet access, I wanted to put the radio station on the internet so that I could listen from my room. RealNetworks’ and Microsoft’s solutions were too expensive, and MP3 was brand new, so I started trying to create my own streaming media server. At the beginning, I knew nothing about threads, asynchronous I/O, or music formats, but pursuit of the end goal taught me all of those things and many more.

Servo is a new web engine written in the Rust programming language, aiming to be much safer and much faster than existing engines.

I’ll talk about what this might look like, the benefits Servo brings, and how we’ll get there.

Some knowledge of the frontend of modern web applications and the web platform will help give useful context. If you know a little bit about Rust (even at a high level), that may help as well.

First, I’m excited that we’re integrating pieces of Servo written in Rust into

Firefox which will hopefully ship later this year. Next, Rust’s asynchronous

I/O story, futures and the Tokio library, are pretty amazing both for Servo

and for the whole Rust community; I’m looking forward to what people will do with them. Finally, I’m a huge fan of VR and am hoping for some amazing new experiences this year that push the platform forward.

Recently some old code I wrote needed some analysis. While I was getting

re-acquainted with the 15+ year old code, I discovered that the most important pieces were the ones with obscure comments like “Do not even try to understand this”. From now on, I will try to avoid mocking my future self. Also from that same old code, I was surprised how bad I thought my old coding style was, even though I considered it great at the time.|||

The cliche answer is that I started BASIC when I was six with the help of my
dad, and spent my teens writing graphics code and BBS software. I can provide a better answer by describing how I started…