Correctional Centers are not normal environments. They are, as Bottoms (1999) observed, not only ‘total institutions’ in the sense that they encompass inmates’ lives to an extent qualitatively greater than other social institutions (Goffman, 1961).

They are physical places (mostly surrounded by high walls) with a specific history and ethos that are designed to be places of punishment. Correctional Centres bring troubled human beings, often with a long history of violence as victim or offender, into confined spaces against their wills.

This article provides a brief overview of what is known about what causes prison violence, and how it can be prevented or reduced. Also, this article provides a brief overview of the relationship between an offender/inmate and an official in a correctional center more particularly at St. Albans Correctional Centre.  

 The focus is interpersonal violence rather than a collective disorder or self-inflicted harm, but the review, on the one hand, does encompass violence involving staff (whether as victim or perpetrator) as well as prisoner-to-prisoner violence.

There are no over-arching theories of prison violence, but there are several influential schools of thought. In prison sociology, two well-established but contrasting perspectives are the deprivation and importation models.  

 The deprivation model holds, in brief, that the prison environment and loss of freedom cause deep psychological trauma so that for reasons of psychological self-preservation prisoners create a deviant prison subculture that promotes violence.

The importation model emphasizes what prisoners bring into the institution: their histories, personal attributes and social networks, including links to criminal groups.  

 The empirical literature supports both these models but perhaps the most pronounced trend in recent literature is a growing recognition of the importance of very specific features of the social and physical environments of the prison and of the “minutiae of the average prison day.”  

 Even in studies that are primarily  focused on other factors, the details of how a prison is organized in time and space, how individuals interact with and help shape a dynamic environment, and the role of specific situational factors in precipitating or regulating violence emerge as crucial.

Factors found to be related to violence include pre-existing prisoner characteristics (e.g., prisoner age and gender); structural or situational factors (e.g., prison architecture and design; level of security); management practices (e.g., staffing models, staff skills and training, prison culture and management style); and outside environmental influences (e.g., political pressures on prison administrators; racial tensions).

Other effective prevention strategies include a range of situational measures (e.g., improved surveillance of high-risk locations, the manipulation of prisoner privileges, improvement of supervision of both staff and prisoners); some offender treatment and education programs (e.g., in-prison therapeutic communities; college-level education programs); and some ‘social prevention’ programs.

The Framework Liberty of the person is one of the most precious rights of all human beings. In certain circumstances, judicial authorities may decide that it is necessary to deprive some people of that right for a period of time as a consequence of the actions of which they have been convicted or of which they are accused.|||

Your description