Github pages are a great way to quickly host your personal blog, repository homepage and any other static content. Combined with Jekyll you have enough to host a free, beautiful, highly-configurable website. Github reserves a subdomain of for each user. But what if you want to use a domain name you own instead? Well, github supports custom domains. However, if you try to reach your domain in https you will find out that the certificate is invalid and the connection is insecure! That’s because github don’t support SSL on custom domains.

Since a few months, OVH proposes amongst its offers a reverse proxy solution to handle SSL traffic to your infrastructure called SSL Gateway. It provides automatic certificate generation and configuration from Let’s Encrypt, support HSTS, HTTP redirection, IP restriction and tuning TLS ciphers. It is an interesting alternative to Cloudflare on these aspects, althought the set of surrounding features is smaller than what the US company offers. There’s a free plan that should be more than sufficient for your custom domain on github pages to support SSL.

Before anything you should add a file in the root of your github pages repository with your custom domain name in it. Push your changes. Here’s an example that is used for this blog.

Visit the offer’s page and activate your free plan. Enter the custom domain name and an IP of the github pages platform. At the time of writing, these are:

Your current configuration probably looks like this:

Once your order has been processed you’ll receive an email with informations regarding your service such as the IPv4 and IPv6 addresses of your SSL Gateway. You now need to make sure your custom domain points to this service and not to github servers anymore:

For instance with this blog the configuration is:

In order for the SSL certificate to be issued and verified by Let’s Encrypt, a DNS probe will check for these two records in your zone configuration. Once found, your gateway will be properly configured and show up in the ‘Sunrise’ section of the customer interface.

Unfortunately, the free plan doesn’t include HTTP redirections. When not hosting critical content you can still write a bit of javascript to redirect visitors to the secure version of your site. For example:|||

The limitation Github pages are a great way to quickly host your personal blog, repository homepage and any other static content. Combined with Jekyll you ha...