Uploading your products under appropriate category plays a pivotal role in marketing them up, concurrently delivering them to the fit audience looking for it.

Thus in order to deliver your products that suit’s the audience, it is quite necessary that the product is defined under a suitable category.

Now to guide you, for category mapping and selecting a suitable category for your products, meet the requirements for following perspectives:

1. Listing the products under Relevant categories and subcategories.

2. Selecting inclusion and exclusion criteria for each category and subcategory.

3. In suitably deciding as to exactly what item is meant to fall under which category and subcategory.

Finally, after the correct category and subcategory have been specified for a particular item, the second part goes with the required attributes mapping which can be further determined by viewing the relevant Spec (for Item Setup via Seller Center) or XSD (for Item Setup via API).

1. Kindly refer Categorization Guide to map up the suitable category for your products.

2. Determine the category and subcategory for each individual product that you are willing to sell on WALMART:

i. If it is unclear which subcategory is relevant, look at the include/exclude criteria and choose the best match.

ii. If your item belongs to an obvious category but does not seem to belong to a subcategory, use the main category.

1. If any of the categories applies to your item does not apply, choose the Other category. However, if you do this, you will only be able to specify a minimum set of attributes and your item may not be well-described on Walmart.com.

2. The Universal Specification categories described here are not identical to the contract categories.

3. There are a few commonly encountered problems regarding category choice, as follows:-

Following aforementioned practices ensure maximum visibility for your products. Also, when the products are mapped to the appropriate categories. Chances of your potential customers find you increases significantly.|||

Uploading your products under appropriate category plays a pivotal role in marketing them up, concurrently delivering them to the fit audience looking for it. Thus in order to deliver your products…