I recently had a chance to meet a college friend after a long time. Turns out, she has become a businesswoman – just like she always dreamt of being one day. Her online handicrafts store is doing really well with a steady income. However, when we got to talking about the challenges in maintaining the stability of the business and customer base, she voiced her concerns.

“Why don’t you go for a mobile app?”, I asked.

“Well, we already do. The problem is giving users the experience that they want to come again and again to the store,” she remorsefully exclaimed.

“Well, it seems your problem is not the fact that you do not have customers, your problem is that you cannot retain your customers. Isn’t it? Have you tried deep linking your app?” I asked.

“I am not sure what you mean.”

And that hit the home run. We zeroed in on the problem. But it got me thinking. Not all businesses can afford monthly marketing and advertising consultation, especially the small and medium businesses who solely survive on marketing and creating a brand value for themselves. While mobile apps for small businesses is pretty much needed these days, it is almost imperative that your marketing efforts are targeted and focused too. This way, your customers will flock to your site regularly and not one time.

A lot has been said about mobile apps and why it important to have one for your business. However, to be ahead of the curve, you need to step up your game. You need to go deep. Deep linking in mobile app is the new “in” and can do wonders for your business.

Sounds inspiring! Can you tell me more?

In the simplest of terms, deep links on a mobile app are like hyperlinks except that they send users to a specific screen within the mobile app rather than directing to a web page.

Deep linking in mobile application development uses Uniform Resource Identifier or URI to link specific locations within the app. The technology can be used in a variety of ways and has become mainstream with inclusion into apps by Huffington Post and ReadWriteWeb.

Technically put, deep links are URLs for mobile apps which help in communication between apps. These communications may be of the following nature:

Deep linking has profound uses to business marketing and is already being termed as the next big asset to the marketers. Using deep links, you can offer ease of navigation to your customers and improve the app user experience significantly.

Outcome? More leads that convert to regular happy customers!

Deep linking enables app users to engage users with their favorite content on the app. When a potential customer realizes that the content on his mobile screen is relevant to his needs, your app will have more installs, user engagement and not to mention, lead conversion.

Did I get you interested? Good. Because there is more.

Here are some more reasons why having deep linking within your app will benefit you as a small business owner:

BluEnt specializes in mobile app development services for your business. Connect with us and become the market leader in mobile Ecommerce today!|||

Learn how the top businesses are profiting from smartphone app development. BluEnt provides mobile app designer team for hybrid app development.