Being the most popular wedding destination, Mumbai is a city that houses endless banquet halls with unique characters and features. Each of them offers beautiful interior along with top-notch facilities and sophisticated ambiance. Among them, we will talk about top 10 banquet halls in Mumbai that are sure to match your style and requirements. After all, your need is our first priority, and we always strive to offer you what you require. Now, go through the list of banquets given below to gather the necessary information before taking any final call.

If you are looking for a banquet hall in Mumbai that will simply awestruck your guests, then nothing can beat ITC Grand Central. Located amidst the business and recreational centres in Parel, this iconic hotel represents the British colonial architecture of old Mumbai on one hand and cosmopolitan ambiance on the other. The colourful patchwork of the city’s cultures, old English charm, and warm Indian hospitality are what make this hotel an ideal place for tying the knot. They have both indoor and outdoor wedding spaces with an excellent team of in-house vendors who are known to serve people with ultimate professional skills. So, while you tie the knot with the man of your life in this venue, the vendors attend your guests with a maximum care and supervision.

Located in Dr. Annie Besant Road, The Mayfair Banquets is another popular choice of a banquet hall in South Mumbai. It offers beautiful interiors with stylish seating arrangements along with an in-house team of decorators who adorns every nook and corner of the venue to turn it into a dream location. It also offers an in-house team of caterers to serve the guests with palatable food and make the ceremony even more memorable. While this venue ensures to host any celebration like no one has watched before, it always strives to lend a uniqueness to the ceremonies. It has four banquet halls for hosting all kinds of wedding ceremonies, starting from mehendi to sangeet to the wedding.

One of the most luxurious wedding venues nestled in the Western Mumbai suburb, Sahara Star has been hosting the wedding ceremonies over more than a decade. With opulent interior and plush ambiance, the banquet halls in this luxurious hotel have never failed to attract people to host their D-Day. The hotel has three spacious banquet halls, each with a unique interior and style. While Jade Ballroom represents a fine blend of contemporary and Indian sensibilities and hosts the weddings with absolute splendour, Oyster Banquet Hall and Coral Banquet Hall complement every event and occasion with their cozy and warm environment.

Nestled in the heart of upscale Juhu and facing the azure of the Arabian sea, Novotel is one of the most iconic wedding venues in Mumbai. Featuring the most stylish and sophisticated interior and ambiance, this venue ensures an unforgettable celebration. It has classy banquet halls that can accommodate from 100 to 500 guests and also has a poolside lawn that can do justice to big gatherings of more than 900 invitees. It has in-house vendors too that are sure to give you and your guests attentive services. While the caterers serve with delectable cuisines, the decorators turn the venue into a dreamy place with their expertise and talent.

In case, you want to redefine the meaning of celebration in your wedding then you must go for this populous wedding venue located along the bank of the serene Powai Lake. It offers the best culinary services and the most sophisticated ambiance along with a grand ballroom and a gorgeous lush green lawn. So, host your wedding here and let your guests accumulate as many memories as possible.

Do you want to celebrate your D-Day amidst contemporary setting and everything beautiful? Then The Westin Mumbai Garden City would be one of the great choices for you. Located in the western suburb of Mumbai, only 1.6 KM away from the Goregaon Railway Station, this luxurious hotel offers a brilliant space for celebrating the wedding. Choose the lavish and large Westin Grand Ballroom that is sure to make your wedding day memorable owing to its contemporary decor with a significant touch of vibrancy. The hotel also offers an in-house team of professional caterers who gladly personalize the menu for leaving you to enjoy every moment of the occasion.

This 4-star banquet hall in Mumbai offers a blissful ambiance to all its patrons. It is located in the Link Road of Malad and is only 2.2 KM away from the Railway Station. Spreads over 12000 square feet, this venue gives a fresh look the moment you step in. Its stylishly decorated interior with the necessary royal touch owing to candle chandeliers, wooden finish wall, and wall to wall red carpet do no less than captivating the minds of the visitors. They also offer a customized decor service to adorn the place according to your choice and style.

With over 50,000 square feet of lavish banquet and conference space, The Lalit is one of the best venues in the Western line of Mumbai suburb for celebrating any kind of occasion. Whether you want to host a grand wedding or you want an intimate one, this venue is sure to suit your style of celebration, offering different sizes and types of banquet halls. Each of them carries a distinctive character with a unique style of interior and seating arrangements that never fail to woo the invitees. While the Lalit Plaza banquet hall can accommodate up to 2000 guests,  the Majestic Ballroom can make room for up to 1000 guests. There are other small banquet halls in the hotel that can do justice to the small gatherings where you have 50 to 300 invitees.

Located in the two prime areas of Mumbai, Nariman Point and Bandra Kurla Complex, Trident is one of those top hotels in Mumbai that offers the perfect space for hosting a wedding. This hotel represents a class with its understated elegance and a subtle charm of sophistication. Owing to high-quality service and lip smacking food, this 5-star hotel has witnessed over a thousand of wedding celebrations. It has grand colonial style banquet halls adorned with beautiful chandeliers and props that can take any wedding to a whole new level and have well-trained in-house vendors to complement the occasion.

Two minutes away from the Vashi Railway Station, Imperial Banquet would be another great choice of wedding venue if you are looking for one that finely blends gorgeousness and tradition. Owing to an elegant decor and plush interior, this venue fits in any choice and style and makes the wedding ceremonies a dreamy affair. It has in-house vendors and caterers who always strive to offer the best services and delight the guests with a variety of exotic cuisines, starting from Italian to Chinese to mouth watering Desi food.|||

Find top ten best banquet halls in mumbai for wedding that will match your style requirements by Wedfine. Browse to know more