Every now and then I like to break out of my safe and cushy world and venture out to the unknown. Venturing into a book shop or book stand is not for the faint of heart (don’t get me started about my online purchases) because we all know that after we pick what we wanted, one is tempted to sneak a peek at the other books “just in case”. This is an amazing book friends to say the least.

So when my eye was attracted to a stark black and white novel with the one name title, I couldn’t help myself. Darnell a Ford, could her story have teeth? Would I like her story? Where could I get her other novels Rising and Crave? Quickly I left the stand, as usual made a brief stopover to pick up a snack or four and off I went home almost quivering as the rush hour traffic held me back from cracking open my new find. Guess what, choke it was.

Come the witching hour, I tumbled headlong into the book and didn’t climb out till I turned the last page.

Do not get me wrong, I’m not a lush. I’m a God fearing Christian Woman who carries the Bible with her everywhere, but that’s only because my Good Book doubles as a phone book. I used all the blank pages in the back to write down the numbers I couldn’t remember.

 Forgive me Lord for being a heathen.

 Who wouldn’t be drawn in faster than a sale at a shoe shop?

This story both challenges the reader and satisfies the soul as you follow Vanessa and her daughter Kennedy who loves the piano and is practicing to audition for a position in an esteemed music academy that Vanessa can in no way afford since she just lost her job as a housekeeper. Vanessa has dreams and aspirations for her and her daughter but is willing to set hers aside to see her daughter rise. The path she chooses is to and for most people not the best but to put food on the table and pay bills this is the only path open to her. Lo and behold the path she takes circles round again and presents itself to her – this time she is the one who is on top and as we all know ‘Karma is a Woman’. Funny thing is after all she went through, light presents itself at the end of the tunnel in form of a cheque from a ghost.

Choke is a story about the roads we take in life and the choices we make as we walk those roads. The lessons we learn stay with us, long after the last page has been turned.|||

Choke by Darnell a ford is one of her best book so far that I have read. It is quite intriguing and captures your thoughts in an unimaginable way.