The most difficult thing about starting to save money is getting started. Saving money can be hard…no doubt about that. Aries Jimenez; Financial Life Planner, says, “being a money saver as opposed to money spender is a mindset that may not be natural to most people, however, it can be developed through practice .”  This means that, it’s possible to grow this habit. In the long run when you have eventually overcome the problem of starting, it starts to pay you.

It can be difficult to figure out simple ways to save money and how to use your savings to pursue your financial goals. That’s why I’ve decided to write this article to show you a step-by-step guide to money-saving habits that can help you develop a realistic savings plan. Not to worry, they’re simple easy to follow tips.

Doing this on a weekly or even monthly basis is a good way to start. All you need to have is an idea on what you spend money on either weekly or monthly depending on how long you’ve decided to create the budget for. Keep track of all your expenses – that means every coffee, newspaper and snacks you buy. Ideally, you can account for every penny. Once you have your data, organize the numbers by categories, such as gas, groceries and mortgage, and total each amount. Consider using your credit card or bank statements to help you with this. If you bank online, you may be able to filter your statements to easily break down your spending. Once you have an idea, you can begin to organize your recorded expenses into a workable budget. This budget should reveal every detail about how your expenses measure up to your income so as to limit overspending.

Now that you’ve created a budget, you’re all set to go. Next thing to do is to create a savings category within this budget. Start by putting away 10% to 15% of your income as savings. This percentage is relatively small so if you find it hard to save that much, then you should cut back expenses. To do so, note the non-essentials that you can spend less on, such as entertainment and dining out then cut back expenses on them.

There’s a difference between saving money and saving money for your future. So don’t just spend less, put the money you save into a savings account. This money can be used to plan for college expenses, retirement, or emergencies that can leave you financially better off. Only a few people get rich through their wages alone. It’s the miracle of compound interest, or earning interest on your interest over many years that builds wealth. Start now. Don’t procrastinate. Later on in the future, you’ll be happy you did.

So you’ve decided to save 10% to 15% of your income, make this a short-term savings goals. Set aside this percentage either weekly or monthly rather than making it a longer term savings goal. After, you can re-assess yourself. Check your progress every three months to see if you’re doing okay or not. Not only will this help you stick to your personal savings plan but it also helps you identify and fix problems quickly. These simple ways to save money may even inspire you to save more and hit your goals faster. People save more successfully when they keep short-term goals in sight.

What would I like to save for? This is a great way to save money. It strengthens the drive to save. You might want to save for anything from a down payment for a house to a vacation, then figure out how long it might take you to save for it. Here are some examples of short and long-term goals:

If you’re saving for retirement or your child’s education, consider putting that money into an investment account. While investments come with risks and can lose money, they also create the opportunity for compounded returns if you plan for an event far in advance.

6. Don’t do it Alone

It can be very difficult if you’re trying to do it all by yourself. There are tools out there available for use depending on the savings goal range you’ve decided to set for yourself. If you’re saving for short-term goals, consider using these deposit accounts:

After your expenses and income, your goals are likely to have the biggest impact on how you save money. Be sure to remember long-term goals. It’s important that planning for retirement doesn’t take a back seat to shorter-term needs. Prioritizing goals can give you a clear idea of where to start saving. For example, if you know you’re going to need to replace your car in the near future, you could start putting money away for a new one now.

Here’s another way to save money that works. Discuss placing spending limits on gifts within your family and/or a system where you only purchase one gift for one person over the holidays. These limits tend to reduce expenditures and be greatly appreciated by family members with less financial flexibility.

Finding a way to start saving money so that unexpected expenses aren’t so devastating may not be easy. But shifting your thought patterns can yield long-term results. That’s all to it…8 ways to save money. Told you the steps are easy to follow. Now let’s be truthful, was this helpful at all? Let’s discuss about it in the comments. Want to talk to me privately, go here. I would be happy to help you out!|||

