Across the United States, every disclaimer about emergencies tells you to call 911. The American Red Cross teaches certification courses in life-saving skills like CPR, and before administering aid you’re advised to call 911. But most of us don’t know what happens between the time we call and the time help arrives.

When you call 911, the call taker confirms your location, sometimes asking for information to figure out where you are. Then she collects information about the emergency and provides you with pre-arrival instructions. Next, she gets in touch with the necessary remote dispatchers in your jurisdiction. The call taker continues to provide you with further guidance until help arrives. Ideally, fire, police, or medical assistance should arrive in seven minutes — though this response time varies nationwide.

Budget cuts and shifting priorities have meant that, in many parts of the country, 911 centers have consolidated and become private. Consolidated centers, in theory, have more oversight, better technological capabilities, and more efficient transfer systems. They’re also supposed to be cheaper than local 911 facilities. In the future, we will likely be seeing more of these consolidated systems. The current political climate has made it evident that privatization of public services is a priority for many regions.

In 2010, Seguin’s call would have been handled in Rutland, only 11 miles away. Elizabeth Adams, the site administrator, used to manage a staff of 16 full-time and seven part-time employees. Vermont had already consolidated down to four centers in 2000, so her staff needed to be intimately familiar with 25 percent of the state — including up-to-date knowledge on road closures during periods of heavy snowfall, detours, and areas without mobile connectivity.

The problem is exacerbated by inconsistent technology and connectivity issues. In Vermont, one of the most rural states in the country, you can lose a radio station around a corner. The state is littered with dead zones without cell service. Even radio communications suffer in remote parts of the state.

Uber might know exactly where you want to be picked up, but that technology isn’t available to 911 operators. Even in areas of the country known for technological innovations, cellphones do not always transmit location data. In Silicon Valley, California, precise location data was shared in only 10 to 37 percent of emergency calls in 2012.

1999 saw 26% of 911 calls originate from cell phones, while the number today has tripled to over 75%. With the signal bouncing off of cellphone towers all over the place, it can be more difficult to use a computer system to locate callers. The most reliable way to ensure 911 has the right address is to call from a landline, but even that isn’t flawless. Frequently, dispatchers must rely on descriptions of landmarks and other local information.

“[Often], the caller has no idea where they are and the technology is not there with cell companies,” said Adams. “Local knowledge absolutely matters when a caller can only cite a house color or what the street around them looks like or what they think a road or town is called. [In one case,] we had people trapped in a cave [who] didn’t know what town they were in.”

Especially because of the lagging technology, local knowledge is crucial. “Accuracy went downhill since local knowledge was not there anymore,” said Lucas Hall, a firefighter who worked out of Rutland County before and after consolidation. “I can recall one time that I could attribute a death to [dispatch consolidation]. Vermont State Police could not tell if the address was Route 30 North or Route 30 South. It took them over 10 minutes to figure it out. By the time it got figured out and we got on scene, the person was dead.”|||

On November 16, 2016, Becky Seguin found her brother David unresponsive with only a faint pulse. Becky called 911 while her younger brother, a firefighter, and his girlfriend, a registered nurse…