The Metadata API from Salesforce allows for the performance of many org setup and configuration features programmatically. You can use the API to deploy, retrieve, create, delete, or update customization info like page layouts and custom object definitions for your org. If you are using Salesforce cloud-based and online platforms like Force.com, Salesforce1, Work.com, Data.com, Desk.com, Do.com, and Site.com, Salesforce Ideas, and App Exchange, you will interact with Metadata API as you move data across them and it is, therefore, important that you understand what it involves.

Metadata API allows you manage the customization and setup information (Metadata) for your organization. You can perform such tasks as:

To deploy and retrieve the Metadata, use the deploy() & retrieve() calls. These commands allow you to move XML files that make up Metadata between the Salesforce org and the local file system. From here, you perform such file-based development operations as:

These changes can then be deployed to any other Salesforce org.

Force.com Migration Tool and Force.com IDE are the easiest way to access Salesforce Metadata API functionalities. The two tools are built atop the API and they use the standard Ant and Eclipse tools.

When using Force.com Migration Tool or Force.com IDE, the deploy() & retrieve() calls are still used, but they are invisible and seamless – you do not need to write code that calls the two commands.

The data in the XML files that make up Metadata is in English (United States) locale format. This way, fields that are dependent on locale like date fields are consistently interpreted during the data migrations between different orgs using different languages and you can use any language you wish to make a presentation in your organization.

Note that Metadata API is meant for building tools used in the Metadata model management and for managing customizations, not for the data itself. If you want to retrieve, create, update, or delete such records as leads or accounts, you would need REST API or SOAP API.|||

