Token sales are a new mechanism for blockchain based companies & projects to raise funds from their communities and early adopters. Similarly to the traditional method of incentivising early employees in companies through stock options, cryptographic tokens allow to incentivise early adopters of the protocol. This effectively solves the strategic chicken and egg problem of needing adoption to grow network value, but also needing value in the network to grow adoption. Fred Ehrsam gives a comprehensive overview of what these tokens are, how they are issued and what incentives they bring in his 2 brilliant blog posts: Value of the Token Model & Blockchain Tokens and the Dawn of the Decentralised Business Model.

Not only does it allow companies to bypass the hassle of raising from Venture Capitalists, it brings higher valuations, community incentives and significantly faster fundraising time periods. In November 2016, Golem raised $8.6m in 29 minutes. In January 2017, Melonport raised $3m in 10min. In April 2017, Cosmos raised $17m in 30min and Gnosis raised a round at a $300m valuation in less than 10min. The list goes on… Most of these rounds were raised on the back of White-papers. When comparing this to the usual 1–3 months VC fundraising periods, a problem for traditional VCs starts to crystallise: they might lose their usual exclusivity with early stage companies.

There are of course a few problems with some of these decentralised projects:

Thankfully a lot of great research is outsourced to Reddit & Slack channels (e.g. CoinFund), research groups (e.g. Smith and Crown) and ratings agencies (e.g. ICO Rating)

The traditional VC investment is an equity investment. We take a minority share of equity in the centralised value-holding company. We invest in an illiquid asset. We take a board seat. We get protective rights. We get voting rights. We look for traction around user adoption, revenues and positive customer referrals. We look for network effects that lead to ‘unfair’ advantages and higher margins.

In contrast, the token model, by definition, is not an equity investment. There is no central entity that will accumulate value. Tokens are liquid and can be traded on exchanges. Large investors do not necessarily get board seats. No protective rights. No voting rights. Projects are often pre-product & pre-traction. By nature, decentralised projects tend to democratise industries which removes unfair advantages and potential for higher margins. Some of these differences are positive. Nonetheless, they will still require significant re-adjustment from the investors’ side!

Another fundamental problem for VCs is that they currently cannot invest in tokens due to their fund mandates — tokens are not a security and many regulatory bodies are still investigating them. They can be bought semi-anonymously by anyone, are paid for in Bitcoin or Ethereum and there’s currently no proper AML or KYC compliance for token sales.

Interestingly, it is currently easier for less traditional and rigid investment structures to invest into tokens; could this lead to the rise of venture-focused family office funds, SPVs run by VCs and business angels?

The ball is in the VC’s court to find solutions to these problems and adapt to them.

There have been a lot of investments into blockchain related companies, but very few funds have been able to participate in token sales so far. USV, continuing its first mover tradition, already plays in the token market.

In fact they have been documenting their thesis around investing at the protocol layer for a while: Joel Monegro’s ‘Fat Protocol’ blog is one of the best illustrations of the new value capture dynamic, and Albert Wenger’s writings about Protocol Innovation thoughtfully demonstrate the radical innovation of incentives through cryptographic tokens.

Other investors that have taken leaps forward include Blockchain Capital, which has in fact raised its own ICO and now has $10m to invest in the space. Polychain Capital and Metastable Capital — that arguably resemble hedge funds rather than VC funds — are building credible and innovative alternatives to invest directly into the tokens at the initial token sale and on exchanges.

Numerous original approaches are likely to spring up, but outlined below are two ways forward for traditional VC funds to start investing in this decentralised future:

If funds can get approval from their LPs to invest in this new asset class, investing directly into tokens at ICO through a pre-allocation of the sale (with a potential discount) makes a lot of sense. Not only is it the most exciting solution that keeps VC investors at the forefront of technological innovation, but it will also allow them to prove their competitive edge over any other VC investor.

Direct token investments will hopefully bring more rigour to ICOs: having institutional investors signal their interest based on technical analyses will most likely be instrumental in the future. Such investments would create a hybrid crowdfunded/VC investment trend, where the VC does the bulk of the research and due diligence.

It’s not a traditional equity investment, but it has a very real potential for VC styled returns when looking at the growth in value of the total token market cap: In just 2 years, the total cryptotoken market cap has increased tenfold from $3.9B to $39B.

Direct token investments will also bring a new breed of more technical investors to the table. These funds will need to dive into the architecture and code of the project, be comfortable with autonomous governance models, understand white papers, accept and assume security issues with token ownership and have trading skills to sell a liquid asset at a right time. Small details, such as having to ‘centrally’ cold store tokens in offline wallets, have most likely not been thought through fully: do we store the wallet in the office, in a safe at home, or (ironically) in a safe deposit box at a bank?

A New Paradigm: Applying the exact same tactics to creating defensibility in these systems simply won’t work. Web 3.0 companies won’t create value through propriety software, but rather open networks and communities built around these networks.

While one of the core problems highlighted earlier is the mismatch between traditional equity investments and the lack of central value aggregation in decentralised networks, there are ways around this. VCs can invest into the teams that developed a protocol, with the idea that, despite consciously breaking down network effect defensibility, those teams will be best positioned to sell services for the protocol users, create apps on top of their protocol, design a slick UI or offer support to larger users. An interesting case is well illustrated by Brad Burnham in USVs post about their investment in OB1 (for profit company created by the founders of the OpenBazaar protocol), and how they intend to make money. Interestingly, when looking at recent blockchain investments, it could even be argued that certain equity investments into projects are just buying an ‘option’ to invest at the token pre-sale with a discounted price.|||

Richard introduced the compilation of posts aiming to outline our thesis about a decentralised future. Attempting to reflect Deleuze & Guattari’s postulate about the Rhizome in A Thousand Plateaus…