If you need such a smartwatch that will notify you for every notification by custom vibration patterns and that is also low in cost, Martian Notifier is the best one to get.

Some people, these days, possess to be as much productive as possible. Every single second counts for them and that is where the Martian Watches Notifier Smartwatch fits.

How much time are you investing in checking notifications on your phone? Or how many times are you refraining yourself from work for viewing new notifications? If I’m not wrong, it is a lot of time when aggregated.

For saving your time and effort from frequently checking notifications, Martian Notifier provides you the opportunity to be updated with notifications in real-time with totally zero distraction!

You need to scan the rest for knowing further how this real-time notification watch would help.

You can easily tell by glancing on the round-shape classic device that it is a watch first and smartwatch later having a small 1.5-inches graphical OLED display located down on the watch.

You would be wrong if you underestimate the screen size of 96 x 16 pixels. The Martian Notifier Smartwatch uses a different approach to discreetly show caller IDs, texts and notifications. They even included a tap sensor to recall notifications that were received in last 5 minutes.

Concerning the built quality, the case is made of plastic with a stainless-steel back and a silicone-made band. It includes an open usb charging port and the fact is that it wasn’t tried to make resistant to waters. The thing that you’d love is that the bands are easily replaceable and support any 22mm bands including steel ones.

This smart watch is available in three basic colors: (1) Black (2) Red and (3) White, although a good number of colorful and easily interchangeable bands are available for buying to meet your fashionable needs.

[Clicking on the colors will take you to its official destination at Amazon]

P.S: The band of the watch is replaceable and can be replaced by any 22mm band. Martian Watches has numbers of colorful quick-change bands available at their official Amazon Store.

1. Separate Analog Clock: The analog clock you see is fully separated from the smartwatch infrastructure. It is powered by a separate battery (lasts up to 2 years) and doesn’t drain the battery that is used for alerts and notifications. So even though you finish up the charge, the analog clock will not stop.

2. Caller ID and Notification: This watch features a small OLED Display to discreetly show caller ID, sms, email, social media posts, news, weather and notifications from 1000s more apps that your smartphone can support.

3. Customizable Vibration Patterns: Now you can feel which notification it is without looking at the watch by the custom vibration patterns. You can set which notification will give long, short or pause vibration feedback.

4. Filtered Alerts: Not all notifications are important enough to be notified. For example, social media notifications are less important while email has the top-most priority. Martian Watches Notifier allows filtering notifications and lets you select which ones you want to get notified for.

5. Tap Glass Notification Recall: Did you miss an important notification? Just tapping on the glass will recall previous notifications that were received in last 5 minutes.

6. Others: This smart watch includes some other features like it can work as a remote for your phone camera and also can find your phone or notify when it goes out of range.

Martian Notifier’s battery is interesting enough to draw attentions. The rechargeable lithium-ion polymer battery lasts usually 4-6 days with high vibration alerts on. It also allows to turn off alerts with one button press and save the battery when it is not needed (e.g: at night).

While the unique fact is that unlike other smartwatches, Martian Notifier Smartwatch uses a separate battery for running the analog clock. So the analog watch will not stop ticking when the smartwatch battery finishes. The isolated battery for the analog clock can last up to 2 years.

Compatibility is not an issue with Martian Watches because it gives support to a wide-range of smartphones and tablets. It is fully functional on devices having Android 3.0 or higher, iPhone 4s or higher, iPad (3rd gen), iPad Mini, iPaid Air and so forth. It uses the Bluetooth connectivity to ensure maximum phone support.

After checking the price, you’d probably think: will this device work as advertised as it labeled a very low price tag? The answer is surprisingly YES!

According to the reviews of 1000+ users, Martian Watches Notifier does its job well with a little to hate. Some people, in fact, recommended it as the best alternative to Pebble smartwatches.

My own opinion is even more positive. After reviewing the design and features while putting the price tag on the front line, I didn’t care to hate what it is lacking. The product was advertised as a notification smart watch and it aced it totally.

It is true that it neither has activity tracking nor has offered any water resistance. But Martian Watches were bold enough to admit it and transparency radiates from their product.

So if you need a digital notifier with customizable vibration pattern, Martian Watches Notifier smartwatch will not let you complain about a thing.|||

Are you looking for a superb notification watch? Martian Notifier Smartwatch is the best in the market that even has a very low price tag.