Take Me Somewhere: The Best Instagram Hashtags for Travel

Everything gets lost in the sea of social media — which is definitely a blessing and a curse. No matter how much you refresh a popular social media feed (think Twitter’s trending hashtags or über-popular Instagram hashtags), you’ll get fresh new content coming in by the hour, minute or even second. And as long as you have internet access, you have an endless font of entertainment to scroll through. How’s that for instant gratification?

But on the other hand, your posts can get lost on these cavernous servers, and other high-quality visual content can be hard to find between the spam, memes and junk. This has forced social media users — and stellar travel photographers in particular — to create their own Instagram niches with highly specialized hashtags.

Whether you’re interested in urban scenes, exotic travel locales or shots of ethnic food, these 10 travel hashtags will help you grow your follower count organically, stockpile likes, meet like-minded social media photographers and maybe even be featured by travel blogs. And who doesn’t want that kind of belonging?

If you’re a social media photographer looking to promote your travel shots or get some more exposure, give the following specialized Instagram hashtags a try. You never know who will discover your posts! If you’d like to take things a step further by selling your photos and videos to brands while still retaining the rights, click here. As a social-media savvy startup, we’re devoted to promoting authentic photos from everyday people. We’ll be sure to set up a payment with you if one of our clients picks up your work.

Still curious? Here’s what a few of our photographers have to say.

An interesting fact about this hashtag community? It actually represents an app of the same name.

Similar to #TravelStoke, #DameTraveler is more than just a hashtag. Dame Traveler is actually an extremely popular blog dedicated to traveling women around the world. Founded by Nastasia Wong, the blog projects “strength, fearlessness and courage” — virtues any woman needs when she’s trekking across the globe.

It goes without saying that #DameTraveler is one of many great Instagram hashtags for travel photography by (or of) women. If you have these kinds of photos, you can also submit them to Scopio’s visual library. If your work is scoped out by companies, we’ll pay you!

Are your shots a little more nature, tropical or beach-oriented? Try tacking on this hashtag.

Contrary to what you’d think, this tag isn’t just photos of small towns. Use #MyTinyAtlas for a chance to be featured by Tiny Atlas Quarterly‘s Instagram account, which boasts over 121,000 followers.

If being featured by brands, companies, news outlets and companies is more your thing, be sure to submit your great work to Scopio’s image library. We’ll pay you per use of your photos or videos.

With over 10 million posts, this slogan-turned-hashtag is sure to get you a diverse, highly talented audience.

Each week, the VacationWolf Instagram account shares amazing pictures common travel destinations. Tag and upload yours for a chance to be featured — or just to get a few more likes.

Young travelers, this is the one for you. This aesthetically pleasing hashtag community is also watched by Darling Escapes, a luxury travel blog for millennials. You can also submit photo essays to them directly, or upload portfolio snippets to Scopio’s library to be scoped out by larger companies.

Like #DameTraveler, this hashtag is meant specifically for female travelers. It also represents a private collective of vacationers who value style.

How could anyone get through a list of travel hashtags without mentioning one from A Beautiful Mess? If you’re interested, the lifestyle blog also has a comprehensive hashtag guide for all of your hashtagging needs.

If you’d like to expand your audience to brands, upload a few snapshots here.

“There are 1,440 minutes in a day,” REI writes. “That’s 1,440 opportunities to step outside, to experience something new, to see the world a little differently.” And thus, REI’s 1440 Project was born. Outdoorsy types were encouraged to upload their moments to fill up an online timeline.

Use this hashtag to celebrate the wonders of the great outdoors, whether you’re camping, fishing or trekking along a trail. Just note that even though the 1440 Project is officially retired, the hashtag is still highly active and a great way to reach a larger audience. You can also give #OptOutside a try — another hashtag sponsored by REI.

Copy and paste this list and tag your travel photos with it for better exposure on Instagram:

Scopio is the industry’s premier search and licensing platform for images and videos on social media. We help companies find and use the photos and videos that matter to their audience, from capturing content to evaluating the analytics on campaigns. Want to sell photos online? Visit our super-handy submit page! Wondering how to find authentic visuals that brighten up your emails? Request a demo with the button below or email info@scop.io. Featured photo by picturesandwordsblog/Instagram.|||

Everything gets lost in the sea of social media — which is definitely a blessing and a curse. No matter how much you refresh a popular social media feed (think Twitter’s trending hashtags or über-popular Instagram hashtags), you’ll get fresh new content coming in by the hour, minute or even second. And as long as…Continue Reading…