Business, Internet and Businesses Online, Self Improvement, Reference and Education

So what does it take to make the switch?

You should know that habits are part of your unconscious mind which gives an automatic order to your brain to react, in spite of whatever situation or the moment you are in. A good example of this is checking your phone, even when you are not waiting for any call or message.

Habits, good or bad, are created by doing or practicing something every day until it becomes a wholly natural thing to do, such as driving a car, riding a bicycle or using a phone.

Such behaviors do not only become second nature after a while but can also turn into an obsession, and that is even worse to get rid of but again, not impossible to do. It requires a lot of self-control and discipline on your part. No one else, you and only you can take care of this matter.

But what causes bad habits in the first place? Well, among the many, there are two primary reasons for this.

Bad habits usually come down from two major reasons such as being stressed and bored.

Everything you do, such as checking your phone all the time to partying every weekend to maxing your credit cards to spending hours on social media, could be a response to stress and boredom.

You should know that there is always a possibility to teach yourself new tricks and healthier ways which you can then put into place, this way substituting your unhealthy habits.

But you should also realize that sometimes these odd habits may be the cause of deeply rooted problems. These issues can often be unpleasant to think about, but if you are serious about making changes and replace harmful behaviors, then you have, to be honest with yourself.

Ask yourself why you have such unfavorable habits? What are the reasons for such actions? Is it something that happened to you? Maybe some circumstances, fear, an incident, or even a belief that is now causing you to hold on to a thing that isn’t good for you?

You have to identify which causes created your bad habits in the first place because it is crucial to defeating them.

You may want to watch this TEDx talk video by Iman Aghay about bad habits causing regrets.

If you have habits right now, good or bad, they are in your life for a reason you generated. It is like staying in a relationship that is not okay for you, smoking or using drugs. In many instances, your bad habits are a simple approach to coping with situations or events that arise in your life.

Once, I stayed for nine years in a relationship in which I gave it my all but where my partner rarely did do a thing, all of this in the hope that she would change at some point in our bond. But it never did happen!

It may be that by checking your phone or social media every five minutes, it might make you feel connected somehow. But you should know that at the same time such behavior often destroys your productivity, divides your attention span, and overpowers you with unwanted stress.

Maybe, it prevents you from feeling like you are “missing out” on something, and so you do it again and again.

As you already know, your negative habits provide you with some relief in your life, and it is very challenging just to eradicate them. Instead, you have to replace your bad habits with good ones who would provide a related feeling but in a positive way.

In other words, your unhealthy habits state certain needs in your life. So, it is better to learn how to replace your bad habit with a healthier and actual behavior that attends that same need.

You cannot expect to simply get rid of a bad habit without even thinking of replacing them. If you try to do so, some of your wants won’t be met, and it would be hard to make any new habit stick to become a routine, and so, you will go back to your old ways of doing.

It is time to give you some ideas for breaking bad habits and be able to replace them by good ones in a constructive way.

Put a piece of paper and a pen near you or in your pocket if you go out. And each time your bad habit gets a hold of you, make a mark on the paper. A little before going to sleep, count up all the marks and see what your total is. And begin again the day after by trying to get fewer marks at the end of the day.

Do not judge yourself or feel guilty about doing it too many times. The goal here is to be aware of when it happens and how often it happens. Then just start to act on the ideas I give above and break your bad habits by replacing them with good ones.

It is not an overnight thing. Breaking and knowing how to replace bad habits takes time and effort, some more than others, but with perseverance and consistency, it will happen.

Know that most people who end up replacing bad habits tried and failed multiple times before they made it work, myself included. You might not have success right away, but it does not mean you cannot do it. I believe in you!

Sergei VanBellinghen, Founder & CEO of First-Class Lifestyle and sergeivanbellinghen.com, Success & Self-Improvement Consultant, Freedom entrepreneur & business partner of Stuart Ross, also counselor in East Europe-West relationships, a passionate Globetrotter and an avid audio booker|||

Learn how to replace bad habits with good ones so you can mold and create a better you which give you better opportunities in business and in life.