It’s amazing how much telecommuting can change you for the better — here are seven things I noticed after just one month of working from home.

Now that you’re not getting extra credit points for being the office jokester (believe me, I’ve been that guy. It’s awesome.), your entire mindset of productivity changes.

You start to realize the real benefit of remote work, the reason so many companies have had huge successes with it. All that counts is your work. Specifically, all that counts is the work you produce and the results it delivers. Showing up an hour early each day can help you only if it results in getting an extra hour of work done. Nobody’s going to see you working late and make a mental note that you’re a real go-getter.

In most jobs, actions speak louder than words. In remote jobs, actions don’t speak at all. Results do.

Distractions from coworkers in an office are so common and trivial that we don’t even realize how quickly they add up. And research shows that even a small distraction can derail productivity for an average of 25 minutes. These distractions are even more common in the open-plan office style that’s so in fashion right now. There’s a reason you walk through these offices and see half the workers wearing big noise-canceling headphones.

At your office job, a whole lot of routines are predetermined for you. Sounds like a drag, but here’s the thing about routines: they’re actually very helpful. They put your brain on autopilot for the boring stuff, so you can use your mental energy on the different, complicated, and fun stuff. But when you work remotely, routines aren’t built in to the job. You have more freedom, which is nice. But it’s easy to burn up energy exploring that freedom.

Everything you hear about telecommuting being lonely is true (if you don’t have your own social network). It can, at times, be painfully quiet. And the world can feel strangely opposite. Everyone else spends their day out in the world, surrounded by people. They just want to come home to some peace and quiet. Meanwhile, you’ve been at home with peace and quiet all day and want to get out into the world. So…

Those feelings of isolation can drive you to find a more social and fulfilling life. If you work for it. Here’s what you do: use that desire for human interaction to be more intentional about being social. For example, I go work from a coffee shop for a while. Many remote workers use coworking spaces. The point is, when you know this is your window of opportunity for social interaction, you’re more intentional about it. And it can be a much more fulfilling experience. It beats getting your social time in by sitting in a cubicle next to someone you might not even like.

Likewise, it can be easy to slip into talking with colleagues only about work matters. If you’re not careful, the work relationships can become cold and dull. That’s why we each have a weekly meeting with a company founder to step back and have big picture type conversations. We can vent about goals, frustrations or just chat about how things are going. It makes it feel more like working with a friend, rather than just passing information into cyberspace.

Working in an office is like strapping a boulder to your back in the morning and unbuckling it when you walk through your front door in the evening. You feel this big energy shift and work mode falls off you like a bucket of concrete. You want to nestle into your home. This doesn’t happen with remote work. The days feel more your own. It gives you more energy.

P.S. If you liked this article, you just might love our perks markeplace — please click here to learn more.|||

It's amazing how much remote work can change you for the better -- here are seven things I noticed after just one month of telecommuting.