Having duplicate items is always annoying for users. Whatever email client you’re using, be it Outlook or IBM Notes (formerly known as Lotus Notes), duplicate items can easily be included in your mailbox without you noticing. Duplicate items are always harmful for any type of mailbox, be it PST or NSF database. Here in this blog post, we’ll learn why duplicate items occur in NSF database and how we can remove them.

In an NSF database, a duplicate item can be an email message, contact or any other item. A duplicate item in NSF database occupies exactly same space what an original item does. Sometimes users take it easily, but they don’t know how much trouble it may cause to them. The common duplicate items in IBM Notes are found in its emails and contact information. Do you know why duplicate item occurs in NSF database? Have you ever tried to find it out? If you use IBM Notes client in a regular manner, it’s quite obvious that you receive hundreds/thousands of email messages daily. Some companies and organizations send email messages to millions of users on daily basis for their promotion. It may happen that you receive an email message twice or multiple times which causes duplicity for sure.

Also, you may face duplicity in contacts information. How?

Having duplicate items in an NSF database not only creates troublesome situations for users but also causes corruption. Duplicate items increase the file size of NSF database. We all know that a large file is always prone to severe issues. It can affect the performance of IBM Notes application. But the worst impact is corruption which may lead to data loss situation.

You must remove all the duplicate items from NSF database in order to avoid corruption and other severe issues. But how? You have two options for that: either you can remove duplicate items from NSF database manually, or you can use a professional solution to make that task done for you.

If your NSF database is not that large and you’re having few duplicate items in it, you can remove them manually. Since there’s no manual way to detect duplicate items, it may take enough time to search them in your NSF database. But if you’re having a large NSF database which contains thousands of duplicate items, it becomes challenging for you to remove duplicate items manually. In such situation, you should use a professional solution like NSF Duplicate Remover.

This is the only software available in the market for removing duplicate items from NSF database. It’s highly recommended by experts and professional users. It can successfully remove every single duplicate items like email message, contacts, etc. from NSF database without causing any alteration to the original mailbox content. You can select single or multiple NSF database files at the same time. The smart search option of this software helps you search duplicate items in the same folder and across the NSF database file. Via this software, you can either remove duplicate items from the original NSF files, or you can create a new NSF file with no duplicate items. It supports NSF database files created by IBM Notes 6, 7, 8, 8.5, 9 and the latest 9.0.1.|||

Are you having duplicate items in NSF database? Get NSF Duplicate Remover tool to remove duplicate items from NSF database without causing any data loss.