I recently published BIP149 and would like to take a few moments to explain the details of this proposal.

BIP149 is a completely new deployment of segwit, which I propose if the current BIP9/BIP141/143/147 segwit deployment fails to lockin/activate by November 15th.

BIP149 cannot be run on mainnet now, and there is code in the reference implementation to prevent it from running. It is incompatible with the current segwit deployment on purpose to remove unnecessary complications.

Essentially, the idea is, if the current segwit deployment fails to activate by Nov 15th, we can release new software that has BIP149. This uses BIP8 to activate segwit by July 2018. Miners will still be able to trigger activation by 95% threshold signalling as normal. In the 8 months from November to July 2018, nodes will be able to upgrade to BIP149. If segwit is not MASF activated by July 2018, there will be enough of the economy running BIP149 that nodes can begin enforcement. What will actually happen is on the first retarget after July 4th, the BIP8 state machine will switch to LOCKED_IN status for two weeks, and then on the following retarget, ACTIVATION will occur. The rationale here is in 5 months we achieved 70% saturation of witness capable nodes, so by the time segwit timesout with all the urgency and demand people feel for segwit, we can expect them to upgrade at least as fast, if not much faster. I have spoken with a number of developers who think this is a reasonable assumption.

Background, I had hoped to be able to release a BIP that can be deployed concurrently now with segwit, but, there are various technical complications in implementing it cleanly and making it easily reviewable. I had various feedback from others in previous iterations and in order to get the widest support from developers especially concerned with predictable results and thus safety, I came to the conclusion that the BIP will get the widest support by not attempting any shortcuts and by removing all complexity. I know many people want segwit now, but, I think we should just bite the bullet and do it the BIP149 way. I already made a shortcut BIP with BIP148. I will discuss the pros and cons at the end.

Back to BIP149, this is a completely new redeployment with a new service bit NODE_UAWITNESS and new compact block protocol version - doing this avoids many gotchyas which I will explain below:

Currently, segwit capable nodes advertize the NODE_WITNESS service bit and preferentially peer with other NODE_WITNESS nodes. Post activation, segwit-active nodes will then know who they should relay witness blocks to and who they should relay old style stripped blocks to. The assumption is if I am a NODE_WITNESS node and segwit has activated, then other NODE_WITNESS nodes will also be segwit activated. We cannot reuse NODE_WITNESS because when BIP149 activates, they would believe non-BIP149 NODE_WITNESS nodes were also active. Using a new service bit, and effectively starting a new deployment as if the previous deployment doesnt exist, is the most predictable and trouble free way to go about it.

Additionally, BIP149 is compatible with existing mining software by reusing the "segwit" name and deployment chainparams (it's not possible to have two deployments with the same name, one expired and one pending/active, due to how versionbits is implemented). In short, if the current segwit deployment fails to activate, we can reuse parts to maintain compatibility, while changing the bare minimum to remove any conflicts with old nodes. It's clean, predictable and easy to review.

Remember BIP148 is exceptional, it's NOT what a usual UASF BIP should look like. A normal UASF if effectively activation on a predetermined date in the future (a flag day). BIP8 combines BIP9 miner signalling with a flagday if MASF does not occur.

How is BIP149 different to BIP148? So BIP148 is a UASF which can be used in two ways. (a) The economy can run BIP148 and basically force miners to signal for segwit, thus activating the current segwit deployment. Or, (b) a majority of miners, 60% or so, could run it and censor other miners who do not signal segwit, thus causing the current segwit to deploy. In method (a) a chain split will occur if any miners do not upgrade, and given the fact there are always absentee miners and pool operators, this is quite likely. It's the economy vs hash power saying "if you dont signal, your blocks will not be worth anything because we will reject them". In the case of (b) you have a majority of hashpower, who could use their majority to orphan any non signalling miners. This isn't great but it's less disruptive than (a) because there is a majority hashpower definitely opted in.

BIP149 on the other had does not guarantee a chain split since that could only happen if a miner deliberately takes action to manually create a segwit invalid block, which would be rejected by the economy. The incentives are different also, with BIP148 a chainsplit comes for free, regardless of if it lasts long or not. In BIP149, a miner would have to specifically take action to split and waste their money, which they could do at any time anyway. BIP149 is uncontroversial in the sense it is just a redeployment with guaranteed activation at the end, for a soft fork we are fairly sure people want and will upgrade to. The evidence is everywhere. UASFs deployed over a long time and a decent flagday are perfectly safe - all soft forks are enforced by nodes, even if activation is triggered by hashpower.

Anyway, we've got 8 months from now to review and think about BIP149 - it cannot be deployed until November. If you would like to show support for BIP149, feel free to add the following to your

Note you can have multiple uacomments like:

You can find the bitcoin.conf file here

You can also just add this to a shortcut - create a shortcut (or edit the existing one you use) and add this to the end:

e.g. (just add the property to the end like this):

if you are using Windows.

You can also just add uacomments as multiple command line/shortcut arguments like

Then you can check here to see how your node is signalling at https://bitnodes.21.co/ will show something like: xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx:8333 /Satoshi:0.14.1(UASF-SegWit-BIP149)/

If your node has synced and doesn't show using the link above make sure to enable forwarding of port 8333 so you accept incoming connections (if you want to that is) - in your client: go into settings / network and tick enable incoming connections and use upnp. You might have to add it to your firewall if this doesn't work. [taken from this user comment].|||

I recently published [BIP149](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0149.mediawiki) and would like to take a few moments to explain the...