Mobile app industry has grown with lightning speed. There are millions of mobile apps that are launched everyday and sometimes some apps becomes famous worldwide in a matter of few days. All it takes is an out of the box idea. Let us see a case study of WhatsApp, a mobile application that has changed how people chat, kicking out the traditional SMS medium. The idea was to allow people to chat, share photographs, videos, and status updates, all at one place. The app was faster and cheaper than traditional SMSs. This idea became popular worldwide at a very fast pace and today has billions of users. Hence, a brilliant idea is accepted by world and there is nothing that can stop you from blooming your business.

All it takes is a brilliant idea for developing a mobile app that can be popular worldwide in no time. But no this is not completely true, as it takes lot of development efforts and planning too. Having an idea of a mobile app is just one step taken. You need to create a base for that idea as well and plan how to proceed with it. There are some key factors you need to consider before getting the app developed. This article will focus on those key points and help you get started on right track.

It is possible that you have multiple app ideas and you are not too sure which app to start with. Apps can belong to different domains like entertainment, shopping, medical, etc. So decide for which domain you want to work for first or which service is more feasible or actionable. Based on that you can priorities your ideas and launch apps one by one. For seeing if app is getting you right business, at least give it 6 to 8 months after launching. If no good results, you can switch to your next idea.

Once you are clear with an idea of the mobile app, it is time to hire an app development expert or get use online tools to create a prototype. You need to clearly present what you want to get developed. It is a good idea to first release a prototype of the mobile app and see user response. If your idea is welcomed by users, you can go ahead with investing in the whole application development. This is a smart way to know if customers are liking the app and forecast future demand.

There is always option to hire developers on premise, but if you are running on strict budgets, it is better to invest money by hiring an expert app development company. Such companies have large pool of resources and can give you cost effective services. Once you get your app developed and it becomes popular, you can then invest in in-house team for further development and maintenance.

If you are planning to develop an app, then to launch it with a price or for free is a next big question. There are many apps launched with a strategy giving base features as free and upgrade with a fee. So it is recommended that based on your business and funds you decide on price strategy.

Mobile app industry has boomed with smartphones becoming a must have for people across the world. If we see market statistics, Android OS based smartphones have 80% of the market share of smart phone selling all across the world. Hence having an android app developed is a must. But you cannot avoid the iPhone user base. Therefore, it is a good idea to develop a mobile app that is compatible with both Android and iPhone OS platforms. Such apps are called cross platform apps, as both Android and iPhone OS have their own software development kits (SDK) and coding languages.

Developing and launching the app is not enough. It can be lost in the crowd of millions of other apps. It is important to make it visible to your target audience. And this is possible with marketing across social media and offline media. Another way is app store optimization, which can also boost your app and improve your user base. Such marketing activities incur cost. Therefore, when you plan to invest in a mobile app idea, marketing must be a main part of your budget planning.

Here, we discussed some of the key point that needs your focus on when you are planning to develop your dream app. Being optimistic is good for business and using your money wisely is necessary for your business. After all a penny saved is a penny earned.|||

With proper planning and execution you can make your mobile app development ideas a real time success.