People often ask me if I can point them to an open-source Elm Single Page Application so they can peruse its code.

Ilias van Peer linked me to the Realworld project, which seemed perfect for this. They provide a back-end API, static markup, styles, and a spec, and you build a SPA front-end for it using your technology of choice.

Here's the result. I had a ton of fun building it!

Fair warning: This is not a gentle introduction to Elm. I built this to be something I'd like to maintain, and did not hold back. This is how I'd build this application with the full power of Elm at my fingertips.

If you're looking for a less drink-from-the-firehose introduction to Elm, I can recommend a book, a video tutorial, and of course the Official Guide.

I went with a routing design that optimizes for user experience. I considered three use cases, illustrated in this gif:

On fast connections, I want users to transition from one page to another seamlessly, without seeing a flash of a partially-loaded page in between.

To accomplish this, I had each page expose . When the router receives a request to transition to a new page, it doesn't transition immediately; instead, it first calls on this task to fetch the data the new page needs.

If the task fails, the resulting tells the router what error message to show the user. If the task succeeds, the resulting serves as the initial model necessary to render 100% of the new page right away.

No flash of partially-loaded page necessary!

On slow connections, I want users to see a loading spinner, to reassure them that there's something happening even though it's taking a bit.

To do this, I'm rendering a loading spinner in the header as soon as the user attempts to transition to a new page. It stays there while the is in-flight, and then as soon as it resolves (either to the new page or to an error page), the spinner goes away.

For a bit of polish, I prevented the spinner from flashing into view on fast connections by adding a CSS to the spinner's animation. This meant I could add it to the DOM as soon as the user clicked the link to transition (and remove it again once the destination page rendered), but the spinner would not become visible to the user unless a few hundred milliseconds of delay had elapsed in between.

I'd like at least some things to work while the user is offline.

I didn't go as far as to use Service Worker (or for that matter App Cache, for those of us who went down that bumpy road), but I did want users to be able to visit pages like New Post which could be loaded without fetching data from the network.

For them, returned a instead of a . That was all it took.

We have over 100,000 lines of Elm code in production at NoRedInk, and we've learned a lot along the way! (We don't have a SPA, so our routing logic lives on the server, but the rest is the same.) Naturally every application is different, but I've been really happy with how well our code base has scaled, so I drew on our organizational scheme when building this app.

Keep in mind that although using to create guarantees by restricting what modules expose is an important technique (which I used often here), the actual file structure is a lot less important. Remember, if you change your mind and want to rename some files or shift directories around, Elm's compiler will have your back. It'll be okay!

These modules hold the logic for the individual pages in the app.

Pages that require data from the server expose an function, which returns a responsible for loading that data. This lets the routing system wait for a page's data to finish loading before switching to it.

Some, like , are very simple. Others, like , are very complex. Each exposes an appropriate API for its particular requirements.

The module exposes a function which wraps each page in a header and footer.

These modules describe common data structures, and expose ways to translate them

 into other data structures. describes a , as well as the

 encoders and decoders that serialize and deserialize a to and from JSON.

Identifiers such as , , and - which are used to

 uniquely identify comments, users, and articles, respectively - are implemented

 as union types. If we used e.g. , we could mistakenly pass a to an API call expecting a , and it would still compile. We can rule bugs like that out by implementing identifiers as union types.

These modules expose functions to make HTTP requests to the app server. They expose values so that callers can combine them together, for example on pages which need to hit multiple endpoints to load all their data.

I don't use raw API endpoint URL strings anywhere outside these modules. Only modules should know about actual endpoint URLs.

This exposes functions to translate URLs in the browser's Location bar to

 logical "pages" in the application, as well as functions to effect Location

 bar changes.

Similarly to how modules never expose raw API URL strings, this

 module never exposes raw Location bar URL strings either. Instead it exposes

 a union type called which callers use to specify which page they want.

Centralizing all the ports in one makes it easier to keep track

 of them. Most large applications end up with more than just two ports, but

 in this application I only wanted two. See for the 10 lines of JavaScript code they connect to.

At NoRedInk our policy for both ports and flags is to use to type any values coming in from JavaScript, and decode them in Elm. This way we have full control over how to deal with any surprises in the data. I followed that policy here.

This kicks everything off, and calls and on the various

 modules to switch between them.

In Elm 0.19, most of this file should become unnecessary thanks to some new asset management language features.

These are miscellaneous helpers that are used in several other modules.

It might be more honest to call this . 😅

I hope this has been useful to you!

And now, back to writing another chapter of Elm in Action. 😉|||

How to organize an Elm single page application.