Diabetes is a condition that affects the body whereby a person isn’t able to produce enough insulin to meet their body’s needs or maybe their cells don’t respond properly to insulin. Insulin which is a hormone is important in the body because when one eats food, the food provides the body with glucose, which is used by the cells as a source of energy. If the body doesn’t get enough insulin to move glucose from the body into the cells, the said glucose will stay in the blood. High levels of glucose in the blood are toxic and that means that the cells that don’t get glucose are lacking the energy they need.

The cause of diabetes is unknown. Genetics, obesity and lack of exercise may play a role in developing diabetes. There are two main types of diabetes, Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes.

Type 1 diabetes is also sometimes called juvenile diabetes, since it often presents itself in children and teens. Type 1 diabetes is when your pancreas does not produce insulin. Everyone with Type 1 diabetes requires insulin injections.

Type 2 diabetes occurs when the body does not produce insulin or the cells are unable to use insulin properly, this is called insulin resistance. Type 2 diabetes is usually diagnosed later in life. 95% of all people suffer from type 2 diabetes. People with type 2 diabetes usually have a family history of the condition.

Are there other forms of diabetes?

Gestational diabetes occurs during pregnancy. It usually goes away after pregnancy, but once you have had gestational diabetes, your chances are higher that it will happen in future pregnancies. Some women later on get type 2 diabetes and need to continue diabetes treatment after pregnancy.

How does diabetes affect the body?

After a long of time, high levels of sugar levels in the blood (also known as hyperglycemia) can lead to kidney disease, heart disease and blindness. Excess sugar in the blood stream can damage the tiny blood vessels in the eyes and kidneys and can either harden or narrow the arteries.

Below are some of the most common symptoms.

a.Extreme thirst

 b.Frequent urination especially at night

 c.Blurred vision

 d.Extreme vision

 e.Increased tiredness

 f.Unusual weight loss

 g.Genital itching and thrush

 i.Wounds taking longer to heal

This often happens because some of the glucose stays in the blood and is not being used to make fuel for energy in the body. Meanwhile the body is trying to get rid of the excess glucose from the body by form of urine.

Sometimes there may be other factors that can lead to the one developing Type 2 Diabetes. This are: –

 Being over 40 years old

 Giving birth to a large baby

 High blood pressure

 High cholesterol

 Having had diabetes while pregnant (gestational diabetes)

 Obesity

 Use of certain A RV’s to manage HIV infection

 Mental health disorders

 Not sleeping well (Insomnia)

 A sedentary lifestyle

How to find out if you have diabetes.

Usually the first time a person finds out they have diabetes is during a checkup by the doctor. Diabetes sometimes affects the circulation in the feet and in the tiny vessels in the eyes. If left untreated diabetes can lead to serious health problems like going into a coma (diabetic ketoacidosis), it may also affect major organs including the heart, blood vessels, nerves, eyes and kidneys. If one suspects that they have diabetes the first thing to do is see the doctor immediately so that the doctor may test you. During the visit to the doctor, he may suggest performing a blood glucose test. This happens after not eating for a minimum eight hours or even overnight. Sometimes after the test, the doctor may find that your blood sugar level is be high, but not high enough that you may be considered diabetic. In such a case, the doctor will make recommendations to bring down the sugar levels to delay the onset of Type 2 diabetes.

Diabetes is a chronic condition and may last for one’s entire life. Although Type 1 Diabetes cannot be prevented, studies have shown that Type 2 Diabetes can be prevented by adopting lifestyle changes. The goal of the doctor, is for you the patient is to keep the blood glucose levels as close to a normal range as possible. This prevents symptoms of diabetes and the long-term complications of the condition to arise.

Part of the treatment plan for managing diabetes is for the patient to learn more about the management of the condition and also its prevention. At this point the patient is also asked to involve a close family member/spouse condition and to who can assist you to manage the condition as this is going to be a lifelong condition and most of the changes will have to do with change of diet and some light exercise if you can manage that. Please note that should you decide to embark on an exercise program, be sure to consult your doctor. Medication is very effective in the treatment of diabetes, reducing symptoms and long-term effects of the condition. Sometimes one may experience low blood glucose levels also called hypoglycemia when using certain medications,

People with diabetes are often advised to carry with them a sugary drink or sweets to help with sudden low blood glucose levels. As always the best way to avoid hypoglycemia is to monitor your blood glucose level, the best way to do this is purchase a blood glucose monitor and have it at easy reach in either your office or home, the amount of times you test your blood glucose level is determined by the type and treatment of diabetes you have.

Keep a record of your readings as this allows the doctor to see your progress and should there be any anomalies, the doctor will be able to catch and manage your condition in time.

As most people start to learn more about their condition and how to manage it, it goes without saying that they will come across other forms of treatment or management. One of the most mentioned forms of management is herbal and most people have mentioned using the following to maintain a low blood glucose level, this include: –

d.Eating less starch in every meal.

e.Doing away with white bread and replacing it with whole meal bread.

Although a lot of this is often talked about, it isn’t proven even though a number of people ascertain that the above have helped them keep diabetes away.|||

Diabetes is a condition that affects the body whereby a person isn’t able to produce enough insulin to meet to meet their body's needs.Its all about glucose