When we started DICE we set out to fix things rather than complain. And by focusing on fans we can figure out solutions that are great for everyone.

Like, did you know that 17% of people who have bought tickets don’t turn up to gigs?

That’s a problem. Or a huge opportunity to make people happy because life happens, circumstances change and fans need flexibility.

Fans no longer have to scour secondary ticket websites, they just need to add themselves to the DICE Waiting List and hope the (ever increasing) 17% return their tickets.

We’ve worked closely with the industry to introduce refunds, and initially we will offer full refunds for sold out events on DICE. But the good news is that because each event on DICE is hand picked, over 80% of events sell out and that number is increasing all the time. We’re also using machine learning to figure out the most efficient way to maximise attendances for events.

We’ll be using this data to figure out how to roll out refunds on ALL events this year. Our job is to make it easier for fans to get tickets to the best events and help promoters pack out venues.

We think it’s a step closer. We’re focused on ending scalpers/touts by building technology that is smarter and easier to use for fans. We want rights holders to control their inventory properly rather than give it away to secondary platforms.

While attention is currently on ticketing bots, a lot of tickets that appear on secondary/reselling platforms are originally put there by genuine fans who have no other means to return a ticket.

These are quickly exploited by speculators and brokers who hoover up these tickets and immediately resell them — often for big profits and causing huge frustrations for artists.

We spent the last two years learning from our Waiting List data. Firstly, we wanted to see if it worked (massively, we’ve had millions of requests) and how we could automate the entire process (until now fans have to return tickets via our customer support team).

Technically this has been challenging. How do you instantly return a ticket and ensure someone else purchases it automatically? How is this affected by time, number of tickets and external factors such as weather etc? How do you make sure a scalper hasn’t bought the ticket (we have data routines running to identify them and, by being mobile, can instantly invalidate tickets).

Our Terms and Conditions are clear — you can’t sell a DICE ticket for more than you paid for it. If you think that’s unfair then you’re welcome to buy your tickets somewhere else.

But if you’re a genuine fan then refunds also means that there’s a much bigger chance for you to buy tickets to sold out shows closer to the date.

Everyone wins — fans get the tickets at fair prices, venues are packed and artists don’t have to worry about people flogging their tickets for insane prices.

This is just the start of a flood of new features on DICE.|||

When we started DICE we set out to fix things rather than complain. And by focusing on fans we can figure out solutions that are great for everyone. That’s a problem. Or a huge opportunity to make…