There is a rising trend in the last years to view sales and marketing activities more closely related to each other. Closer than ever before. Usually, these two sectors of a business have worked in completely different tasks, resulting in constant conflicts between each other. Sales teams often complained about low-quality leads provided by marketing teams and marketing teams complained about sales teams blowing off important deal opportunities provided by them. According to a study by Hubspot, only 5% of sales people considered the leads coming from marketing activities to be high-quality, while only 22% considered marketing leads to be the most relevant. Nonetheless, this is starting to change for both small start-ups and larger businesses too.

Since the arrival of digital technologies and the online branch of businesses, sales and marketing teams have been working closely together and collaborating in the lead generation process. This gave birth to the term smarketing, a new trend in businesses that are characterized by a clear alignment between both sectors. One of the top priorities of marketing teams is to generate sales-ready leads. According to BrightTalk at least half of the marketing budget is usually invested in this specific goal. Thus, it is of significant importance for marketing and sales teams to collaborate step by step in the lead generation process. Marketo reveals in a study that companies where marketing and sales are aligned have a 67% higher chance of closing deals successfully. Diverse digital technologies, as well as online channels such as social media and techniques such as content marketing, have popularized inbound marketing campaigns that result in automated lead generation. Such leads are normally followed carefully by both the marketing and sales team along the whole sales funnels and addressed by the respective team at the respective moment. In this way, deals can be closed more effectively. But what other advantages does smarketing have? Why is it turning so popular and how can it be implemented?

Beamium is easily one of the strongest tools to support your smarketing integration. Why? Well this platform enables you to share your marketing presentations or sales pitches online with just one click. Once you have shared your presentation as a link on social media or emails, or if you prefer, embedded on your blog or landing page, Beamium allows you to convert your viewers into leads. How? You can specify specific parameters on the tool to request the viewers for a verified email address. Only the viewers that are really interested on your pitch will go ahead with this step, resulting in high-quality leads. Moreover, the tool also provides diverse smart statistics on the viewer’s behavior along the presentation, which help your teams better qualify the leads. In this way, a marketing team can use Beamium to share diverse marketing presentations on preferred channels and provide the sales representatives with genuinely high-quality leads, along with the diverse collected statistics. As simple as that, Beamium creates brand awareness, attracts traffic, captures leads and ensures they are sales-ready. All in one simplified, collaborative process among both marketing and sales teams. Do not let those important leads get away and take a jump into the future of sales and marketing integration.|||

The closing gap between sales and marketing in the lead generation process