Sales of products on Walmart.com adds to the significant value in the revenue column of the balance sheets of online sellers offering their products at Walmart.com.

 If you’re still not sold on Walmart, Register now.

And more and more sellers are taking it to Walmart to offer their products, however, there are certain rules or guidelines regarding the framing and structuring of the content being laid by Walmart. Non-compliance with these rules don’t let your products get published at Walmart.com

It is, therefore, mandatory as well as advisable to the sellers to follow such guidelines in the letter and spirit. And the corresponding guidelines are stated below:

Images contribute heavily to the customers’ making the decision in favor and against of the final purchase being made thus, Walmart.com takes great care of these guidelines:

Image URLs must end in an image file type, Links that end in a valid image file type load as an image, not as an HTML page.

Walmart.com prohibits sales of certain product types and if your products are one of those then it also can be a reason for your products not being published at Walmart.com.

Here are some of the categories prohibited to be sold at Walmart.com:

These type of products are prohibited on Walmart Marketplace.

Walmart accepts the products only in those condition in which the product fulfills all the important and predefined rules of Walmart. The product identifier is one of the most mandatory fields for the product identification.

The following can be the reasons for your products not getting published at Walmart.com unpublish:-

The product gets unpublish in the case of uneven pricing of items at the different platform other than WALMART.COM as well.

If the product price is much higher than the market price, or much lower than the market price, in that case product gets unpublish.

Buy Box concept is to provide the best price to the products and for the good experience of the customer on Walmart. It manages the consistency of pricing among sellers.

If the vendor sells their product at the lowest cost (feasible price) in comparison to others, so the particular vendor wins the buy box.

The buy box winners are not fixed for all time, they are subject to change anytime as soon as a better offer props up and is in Walmart’s marketplace competition line.

The product is denied for PUBLISH in case if the vendor does not perform the test order scenario.

Originally published at Cedcommerce.com on May 7, 2017.|||

Sales of products on Walmart.com adds to the significant value in the revenue column of the balance sheets of online sellers offering their products at Walmart.com.
 If you’re still not sold on…