The PlainFlow Digested Week is a crowdsource email newsletter that goes to all the PlainFlow subscribers.

You can contribute to this project by submitting useful links in this public Github repo.

Every Monday morning 9 am PST we will review and approve all your pull requests aiming to send the email to your inbox by 10 am PST.

We will mention all the featured authors on twitter with the @plainflow account before sending the email out.

In order to keep the bar as high as possible, we will add your posts only if they meet these 4 principles:

The great Alfred Hitchcock once said: to make a great film you need three things - the script, the script and the script.

The script is to movies as the content is to newsletters.

We're asking you to submit only what you think is so genuinely interesting that's worth other people's time. Always avoid catchy titles or more-searched-terms kind of articles.

We're starting this open project because we love great content and because we want to make that available to you, not because we want you to read specific blogs or authors.

It's important for us that you submit articles in a fair way without obvious bias or added commentary.

We won't sell anything in this newsletter. It's not our goal and should not be your goal either. We need your full transparency.

In a world that is constantly changing being up to date is quite relevant.

We're not Google and we're not as strict as the PageRank algorithm, but fresh content is something we value.

We divided the Email template into 5 different main areas:

In the headline, we'll tell you a brief summary of the content below. How people contributed to the Email and how many PRs we've got. We'll also tell you what's email number and a quick link to get access to another newsletter we've published.

This whole section is about Email Marketing. If you work in this industry you'll probably already read a few great blogs out there:

What can you submit here?

Marketing Automation is one of the topics that we love most. Simple smart ways of building complex things.

What can you submit here?

No matter if work in Product, Marketing, or in Sales, nowadays you need to understand how technologies work together and how you can get this most out of those.

We want this whole section dedicated to Marketing Technology.

What can you submit here?

If you've got something interesting that you want to show here but it's not suitable for all the categories above, this is your go-to section.

As long as you respect the Content & Style Guidelines written above, you can post here (almost) your want.

We will be reviewing and approving the pull requests each day from Tuesday till Monday morning.

Every Monday morning 8:30 am PST we will make sure we had reviewed and approved all your pull requests. We'll send the email to your inbox by 10 am PST.

This is how a traditional Monday morning will look like for us.

You can contribute to the PlainFLow Digested Week by submitting a pull request.

If you're new to GitHub, don't panic. You don't necessarily need to open your terminal to submit a pull request.

This is the structure we suggest you submit links.

So this is how a final pull request will look like.

You can subscribe to the PlainFlow Digested Week here: http://www.plainflow.com/|||

plainflow-digested-week - The PlainFlow Digested Week is a crowdsource email newsletter that goes to all the PlainFlow subscribers.