Your ecommerce business is booming. You’re driving a lot of traffic and a significant percentage of that traffic is converting. There’s only one problem – you’re not driving enough conversions through mobile. And as a retailer that wants to reach the top, this is a big issue for you. You want to make some changes so you can improve ecommerce conversions on mobile. And this post is going to help you with that.

Before you get started, it’s important to remember that you’re not the only retailer struggling with mobile conversions. According to Salesforce (previously Demandware), smartphones account for 45% of ecommerce traffic worldwide. They also predict that the numbers will reach 60% by the end of 2017. Additionally, smartphones saw 70% more cart creations than other devices.

However, despite being a major source of traffic and high cart creation rate, smartphones aren’t yielding enough conversions for ecommerce retailers. An Adobe study found that only 16% of shopping carts turn into conversions on mobile. At the same time, 26% of shopping carts turn into an order on desktops.

The study also found that 30% of shoppers switch to desktop because navigation is easier. 26% did so to view images on a bigger screen and 16% switched to desktops to enter their payment information. So this means that retailers will have to address all these factors to close the conversion gap and improve ecommerce conversions on mobile.

Now that you understand the basic factors that affect mobile ecommerce conversions, it’s time to find out what you can do to address those issues. Here are three of the best ways to improve ecommerce conversions among mobile users besides the obvious requirement of creating a mobile-friendly site:

We’ve all experienced it before – websites that take too long to load. And slow load speed is especially frustrating when you’re using mobile. If you’re browsing something on mobile, it’s likely that you’re doing it for convenience. Maybe you’re in a hurry or maybe you just want to quickly look up some information. But if the page takes several seconds to load, it defeats the entire purpose of using mobile.

According to Google Double Click, 53% of mobile visits result in site abandonment if it takes more than three seconds for the page to load. And unfortunately, 77% of mobile sites take 10 seconds or longer to load on 3G networks.

So if you’re among the majority and your page takes too long to load, you’re going to experience high bounce rates. And if people aren’t staying long enough to see what you have, it’s likely that you won’t be seeing a lot of conversions.

This means that improving load speed is crucial to improve ecommerce conversions on mobile. But what can you do to make sure your mobile website loads quickly and properly? Here are a few basic tips to help you out:

These three basic tips should be able to help reduce page load time. But for a more comprehensive guide, you can try analyzing your site using PageSpeed Insights. The tool will analyze the load time of your mobile and desktop site. And it will also provide you with suggestions on what you can fix to improve your page speed.

A case study conducted by Quanta found that reducing page load time for lingerie retailer ETAM significantly increased conversions. After they reduced the load time from 1.2 seconds to 500 milliseconds, their time spent per visit increased by 21% and page views per session increased by 28%. There was also a 20% increase in their conversion rate.

The trend is consistent with mobile websites too. According to a SOASTA case study, mobile sites with a load speed that’s just one second faster also experienced 27% higher conversion rates.

A good user experience could improve ecommerce conversions on mobile. Enhancing mobile user experience involves making sure that users can effortlessly find items and complete their purchases on your mobile site.

In other words, you need to reduce the amount of work they have to do when using your mobile site. While a fast-loading page also contributes to good user experience, this section will cover other aspects of your site that will enhance user experience.

Previously, we talked about the Adobe study, which found that many mobile shoppers switch to desktops to complete their purchases. Some of them do so because navigation is easier or because they want to view the images in a larger screen.

A report by Facebook IQ also found that 56% of shoppers find it easier to use desktops for viewing all the available products. 55% shop on desktops because big-screen devices are easier to use for them. And 27% said that smartphones and tablets have limitations when it comes to comparing products and retailers.

This suggests that mobile sites don’t provide shoppers with an experience that makes them want to complete their purchases. Maybe navigation is too difficult and they can’t find what they’re looking for. Or maybe the images are poorly placed and they have to pinch zoom to view them properly, for instance.

So you’ll need to enhance all these aspects if you want to improve ecommerce conversions on mobile. Here’s what you can do to improve user experience on your mobile site:

Make it easy for mobile users to easily find what they’re looking for by simplifying your navigation. Neatly arrange the various elements on your page so users can browse through the page in an orderly manner.

For example, you might want to prominently display the product image in a product page followed by the checkout button. And give them the option to read the product description as they scroll further down.

Take this Zara product page, for example. The most prominent element is the product image. Shoppers can see the product name at the top. The pricing and CTA button are also clearly visible.

If they scroll down, they can see more information about the product. And they can also view other angles of the product. As you can see in the screenshot below, the pricing and the CTA button are still visible even as the user scrolls down.

Here, you’re prioritizing the two most important elements on the page – product image and CTA button. But if shoppers want to find more info on the product, they can easily do so by scrolling down.

You should also make sure that the search bar and the shopping cart are easy to find. And your navigation bar or button should be easy to access but neatly arranged at the top of the page or tucked away at the corner.

You can see an example of this in the Zara homepage. The most prominent element is a featured photo of their latest collection. Shoppers can see a search bar right at the top. Towards their left, there’s a button to access the navigation bar and there’s a shopping cart icon to their right. There’s no clutter and you can see all the important elements on the page.

Mobile screens are smaller so one of the obvious ways to enhance mobile user experience is to ensure people can read your copy properly. You should avoid using fonts that are too small for users to read without zooming in. And you should also avoid filling the entire screen with huge letters.Ideally, try to have about 30-40 characters in each line to ensure better readability. You should also make sure that the font color clearly contrasts with the background color.

Another way to improve readability is by aligning your texts properly. Short bits of texts should be centrally aligned and larger text blocks should be left aligned.

The typography on Barneys New York mobile site is easy to read. They don’t use more than three different types of fonts. And even the smallest font size is easy to read here. They’ve also adjusted the font color according to the background color for easy reading.

Based on the previously-cited Adobe study, you know that some shoppers switch to desktops to enter their payment information. And according to the Facebook IQ report cited earlier, 26% of shoppers prefer desktops because it’s not user-friendly to enter personal data on mobile. This means that to improve ecommerce conversions on mobile, it’s crucial that you optimize the checkout process.

You need to make it simpler for shoppers to enter their personal and payment info to complete their purchase on mobile. In order to do this, you can use the following tips:

A long checkout page can be inconvenient to navigate. When you type on your mobile, you need an on-screen keyword, which takes up a large part of the viewable screen area. Combined with a long checkout page, this may intimidate some shoppers.

Try breaking up your checkout page into multiple pages in which the form fields only take up half the screen. This way, shoppers will just have to click on the “Next” button and easily move on to the various stages of the checkout process. Ideally, you should include a progress indicator so shoppers know exactly where they are and how much longer it’ll take to complete their purchase.

Check out how Lululemon is using this tactic. Towards the top, shoppers can see how many stages they need to go through to complete their purchase.

If you’re trying to get users to convert, you need to make it as simple as possible for them to complete their purchase. The idea is to ensure that they’re through with the purchase process before they get a chance to change their mind or get frustrated. So if this is the case, it’s crucial to reduce the amount of information they have to enter to finish the purchase.

Give them the option to checkout as guest or register using their social media account. And try to remove form fields that aren’t completely necessary. For example, instead of having separate fields for first and last name, give shoppers the option to enter their full name in one field like Amazon is doing.

Another step you need to take to improve ecommerce conversions on mobile is button optimization. Increase the size of your CTA button and place it in an area where users can easily reach it with their thumb. And make sure the color of the button also contrasts with the background color so shoppers can easily find it. The Amazon checkout button is an excellent example.

These are some of the most effective ways in which you can improve ecommerce conversions among mobile users. The main focus is on making it as convenient as possible to go through with their purchase. You need to give them an experience that will compel them to complete their purchase on mobile instead of having to switch their devices.

Got any questions? Let me know in the comments below. Or if you need more help optimizing your website for conversions, feel free to get in touch with me.|||

Struggling to convert your mobile visitors? Learn how to enhance user experience and improve ecommerce conversions on mobile.