We’re excited to announce that our powerful marketing automation features are now free for all MailChimp users! No matter what type of plan you’re on—Forever Free, Monthly, Pro, or Pay As You Go—you can now send personalized automations at no extra cost.

Automation helps you communicate with your customers exactly how you would, but eliminates the need to create and send every message manually. Think of it as an extra set of hands that help you operate—and grow—your business each day.

And if you’re new to marketing automation, our intent-based campaign creation process will help you get started by guiding you to the right automation for your goals. We’ll show you the different campaigns that fit your objectives, so you can be more effective with your marketing and still have time to spend on other things that add value to your business.

At MailChimp, our mission has always been to help small businesses grow by democratizing powerful marketing tools that are often reserved for large enterprises.

Automation empowers our customers to create sophisticated campaigns that help them compete with bigger companies, but we know that not everyone has a large list or the budget to upgrade to a paid account when they first get started. Small businesses look to MailChimp to help them build their brand, and we want to give everyone—no matter their account type or list size—the opportunity to use our marketing automation tools to do just that.

Whether you operate an online store, head a nonprofit, or run a creative side project, automation makes it easy to send the right message to the right people at exactly the right time, giving you a competitive edge without burning a hole in your budget.

Our collection of preset automations gives you the power to choose the right workflow for your business, customize its settings, and start sending in just a few clicks. Greet your new subscribers with a welcome message, educate readers about a specific topic, follow up after a purchase, increase brand awareness, and more.

The best part? You’ll know you can always be there for your customers (even when you’re not).

Developing a marketing journey for your audience can be a bit overwhelming. No matter your line of work, you have to identify the intent of your messaging, decide how you want to reach your customers, and then make sure you include the right content each step of the way.

With this in mind, we’ve redesigned our campaign creation process, making it easier than ever to create a personalized experience for your customers or subscribers.

When you create a campaign, you’ll notice that we’ve streamlined all of your options. If you already know exactly what type of campaign you need, you can jump right into creating an email or ad. But if you’re not sure how to get started, we’ll guide you through the process by showing you the most useful and profitable ones for your marketing goal.

Don’t have an email list yet? Start with the Build your brand section.

Do you have an established customer base you want to grow? Decide what type of campaign under the Sell more stuff or Boost loyalty sections works for you. Here are just a few of the things you can do:

Whether you sell stuff online or want to send updates to your subscribers, we have campaigns and automations to fit your customer journey. And if you want something specific, try typing what you’re looking for in the search bar up top.

Marketing automation is available to everyone today, May 2, from the Automation tab in your account. We’re beginning the rollout of our new customer journey path today, and it will be available to all users by next week.

Dive into our guide to getting started with marketing automation to learn more about connecting with your new contacts, generating more revenue, boosting customer loyalty, re-engaging inactive subscribers, and more.|||

Drum roll, please&#8230; We’re excited to announce that our powerful marketing automation features are now free for all MailChimp users!&hellip;