In 2002, I wanted to get two Boeing 767–300ERs (which later became B777–200s) and fly between the States and Europe (livery pictured below). September 11, 2001, turned things upside down and put these plans on hold indefinitely. This model was for two long-range aircraft going between four cities internationally. Starting a US domestic airline would change the model somewhat, the fleet requirements would be for smaller airplanes, but the corp structure/financials would be the same.

This is the first time I have ever published or told this story outside of my team. You ready? Here we go!

Olympic Airways was no longer going to fly their US/Canada-Greece routes, and I thought it would leave a vacuum in the market (which it did), more specifically the following routes: ORD-ATH-ORD, IAD-ATH-IAD, JFK-ATH-JFK (between Athens and Chicago, Washington DC and New York JFK). In 1999, it was just an idea, which was soon to change…

In the spring of 2000, while taxing to the gate at LAX, I saw the blue livery of the A340 Air Tahiti Nui from my window seat. I did some research on the airline, and found out, in 1998, Air Tahiti Nui, or “TN”, started long-haul services flying from Papeete (capital of French Polynesia) to Los Angeles and Tokyo with two A340s.

Their business model was similar to what I wanted to do over the Atlantic, the only difference being TN flew over the Pacific. Mr. Nelson Levy, the founder of Air Tahiti Nui, was an incredible, charismatic, gentleman in his 40s. You would never notice his 5′7″ height because his personality was larger than life. He was able to get funding from the French Polynesian government for his airline and ended up taking a large chunk of the shares. He still kept minority share and the CEO title.

E-mail exchanges between the two of us led to telephone conversations. Mr. Levy, pictured with me in 2000 (above) at TN’s headquarters, with the Air Tahiti Nui livery in the background and me holding the Aellas livery blueprint.

Mr. Levy gave me the gift of full access to his entire organization in Papeete. He provided me with an empty cubicle at TN’s headquarters, at no charge, and allowed me to meet with the various divisions, sort of an incubation set-up. It was truly incredible. In the span of about eight months, I was able to go back and forth to Papeete (I only had to pay the taxes for the business class seat) and put together my business plan, and most importantly, work on the numbers.

The market analysis showed routes to/from Athens to/from various cities in the United States and Canada to be hugely underserved for business travelers, tourists and “VFRs” or Visiting Friends and Relatives. (The study also showed Athens-Sydney/Melbourne/Johannesburg underserved as well.)

Boeing’s North American sales office liked the concept. I started working with Boeing to secure two 767–300ERs financed by GE Capital (TN assisted in the process) and other funding sources. As the project started to materialize, it changed to two 777–200s.

For the sake of space and time, there are big chunks missing. I am going to stay away from anything to do with the financials side, some marketing aspects and other things, like scheduling, I don’t think would be relevant to share. Also, Boeing has a website called StartupBoeing - Boeing: StartupBoeing

Here is the cover page business plan for Aellas, this was the first livery rendition drawn according to specification (below). It took me a good two years to put this plan together, taking all the information collected from meetings with Air Tahiti Nui, Boeing, various airport authorities and other sources. Note the Table of Contents - about 100 pages for a macro-level snapshot for a start-up airline. The numbers were the most important part and a lot of work went into making sure everything was identified and realistic.

A new US airline has to obtain an FAA 121 Flight Certificate (each country has their own counterpart to the FAA), the time frame being twelve to fourteen months. The Chief Pilot has to be a part of this process. Also, we had to get approval from the Greek Aviation Authority to obtain right to fly into and out of Athens.

Other things on the list:

Below you will see the Organizational Chart for Aellas, which would be similar to any start-up airline. The Chief Pilot would manage a total of 16 pilots and co-pilots, 45 flight attendants would be under the Chief Purser, and all the Station Managers would report to the COO. This for two Boeing 777–200s serving four cities, three in the United States and one in Athens, Greece.

A 767–300ER Route Analysis Summary from Boeing, below (note the various routes). There is one for the 777–200 as well, but not pictured. Many parts of the business plan has been purposely omitted.

Airport authorities monetize every movement from the moment the plane lands at their airport until it departs. Below you will find two of five pages from the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority for Washington Dulles, every airport has more of less the same breakdown. Every single action has a price tag - take a look below, which I found to be very interesting. For the first year of service, airlines flying into Athens Airport received a full year of services gratis.

A sliver of the numbers part of a business plan for an airline, below. I want to give you an idea of how detailed and thorough a plan is for a start-up airline. The model was kept simple and uncomplicated. Cargo was also included, roughly 10% of revenue.

At that time, before the announcement of the Dreamliner, Boeing told me I should get some 737 long-hauls and start flying them across the Atlantic because that is where the future is headed (what Norwegian is doing now).

Cash Airplane Related Operating Costs, below, for four types of long-haul aircraft.

LOPA or “Layout of Passenger Arrangement” (below). This was during a time when lie flat in business class was a new concept, also the entire economy class cabin was to be similar to United’s Economy Plus.

Airline services are broken into four “Modules”, each giving a snap-shot of the the entire airline: Module One - General Information; Module Two -Configuration Data; Module Three - On-board Services (below); Module Four - Ground Services

ADDITION: Some questions I am being asked,

Will you consider starting this up again? I never say never. The landscape has changed. Greece is in an economic spiral (even though Aegean is making money) and now United, Delta, and now, Emirates (Emirates!) have jumped into the picture. For Emirates to make this their second European-US route stays a lot. I would do differently is do exactly what Air Tahiti Nui is doing - changing to an all Dreamliner fleet. This is what I would do, the 787 is a very good airplane, and a workhorse. I would get a fleet of 787s and fly to Europe non-stop from places like Kansas City and Des Moines.|||

