Service based businesses have moved to an on-the-go approach to get tasks done readily. The on-demand economy has changed the way businesses were perceived before. The digital transformation assured flexibility in businesses by generating a streamlined business model. It further went on to provide the best possible means to ensure unbroken functioning all the time.



Simpler ways are sought-after that save time and effort for the customer, and an online appointment booking application does the same.

In a typical scenario, a receptionist for a service based organisation might receive 50 appointment booking calls per day. On an average, the staff may spend 3-4 minutes of telephonic conversation with each caller. This consumes plenty of time and results in almost 3 hours of appointment booking calls each day. On top of this, a large amount of time will be spent on managing these appointments. This reduces the staff productivity and increases chances for duplication, giving rise to missed follow-ups and needless visits.

Below, we are covering some attributes that can’t be ignored while developing an appointment booking and scheduling application:-

The application has to be user-friendly to make the users feel clear and comfortable in using it. Service types should be categorised properly and the search module should be so advanced so as to allow each user to look for professionals based on the type of service, location, specialisation, experience and availability. There is also a need for an effective public calendar that enables scheduling just about everything in the blink of an eye.

A common problem with every service based business is that of a no-show by the customer. Due to this, a substantial amount of money is lost. This is where an automated reminder system can be of great use. Appointment reminders, generated within the portal, can reduce the number of no-shows as they send timely email and SMS notifications to customers about their scheduled appointments.

Building credibility is of utmost importance today, especially, if you are in a service based business. It helps you attract new potential customers. They best possible way to project your trustworthiness is by enabling users to see how your customers or clients were benefited from your services. Add modules that allow customers to rate and review your services.

Endive Software is a leading ITES company that offers custom Appointment Booking App solutions which give you an extended set of functionalities that can help you standardise appointment booking and scheduling to stay ahead in the fast-paced business environment.

To know more, email us (marketing@endivesoftware.com) or connect with us on Skype (endive-consulting).|||

Service based businesses have moved to an on-the-go approach to get tasks done readily. The on-demand economy has changed the way businesses were perceived before. The digital transformation assured flexibility in businesses by generating a streamlined business model. It further went on to provide the best possible means to ensure unbroken functioning all the time.…