After Microsoft launched the first version of its Visual Studio, it quickly became one of the most used IDE. Since then, the technologies and way of programming has changed, and Microsoft released multiple versions of Visual Studio including 2010,2012,2013,2015.  After numerous preview and beta releases, Visual Studio 2017 is available for download and use in live environments.

Visual Studio 2017 introduces a number of New features, such as live dependency validation, help drive DevOps earlier in the development process. In addition, enhancements to popular features, like code navigation, IntelliSense, refactoring, and code fixes, save you time and effort, regardless of language or platform. ot

The entire debugging and test experience has been enhanced to help you find and address issues as early as possible. Features like Live Unit Testing, Exception Helpers, and Run to Click tighten your DevOps loop by reducing regression risks and immediately exposing the root cause of new bugs. Directly manage your team projects hosted by any provider, including Visual Studio Team Services, Team Foundation Server, or GitHub. Or use the new Open Any Folder feature to immediately open and work with virtually any code file without a formal project or solution around it. Built-in tools provide comprehensive integration with all of your .NET Core, Azure applications, services, Docker containers, and more. The experience is so seamless that you’ll feel like you’re working from inside an Azure datacenter.

With Xamarin’s advanced debugging, profiling tools, and unit test generation features, it’s faster and easier than ever for you to build, connect, and tune native mobile apps for Android, iOS, and Windows. You can also choose to develop mobile apps with Apache Cordova or build C++ cross platform libraries.

Visual Studio continues to invest in support for the latest programming language features. Whether working with C#, Visual Basic, C++, TypeScript, F#, or even third-party languages like JavaScript, you’ll find first-class feature support across the entire development experience.

A brand-new workload-based installer optimizes your install to make sure you have everything you need and nothing you don’t.

Visual Studio is packed with tons of performance enhancements to the core features you use every day. You’ll also see a noticeably faster startup time, lower memory footprint, and higher degree of responsiveness throughout the entire development lifecycle.

Enjoy complementary access to training from top partners, including Pluralsight and Opsgility, for Enterprise and Professional customers. You’ll also get access to software licenses from select partners, such as Parallels and SyncFusion.

Every release of Visual Studio has new libraries and frameworks, new project templates and new capabilities of the IDE. You may think you know Visual Studio, but there’s always more to learn. Update your visual studio and start using amazing features available.

Visual Studio 2017 can be downloaded from downloads. Community version is Free, fully-featured IDE for students, open-source and individual developers is also available.

To update Visual Studio, run the Visual Studio Installer and click the “Update” button.|||

After Microsoft launched the first version of its Visual Studio, it quickly became one of the most used IDE. Since then, the technologies and way of program