China SDN/NFV Industry Alliance and NETSCOUT, INC. join open source NFV community to accelerate growth in China, further work with segment routing and security

Boston, Mass.—OpenStack Summit—May 8, 2017 — The OPNFV Project, an open source 8:project that facilitates the development and evolution of Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) components across various open source ecosystems through integration, deployment, and testing, today announced China SDN/NFV Industry Alliance, a 50+-member alliance focused on increasing the readiness of SDN/NFV, and Netscout, a leading provider of business assurance, have joined the project.

The newest members are coming on as the community hosts OPNFV Day as part of OpenStack Summit’s Open Source Days on Monday, May 8. Workshop attendees will become familiar with the collaboration between OPNFV and OpenStack communities, the feature development process, the march toward common infrastructure, and how to get involved.

By joining OPNFV, China SDN/NFV Alliance and NETSCOUT help further diversify the project’s member roster, comprised of leading service providers, carriers, vendors, research institutions, and other collaborators, all working together to accelerate open source NFV and the end-to-end open networking stack.

“We are pleased to welcome China SDN/NFV Industry Alliance and NETSCOUT to the OPNFV community as our newest members,” said Heather Kirksey, director, OPNFV. “Collaboration is key to accelerating a collective vision for the future, and we look forward to their diverse perspectives and contributions, including the acceleration of open source NFV in China and further exploring the areas of service assurance and security with the support of NETSCOUT.”

More about the newest members

 The China SDN/NFV Industry Alliance was founded in November 2014 by the China Academy of Information and Communications Technology (CAICT), together with 15 organizations in the industry. Guided by the principle of openness, innovation, collaboration, and implementation, the 50+-member alliance focuses on increasing the readiness of SDN/NFV commercial utilization and promoting the healthy development of SDN/NFV industry.

“SDN/NFV Industry Alliance brings the industry together to build up the SDN/NFV ecosystem, promote solutions to help organizations migrate from existing networks to new, SDN/NFV-based architectural solutions,” said China SDN/NFV Industry Alliance chairman, Mr. Wei Leping.  “At present, SDN/NFV Industry Alliance has set up a special test team which relies on the CTTL Certification Lab of the China Academy of Information and Communication Research, to carry out NFVi integrated testing. By joining the OPNFV community, we hope to work together in an integrated, multi-vendor testing environment to drive solutions that advance commercial deployments of NFV technologies.”

NETSCOUT SYSTEMS, INC. is a leading provider of business assurance—a powerful combination of service assurance, cybersecurity, and business intelligence solutions—for today’s most demanding service provider, enterprise and government networks. NETSCOUT’s Adaptive Service Intelligence (ASI) technology continuously monitors the service delivery environment to identify performance issues and provides insight into network-based security threats, helping teams to quickly resolve issues that can cause business disruptions or impact user experience. NETSCOUT delivers unmatched service visibility and protects the digital infrastructure that supports our connected world.

“We are extremely pleased to have joined the many distinguished members of the OPNFV project, which is committed to accelerating the transformation of enterprise and service provider networks to a dynamic software-centric platform,” stated Dr. Vikram Saksena, chief solutions architect, NETSCOUT.  “As a leading player of security and service assurance technologies, we believe NETSCOUT’s expertise will allow us to make an invaluable contribution to OPNFV. In addition to benefitting the industry as a whole, our customers will also benefit from our participation, as NETSCOUT gains critical insights into leading-edge technologies.”

OPNFV is hosting its third OPNFV Summit in Beijing, China (June 12-15). The event will feature both a Design Summit—where the OPNFV technical community will convene to continue working on the E-Release with plenary sessions, project breakouts, and social events—and a Summit Conference with keynotes, breakout sessions, a technology showcase, networking opportunities, and much more. More details on sponsorship, attendance and registration are available here: http://events.linuxfoundation.org/events/opnfv-summit.

Members of the media who would like to reserve a complimentary press pass to OPNFV Summit should contact pr@opnfv.org.

About the Open Platform for NFV (OPNFV)

 Open Platform for NFV (OPNFV) facilitates the development and evolution of NFV components across various open source ecosystems. Through system level integration, deployment and testing, OPNFV creates a reference NFV platform to accelerate the transformation of enterprise and service provider networks. For more information, please visit  http://www.opnfv.org.

 OPNFV is Collaborative Project at the Linux Foundation. Linux Foundation Collaborative Projects are independently funded software projects that harness the power of collaborative development to fuel innovation across industries and ecosystems. www.linuxfoundation.org.|||

