How one man drove right into the center of a daring and dangerous crime

After the theft, the day took on a surreal veneer of suburban normalcy: The fugitives went shopping for clothes at Ross Dress for Less; they visited a hair salon. The three escapees each altered his appearance—none more than Duong, who had his goatee shaved and his hair dyed black and cut into an army-issue high-and-tight.

Earlier that morning, the escapees had found a van for sale on Craigslist. Duong figured he could take the vehicle for a test spin and then simply drive away. And so, on a quiet backstreet in L.A., Nayeri slowed the Civic to a stop, and Duong got out and disappeared around the block. Before long, he reappeared with a white van.

But time can weaken resolve, and as an old man with a gun to his belly, too frail to fight, too tired to resist, Ma thought he would surely die. As they drove toward Los Angeles, his captors said nothing, which frightened him all the more.

Ma had been a lieutenant colonel in the South Vietnamese Army during the war. At night, he would venture with the Americans in search of Vietcong guerrillas—the ones who, by day, shelled his base, hard against the Cambodian mountains. After the war, after the Americans fled, Ma had endured a second horror as a captive, held for seven long years in a Communist forced-labor camp. “You are an especially stubborn case!” one Communist official would shout before clubbing him with the butt of a rifle. All these decades later, Ma could still trace with his finger the scar just beneath his hairline. He had survived, while others had not.

In the motel room, the escapees seemed to realize that the media attention was problematic. Spooked, perhaps, by the prospect that Ma's disappearance had been noticed, they decided they needed a second vehicle—and now, with their photos everywhere, they also needed to mask their appearance. They hauled Ma out into the parking lot. He was again ordered into the backseat, where Tieu steadied the gun on him. He was afraid anew and unsure what would happen next—it was a mix of dread and confusion he hadn't felt in 40 years.

As the men in the motel studied the television, Ma was introduced to his captors by their rap sheets. Tieu had allegedly taken part in a drive-by shooting that left one college-age kid dead; Duong had allegedly shot a man in the chest after an argument. And Nayeri, well, Nayeri was plenty notorious. Four years earlier, acting on a hunch that the owner of a marijuana dispensary had buried $1 million in the Mojave Desert, Nayeri had allegedly snatched the guy and his girlfriend and driven them to the spot where the loot was thought to be hidden. There, he and his crew shocked the man with a Taser, burned him with a butane torch, poured bleach on his wounds, and severed his penis in a failed attempt to locate the cash. After the man assured Nayeri there was no buried money, he was left out there to die. (His girlfriend found help and saved his life.)

They needed to put distance between themselves and their predicament, which meant they needed a car. Stealing one would be risky and probably require expertise they didn't have. But what if they took a driver hostage? The only trick would be quietly luring someone close. Duong dialed a cab service that advertised in the local Vietnamese newspaper. Long Ma answered the call.

The fugitives allegedly first visited a friend of Duong's, hoping he would give them enough cash to leave the country. Nayeri had thought he could somehow spirit the group to Tehran. But Duong's pal could give them only $900. So, Tieu contacted what police later surmised were members of his Little Saigon gang. A security camera outside a deli recorded what appeared to be a hasty midmorning rendezvous. But whatever money Tieu may have received wasn't enough to get them far. At 9 P.M. the escapees were still in Santa Ana, eating at a Vietnamese restaurant a few miles from the jail.

When the last of their feet touched the dewy grass outside the jail, the men still had more than a half hour before the sun rose. No alarms sounded; no lights swept the exterior. They'd done it. They were out.

They were on the roof now and made a quick dash to the building's northeast corner. There, they cut through concertina wire and unfurled a makeshift rope that they'd fashioned from bedsheets. Fastening one end of the line to the building, they tested its strength and peered over the edge of the roof, four stories to the ground.

Using pipes, they shinnied skyward. After sawing off the bars that sealed the shaft, they shouldered their way into the cramped ductwork. They moved upward on hands and knees toward a trap door. With a hard push, they got the thing open and felt on their faces the rush of cold, fresh air.

In no time, the three used their tools to work loose the grate. The trio quickly bellied through the hole to reach the jail's innards. Surrounded by pipes and wiring, they crouched low and inched along a metal walkway until it dead-ended against a wall. There, they looked up. In the gloom, they could see—suspended 12 feet above them—their salvation: a ventilation shaft that ran to the jail's roof.

On the day of their escape, Duong watched as the guard finished his count. He gathered the knives and other sharp tools that he'd been hoarding and shuffled to the rear of the housing block where Nayeri and Tieu waited for him. There, behind a bunk bed, was the metal grate that the men knew could lead to freedom.

Gathering intel had been easier than it should have been, too. Months earlier, Nayeri had met a college instructor, a woman named Nooshafarin Ravaghi, who visited the jail to teach English. She spoke four languages and had authored a series of children's books about a girl discovering her Persian roots. When the Iranian-born Nayeri began attending her class, the two grew friendly. She seemed to respond to his persuasive charm, because one day she'd passed to him something he'd needed: a printout from Google Earth that showed a satellite image of the jail's roof, one floor above Module F.

The scheme that had won them their freedom had clicked into motion a day earlier, in the last moments before dawn. That was when Duong—sprawled on a bunk in the open-floor dormitory of the Orange County Jail's Module F—had watched the guard finish his 5 a.m. head count. In the months that the three men had been formulating a plan to escape, a series of factors inside the jail had been tilting the odds of success in their favor. According to a lawsuit later filed on behalf of jail guards, the facility had grown overburdened and insufficiently staffed. Duong had allegedly exploited this, tapping criminal contacts on the outside to help him acquire contraband tools that could be useful in an escape.

Mug shots filled the screen. A massive manhunt, Ma now learned, was under way for the three guys he was watching sit up in bed. They were riveted as the broadcasters ran through the litany of alleged crimes that had put them in jail—murder, attempted murder, kidnapping, and torture. They hooted and marveled at their own images on TV, their instant fame.

In the morning, as the sun broke through the curtains, the old man felt Duong roll over and grab for the remote. He clicked it and the TV came alive with breaking news of a daring prison escape.

He watched as Nayeri, who he suspected was the group's ringleader, splayed out on one of the two beds. Ma was ordered to double up with Duong on the other as Tieu curled up on the floor near the door, resting the gun carefully under his pillow. For Ma, there was no escape and, with all the dread he felt, no easy way to fall asleep.

By the time they arrived, Ma was convinced he was going to die—he just didn't know how, or when. Inside a cramped room, he watched as his captors pulled clothes and cell phones from their shopping bags. The men were growing tired now, it was clear.

The men patted the driver down and placed him in the backseat, where Tieu trained the gun on Ma's stomach. Nayeri jumped behind the wheel, and they set out for a nearby motel.

Ma's mind raced. “Please, just take what you want,” Ma told Duong, his heart drumming in his ribs. Duong flashed him an odd look. “No, you need to come with us,” he said. “Get out of the car.”

If they killed the driver now, they could make a cleaner escape. Ma watched as Nayeri pointed in his direction and shouted, “boom boom, old man!”

Ma flinched. His eyes darted to the mirror, and he watched with panic as Tieu handed Duong a pistol. A moment later, Duong had it pointed at Ma and told the driver, calmly, in Vietnamese: “We need your help.”

The streets were dark and quiet, and after a few minutes, Duong motioned to a coffee shop that anchored a mangy strip mall. “Pull in here,” he said. Ma realized this was no home, but he reluctantly complied. As Ma parked, Duong twisted around and locked eyes with Tieu in the backseat. Duong spoke in English: “Give me the gun.”

It was after 11:30 when they emerged, and as they found their seats in the car, Duong seemed to sense the driver's agitation. “My mom's place is right around here,” he lied. “Take us there, please.”

Once at Target, the men were inside forever. Ma had no way of knowing what they were doing in there—that they were desperate for phones, for clothes, and for some semblance of a plan. For all their casual silence since getting picked up, the three men had been growing impatient. The night was ticking away. Outside, Ma was trying hard not to be frustrated, too. He paced to the far end of the deserted parking lot, a slim Vietnamese cigarette between his fingers. He had been asleep when Duong had called and he hadn't bothered changing out of his pajamas. This was supposed to be just a quick ride, he thought. What was going on in there?

At Walmart, Ma dropped the men off at the door and was asked to wait. But soon Duong and the others wandered back to the car. They needed to go to a Target in Rosemead instead, they told Ma. As Ma began to protest—the store was 45 minutes away—Duong reassured him: “Look, we'll pay you $100 extra.”

Ma said nothing, just plotted a course through the outlays of Orange County. He had moved here, to greater Los Angeles's Little Saigon, four years ago, after a painful divorce, taking a room at a boarding house and starting a new life as a self-employed cabbie. Ma never bothered to get his car—a worn Honda Civic—registered for commercial use. He didn't see the point. Little Saigon had always felt to him like a place that enforced its own rules, and so he lived by an old Vietnamese proverb: The king's rule ends at the village gate. He was 71, and in more ways than one, he was on his own. The work had a way of easing the loneliness he felt.

In the rearview mirror, Ma could see Duong's friends, quiet in the backseat: Jonathan Tieu, a pimply 20-year-old, and Hossein Nayeri, an athletic Persian with an air of insouciance.

His name was Bac Duong, and he spoke to Ma in Vietnamese—their shared native language—and wore on his thin and weary face a salt-and-pepper goatee. It was 9:30 at night, and now they wanted to go shopping? Ma thought. What happened to going home?

“Take us to Walmart,” said the man who settled into the passenger seat—and this was the second signal to Ma that something was off. Ma recognized from the man's voice that he was the one who'd called for the cab, telling Ma that he and his friends had needed a ride home.

They wore no coats. They just shivered there, in the crisp night air. And to the cabdriver who slowed to study the three men who'd called for a ride, this seemed strange. It was January, after all, and the temperature in Santa Ana, California, had dipped into the 50s. Yet these men had on only collared shirts. As they piled into Long Ma's warm car, the driver filed that detail away.

1. Staffing changes had allegedly hampered security within the busy jail. 2. From the outside, criminal contacts helped the men get tools into the facility. 3. And with a hand on the inside, they got hold of a crucial map of the jail. 4. Using pilfered bedsheets, the men were able to fashion a rappelling rope.

The day after Duong turned himself in, Ma spoke with the police about where the other two fugitives might be. The next day, a homeless man in San Francisco noticed a white van on Haight Street. Jonathan Tieu was found inside the vehicle, and Hossein Nayeri bolted. Police tracked him down a few blocks away. The homeless man shared in the reward that had climbed to $200,000. For his part in the capture, Ma got nothing. (He's since filed a suit claiming he deserves a portion of the reward and arguing that lax oversight at the jail led to his kidnapping.) He returned to his boarding room in Garden Grove. No one had even reported him missing.

There were moments, Ma told me as we drove, when the awful memory of the ordeal came back to him in waves of anxiety. But still, he agreed to share his experiences, from which this story has been drawn. Nayeri and Tieu consented to jailhouse interviews as well, though there were many aspects of their week on the run that they would neither confirm nor deny. They face new charges, including felony counts for kidnapping and car theft (they've all pleaded not guilty), and didn't want to compromise themselves. “It's a hell of a story,” Nayeri granted me at one point, speaking in a surprisingly gentle voice.

Throughout their half-hour visit, the two men wept softly and spoke—in their native language—of the bond they had nurtured since their week on the run. They both felt so grateful, so surprised by the possibility of friendship. Perhaps Ma, especially. Whatever he had expected to experience on that dark, cold night when he left his house in his pajamas, it wasn't this. Wherever he'd figured that trip might lead, it wasn't here. Ma told me that as he grinned through the glass of the visitors' room wall, he realized that Duong had saved his life, even redeemed his soul. “My son,” Ma said to Duong, “as long as you are still here, I will rescue you like you rescued me.”|||

Long Ma was just a driver. But a routine call put him in the center of a daring and dangerous crime.