Team building helps everyone get to know and trust their fellow coworkers, but you don’t build trust overnight. Your team goes through gradual stages as they grow from a collection of strangers to efficient collaborators. Psychologist Bruce Tuckman’s team building model describes three stages — forming, norming, and performing—to show how teams can become more united over time.

During the performing stage, everyone is working together at their highest potential. If your team reaches this stage, they’ve built the highest level of commitment, trust, and support for one another. It means that they’re at their most productive and are highly motivated to achieve team goals.

Here we’ll break down each of the stages and suggest team bonding activities that you can use outside of the office to increase trust and cooperation on your team.

Forming happens when your team first comes together. Team members learn about each other, project requirements, and the leadership structure. This is also the information gathering stage. They’re beginning to form impressions of how well they’re going to work together.

You might be at this stage if you’re a brand new company, hired a bunch of new people, or if your employees are just not getting along.

With this in mind, you can use a team picnic to help everyone get to know each other better. Your team can share a meal outdoors and chat with their coworkers to get those first impressions out of the way. Here are three examples that you could use at your next company picnic to spark discussions.

You can order a variety of gourmet food truck catering services, such as Roaming Hunger, so no one has to worry about preparing food at your company picnic. Your team can enjoy a quick tasty meal outdoors and have more time to enjoy the ice breaker activities you planned.

We naturally bond over food — eating the same food increases people’s trust and cooperation. But team picnics outside of the office will help everyone have fun and get acquainted with each other in an informal setting.

In the norming phase, teams become more cooperative. Team members start to understand and appreciate each other’s work habits, ethics, and roles. This helps them respect team leaders and compromise with their coworkers.

They acknowledge the talents, skills, and experience that each team member brings to the table. They’re more willing to trust and depend on one other to get work done.

Once your team has learned how to get along and function together, this is the ideal time to have your team collaborate on a group scavenger hunt. Your team will strengthen the social bonds they’ve already started to form, and they’ll get to practice cooperation and communication in a more relaxed setting.

Consider organizing a high-tech interactive scavenger hunt with an app like Scavify. With this app, you can build a list of challenges for your team members to complete as they explore a town. For example, if they’re in New York, you could have them take a group picture from the castle in Central Park. You can reward them for correct answers to trivia questions or include GPS challenges to encourage them to explore a specific location together.

With a scavenger hunt activity, your team is actually developing work skills like communication and collaborative problem-solving. But it seems more fun and relaxed when you’re doing it outside of a project deadline. You learn who the natural leaders, creative types, and methodical problem solvers are on your team.

In the performing stage, your team really starts shining and working together harmoniously. They’re motivated to work towards the team’s goals with efficiency and enthusiasm. Team leaders can delegate much of their work and focus on boosting team morale rather than constantly supervising their employees.

But even once you’ve achieved this goal of performing as a team, you want to keep the momentum going. Charity work is a way to reinforce those bonds while encouraging teams to give back to the community. Here are some ways you can encourage your team to participate together in charitable activities.

Prosocial behavior like charity work encourages employees to feel more empowered and inspired to give back to their team. It promotes personal growth and self-esteem, which will boost employee morale and engagement and keep those team bonds strong.

Each team building activity can bring everyone closer together, whether they’re just starting out in the forming stage or at their highest potential in the performing phase. But your team can return to any phase within this team building model, such as when old members leave or new hires join your company. So you need to be flexible in your team building approach as the team’s life cycle changes.

As your team grows and evolves, it will go through another stage known as transforming. Transforming is when your team moves onto other goals and projects cohesively. Your adaptable team-building approach will propel your team to be more united and productive as they tackle new goals.

P.S. If you liked this article, you just might love the premium version of our app, I Done This. Please click here to learn more about it.|||

Team bonding can improve productivity, ease management and the overall cohesiveness of your team to reach new heights.