Are you a startup investor? Perhaps—but you may not know it.

That’s because your mutual funds may have bought private shares in early-stage companies—including those nicknamed unicorns (startups valued at $1 billion or higher like Uber Technologies). As a fund shareholder, you own a piece of these stakes—and the profits or losses that the fund eventually realizes.

This increasingly common practice comes with some regulatory red flags, says Jeff Schwartz, a law professor at the University of Utah. In a new paper that will be published this year in the North Carolina Law Review, Prof. Schwartz looked at Fidelity Investments’ flagship Magellan Fund, which has some $15 billion in assets and is a leader in startup investing. Magellan has invested about $134 million since 2012 in 12 startups, including DocuSign, Hubspot, Roku and Uber.

Although startup investing can be exciting, Prof. Schwartz’s paper cites these potential problems with the practice: “lack of awareness among mutual-fund investors, lack of liquidity for mutual-fund shares, lack of venture-capital expertise among mutual-fund management, and lack of accountability over how funds value their ownership stakes in startups for purposes of calculating their net asset values, which creates an opportunity for management to manipulate such estimates.”

Fidelity says that it invests in private companies that would have gone public a decade or two ago, when companies hit the public markets earlier in their life cycle, and that it chooses those it thinks are likely to go public in the future. “We like to look for companies we think are going to be long-term winners, companies that we will be able to invest in, and they will appreciate over a long period of time for the benefit of our shareholders,” says Andrew Boyd, head of global equity capital markets at Fidelity.

The Wall Street Journal spoke with Prof. Schwartz about mutual funds’ startup investments and what regulators can do to protect investors. Edited excerpts:

PROF. SCHWARTZ:The main reason is actively managed funds are looking for ways to distinguish themselves. Index funds can’t copy this. It’s an exciting area. They want to be a part of it. They can control the valuations. It’s a little bit of a loophole. They are allowed to do this. There’s nothing that restricts them. They just can’t invest more than 15% of their assets in illiquid securities such as private companies. But right now, most funds are well below that. When you have such huge assets under management, you can invest billions and billions of dollars—and still invest hundreds of millions in startups. Magellan invests around $170 million in these kinds of companies, around 1% of its assets.

WSJ: How can you find out if your mutual funds hold startup stakes?

PROF. SCHWARTZ: You have to look at their quarterly filings through the SEC website and scroll through the schedule of investments. Within that, there’s a category for preferred shares. That’s where these investments are typically found.

You’d have to look up the companies to see what they do and whether they are public or private; you may not have heard about them. There are also disclosures if the shares are restricted, which means that they’re usually private shares.

WSJ: What are the effects of startup investing on mutual-fund performance?

PROF. SCHWARTZ: It’s too early to tell. Don’t automatically sell your mutual-fund shares, if you discover it is investing in startups. It depends on investors’ opinion of whether we’re in a bubble with respect to unicorns and other startups. If you think we’re in a bubble, it may be a good time to sell if your fund has a large percentage of startups. If you’re concerned about the valuation of the fund managers because they have latitude in how they assess the value of assets under management, you may also want to sell. There’s a dual risk: could be a bad investment, or the valuations could be biased.

WSJ: Private shares are often illiquid and can have whatever value the company and the fund managers decide. When a fund manager can choose to invest in private companies that have huge valuations, like Uber, how does that affect how he or she gets paid?

PROF. SCHWARTZ: Based on assets under management, they get a percentage. The AUM is calculated each day. This would lead to higher compensation for fund managers, because it inflates the value of the mutual fund.

WSJ: What can investors learn from this?

PROF. SCHWARTZ: These investments in young private companies are actually in their mutual funds. It’s not easy for investors to tell by reading the prospectus or the website that these investments are present. They are present, and they pose these obvious risks in terms of how they’re valued. The mutual-fund managers don’t necessarily have incentives aligned with shareholders in terms of how they’re valued.

WSJ: Should the practice of funds investing in startups be regulated differently? What could the government do to make this practice more friendly to investors, or to bring more transparency to the market?

PROF. SCHWARTZ: Yes, regulations could be improved to better protect investors. Currently, they give broad discretion to fund management with respect to valuing startups. Funds also may disclose little about the valuation process.

Instead, the laws could require that funds change the value of their startup holdings when, and only when, justified by publicly available information, and that funds disclose the information that leads to any such changes.

The limitation on the valuation process would enhance the credibility of the valuations, and the additional transparency would incentivize funds to provide more careful and conservative estimates.

Also, under current rules, it can be difficult for investors to find out whether their funds hold startups. To improve matters, I recommend that funds be required to explicitly disclose that they invest in these companies and discuss the risks that doing so entails.

Ms. Schoenberger is a writer in New York. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com.

Appeared in the May. 08, 2017, print edition as 'When Funds Invest in Startups.'|||

A law professor sees a lack of transparency when mutual funds own shares in private companies.