Note: all comments will be part of the online, searchable public record.

But you can save it. The FCC is accepting comments on this proposal. Use the form below to submit comments to the FCC.

Millions of people spoke out in 2014 to demand bright-line rules to ensure ISPs didn’t violate net neutrality. Now that victory is in jeopardy.

A new proposal would destroy the FCC’s net neutrality guidelines, leaving the door open to ISPs creating “Internet fast lanes” that prioritize certain websites over others.

The FCC should safeguard Internet freedom by keeping the bright-line net neutrality protections in place and upholding Title II. We need the FCC to defend the rights of millions of Internet users by upholding net neutrality protections. I’m calling on the FCC to stand up for net neutrality and safeguard Title II protections. The FCC should ensure a fair and open Internet for all by opposing efforts to undermine net neutrality. The FCC should stand up for Internet users by safeguarding net neutrality. The FCC must protect the open Internet by maintaining net neutrality protections under Title II. As an Internet user, I’m asking the FCC to protect the net neutrality protections currently in place. The FCC needs to stand up for Internet users like me and keep the net neutrality rules that are already in effect.

throttle whatever they please,

I’m worried about creating a tiered Internet with “fast lanes” for certain sites or services because I’m concerned about ISPs being allowed to discriminate against certain types of data or websites because I’m afraid of a “pay-to-play” Internet where ISPs can charge more for certain websites because

faster. That’s exactly the right balance That’s the best way forward That’s the right kind of forward-looking approach

to make sure competition in the Internet space is fair and

as well as

with an effective veto right on the ability to veto new

That’s not how the Internet was built, and that's not what we want. That’s not the kind of Internet we want to pass on to future generations of technology users. That’s contrary to the basic precepts on which the Internet was built.

Thank you for keeping Title II net neutrality rules in place to protect Internet users like me. I urge you to keep Title II net neutrality in place, and safeguard Internet users like me. Thanks for protecting Internet users like me by upholding the existing Title II net neutrality rules. I appreciate you maintaining Title II net neutrality rules and the rights of Internet users like me.

These comments are a matter of public record and are viewable online, including name and address, one day after being submitted to the FCC public docket.

You'll have a chance to review your comments before they are submitted.|||

