Cerebral edema is a type of diseases which occurs due to the deposition of fluid in the inter cellular and extracellular parts of the brain.there are many symptoms of Cerebral edema by which we can detect the presence of cerebral edema in the brain, these symptoms are:-

Apart from these symptoms cerebral edema also causes nausea, vomiting, blurred vision and many other problems like these.these are the symptoms of cerebral edema.

Now talking about the causes of cerebral edema. The cerebral edema is generally occur from brain trauma and it can also occur from the non traumatic causes. The non traumatic causes include ischemic stroke, cancer and brain inflammation. Due to the breakdown of blood brain barrier and blood-cerebrovascular fluid will result in the deposit of fluid parts in the extracellular space of the brain.

Due to the metabolism brain cells will start to retain water and this will result in the dilution of the blood plasma and will cause an excess amount of water will move into the brain cells. Some research also said that moving to the high altitude without the use of proper acclimatization can also cause high altitude cerebral edema.

There are many types of cerebral edema some of these are:-

The cytotoxic edema is occurred due to the hypothermia and sometimes due to the early stroke or hypoxia.Due to the hypoxia, the lack of oxygen and glucose occurs in the body which results in the breakdown of the sodium and calcium pumps on the cell membrane of the brain. This will result in the excess building of the sodium and calcium in the brain. This excess building of the sodium and calcium will result in uptake of more amount of water which results in the swelling of the cells.

In many types of research, it will be noted that the cytotoxic and the vasogenic edema occurs together.The vasogenic edema is persisted more days than the cytotoxic edema.

These are the different methods by which we can prevent us from the cerebral edema.

There are many types of research are occur time by time on the cerebral edema. The research in 2010 about the cerebral edema is based on the study of finite element analysis. The finite element analysis is one of the widely used solid mechanics. The second research is also occurring which depends on the condition of the thermal conductivity, this research is generally related to the water content of the tissue. These researches will help to cure for the cerebral edema and now many prevention are used to cure cerebral edema with the help of these researches.

Bruce Lee was died due to the disease of Cerebral Edema. And at that time cerebral edema Bruce Lee get sudden stroke and immediately called doctors but it was too late. He already passed away.|||

Bruce Lee was died due to the disease of Cerebral Edema. And at that time cerebral edema Bruce Lee get sudden stroke and immediately called doctors but it w