Obviously, you all know, last month the Nubia Z17 mini had hit a great success in China and now, to expand their product portfolio; the company is expected to add a new smartphone, Nubia Z17, to the series, soon. Recently, all the specs and features of the phone were spotted on a Geekbench listing. And now the device is again caught-up with another leak that is pretty much official.

The interesting fact is, Nubia had accidentally posted the image and some specs details of the upcoming phone, on their official website. But, they realized the mistake and removed the listing, soon after it. Fortunately, we are so lucky, because in the meanwhile someone else had taken a snap of the listing and posted it on the China’s well-known micro-blogging site, Weibo.

Thanks to Weibo, we have got a perfect glance on the Z17 handset and in addition, we have also spotted more of its features, in detail, which are dumping out the previous rumors.

As per the said image, the handset is adorned with a vertically arranged, dual rear cameras and the fingerprint sensor is just placed below it; interestingly, both the aspects are quite different, from its predecessor Z17 mini.

The image also manifests that the front panel is designed with a dual edge display, which gives it a bezel-less look. As of now, all the other details are somewhat similar to the earlier rumors, but now we have found upgrades, in the memory aspects.

The fresh leak reveals that, in China the handset will come with two memory options. The first option is 8GB RAM and 128GB internal storage, while the other one is 6GB RAM with 128GB internal storage.

But on a quick recall, in the Geekbench website, we have spotted that the handset will come with the Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 processor, holding 4GB of RAM. Perhaps, this 4GB might come in some region, out of China or they might have used this memory in the pre-production phase.

As of now, we have noticed the Frosted Gray color of the handset, in the image; in addition we could also infer that the device could have two more color options, which includes Champagne Gold and Aurora Blue, on an attempt in translating the Chinese text in the photo.|||

ZTE's upcoming Nubia Z17 Spotted on their official website. The handset specs and features listed on it. It will come with 6/8GB RAM and dual rear camera.