Smartphone usage is increasing by leaps and bounds every day. It is playing a major role in digitizing the human life. Today, people used to accomplish their routine tasks using mobile apps such as bill payments, net banking, shopping, and much more. Well, few of the mobile apps offer unlimited fun and entertainment too.

We all know mobile app is one of the highly competitive markets these days, as users have several options while they need one app. To win the competition, mobile app analysis is equally important as mobile app development. It helps you in identifying users’ behavior on your app. It also unveils strengths and weakness of your app so that you can work out on lacking areas to deliver the best user experience. Using the best mobile app analytics, you can strategize your marketing efforts and increase the sales.

Your mobile app analytics can be divided into five categories in-app analytics, A/B testing, app store analytics, advertising analytics and marketing analytics and automation.

Let’s dive into best mobile app analytics (not in order) that help in boosting your app performance.

A robust open source analytics platform with a slick interface and powerful tracking features. It works for iOS, Android, WD, and Blackberry.

It is one of the important upgrades of Google’s app analytics platform. It provides brief analysis with each detail. Universal Analytics is available for free and works on Android and iOS.

An incredible platform to boost user engagement on the mobile app. Localytics serves to Fortune 500 companies such as Skype, HBO, Underarmour, etc. It contains next-generation features such as personalized messaging and segmentation that help in increasing user engagement.

Understand user experience of your app with attractive visuals using Appsee. It tracks everything starts from button clicking to focusing on screens to time spent by users on the app. It also helps developers in analyzing crashes of the apps. Appsee offers amazing features like real-time user analytics, monitoring the summary of aggregate data, and so on.

No need to login with Facebook. It’s a cutting edge tool to analyze page views, events and more. Facebook analytics works for iOS, Android, and Canvas.

One of the most powerful app analytics platform for iOS platform. It’s a Cupertino version that bundled with Apple’s Developer Program.

Identify users’ behavior by analyzing their actions rather than pages. It holds the features of funnels tracking and retention. Mixpanel is available for free. You can have five another plans to choose from depending on datapoints.

It’s an analytics platform having a dashboard. Apptentive offers an easy way to users to share their feedback. Analytics analyzes all the data effectively and generates the report that aid you in engaging the target audience.

A very popular name in analytics industry due to the broad range of product and service offerings. It covers everything start from ASO, in-app data, marketing, ad analytics, and much more.

Sensor Tower contains three innovative analytics tools such as app intelligence, ad intelligence, and store intelligence. It serves to several industry leaders such as Adobe, SEGA, etc. It provides analytics reports of daily chart ranking and stats.

A well-known analytics platform for mobile advertising. Appsflyer holds a wide range of metrics from ROI to conversion rate including funnels, installs, and even user created metrics.

Upsight offers app analytics, business KPIs, tracking of app and user data, and set up your own metrics.

Apsalar provides wide resources for its key analytics products that are CRM, marketing attribution and remarketing. It is available for free and can be used for iOS and Android platform.

It offers a broad range of analytics tools to improve user engagement and marketing campaign management. Urban Airship also caters with complete guidelines and seminars on how to use those tools.

Utilize all these mobile app analytics tools to have thorough insights into your app performance. They enable you to understand your users and accordingly define an innovative strategy to run the business successfully. The mobile app analytics help you in reaching out to more customers, improving user engagement, and maximizing the ROI.

There are many more mobile app analytics tools providers who hold the exceptional capability to deliver details insights about your mobile app performance. In this article, Intuz has tried to cover market leaders. If any mobile analytics tool is not included in this listing, that doesn’t indicate the inefficiency of the tool. Feel free to add any other analytics tool in comments, if you know.

Spread the word by hitting the heart! ❤ if you found this article useful!|||

Smartphone usage is increasing by leaps and bounds every day. It is playing a major role in digitizing the human life. Today, people used to accomplish their routine tasks using mobile apps such as…