So, you are mulling to start a small business this year? Having that passion about entrepreneurship is not enough: you need to have a great business idea that is in-demand and unique. Your business idea should be different from 100 million others in the market for it to be successful.

 Wondering to start a research for your small business idea?



 Don’t.

 Here’s a list of 30 small business ideas that require low investment but will bring you BIG profits! We have categorized these business ideas according to specific industries. The best part is that you can run these businesses without quitting your full-time jobs.

 So, without any further delay, check out these small business ideas that will get your entrepreneurial wheels moving…

This is one of the top food business ideas for those with small capital. You can sell your ready-to-eat food items, without paying a high monthly rent. All you need to do is to put in a minor investment in the food cart and pay a small fee. It is not necessary to push the car or move around. You can stand at one place and employee a worker to sell your products.

Starting a fast food joint is quite profitable small business idea. Though there are giants such as McDonald’s, KFC and Dominos in the fast food industry, you can have high revenue if the place is good and your food is of quality. People are always on a look out to try new shops and joints.

This is a lucrative business idea. Over the past few years, the coffee industry has seen a rapid growth. If you too are a “coffeeholic”, you can initiate your own coffee shop business with little investment. Coffee shops are generally very casual and a place where customers come to relax. You can turn your love and passion for coffee into a profitable business.

You can start your bakery business even from the comfort of your home. If you know baking, you can sell fresh baked items such as cakes, pies, cupcakes, cookies etc. from your home or deliver them. Another way is having tie-ups with retail shops who will keep your products in their stores. However, this business will need proper planning and management.

Now, this type of farming can be done only if you have space and can care for cows and other dairy animals. Milk products are always in high demand as they are considered healthy for beings. The maintenance cost is low and you can produce and sell products such as cheese, milk and cottage cheese.

Manufacturing of paper does not require much capital investment. Paper is something that is used widely in every sector and industry, especially in the education sector. Therefore, this business can never fail to give you profit.

 Before starting this business you need to decide paper size and volume, based on size and volume you need to select equipment and space for the manufacturing.You will have to buy paper-making equipment and raw material for the same.

There is hardly any company today that does not have a website. In fact, even those who have look fo ways to revamp it and make it better than their competitors. You can become a web or Graphic designer by doing a specific online course and then approach different companies for work.

If you have SEO skills and know platforms such as Google Analytics, you can help business owners transform their sites with more SEO-friendly content. You can tell them how to get more traffic and rank their websites or blogs higher in Google. This type of business does not require any capital but your skills.

If you have an eye for detail, you can start a resume writing business by creating an excellent resume for job seekers. Youngsters are always willing to spend money for making themselves stand out from the rest while they are seeking jobs, and one such way of being different from others is by having a good resume. Become a resume writer and earn extra money!

If you have a passion for writing, then freelance ghostwriting business if just for you. You do not need anything except your computer and internet service to start as a ghostwriter. There are many sites on which you can upload your portfolios and start working as a part-time.|||

Business idea should be unique for it to be successful. Here are the top 30 Small Businesses Ideas For Beginners in 2017