SAN DIEGO -- Changing surgical gloves prior to abdominal wall closure during a non-emergent cesarean section delivery was linked with a lower rate of composite wound outcomes, researchers said here.

Overall in the small, randomized trial, there was a significant difference in the rate of composite wound complication in the intervention group compared with a control group where clinicians did not change their gloves (6% versus 13%, respectively, P=0.008), reported Buvana Reddy, MD, of HealthPartners Institute in Saint Paul, Minn., and Jonathan Scrafford, MD, of the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis.

Complication rates from C-sections range from 10% to 25% and that transfer of bacteria from the lower genital tract to the uterus and abdomen contribute to infectious morbidity after C-section, Scrafford said in a presentation at the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists annual meeting.

He cited a previous Cochrane review that found decreased rates of endometritis when cleansing the vagina with iodine prior to C-section.

"We wanted to take those same concepts and target surgeon's gloves," Scrafford said.

Scrafford described a "handful" of studies in the 1980s and 1990s that found no difference in outcomes if the clinician changed gloves prior to delivery of the placenta, and said his group wondered what would happen if they "changed the timing" to changing gloves after hysterotomy.

The authors randomized 553 women undergoing C-section delivery at one Minnesota hospital from August 2015 to November 2016. Patients with emergent C-section were excluded. In the intervention group, the entire surgical team changed their gloves prior to abdominal closure, while the control group received usual care. The primary outcome was a composite of wound complications, including wound seroma, wound hematoma, wound infection, and skin separation of at least 1 cm.

The mean age of both groups of patients was 30, and there was no significant difference in BMI, prior C-section, or other risk factors. There was also no significant difference in surgical time or blood loss.

However, there was a significant difference in the portion of patients receiving vaginal prep between the intervention and control groups (20.3% versus 10.5%, P=0.001). The authors adjusted for vaginal preparation and found there was still a significant difference in wound composite outcomes between the intervention and control groups (adjusted OR 0.43, 95% CI 0.23-0.81, P=0.009).

While composite wound outcomes were the primary outcome, the authors did examine each separately. They found that there were no significant between group differences among seratoma, hematoma, wound infection, or other incisional complication. The main driver appeared to be skin separation, which had a significant difference in the intervention group compared to controls (6.8% versus 2.1%, P=0.01).

There were no significant between group differences on secondary outcomes, including febrile morbidity, surrounding soft tissue cellulitis, and endometritis.

Scrafford noted some limitations to the findings, including that the study used "non-block randomization," which had the potential for historical bias. There was also the potential for surgeon bias due to lack of surgeon blinding.

Eva Pressman, MD, of the University of Rochester Medical Center in Rochester, N.Y., told MedPage Today via email that changing gloves at that point in the surgery "is not a widely used practice. It does seem like an easy, relatively inexpensive way to decrease wound complications." Pressman was not involved in the study.

Asked why clinicians did not tend to change gloves at this point during C-section, "the only reason is old habit," she said.

Scrafford said that while future research is needed to attempt to reduce transfer of bacteria from the genital tract to the abdominal cavity wall, he emphasized how the study was "easy to reproduce." He encouraged other clinicians to try and duplicate these findings.

"At about $1.70 for a pair of gloves, an entire surgical team could perform this study for about $5," Scrafford said.|||

New gloves donned prior to abdominal closure