Browsing Behaviour Analytics: How People Use the Internet at the Workplace

We compared global browsing averages with the typical day of browsing the Web at the office, which we established using our own user logs. Instead of focusing on single websites, we mapped the Web using 9 categories, which turned out to be much more revealing of the actual use of the Internet overall, as well as at the workplace.

Social, Entertainment and Search (SES) make up almost two-thirds of overall Web browsing. At the workplace, SES’ share drops below half of all the time spent on the Web, while the share of Shopping, Informational, Educational and Email increases from 29% to 48%.

Daily browsing patterns confirm that Search is predominantly used for personal reasons, with usage spikes during the first and last hours at the office, and during lunch. Email usage at the office spikes between 3pm and 5pm.

Then, using referer info, we looked into how people use Facebook, Twitter and Google. Facebook revealed itself to be much less of a distraction than people assume: it has become the go-to source for news and information. Twitter, on the other hand, is used exclusively for entertaiment.

A Quick Note On Website Categories

 Workplace Web Browsing Behaviour

 Daily Pattern of Workplace Web Browsing

 Some Outstanding Office Browsing Patterns

 How Do People Use Facebook, Twitter & Google While At The Office?

We categorize every website where our users have spent more than 20 minutes as a group. Looking at 9 categories, instead of hundreds of thousands of websites, makes it much easier to understand how people spend their time online, and how they use a particular website. Furthermore, we need much less data for our analytics to be statistically meaningful.

We only log the time during which users are active. When the browser loses focus, the timer stops. When the user switches tabs, the timer switches, too. When the user doesn’t move the mouse, and doesn’t type anything on the keyboard, the timer switches off after 15 seconds.

Websites are assigned with one of the following categories: Social (Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn...), Entertainment (Youtube, Tumblr, 9gag…), Adult (porn and gambling), Search (Google, Yahoo, Bing…), Informational (corporate websites, online tools such as Google Translate), Educational (Wikipedia, Quora, Stack Overflow, online colleges…), Shopping (Amazon, Ebay, PayPal…), News (Google News, Daily Mail, Hacker News…), and Email (Gmail, Yahoo Mail…).

Our users spend on average 1 hour 12 minutes per day browsing the Web on their office computer. This duration is above global averages, which makes perfect sense: our service is used mainly by companies who rely on the Web a lot.

Here’s a head-to-head comparison of overall and office Web browsing, in percentage terms:

Note: for a description of how we obtained global browsing averages, please refer to my previous artile, How We Spend 3 Hours Per Day on the Internet.

The share of time spent on Social, Entertainment and Search (SES) is reduced, down by around 25%. Adult is almost non-existent, which makes sense: we tend to go there in the privacy of our homes.

Other categories end up with approximately the same share as for global Web browsing, when adjusted for the decline in SES.

We looked into the average workday, hour after hour. After adjusting for different timezones, we computed the average daily browsing pattern of all our users.

Note that some of our users work outside of the traditional office hours, i.e. outside of 9am to 6pm. To be honest, our data sample must have a statistical bias, as our business is still in the early stage "startup" phase, and our clients tend to be of the "early adopter" kind: tech-savvy and open-minded.

Here’s a different way to visualize these statistics, normalized to 100% for every hour of the day:

The first hour at the office is the moment when employees spend the most time on social media, both in percentage and in absolute terms. They compensate by spending the least time on entertainment, and shopping; I guess it just feels wrong to go on Buzzfeed, or to look for airplane tickets, as soon as you get to the office.

Search use increases (especially in percentage terms) when employees are least enclined to work: first hour at the office, last hour at the office, and during lunch. This seems to corroborate the fact that search is mainly used for personal purposes - as indicated by the fact that its time share decreases significantly from overall use to workplace use, almost as much as social media and entertainment.

Entertainment increases slightly throughout the workday, compensated by a continuous decrease of social media.

Email is big between 3pm and 5pm. I guess this is when you stop procrastinating and finally answer to all these bothersome emails.

This part is about the good, the bad, and the ugly. People have long-standing misconceptions about how the use the Internet. We get a lot of requests from potential clients asking us if they could use our software to block Facebook, for example (short answer: no).

The Internet changes faster than companies can keep up, and most managerial decisions concerning its use are taken based on outdated assumptions. We use referrer data to profile websites, in order to understand how people actually use them.

Let’s have a look at three Internet giants. I’ve included the links to the actual data, so you can check for yourself. There, you'll have access to global averages, along with your own account statistics. If you're not logged in, you'll be served with data from our demo account, which is, in fact, my own live browsing history.

17% of clicks on Google send back into Search, i.e., another page of Google search results - which is in line Google’s own admission that 85% of searches never go beyond the first page of results.

Google also sends over 9% of its traffic to Educational - a direct effect of its practice to favor Wikipedia’s articles among search results.

Facebook can no longer be considered a "time waster". People use it predominantly to access news, educational, and informational content. This is revealing of our state of mind when we open the webpage: it’s become a hub for accessing information, news in particular.

Twitter turns out to be used only for recreational purposes, with 74% of outgoing traffic sent to Entertainment. Note that the platform handles its outgoing traffic through t.co. Good luck trying to monetise that, Mr Dorsey.|||

We compared global browsing averages with the typical day of browsing the Web at the office, which we established using our own user logs....