Low back pain causes more disability than nearly 300 other conditions worldwide, according to new research, and nearly one in 10 people across the globe suffers from an aching lower back. How about you? Do you suffer from the back pain? What do YOU do about it?

Doctors and leading scientists in the field advise us to stay active, go to the gym, walk as much as possible etc. But how about that time of the day when you have to work at the office and sit long hours?

There is only one solution – SpinaliS chairs for active sitting! Active sitting means you are sitting, but you are stabilizing your torso the entire time. Check out SpinaliS Navigator Series Chairs, which are great for slim and tall people, especially over 6’3″

 https://www.spinalis-chairs.ca/spinalis-chairs/navigator/

“Low back pain is something that almost all people experience at some point in their lives. It is something common across sexes, age groups, countries, socioeconomic groups, education levels and occupation,” said the lead author of the first study, Damian Hoy, a senior research fellow at the University of Queensland’s School of Population Health, in Australia.

Research shows that 40% of people become less active after back pain strikes — a strategy that’s likely to delay healing or even make their condition worse. Try SpinaliS chairs and don’t look back!

Order online at https://www.spinalis-chairs.ca/spinalis-chairs/ and we will deliver any of the SpinaliS chairs of your choice right to your door!

For more info call 844 777 0489

 or drop by any of our three stores

FREE Shipping Anywhere in Canada

 Alberta AB, British Columbia BC, Manitoba MN, New Brunswick NB, Newfoundland and Labrador NL, Northwest Territories NT, Nova Scotia NS, Nunavut NU, Ontario ON, Prince Edward Island PEI, Quebec QC, Saskatchewan SK, Yukon YT (Alberta, Colombie-Britannique, Nouveau-Brunswick, Terre-Neuve-et-Labrador, Territoires du Nord-Ouest, Nouvelle-Écosse, Nunavut, Ontario, Île-du-Prince-Édouard, Québec, Saskatchewan, Yukon)

Medical Device

 SpinaliS chairs were developed with a help of doctors and evaluated as a Class I medical device. Clinical evaluation of the medical device was processed by multiple clinics in Europe. However, in Canada, it is not possible to claim SpinaliS chairs to write your taxes off and they are not covered by any kind of medical insurance or health plan, yet.

Abs and Back Workout

 Work out while sitting on any of the SpinaliS chairs and performing your daily tasks at the office or home.

Back Pain Relief

 SpinaliS Chairs will work out your core muscles for you. Just sit, do your thing and leave everything else up to SpinaliS.

Stylish Office Chairs

 Design of the SpinaliS Chairs is an eye candy – your customers will definitely notice them!

Yoga Ball Alternative

 It is recommended not to sit longer than 2 hours on a yoga ball, but on the SpinaliS chairs you can sit all day long.

Standing Desk Alternative

 SpinaliS chairs will actually make your body to work out and get you into a great shape without the hard task of standing or exercising.

Who does use SpinaliS?

 Google, Dubai Airport, SONY, IBM, DELL, Skoda Auto, CSOB Bank, Unicredit Bank, Vodafone and many more.

Ness Op Media Ltd. offers powerful web marketing and marketing solutions for the medium size businesses and start-ups. We guarantee rapid growth of your company without spending money on expensive Google AdWords and Facebook Newsfeeds. Tell us what you want and see the difference within a month .. guaranteed!

Call us now at 778 938 9883 for a FREE CONSULTATION!|||

Low back pain causes more disability than nearly 300 other conditions worldwide, according to new research. How about you? Do you suffer from the back pain?