Light Image Resizer v5.0.6.0 Download Free With Serial Key 2017 Many times we encounter digital photos that are extremely heavy due to their resolution causing loss of space on the hard drive in addition to slowing down the PC so I bring you this software Light Image Resizer 5.0.6.0 in its latest version 2017, the program allows us Reduce and optimize image size, we can convert images to multiple formats, change image resolution and more, Light Image Resizer 5 is complete for Download in installer as Portable included Serial generator and best of all includes Spanish, you I invite you to see the characteristics, information and captures in this contribution. I hope you like it and it will be useful with light weight of no more than 30 megs,

Description of the program

 Light Image Resizer – formerly known as VSO Image Resizer – software organizes your photos by reducing their resolution to easily move them to your hard drive. Light Image Resizer is the perfect tool for storing your digital photos and images on your PC and you want to resize, compress, convert, create copies, create thumbnails, import or organize photos.

System Requirements

 Minimum: Intel Pentium III / AMD Athlon XP, 512 MB RAM (Windows XP)

 Recommended: Intel Core 2 Duo or equivalent, 2 GB of RAM (Windows 7 or higher)

 Best performance: Core i5 / i7 or equivalent, 4GB of RAM (Windows 7 or higher)

 Compatible Operating Systems

 It is compatible with Windows XP (SP3), Windows Vista, Windows 7, Windows 8. There is no Mac version available.

 Principal functions

 Resize and convert

 Use the Light Image Resizer resize images. The Batch Image Converter can easily convert your images into different formats. Select your output resolution, resize the original or create a copy, move and / or rename files or compress, choose a specific destination for the processed images. You can work on individual photos or edit a large number of images by simply making a batch resize in a single click. Extra options Add your own watermark to protect your work or add a copyright to the photos with text, html and support format like transparency. Customize photos by converting to sepia or adding a border. Use the live preview to see what the end result will look like before you actually render the image. ObviousIdea Photo Resizer / Picture Resizer works on files, subfolders and folders, and supports RAW formats. With integrated multi-core support, you can convert images even faster. Start the application easily from Windows Explorer shell with a right click on the image or folder.Production and exportPhotos can be added directly as attachments, individually or in a ZIP file, to e-mail using the publish feature, without exceeding the maximum size allowed by e-mail servers. Create PDF files of your images, such as jpg to PDF; Do this for single or multiple images. Edit, create, export, new backup profiles with your favorite settings. The most popular profiles are already pre-defined, such as full HD resolution wallpaper images, Ipod, NTSC, 640 x 480. Access to profiles in 1 click with the integration shell.

 Digital Frame

 Transfer photos and optimize space in digital frames with Digital Photo Frame Assistant. You can use the resize options to resize the image to supported the resolution of the picture and add even more photos to see!

 Supported input image formats

 .JPEG

 .JPG

 .CR2 (Canon RAW) .NEF (Nikon RAW) .DNG (Adobe) .GIF (Animated GIF Compatible) ICO .PNG

 .PSD (Photoshop) .TIFF (multiple TIFF pages supported) .ARW .BMP .CRW .MEF .CUT .DCM .DIB

 .DICOM .EMF .JP2 .JPE .MRW .ORF .PBM .PCD .PCX .PEF .PPM .PSP .PSP .AGE .RAF .RGB

 .SGI .SR2 .SRF .TGA .TIF .WMF

 Output Formats

 .BMP

 .JPG

 .GIF

 .PNG

 .TIFF

 .PDF

 .PSD (Photoshop)

 .PCX

 .TGA

 .ZIP (containing any of the above)

 Changes of this Version

 FIXED: A black or block output may occur if you resize to very large dimensions

 FIXED: A crash may occur when you close the preview before the image has just loaded

 FIXED: The original preview was not loaded when using Center mode

 FIXED: Memory Leak When Text Markup Fails

 FIXED: The Add Border dialog box would not accept decimals if the unit was set to percent

 FIXED: text alignment of the watermark when rotation is used

 IMPROVED: it detects the read-only indicator of the target files|||

Light Image Resizer v5.0.6.0 Download Free With Serial Key 2017 Many times we encounter digital photos that are extremely heavy due to their resolution