Basically, it is a conscious decision to skip a certain meal throughout the day. In our opinion / experiences breakfast seems to be the easiest option.

You may wonder why would I want to do this? Well, there seems to be many benefits that come with intermittent fasting day in and day out. One of the most popular and widely claimed is fat loss.

If you wait to eat 4-6 hours from the time you wake up, your body is in a fasting state. When you consume your first meal after 4-6 hours of waking up your body will need to pull energy from somewhere to burn the food you just ate and extract the nutrients. Since you don't have anything in your system to pull from, naturally, your body will resort to your stored body fat to help break down your first meal.

Another added benefit to intermittent fasting is, the ability to eat MORE for each meal throughout the day. We have tried ourselves to eat 6 small meals throughout the day, but in reality it takes a lot of work to prep all of those meals! If you eat a large lunch and dinner, you feel more satisfied. Just remember to stay within your daily caloric intake goal.

If you have tried intermittent fasting in the past and saw no results, then there is really only one reason why it didn't work. That reason is because you over ate when it came to eating after breaking your fast. Just because you skip breakfast in the morning doesn't mean you can eat as much food as you want towards the end of the day.

You still need to be aware of how many calories you are taking in. You should still have a calorie deficit at the end of the day in order to lose the body fat. The best thing to do is load up on meat / protein and have smaller portions of carbohydrates, to kill those snack cravings at the end of the night.

If you aren't following us on Instagram check us out! Don't forget to like us on Facebook if you like what we are doing.|||

What is intermittent fasting? Basically, it is a conscious decision to skip a certain meal throughout the day. Check it out!