Every time I building sideproject, I always thinking which the best way to do it. From handpicking idea, collaborate with other people or decide to do solo. Finish it up, launch it and what happen after launch time.

Here’s below step by step that I did to create side projects:

Finding Target Market/ Audience

Before you start with coding, copywriting or think about what technology you want to take for the project, choose very well your audience. I know it’s not always about money as a motivation but what the point you create project until months by months when you don’t have people using it.

Working with Idea

You could got idea from anywhere. It’s not always tech related stuff but could be a problem that you feel or see in daily life. Talk to your friends and your family or going to conference. Browsing internet, lookup Hacker News and Quora.

Collaborate with partner in crime or going solo

If you’re programmer, you maybe didn’t have any problem on execution process. But for designer or people who don’t know coding at all, would be one of many factor that hold you back to create side project. Team up with your friends or colleagues even hire developer would be the best solution. Need someone to talk to about side project? join the community where people help each other when building side project Sideproject XYZ and Product People Club

Choosing the right tool

Are you building website or apps that solve other people problem? Don’t have a friend or mate to help you on execution process? Or perhaps you need to do that alone? There’s always a tool that help you to bring your idea into life, if you create website or apps you simply use webflow or wordpress theme. You just need to customize it with your own content and voila. You did it!

Don’t overtiming

Time to finishing sideproject it would be better if less than 3 months, if more than that you’re gonna lost your interest and create other sideproject without finishing the one that you started first.

Time to Launch your side project

When you’re launching your side project at the first time that could be daunting and skeptical. Your launch will be key in determining how well you do. The only deciding factor is whether you can devote the time in continuing to grow it. However, the truth is that your chances of failing are greater than your chance of succeeding. Figure out why you failed, if it’s worth saving, do it. Need a little guide? Download side project launch checklist here.

Take away: there’s still multiple factor even if read this you keep procrastinate your goal to create side project this year. But if you follow above step, it would be more easily.

Stay tune for the next article ;)

originally published at sideprojectlauncher.com on 8 May 2017|||

Every time I building sideproject, I always thinking which the best way to do it. From handpicking idea, collaborate with other people or decide to do solo. Finish it up, launch it and what happen…