One way that people can have a social impact with their career is to donate money to effective charities. We mention this path in our career guide, suggesting that people donate to evidence-backed charities such as the Against Malaria Foundation, which is estimated by GiveWell to save the lives of children in the developing world for around $7,500.

Alyssa Vance told me that many people may see this as highly ineffective relatively to their optimistic expectations about how much it costs to improve the lives of people in people. I thought the reverse would be true – folks would be skeptical that charities in the developing world were effective at all. Fortunately Amazon Mechanical Turk makes it straightforward to survey public opinion at a low cost, so there was no need for us to sit around speculating. I suggested a survey on this question to someone in the effective altruism community with a lot of experience using Mechanical Turk – Spencer Greenberg of Clearer Thinking – and he went ahead and conducted one in just a few hours.

You can work through the survey people took yourself here and we’ve put the data and some details about the method in a footnote. The results clearly vindicated Alyssa:

It turns out that most Americans believe a child can be prevented from dying of preventable diseases for very little – less than $100. In fact, 40% of people believed the ‘most effective charities’ could save a life for under $10 – less than a hundredth of what we believe to be the true cost. 3% believed a life could be saved for under $1! A minority thought it would cost much more – 5% gave an answer over $1,000 – which pushed the average to around $500:

We asked about both typical charities and the most cost-effective charities, and as shown in the table, people thought they were roughly equally effective.

We have good evidence that the cost to save a life for typical charities is not anything like as low as $40. If this were true, then such charities spending $1 billion each year would be able to save 25 million lives – a sixth of all births globally, and more children than are actually dying of easily prevented diseases. There simply aren’t enough lives being saved in total for figures like that to add up.

On the other hand, we can’t know for sure that the estimates for “the most cost-effectiveness charities” are wrong. There could be some high-risk high-return projects, for example those conducting scientific research, that ultimately will save lives for less than $100 each. That said, we don’t know any reliable way to save lives for that price – GiveWell has spent a decade searching and hasn’t come close to finding anything that cost-effective which isn’t already being funded.

We should keep in mind that this survey only elicited people’s snap judgements. Most Americans don’t have considered views on the issue of charity cost-effectiveness, and many commented that they were “pulling numbers out of the air”. A different wording of the question might have elicited different answers (e.g. how many people would be prevented from dying, who otherwise would have died, if you donated $1,000 to a charity delivering health services in the developing world).

Furthermore, there are ways the survey questions could be interpreted differently by different people. Respondents may have read the question as asking about the average effectiveness of charities in the developing world in general, rather than the cost of saving an additional life by increasing spending. Some programs that are already well funded, like basic vaccinations, will save lives more cheaply than the best incremental spending opportunities available. Some may also have been thinking of the unit cost of delivering a vaccine that ‘could’ save a life, rather than the total cost of distributing a sufficient number of vaccines to save one person who otherwise would have died. Consistent with this, one respondent noted:

But even given these limitations there are some things we can learn from this survey:

So Alyssa was right that most folks are inclined to think global health charities are much more cost-effective than I do. Thanks to Spencer Greenberg for running the survey. Hopefully we can use Mechanical Turk to deal with questions like this again in future.|||

