I had no intention of writing this but then I saw a social media post by my friend and colleague Brian McNoldy at the University of Miami. He mentioned a new paper in the American Meteorological Society's Journal of Atmospheric Sciences entitled, "The Stability of Mars’s Annular Polar Vortex". Brian jokingly lamented that he feared what would happen to this outstanding paper once the media gets hold of it. I understand his point because we have certainly seen instances of wide spread misinformation and abuse of the Earth's polar vortex. Heck, it is a bit cool here in the Southeast this weekend, I am surprised no one has blamed it on the polar vortex or said that it is "coming to get us." I thought, as an atmospheric scientist, that I better get ahead of the curve just in case Martian polar vortex abuse begins. I created a #stoppolarvortexabuse hashtag a few years ago in frustration over the circus with our version.

First, let's recall what Brian McNoldy told me in a previous discussion about the polar vortex,

I have previously written in Forbes about Earth's polar vortex. The American Meteorological Society's Glossary of Meteorology has provided a nice, updated definition of the polar vortex

It most commonly refers to a planetary-scale mid- to high-latitude circumpolar circulation. There are distinct tropospheric and stratospheric circumpolar vortices.  The tropospheric polar vortex is usually defined by geopotential contours that lie within the core of the tropospheric westerlies. The tropospheric vortex edge is generally between 40º and 50º latitude, and the vortex exists throughout the year but is strongest during winter when the air within the polar vortex is the coldest.  The term “polar vortex” is sometimes used in reference to smaller-scale (meso- to synoptic scale) vortices that usually occur within the tropospheric polar vortex in polar regions near the tropopause—for example, “tropopause polar vortices.”  The stratospheric polar vortex exists from spring to fall and usually extends from just above tropopause to the upper stratosphere. The stratospheric vortex generally increases in size from the lower stratosphere to the upper stratosphere where its edge is located around 50º latitude. The stratospheric vortex breaks down, and the circumpolar flow reverses, during summer.

What the glossary definition ends with is revealing, "Circumpolar vortices have also been observed on other planetary bodies." As McNoldy recently tweeted, "They're very normal parts of planetary atmospheres." Peter Read's paper, "Dynamics and circulation regimes of terrestrial planets" published in Planetary and Space Science is an excellent review of the polar vortex and dynamics on Mars, Venus, Saturn, and Titan.

One of my favorite science writers, Emily Lakdawalla, wrote an excellent piece for the Planetary Society on "Polar vortices across the solar system." Her comment in the article perfectly sums up some of the more complex stuff that I am about to discuss

The new paper by researchers at Johns Hopkins University and the University of St. Andrews note that the Martian polar atmosphere has a rather persistent potential vorticity (PV) minimum with a ribbon of higher PV going around it. The researchers note in the paper that

In Earth's stratosphere, PV increases as you go from the equator to the winter pole. There are typically strong differences (gradients) near the polar vortex at roughly 60◦ latitude, according to the paper. The gradients have been found to be weaker at mid-latitudes and within the actual vortex. However, the authors note

Potential vorticity is not really common "coffee conversation" for some of you so if you want ore information, you might attempt to read this summary, if you dare.

The martian vortex was simulated by the researchers using numerical models with good accuracy. A Martian solar day or "sol" is about 24 hours, 39 minutes, and 35.244 second.  The new paper suggests that 0.5 to 2.0 sols may be a critical time scale similar to certain radiative (energy) process time scales of Mars' polar atmosphere and may be important (along with weak topographic forcing) in maintaining the Martian Polar Vortex. Ok, so what? Well, we now send spacecraft and rovers to Mars. One day we will send humans.

In a rather festive, NASA press release describes the following implications of the polar vortex on the Mars Odyssey Spacecraft mission

If he were flying above the North Pole of Mars, my advice to Santa would be 'Hang tight onto your reins,'" said Odyssey navigator John C. Smith. "You could be in for a rough ride."In the midst of aerobraking maneuvers that are lowering the spacecraft's orbit around Mars, the Odyssey team has discovered an unexpected and somewhat unpredictable north polar atmospheric disturbance that is making the job a real adventure, Smith said......Called the "polar vortex," this cold, low density region forms each winter in the atmosphere above the planet's latitudes 70 degrees north and higher. The region between the polar vortex and the rest of the atmosphere is called the 'transition zone.' In this zone, strong winds swirl around the pole and the zone itself weaves in and out in the typical fashion of a terrestrial jet stream. It is an area where sometimes surprising shifts in the atmospheric density can become fasten-your-seatbelt territory for Odyssey.|||

Mars and other planets have a polar vortex. A new paper has found a way to model it. So what? Here is the answer.