In this tutorial, you learn how to create an Azure Virtual Machine (VM) with Accelerated Networking. Accelerated networking enables single root I/O virtualization (SR-IOV) to a VM, greatly improving its networking performance. This high-performance path bypasses the host from the datapath reducing latency, jitter, and CPU utilization, for use with the most demanding network workloads on supported VM types. The following picture shows communication between two virtual machines (VM) with and without accelerated networking:

Without accelerated networking, all networking traffic in and out of the VM must traverse the host and the virtual switch. The virtual switch provides all policy enforcement, such as network security groups, access control lists, isolation, and other network virtualized services to network traffic. To learn more about virtual switches, read the Hyper-V network virtualization and virtual switch article.

With accelerated networking, network traffic arrives at the VM's network interface (NIC), and is then forwarded to the VM. All network policies that the virtual switch applies without accelerated networking are offloaded and applied in hardware. Applying policy in hardware enables the NIC to forward network traffic directly to the VM, bypassing the host and the virtual switch, while maintaining all the policy it applied in the host.

The benefits of accelerated networking only apply to the VM that it is enabled on. For the best results, it is ideal to enable this feature on at least two VMs connected to the same Azure Virtual Network (VNet). When communicating across VNets or connecting on-premises, this feature has minimal impact to overall latency.

This feature is currently in preview release and may not have the same level of availability and reliability as features that are in general availability release. The feature is not supported, may have constrained capabilities, and may not be available in all Azure locations. For the most up-to-date notifications on availability and status of this feature, check the Azure Virtual Network updates page.

The following limitations exist when using this capability:

Changes to these limitations are announced through the Azure Virtual Networking updates page.

You can use the Azure portal or Azure PowerShell to create the VM.

Once you create the VM in Azure, you must install the accelerated networking driver for Windows. Before completing the following steps, you must have created a Windows VM with accelerated networking using either the portal or PowerShell steps in this article.

You can use the Azure portal or Azure PowerShell to create the VM.

Once you create the VM in Azure, you must install the accelerated networking driver for Linux. Before completing the following steps, you must have created a Linux VM with accelerated networking using either the portal or PowerShell steps in this article.|||

Learn how to create a virtual machine with Accelerated Networking.