There is a lot of discussion about the exchange and optimization of professional talent between India and the United States, and with the recent focus on the U.S. H1B visa program and its effect on the employment opportunities for technology professionals in America.

In considering this issue, I have come to the conclusion that, with the appropriate focus, this talent exchange and knowledge-sharing program can and should benefit both India and the United State. But, if these benefits are to be fully recognized, we must carefully target the program to leverage the best resources of both countries and allow for optimal opportunities and growth.

Start-ups and smaller businesses and to some extent even large players have already begun to take this approach in order to capitalize on limited budgets and schedules, and shape a business model that will allow them to spend money on the more highly skilled resources without sacrificing the opportunities provided by projects and work that requires a less challenging skill set.

If the U.S. wishes to provide employment opportunities to grow its economy and allow for upward mobility for college graduates, it might consider using this technique to train and staff entry-level technology positions within its businesses. This approach provides opportunities for employment and satisfies the needs of organizations and, at the same time, allows U.S. businesses to plan for and fund the highly skilled positions. Where it is necessary (or desirable) to seek highly skilled professionals from other countries, U.S. companies can work with offshore businesses to share knowledge and create multi-national teams that encourage and leverage growth across the board. Where skilled, trained workers from India or other countries are needed, the H1B lottery system will allow professionals the opportunity to vie for a chance at these positions, selecting only the best and the brightest to satisfy the need.

By modifying the current approach and improving employment opportunities for U.S. college graduates, these countries can come together to encourage an international exchange of information, training and cultural exposure.

In fact, U.S. companies like Google and Facebook are already using a similar approach with a good deal of success. The added benefit of carefully defining the levels and skills of those applying for an H1B visa is that this approach would limit the number of people applying and therefore make it possible for only the best and the brightest to be accepted. That means that U.S. businesses would receive more appropriate support, resources and knowledge.

While the U.S. is considering visa reform, it might be worthwhile for them to review the flaws and the strengths of the current system and make changes that will have a lasting and positive effect for the U.S.

The benefit to India is also worth discussing.

Because they entered the U.S. to take on a low-level position, their salary will not advance enough to improve their economic situation. Changes to the visa system can significantly benefit India's technology professionals, by allowing highly skilled resources to get an H1B visa and to earn a salary that will offer them a reasonable lifestyle while in the U.S. An additional benefit to the U.S. and India is the increase in options for building near-shore and offshore relationships and cooperation and increasing innovation in the automation and other technologies.

All things considered, this approach to H1B reform would benefit the U.S. and India and the professionals who work in both countries.

Kartik is the founder and CEO of Elegant MicroWeb, specializing in software services and products. For two decades, Elegant MicroWeb has provided a full suite of innovative offshore technology services, serving clients worldwide, with sustained business partnerships. The flagship ElegantJ BI business intelligence solution offers a Smarten approach to BI, with Plug n' Play Predictive Analysis, Self-Serve Data Preparation and Smart Data Visualization.

ElegantJ BI was listed as a Representative Vendor in the 'Gartner Market Guide for Enterprise-Reporting-Based Platforms', as an Other Relevant Vendor in the Gartner MQ for Business Intelligence and Analytics Platforms, as a Niche BI and Analytics Vendor for the Gartner Report, Competitive Landscape: BI Platforms and Analytics Software Asia/Pacific and a Listed Vendor for Other Vendors to Consider for Modern BI and Analytics, Gartner Report.|||

