1.5.0 is out at last!

The major new functionality makes it much easier to add dependencies to your lein projects. If you’re modifying your lein project by hand, you’ll now get autocompletion on artifact names, groups and available versions. But there’s now a much easier way to do this - you can add a dependency from anywhere in your project using the Generate… action (Cmd-N on OSX, Alt-Insert on Win/Linux). This will pop up a dialog which will allow you to select one or more artifacts with full search capabilities. You can select the profile which you want to add the dependency to, and your project will be automatically refreshed once it’s added. There is also a notification when project.clj files are modified. This allows the projects to be synchronised easily after manual modifications, which has been a frequent source of confusion for new users.

All this functionality is built on functionality provided by the Maven plugin, so you’ll need that installed and enabled for this to work. You will also need to index any repositories referred to in your project.clj, you’ll get a popup warning you if any of them are not indexed.

There are also fixes to the REPL commands functionality. You can now use ~selection in your REPL commands to create commands which use the currently selected form. A problem has also been fixed when using REPL commands which execute the previous command. You can now also bind a key to interrupt current execution in the REPL.

There have been several fixes to the macroexpander, with more to come soon. It has never worked in the REPL editor, and would frequently not do anything with no message explaining why - both of these issues are fixed. I’ve also fixed a bug using the expander under Clojure 1.9.0, due to the namespaced maps

This release also contains fixes for various nasty performance and hanging bugs, and one where namespaced maps were not pretty printed correctly. There are also some fixes for the stub generation functionality and the possibility to enable more logging to diagnose problems when it doesn’t work correctly. There’s a minor fix to the ns form formatting, it now obeys the 1-space list indent flag which helps match Emacs’ formatting. Cursive no longer buffers output when loading files into the REPL, which caused problems with test frameworks which run long processes on namespace load. There are also several other bugfixes which you can see in the issues.

This is the last release supporting IntelliJ 15. Generally, I committed to supporting the last two years’ releases of IntelliJ, and 2017.1 is out now. If you’re using v15 this version of Cursive will continue to work, you just won’t receive any more updates.

Here are the issues:|||

