Azure Database for MySQL is a relational database service in the Microsoft cloud based on MySQL Community Edition database engine. Azure Database for MySQL delivers:

These capabilities require almost no administration, and all are provided at no additional cost. They allow you to focus on rapid app development and accelerating your time to market, rather than allocating precious time and resources to managing virtual machines and infrastructure. In addition, you can continue to develop your application with the open source tools and platform of your choice, and deliver with the speed and efficiency your business demands without having to learn new skills.

This article is an introduction to Azure Database for MySQL core concepts and features related to performance, scalability, and manageability, with links to explore details. See these quick starts to get you started:

For a set of Azure CLI samples, see:

Azure Database for MySQL service offers two service tiers: Basic and Standard. Each tier offers different performance and capabilities to support lightweight to heavyweight database workloads. You can build your first app on a small database for a few dollars a month, then change your service tier to scale with needs of your solution with no downtime. Dynamic scalability enables your database to transparently respond to rapidly changing resource requirements. You only pay for the resources you need, when you need them.

How do you know the right click-stop when you dial up and down? Use the built-in performance monitoring and alerting features, combined with the performance ratings based on Compute Unit. Using these features, you can quickly assess the impact of scaling up or down based on your current or project performance needs. See Concepts: Service tiers for details.

Azure's industry leading 99.99% availability service level agreement (SLA), powered by a global network of Microsoft-managed datacenters, helps keep your app running 24/7. With every Azure Database for MySQL server, you take advantage of built-in security, fault tolerance, and data protection that you would otherwise have to buy or design, build, and manage. With Azure Database for MySQL, you can use point-in-time restore to recover a server to an earlier state, as far back as 35 days.

Azure database services have a tradition of data security that Azure Database for MySQL upholds with features that limit access, protect data at-rest and in-motion, and help you monitor activity. Visit the Azure Trust Center for information about Azure's platform security.

Now that you've read an introduction to Azure Database for MySQL and answered the question "What is Azure Database for MySQL?", you're ready to:|||

Overview of the Azure Database for MySQL relational database service.