LONDON—One of Europe’s largest equity crowdfunding platforms will be the first to offer investors a chance to trade their investments on the secondhand market, breaking new ground in an industry quickly becoming an important funding source for small businesses.

Seedrs—backed by high-profile U.K. fund manager Neil Woodford —said Monday it plans to launch a limited secondary market offering this summer.

Mr. Woodford is one of Britain’s best-known money managers, and his investments generate significant interest. He is known for his contrarian views, and for selling off U.K. bank stocks in 2008 before the worst of the financial crisis.

U.K.-based Seedrs hopes the launch of a secondary market will have a transformative effect on the crowdfunding sector, which has disrupted traditional fundraising methods by allowing startup businesses to sell equity stakes to investors online.

The industry has soared in popularity as ordinary investors look to cash in on startups as they get off the ground, despite the risks. The sector has also redrawn the traditional investing landscape, allowing amateur venture capitalists the chance to invest before the traditional route of an IPO or private placement.

Britain has led the way in opening up equity crowdfunding. But U.K. regulators have expressed some concerns, including a lack of experience among many of the investors. A 2015 review from the U.K.’s Financial Conduct Authority reported that 62% of investors said they didn’t have any previous investment experience.

While equity crowdfunding has shown potential to be a major source of funding for new companies and ideas, observers have noted there hasn’t previously been an easy way for investors to sell their shares. Investors have to wait for an exit event, such as a company sale or IPO, to cash out. However, Seedrs will now offer investors the ability to sell shares in companies they have bought, and other investors the chance to increase their stakes.

Jeff Lynn, chief executive and co-founder of Seedrs, told The Wall Street Journal that the secondary market launch was in response to strong investor demand.

“We have listened to our huge investor base, who have increasingly been showing a desire for a mechanism to buy and sell shares in our portfolio companies.” Mr. Lynn said.

Investors have poured over £210 million ($272.4 million) into companies via Seedrs, making it the most active investor in private companies in the U.K.

The secondary market will initially have a number of restrictions, and the company said historically a secondary market for shares in private companies has been “highly illiquid.”

Seedrs is imposing several key rules, most notably limiting trading to one week a month to help coalesce activity, and only allowing current investors in a company to buy its shares.

The firm said it would look at increasing the windows and relaxing rules on who can buy in once the secondary market is under way.

“It will never be, and never should be, as liquid as a major public market, but I think adding elements of liquidity so investors have a chance to trade out or trade in is very much a natural evolution of the space,” Mr. Lynn said.

This story is from our WSJ City app, which you can download from the App Store or Google Play. now.wsj.com/mobile/wsjcity/|||

One of Europe’s largest crowd-funding platforms has set up a secondary market on which investors can trade stakes.