Google? Of course! Not only have they been a presence in Tokyo for many years, but they’ve also supported more smaller pride parades in Japan (Osaka, for example) and events in far less gay-friendly countries like South Korea and Singapore. Seriously–in Singapore they didn’t even back down when the local government told foreign companies to stop. As usual, this year at Tokyo Rainbow Pride they had an extra-large booth staffed by dozens enthusiastic employees. Their #WhatIsLove campaign was a big hit. Rare among corporate sponsors, they also tried to make a grassroots-level contribution to the community by designing a YouTube workshop specifically for Tokyo Rainbow Pride participants.

IBM Japan? Absolutely! Thanks to the work of Atsushi Kawada they were one of the first US companies to publicly embrace LGBT rights in Japan more than a decade ago. Mr. Kawada often speaks publicly topics like coming out at work, and when he does his employer is prominently identified. As a direct result of publicly supporting LGBT right for nearly a decade, they have become one of the most sought-after companies for LGBT new graduates. This year they showed their strength in numbers, with dozens of employees marching behind a colorful IBM banner. One recent graduate proudly pointed out that his direct manager was also attending, and quickly launched into a pitch for IBM Watson.

Microsoft Japan? Stronger than ever! When my co-chair and I launched the Japan chapter of GLEAM in 2013 we thought it would be years before the company would be ready to join Tokyo Rainbow Pride. We couldn’t have been more wrong. Thanks to strong support and encouragement we were able to join Tokyo Rainbow Pride for the first time shortly after we launched, and every year since Microsoft Japan has had a more prominent presence. I’m proud of what we accomplished, but more than that I’m ecstatic to see the organization continue to flourish since I switched companies last year. Like IBM, Microsoft Japan has become a highly-sought-after destination for LGBT new graduates. These are young people who are out, proud, and have no intention of working for a company where they couldn’t be their whole selves.

Accenture? Well represented! They had both a booth and dozens of employees in matching t-shirts marching in the parade. They were also a Banner sponsor.

Yahoo! Japan? Booth? Check! Enthusiastic employees marching? Check! The history of Yahoo! Japan as a company and it’s enduring prominence in the Japanese market is a fascinating story for another time, but suffice to say they are much more well regarded here than they are in the US.

Oracle? Wait…Oracle?!? Yes, Oracle had a strong presence at Tokyo Rainbow Pride. Booth? Check! Enthusiastic employees marching? You got it!

This is hardly a complete list but all of these companies were well represented:

Goldman Sachs had bright pink t-shirts for all their employees–pink so that they could be used across Asia and specifically at Singapore’s Pink Dot event. (No word yet on whether they will continue their support, unfortunately.)

EY? Booth? Check! More than a hundred enthusiastic employees marching in colorful shirts? Of course! Beth Brooke-Marciniak, EY’s Global Vice Chair of Public Policy and one of Forbes “The World’s 100 Most Powerful Women” made waves when she came out in 2012, and she has spoken publicly about her experience on visits to Japan.

BuzzFeed Japan? They didn’t just have a booth–they changed their Twitter icon to a rainbow for the entire week and wrote numerous stories about the event and the LGBT community. Check out some of their photos from the festival area.

Spotify? They bought a massive billboard in front of Shibuya Station (>3.2 million commuters daily)for the event and were the official Music Sponsor.

Lush? Turned all their shops windows into giant rainbows and spent asking visitors to their shops to post photos to Twitter and Instagram with the hashtags #WeBelieveInLove and #LoveIsLove. And of course a full-page ad and Charity sponsorship.

GAP? Full-page ad, Silver sponsorship, rainbows in their shop windows, and rainbow bags for everyone.

Since I’m writing about an influential US technology company, I’ve tried to focus on other influential US companies. But please don’t let that suggest that there was any lack of influential Japanese brands joining the festival and parade. A few examples:

Nomura: This major Japanese investment bank didn’t just have a booth and a ton of people in the parade–they had employees take over one of their most prominent branches in Shibuya to wave giant rainbow flags as the parade passed by!

Dentsu: Japan’s No. 1 advertising agency had a booth at pride. They also publish regularly surveys about the size of the LGBT market in Japan.

Panasonic: A huge consumer brand in Japan with a huge booth and tons of marketing budget.

Shiseido: Took over no fewer than 6 booths to hawk cosmetic products and spray passers-by with sunscreen.

Japan Tobacco: JT is massive, and the Japanese government retains a large ownership stake (there’s a fascinating history on Wikipedia). They were a Platinum Sponsor of Tokyo Rainbow Pride.

NTT Group: The massive telecommunications conglomerate (>240,000 employees) with partial government ownership was a Banner sponsor.

Mizuho: In Japan, every bank is assigned a number. It’s sort of like a routing code. Mizuho’s number is 1. Literally. This year they joined the LGBT Finance booth.

mixi, Inc: Originally Japan’s answer to Friendster, this social network has evolved into a major social game maker. They made a massive two-story puppy out of colorful flowers and were a Platinum sponsor.

Marui: This massive department store chain had huge rainbow banners for the event adorning multiple buildings in Shibuya. They were also a Gold sponsor, had a large booth selling shoes, and advertised in the free paper for the event..

Isetan: The other giant department store chain followed Marui’s lead with a smaller advertising push.

BEAMS: The major fashion brand had a website sponsorship and full-page ad.

Don Quixote: The totally crazy everything store was selling rainbow everything on site!

Shibuya City: Yes, this major city in Tokyo had several booths at the event to discuss their civil partnerships. The mayor of Shibuya has spoken about his support for LGBT rights, and was notably the keynote speaker for Work With Pride in 2015.

Shibuya City Tourism Association: Promoted the event with an interview with transgender activist and Tokyo Rainbow Pride representative Fumino Sugiyama.

Unfortunately, there’s not really much to say: Apple didn’t have a booth at the Tokyo Rainbow Pride festival; they didn’t have an organized group of employees marching in the parade; they didn’t sponsor the event, even at the lowest sponsorship level; they also didn’t sponsor or publicly participate in any of the week-long series of events leading up to Tokyo Rainbow Pride; they didn’t advertise in the Tokyo Rainbow Pride guide; they didn’t feature LGBT content in iTunes or the App Store in coordination with the with the event; and they didn’t have LGBT-focused advertising around the parade route or elsewhere in Tokyo. In fact, to my knowledge they didn’t do anything at all.

Sadly, this is also not unexpected. While companies from Softbank to Osaka Gas have been found ways large and small to publicly show their support the LGBT community, in more than a decade of attending LGBT events in Tokyo I am not aware of a single event that Apple has publicly sponsored, of any LGBT organizations that they publicly support or participate in, or of any public outreach to the LGBT community. If they do any of this (and I don’t believe they do), their efforts have been so hidden, so quiet, and so under-the-radar that they might as well not exist at all.

For better or for worse, we are living in a time when a small number of powerful companies enjoy an incredible influence in our lives. When they show their support for diversity and inclusion it has a huge impact on the lives of their employees, their customers, and society at large.

A booth goes for 70,000 JPY. The cheapest iPhone 7 (32GB) retails for 72,800 JPY. Neither price includes tax.

Not to put too fine a point on it, but participating in events like Tokyo Rainbow Pride is primarily symbolic. It’s a simple but powerful message two-part message to the LGBT community:

While Tokyo Rainbow Pride is far-and-away the most prominent LGBT-focused even in Japan, there are many other organizations and events that Apple could (but currently does not) publicly support or participate in:

Work With Pride: This annual event for HR professionals has been growing exponentially and had more than 600 attendees in 2016. The mayor of Shibuya was the keynote speaker in 2015, and major companies like Recruit and Panasonic have provided spaces for the event. IBM Japan was a founding member along with Human Rights Watch Japan and Good Aging Yells, and many of the biggest brands in Japan participate in its PRIDE Index Working Group: Dai-Ichi Life Insurance, Dentsu, Oracle Japan, Nomura Securities, Fujitsu, Morgan Stanley, etc.

NIJIT, which started life as the (Tokyo) ‘IT Industry LGBT Association,’ would be a natural fit. Founded by Google, NIJIT holds networking events for IT professionals in rotation at Google, IBM, Microsoft, and Yahoo! Japan.

Good Aging Yells, Japan’s most successful LGBT-focused non-profit is sponsored by Oracle and regularly works with major brands such as GAP, Johnson & Johnson, Alfa Romeo, and Shiseido.

Rainbow Reel Tokyo (née Tokyo International Lesbian and Gay Film Festival): This even has been held annually since 1992. That’s right–Tokyo has had an LGBT film festival for a quarter-century at this point. Last year’s sponsors included Netflix, Alfa Romeo, and the high-end Beams fashion brand.

My name is Morris Cornell-Morgan. I worked at the Apple Store in Ginza while I was finishing my masters degree in 2012 and 2013 (it was one of the best jobs I have ever had, and I highly recommend it). I joined Microsoft in 2013 and helped launch GLEAM Japan while I was there (full disclosure, I still own a small amount of Microsoft stock). I once applied for a corporate job at Apple Japan but did not get it (at the time I was not sufficiently technical). I currently lead a small team of engineers at a rapidly growing startup in Tokyo (we were a Banner sponsor of Tokyo Rainbow Pride, passed out stickers at the event, and walked in the parade–it was cheap, easy, and the right thing to do). I co-host the Harajuku Data Lake podcast.

I’m also a big fan of Apple design and Apple products–on my desk at home I have 2 iPads, an iMac, a MacBook, 2 iPhones, and an Apple Watch, and I regularly use all of them.

I care because I know Apple is a good company. I know many people who work there, and they are some of the best people I have ever met. I have also personally met many LGBT employees at Apple Japan, both on the corporate side and in retail. I have not discussed this blog post with any of them because I don’t want them to get in trouble for it.

My motive in writing this is simple: I hope that it will encourage Apple to publicly support the LGBT community in Japan. Japan has embraced LGBT rights, and I hope Apple will do so as well.|||

Will Apple be the last major tech company to openly support the LGBT community in Japan?