The following list covers some of the topics to be presented at Waste Management 2018. Papers on other subjects related to the objectives of the conference are also welcome.

This creates a need for more research on current disposal methods such as landfills, incineration, chemical and effluent treatment, as well as recycling, clean technologies, waste monitoring, public and corporate awareness and general education.

Society is increasingly aware of the need to establish better practices and safer solutions for waste disposal. This requires further investigation into disposal methods and recycling as well as new technologies to monitor landfills, industrial mining wastes and chemical and nuclear repositories.

Waste Management is one of the key problems of modern society due to the ever-expanding volume and complexity of discarded domestic and industrial waste.

The conference provides a forum for the exchange of scientific information and work on the current situation of waste management amongst professionals, researchers, government departments and local authorities.

Publication of Papers

Papers presented at Waste Management 2018 are to be published by WIT Press in a Volume of WIT Transactions. Selected papers will appear in an issue of the International Journal of Environmental Impacts instead.

Reviews

To ensure the quality of our publications, abstracts and papers are peer reviewed by members of the International Scientific Advisory Committee and other experts, with manuscripts processed through CrossRef Similarity Check.

Open Access

WIT Press is an advocate of Open Access which offers maximum dissemination of your work. All WIT Transactions and Journal papers can be downloaded for free from the wit elibrary (www.witpress.com/elibrary).

Indexing and Archiving

Papers presented at Wessex Institute conferences are referenced by CrossRef and have appeared in notable reviews and databases. Papers are submitted to various indexing services such as Web of Science, Google Scholar and Scopus. All conference books are listed in the British Library and American Library of Congress.

Conference Proceedings

 At registration delegates will be given copies of the papers presented at the Conference on a USB Flash drive. Following the Conference, delegates will receive an electronic copy of the final publication in which their paper has been published.

Digital Archive

All conference papers are archived online in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com/elibrary) where they are permanently and freely available to the International Scientific Community.

Networking

Participants can present their research and interact with experts from around the world, as part of a unique community.

Reduced Fee for PhD Students

The Wessex Institute believes in the importance of encouraging PhD students to present and publish innovative research at its conferences. As a result, the Institute offers PhD students a much reduced conference fee.

*Google Scholar Indexation  WIT Press has made all its conference and journal papers open access in an effort to help its dissemination within the scientific and technical community.

This means that you are now able to download any paper in the WIT eLibrary (www.witpress.com/elibrary) totally free and without having to pre-register.

This major development has the added benefit of allowing the Google Scholar search engines to fully index all WIT papers.

Google Scholar is a search engine created specifically for researchers to facilitate the indexation and citation of academic papers free of charge. This service is becoming the most accepted comprehensive benchmark and quality standard.

In Google Scholar you will be able to see the number of citations of your articles as well as the ‘h-index’ ranking for both author and publications. The h-index is the largest number h such that at least h articles (by the author or in a publication) were cited at least h times each.

The impact of your work is given by the ‘i10 index’ which refers to the number of publications within the last 10 years that have at least 10 citations.

You can also easily create within the system an Author’s Profile which helps to highlight your achievements.

Google Scholar is becoming the most popular system in the world and its metrics are independent and unbiased. Unlike other ranking systems, it is free.|||

The Wessex Institute (WIT) is a research and advanced training centre with an international reputation for excellence in engineering and physical sciences.  It organises the well established programme of international WIT Conferences published by WIT Press.