UPDATE: 05/10/2017: This post has been updated with new options and additional information based on comments and feedback from readers since the original version went live. We’ve also included summaries of user reviews to better reflect actual users’ experience with different systems. Several existing solutions have had their descriptions changed to better reflect their current functionality.

Just kidding. I love pizza. Especially if it’s free.

I even like things that look like free pizza. Just the other day, a package came in the mail for me and it was delivered inside of a pizza box. Five stars out of five for that Etsy shop owner. I’m keeping the box. They had good taste in pizza shops.

Free pizza was one of my favorite things about college. Fliers advertising new clubs and organizations on campus always included a small note about free pizza at their meetings. And I was there. Because duh.

Unfortunately, as I’ve learned whilst navigating this endless maze called adulting, pizza isn’t always free. That sweet taste of zero-cost cheese is long gone.

But not so for the database management software world, where free database software and open source solutions are as abundant and mouthwatering as a cascade of tomato sauce and pesto.

Because when IT departments are operating on miniscule budgets, cutting costs is great for both staying in business and keeping IT afloat. Everyone likes free stuff.

So let’s take a step back to your formative college years, when the world was as free and dreamy as melted mozzarella, and check out these five fantastic free database software and open source DBM solutions to keep your department on budget.

CUBRID is a great free and open source option optimized specifically for web applications, useful when complex web services process large amounts of data and generate huge concurrent requests. This solution is implemented in C.

This relational database has been used in production systems (under a variety of names) since 1981 and features many ANSI SQL standards. Firebird is capable of running on Linux, Windows, and various Unix platforms.

Made by the original developers of MySQL, MariaDB is used by tech giants like Wikipedia, Facebook, and even Google. MariaDB is a database server that offers drop-in replacement functionality for MySQL. Security is a top concern and priority for MariaDB developers, and in each solution release, the developers also merge in all of MySQL’s security patches and enhance them if need be.

Leave another review for MariaDB here.

MongoDB was founded in 2007 and is known as the “database for giant ideas.” Developed by the people behind DoubleClick, ShopWiki, and Gilt Groupe, MongoDB is also backed by popular investors such as Fidelity Investments, The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., and Intel Capital. Since its inception, MongoDB has been downloaded 20 million times and is supported by more than 1,000 partners. These partners are dedicated to this free and open source solution’s belief that coding and databases should be simple and natural.

Leave another review for MongoDB here.

MySQL has been around since 1995 and is now owned by Oracle. While open source, there are also several paid editions available that offer additional features, like cluster geo-replication and automatic scaling. Because MySQL is an industry standard, it’s also compatible with just about every operating system and written in both C and C++. This solution is a great option for international users since the server can provide error messages to clients in multiple languages, encompassing support for several different character sets.

Leave another review for MySQL here.

With more than 15 years of active development, PostgreSQL is another stellar open source option, running on all major operating systems, including Linux, UNIX (AIX, BSD, HP-UX, SGI IRIX, Mac OS X, Solaris, Tru64), and Windows. PostgreSQL is also fully ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) compliant.

Leave another review for PostgreSQL here.

Self-proclaimed as the most widely deployed database in the world, SQLite began in 2000 and has been used by notable companies like Apple, Facebook, Microsoft, and Google. Each release is carefully tested to ensure reliability. Even if there are bugs, the developers of SQLite are honest about potential shortcomings by providing bug lists and chronologies of code changes for every release.

Did I miss a few essential pros and cons to the solutions listed above? Think there are better free database management software alternatives? Let me know in the comments below.|||

Have a tight IT budget and need customization? Check out our list of the top free database software and open source database management solutions to solve these complex problems and get back to work.