The face of the World Wide Web has certainly changed. Over the past several years we’ve seen a massive growth of online video, and with an abundance of connected mobile devices, accessing information is easier than ever. Video is also the main driving force on the current B2B scene. YouTube remains the most influential public video platform, practically dictating the video content marketing scene. Lately though, video creators and video advertising companies are beginning to seek business elsewhere. Major advertisers like Verizon, Pepsi, Walmart, Volkswagen, Toyota, and many others, are no longer advertising on YouTube, because they’ve seen their promoted content right next to videos that also promote extremist views or hate speech.

Such events are making a dramatic impact on the video industry, and as a result, many business owners are simply turning to native website advertising options powered by alternative video platforms such as JW Player or BridTV.

We’ve already talked about the violent, but rewarding world of online video players in our HTML5 video players comparison post. It never hurts to take a closer look at how we compare to some of the top services.

Now, the truth is that while JW Player delivers on most fronts, there are other important things to take into account when you’re running a video-oriented business – be it large or small. One of the primary concerns that’s a top concern for every is ROI. To accomplish this, it’s very important to think about expenses, and in that regard, BridTV is an excellent place to start.

Utilizing JW Player will meet most demands for publishers, albeit there are certain aspects to consider. JW imposes certain storage limits, in addition to certain other limits. The JW storage limits denote 50GB for the first paid plan. Publishers may decide to encode files or upload a variety of high-definition videos, and these actions will eat up storage space and therefore JW can easily limit the amount of videos that are being uploaded. This is not a problem on BridTV, which does not impose any storage limits.

JW restricts the amount of video plays per month as well, and that correlates to limiting the amount of ad calls and ad impressions. If a publisher has a 100% fill rate and uses BridTV, 100,000 ad plays would incur approximately 8GB of data. For instance, 10c per GB that’s under $1 for platform usage. In contrast, JW player the first paid tier ads will cost the publisher 83$ per month for 100k ad plays.

One of the primary benefits of the BridTV video platform, as opposed to services like JW Player, is its streamlined and straightforward monetization. Publishers have the ability to reach viewers and monetize content on Flash-disabled browsers and devices, eliminating the risk of substantial loss in revenue. Basically, it’s a fully automated seamless solution, all you need is an HTML5 compatible VAST/VPAID 2.0 ad tag and the system will do the rest.

Overall, as a video player, JW Player is undoubtedly a great choice. However, BridTV is quite simply a more affordable and far more elegant solution, giving you more bang for your buck. With Brid you get unique AdBlock recovery solution, Facebook Instant Articles and AMP video player support and unique video ad features – all of that available for a fraction of the price you’d normally pay for an enterprise level video platform.|||

BridTV Blog