Writing an interpreter or a compiler is usually considered one of the greatest goals that a programmer can achieve, and with good reason. I do not believe the importance of going through this experience is primarily due to its difficulty. After all, writing an efficient compiler is difficult, but the same is true for a good web framework, or a feature-rich editor.

Being able to write an interpreter is a significant skill mainly because of its recursive (or self-referring) nature. Think about it: you use a language to write a new language. And this new language, if it becomes sufficiently rich, can eventually be used to create its own compiler.

A language can be used to write the program that executes that same language.

Didn't this last sentence fire you with enthusiasm? It makes me eager to start!

Compilers have been the subject of academic research since the 50s, with the works of Hopper and Glennie, so trying to provide an overview in a few lines is basically impossible. I highly recommend you to check the online resources listed at the bottom of the post if you are seriously interested in the matter.

In this series of posts I want to try an experiment. I want to guide you through the creation of a simple interpreter in Python using a pure TDD (Test-Driven Development) approach. The posts will be structured like a game, where every level is represented by a new test that I will add to the suite. If you are not confident with TDD, you will find more on it in the specific section.

Following this series you will learn about Python, compilers, interpreters, parsers, lexers, test-driven development, refactoring, coverage, regular expressions, classes, context managers.

Are you ready to start?

This series of posts will introduce you to TDD with a sort of game. I'll give you the test, and you are supposed to write something that passes that test, finishing the level. This is the reason why I will not provide my solution in the same post as the tests, but in the following one. Let's say that this should help you resisting the temptation.

My best advice for the TDD game is: remember that the easiest solution for a test that requires the output is to write a function that returns exactly .

Beautiful is better than ugly, but ugly and tested is better than beautiful and untested.

At the time of writing the language we are going to implement is a simple calculator with support for integer and floats, binary operators (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and power), unary operators (negation), nested expressions (parentheses) and variables.

The name smallcalc is a homage to one of the most innovative and influential languages ever conceived: Smalltalk.

I do not know if the final version will be something richer, it depends on how much fun you will find in the series. So, if you are interested, just ask! You can drop a line of appreciation on Twitter.

At the time of writing, then, the language grammar is

The syntax of the grammar is pretty self-explanatory if you have some programming background. If you want to know more about grammars like the one above start from the links in the resources section.

If you already know what TDD is feel free to skip this section.

TDD means Test-Driven Development, and in short it is a programming methodology that requires you to write a test for a feature before implementing the feature itself. Much has been said on the benefits of TDD elsewhere. I personally think it is one of the most effective ways to work on a programming task, and something that every programmer should know. I wrote a post on TDD with Python that you can find here.

A test, in TDD, is code that uses the code you are going to develop. You will start with a project skeleton and add the tests I will present in the posts one at a time. Once you add the test, you have to write the code that passes the test. Your code doesn't need to be beautiful or smart, it just needs to pass the test. Then you can move to the following test and start the cycle again.

After adding some tests you can start considering refactoring, which means changing the existing code in order to make it more beautiful, simpler or better organised. Every change has to be tested against the existing battery of tests. If the tests do not fail your change is correct, at least in terms of the behaviour that the tests are checking.

Coverage is the check of how much of your code is covered by your tests. We call some code "covered" by a test if executing the test makes that code run. So, for example, if you have a test (an block) you should write two tests. One to cover the first option, and another to cover the second one. If you work with a strict TDD methodology your coverage is going to be always 100%, because you wrote just the code that makes the tests pass.

You can find more on TDD on this blog here.

The main components of our interpreter are the following:

I will provide two classes: and . These will avoid you spending too much time in creating the basic tools, and allow you to get straight into the game. Since those classes come obviously with their own test suites you are free to develop them on your own, however, starting from the same tests.

I prepared this repository, which contains everything you need to start the project.

I created that repository using the amazing Cookiecutter project by Audrey Roy Greenfeld. The specific template I used is one that I created as a fork of the official one. You can find the source on GitHub.

Once you cloned the repository you can set up an environment with

At this point you should be able to run the test suite. For this project we are going to use py.test, so the command line is

or, if you want to check your code coverage,

The first class that I provide to start working on our interpreter is .

This represents one syntax unit in which we divide the input text. The token can contain information about its original position, which can be useful in case of syntax errors to print meaningful messages for the user. The class implements the method to provide comparison between tokens.

The value of a token is always a string, and shall be converted into a different type by an external object according to the value that the token assumes. For example the string can be interpreted as an integer, but could also be the name of a variable if our language supports such a feature.

Remember that everything you find in this class has been introduced to make one or more tests pass, so check the test suite to understand how the object can be used.

The second element that you will find in the initial setup is the class , that provides a very basic manager for an input text

As for the class you can read the tests to understand how to use the class. Basically, however, the class can an input text and extract the , the , and the . You can also a given number of characters, a given position, extract the current and read the , which is the remaining text from the current position on.

This class has not been optimized or designed to manage big files or continuous streams of text. This is perfectly fine for our current project, but be aware that for a real compiler you should implement a better file/memory management.

The third element we will need for the first part of the tutorial (that is, while we will deal with a simple calculator), is a simple Command Line Interface. For the moment is just echoes any text you will input, and gracefully exit when we press Ctrl+D. There are and there will be no tests for the CLI. Testing endpoints like this is complex and not always worth the effort, as in this case.

The command line can be run from the project main directory with

"End? No, the journey doesn't end here."

The first thing a Lexer shall be able to do is to load and process an empty text. This should return an token (which stands for "End of File"). is used to signal that the input buffer has ended and that there is no more text to process.

The method returns all the tokens of the input stream in a single list.

Edit the to contain the following code

This is our first test, and if you run the test suite now you will see that it fails. This is expected, as there is no code to pass the test.

Implement now a class in the file that makes the test pass. Remember that you just need the code to pass this test. So do not implement complex systems now and go for the simplest solution (hint: the test expects that specific output...).

The constant can be a simple string with the value.

It is worth executing the test suite with coverage (check the command line above), which will tell you if you overengineered your code. You should aim for 100% coverage, always.

"You're missing just a couple of digits there."

Since a calculator has to deal with numbers let us implement support for integers (we will add floating point numbers later). The first thing that we need is to recognise single-digit integers. This is the test that you have to add to

Note that here we are testing and not . This method will come handy later, so it is worth introducing it here. As soon as this method works you can test the behavious of

Please note that now the lexer shall output both an and an token, as the current line of code ends. The biggest issue you have to face here is that when you recognise a token you have to skip it in the original text.

After this test you may end up with some code duplication, as and perform similar tasks. If you didn't already use the first one in the second it could be worth doing some refactoring. Remember: as long as the tests pass your changes are correct!

If you refactor the code creating helper methods you should make them "private" by prefixing their name with an underscore. This also means that you do not need to test them, in principle (watch this talk by Sandy Metz on this subject).

Now that we have a working lexer that recognises integers let us work on the parser. This has to use the lexer to process a text and produce a tree of nodes that represent the syntactic structure of the processed code. Don't worry if it seems extremely complex, it is actually pretty simple if you follow the tests.

Edit the file and insert this code

The variable is an instance of a specific class that contains integers, (but you are free to name it as you want, as this is not tested). Please note that this class doesn't consider the value as a string anymore, but as a proper (Python) integer. Now edit the file and write some code that passes the test.

Does it work? Well, you just wrote your first parser! Congratulations! From here to somethings that understands C++ or Python the journey is pretty long, but the initial steps are promising.

Let us consider the visitor, now. This is the run-time component of our language, the part that actually runs through the tree of nodes and executes it. This part, thus, is where most of the actual behaviour of the language happens. For instance, the fact that the symbol "+" actually sums integers is because the visitor implements that operation.

This can seem a trivial consideration, but if you think about the division between integers you immediately understand that the visitor has a great responsibility. Does the symbol divide integers with or without floating point math? Python 3, for instance, opted for a floating point division, and introduced the operator for the integer version of the operation, but other languages behave differently.

I'll discuss further about this later when we will implement mathematical operations. For the moment being, let us create the file and introduce the following test

As you can see, at this stage the visitor has a trivial job, which is to just return the value and the type of the number that it finds in the tree. Note that the visitor provides a method which is type agnostic (i.e. it doesn't care about the type of the node). This is correct, as the visitor has to traverse the whole tree recursively and to react to the different nodes without a previous knowledge of what it should expect. This however doesn't prevent us to split it internally into different small private methods.

As simple as the visitor can be, now we can make our CLI interface use the parser and the visitor to understand and execute one simple command, which is to parse a single-digit integer and print it with its type. Change the file to

Test it to check that everything works. If your code passes the tests I gave you, the result is guaranteed.

Let me recap what we just created. We wrote a lexer, which is a component that splits the input text in different tokens with a meaning, and we instructed it to react to single-digits integers. Then, we created a parser, which is the component that tries to make sense of several tokens put together, applying syntactical rules. Last, the visitor runs through the output of the parser and actually performs the actions that the grammar describes. All this to just print out an integer? Seems overkill! It is, actually, but there is a lot to come, and this separation of levels will come handy.

"You're about to become a permanent addition to this archaeological find."

At the moment our parser doesn't sound like an important component, as its output is just a refurbished version of the lexer one. The visitor, in turn, doesn't really perform any action but to print in a different format what the parser produces.

Let us try to introduce a simple mathematical operation, then, that should spice up our components. The new test for the lexer component ( ) is

Please note that there are no spaces, as our lexer doesn't know how to deal with them yet. As you can see the output is straightforward, so go and change the class to make all the tests pass. Check for coverage, to spot possible overengineered parts, and if necessary refactor the class to keep methods as simple as possible.

The parser now has a more complex job than before, though not yet really challenging. The test for the parser is

I want to resume here the discussion about methematical operators and the role of the visitor that I started in the previous section. As you can see the expression is a generic binary operator, with a term, a term, and an . The operator, furthermore, is just a literal which value is the symbol we use for that binary operation.

This parser, thus, is pretty ignorant of the different operations we can perform, giving the whole responsibility to the visitor. We could, however, implement the parser to make it produce something more specific, like for example a or node, which represents only the addition, and which wouldn't need the key, as it is implicit in the node type.

The amount of work done by the parser and by the visitor is a peculiarity of the specific language or program, so feel free to experiment. For the moment you have to stick to one solution as you are guided by the tests that I wrote, but as soon as you grasped the concepts and start writing a new language, you will be free to implement each component as you prefer.

Finally, the visitor shall implement the actual mathematical operation. The test is

As soon as you changed the method to deal with nodes, you can test the new syntax in the CLI. Since we changed the method internally, that part of the CLI doesn't require any modification. We have, however, to change the parser entry point from to , so the new file will be

And a quick test of the CLI confirms that everything works fine

Everything? Well, not exactly. If I type just a single integer in the CLI the whole program crashes with and exception. (If your solution doesn't blow up it means that you (probably) overengineered it a little. This is fine, but if you had implemented just what was needed to pass the tests the result would have been an error.)

Why do we have an error? Because we now parse the input with and this method expects its input to be a full-formed expression, not a single integer. Generally speaking, our parser's entry point should be able to parse different syntax structures. We will improve this behaviour later, when we will address the problem of nested expressions.

Up to now our language can handle only single-digit integers, so this part shall be enhanced before moving to more complex syntax structures. The only component that requires a change is the lexer, as it should emit one single token containing all the digits. The test, consequently, goes in

There are many ways to solve this problem, one of the simplest (and a perfectly valid one) is using regular expressions (which are, if you think about it, another language).

If you do not know how to use regular expressions do yourself a favour and learn them! You can find a nice tutorial on them at RegexOne. If you already know the syntax and don't know how to use them in Python this Google for Education page and the official documentation are your friends.

After this test the CLI should be able to handle expressions like . We don't need any change in the parser and in the visitor, can you tell why?

The second limitation that our language has at the moment is that it cannot handle whitespaces. If you try to input an expression like in the CLI the program will crash with an exception (why?). Traditionally, whitespaces are completely ignored by programming languages: in Python, as well as in C and many other languages, writing , , , or doesn't change the meaning at all.

How can we put such a behavious in our language? Again, the lexer is the component in charge, as it should just skip whitespaces. So add this test to

While you change the class to make it pass this test, ask yourself if the current structure of the class satisfies you or if it is the right time to refactor it, possibly even heavily rewriting some parts of it. You have a good test suite, now, so you can be sure that what you implemented is correct, at least according to the current requirements.

"I can add, subtract. I can make coffee. I can shuffle cards."

Now that we addressed two basic issues of our language we can start enhancing the higher level syntactical structures. Since we implemented the addition operation, the most natural step forward is to implement subtraction. As for the addition, this change will involve all the three layers of the language, lexer, parser, and visitor.

Let us start teaching the lexer to understand the minus sign. The test that we need is the following (in )

Does the lexer require any change? Why?

As you can see the decision to handle operators and symbols as tokens allows us to introduce new symbols without the need to change the lexer. This obviously means that we will need to tell the symbols apart in a later stage, as nothing happens automatically. We could have decided to represent each symbol with a specific token, like and , but if you think about it it would not have really changed the code in later stages, as is just another symbol, exactly like is.

Using specific tokens, however, can simplify things if we want to handle multi-character literals. If we have an operator like (as in C) or (like in Python), or something more complex, we could prefer to handle those in the lexer, emitting a single token with a specific name.

We could introduce in the lexer a table of accepted values for literals, which would lead to an earlier and better error reporting. At the moment our language accepts every literal between two integers (try with , for example), but fails to process them in the parser, interpreting any literal as . Feel free to expand the project in such a direction if you want.

The test for the parser is the following

which is a small variation of the previous one, .

The considerations made for the lexer are perfectly valid for the parser as well, so you should need no node change at this point.

The last test we have to add is that of the visitor, which is again very similar to the previous one

This time, however, we are at the end of the processing chain, and we have to deal with the difference symbol, namely to actually subtract numbers. To make this test pass, thus, you will need to change something in your class.

Once your code passes this test, a quick test of the CLI shows that everything works as intended

and since we rely on Python to perform the actual subtraction we get negative numbers for free. Pay attention: we can have negative numbers in the results, but we cannot input negative numbers. This is something that we will have to add later.

"The machine simply does not operate as expected."

Before we dive into the fascinating but complex topic of nested operations, let us take a look and implement multiple operations, that is the application of a chain of "similar" operators with the same priority.

Since this tutorial is a practical approach to the construction of an interpreter, I will not go too deep into the subject matter. Feel free to check the references if you are interested in such topics. For the moment, it is sufficient to understand that addition and subtraction are two operations that have the same precedence, which means that their order can be changed without affecting the result.

For instance: the expression gives as a result. The result is the same if we perform or , where the expressions between parenthesis are executed first.

From the interpreter's point of view, then, we can process a chain of additions and subtractions without being concerned about precedence, which greatly simplyfies our job. As the output of the parser is a tree, however, we need to find a way to represent such a chain of operations in that form. One way is to nest expressions, which means that each operation is a single node, with the left term containing an integer and the right one the rest of the expression. In the previous example is represented by an addition between and . , in turn, is another binary node, asubtraction between and .

Let us start checking if the lexer understand multiple operations

If the current version of your lexer doesn't pass this test make the necessary changes to the code.

Now we should modify the parser. While expressing the test is very simple, actually creating the code that makes it pass is not that trivial. So, as an intermediate step, I will make you implement the code that allows the parser to check upcoming tokens.

One solution to this problem is to save the state of the parser, get as many tokens as we need, and then restore the status. Inspired by Git, I called those methods and . Put the following test in

As you can see the call between and doesn't leave any trace.

Once your code is working implement the second test. Create a method that performs all the previous actions together

You can implement very easily leveraging and .

Now we are ready to face the test that covers nested operations, which goes in

A note of warning: probably the first version of the code that makes this test pass will be horrible, as the logic involved is not trivial. Remember that your first target is to make the test pass and then, with the battery of tests in your arsenal, to tidy up the code.

As usual, the last test involves the visitor

What changes do you need to make to the class? Why?

Tutorials and analysis of compilers and parsers

The section quotes comes from some good movies, the complete list is: "The Lord of the Rings - The Return of the King" (2003), "Iron Man" (2008), "Raiders of the Lost Ark" (1981), "Braveheart" (1995), "The Matrix" (1999), "The Bourne Identity" (2002), "The Prestige" (2006).

Feel free to use the blog Google+ page to comment the post. Feel free to reach me on Twitter if you have questions. The GitHub issues page is the best place to submit corrections.|||

