Walmart is one of the biggest marketplaces of the USA and gives you a lot of varieties of every single product. It seems like you can buy everything on Walmart. But there are some product categories that finds its place in the Prohibited and restricted items on Walmart list.

Some of the prohibited categories include those products which are having following information-

Academic Software finds themselves among the list of Prohibited and restricted items on walmart.com. The software that is banned from selling on its platform includes Beta codes, Beta keys, Beta software, OEM software, and Recovery software (bundled or stand-alone)

Similarly, Alcoholic and Intoxicating products also find themselves among the list of the banned products on the Walmart.com. The online sellers are advised against trying to approach Walmart.com for sales of products such as Alcoholic beverages or products of any kind, including powdered alcohol, Collectible alcohol, Empty collectible alcoholic container not identified as empty in the description, Non-alcoholic wine and beer.

Walmart has also clarified its stance on the sale of Digital goods on its e-commerce platform. All digital products, including, but not limited to, currency, eBooks, games, movies, songs are exclusively Prohibited by Walmart to be sold on its platform.

As far as Animal and related products, Walmart doesn’t permit these types of products also to be sold at its e-commerce vertical. The following Animal and related Products are banned from Walmart’s platform:

Yes, weapons too find themselves in the list of the banned products on Walmart. Guns of any type from air guns, BB guns, pellet guns, paintball guns, replica/imitation guns, or firearms of any type to Explosives, Tannerite, fireworks and Claws or spikes that attach to the shoe, other clothing items, or any body part. The list is long.

Including the aforementioned categories, there are overall 25 categories of merchandise each with its own laundry list of specific items that can’t be sold or comes under Prohibited and restricted items on Walmart list.

To see the complete list of categories with their laundry list, click Prohibited Products list.

If you sell any of the products, for the time being, there is no place for you at Walmart.com and also if some of your products if not being published for a while could also belong to this list, making them unable to be published at Walmart.com|||

Walmart.com has defined Prohibited and restricted items on walmart. The blog contains the list of articles defined as Restricted. Read to find out.