For years now I have been wanting to do more character animation and central to the kinds of characters I have in mind is the walk cycle.

And when I say I have been wanting to do more character animation, what I mean is I have been trying to do more character animation for years and whenever I have set aside time for it I never achieved the results I wanted.

We as walking creatures instinctively know if something doesn't look like it's moving naturally whether it's walking or slithering - many's the movie that has become an object of ridicule because the movement of the aliens or the characters has fallen woefully short of the mark (usually these films have terrible acting and wooden dialogue too but that's beside the point).

However some recent developments have made the process of walk cycles and limb animation a little less frustrating. My background is in After Effects (AE) - I was creating video animations long before even Flash came along and so AE feels like a second home. Every so often I dip back into the wonderful world of AE; sometimes a project needs it and sometimes I just feel like a change from the GreenSock and SVG combo.

During one of my prodigal returns to AE (which usually involves lots of Googling for tutorials)  I noticed a new plugin called RubberHose from BattleAxe which states it's 'a quick way to remove a lot of the technical overhead from the animation process to allow you to really focus on character'.

...I whispered in caps to no-one in particular, purchased a copy and spent a happy afternoon making some fairly terrible animations (purely down to my own shortcomings). RubberHose removes some of the fiddly keyframing, rigging, inverse kinematics stuff that can get in the way of a stress-free afternoon and it's pretty intuitive too. It's also great fun to play with and, with a little experimentation, has lots of application and uses beyond swinging limbs and pointy fingers.

Around that time an export plugin for AE called Bodymovin arrived on my radar. It piqued my interest in part because it exported AE stuff to SVG and as you may know I am a big fan of SVG and there were some very cool animations appearing, mostly courtesy of Hernan Torrisi (@airnan). It was in its infancy back then and the install procedure was pretty convoluted (in part due to Adobe's extension install issues) and I never actually managed to get the thing working in AE. I played around with some pens and tried to rebuild some and just didn't understand how it was working at all so I just sort of gave up.

Jump forward several months and a completely rewritten version 2 of RubberHose arrived. And behind the scenes those cheeky scamps had added support for Bodymovin. So I revisited Bodymovin with a renewed sense of determination to get the damn thing installed and with the help of Matt Wilson's useful video I finally got it installed (it too had been updated to make rendering and export much easier. I know this because Matt's tutorial had a different UI).

The scope for RubberHose support is somewhat limited, in part due to the SVG 1.1 spec, but you can do a lot of cool things with it and the most important parts are front and centre i.e. bending hoses. Yes, you might have to be a little inventive in order to pull off an effect that AE Shapes can do in a snip because the Bodymovin exporter doesn't support it yet but I'm just glad to be able to mess around with walk cycles and wobbly fingers and then output it to the web.

Well, they are for me at least. It occurred to me that I could combine all of these things I love into one demo - namely GreenSock (number one best animation buddy), SVG, After Effects, RubberHose and Bodymovin to create an interactive animated character. So recently I've been either designing new animations or revisiting old ones and refactoring the way they are built to conform to Bodymovin export spec - and most importantly I'm having a lot of fun.

My most recent project is a reworking of an animation called Eggs-ercise - I originally animated an egg working out on a treadmill (as you do) and it had a just-about-passable walk cycle. It was a flat video and it was ok but by mixing in these great tools there was real potential to take it further.

And so Interactive Eggs-ercise emerged (see what I did with the title there?). It involved designing and building the character animation in After Effects (using shapes only), animating with RubberHose, exporting it using Bodymovin, bringing it into CodePen, making a slider controlled by GreenSock and controlling the animation speed using the Bodymovin API. The interaction in this demo is limited - basically you can make the egg run really quickly or in slow motion but the possibilities are endless.

I have always liked learning new things, although I am quite choosy about what I learn. It's easy to feel like you have to learn everything to stay up to date but that just isn't true. Choosing the right tools that interest and benefit you and your projects will always be the better choice than just trying to learn the latest thing to come out. However when I do learn new tools I add them to my skill portfolio; one rarely replaces another and in fact they usually complement each other. I have always loved and will always love GreenSock - it is THE tool of choice for SVG animation without doubt. There are very few things it doesn't do well but character animation is one of them and so when the need arises I now have the right tools for the job.

And by combining all these tools, a whole new world of opportunity for interactive characters has opened up to me and I have a renewed sense of optimism and energy for the future of web animation.



 

 This post is taken from my personal blog which is here|||

