When you’re always present and online in digital world, it’s hard to concentrate and think how and how quick you’re receiving the information. You’re just receiving it, sometimes even accidentally or against your own free will, and move forward no matter what reaction this information evokes in you.

Not so long ago, for the first time in my life, I thought about the informational issue. I became used to receiving information right away or never. Subject that was relevant for me one day becomes irrelevant on the next day.

So I wondered, how we even came to such model of information consumption? It was different not so long ago.

Let’s look at the statistics. In the beginning of 21st century the world was in flames of informational hunger. There was not enough information online. Moreover, people rarely trusted their online sources. Any product you saw online was questioned until the very moment, when you come to a real store offline and see it with your eyes, touch it with your own hands. Only afterwards you begin to think that it’s ok or not to buy.

5 years ago the situation changed. We finally had enough information online, sometimes even more than enough, but still people wanted more info. All these newsfeed’ scrollings in social networks derive exactly from the need to know more.

Even new terms started to form. For example, facebook shower — which means the regular early morning doze of social network while sipping your cup of coffee (or even instead of it). Fabbing is another example. Fabbing is a habit to look at your mobile device screen instead of speaking with your talk partner. In average, every restaurant face 36 fabbings per dinner. Even while 97% of respondents say that their dishes are less tasty when they fab, they’re still doing it!

You can also face oversharing from users that are too exposed in their online social accounts and tells us all about every their step. For people over the world the screen-voyeurism became regular, even the accidental one.

Just look at some statistics from all over the world. Scary, isn’t it? Still, it shows us immediately that users like to receive the info right away.

Where this informational hunger leads us to? I don’t know about you, but I rarely read the news, I scan the newsfeed instead and rarely see something important that catches my attention. Most of the info in the net goes into background. Even the new word appeared — newsacs, the background news. This is news that is present, like the music in supermarket, but carries out no use.

How many similar newsletters you receive in a month? How much of them you open? What about number of articles per day? The information in limitless, but it captures less and less attention. It’s really hard to become noticeable.

More and more people are trying to master the digital detox, the conscious break in the usage of electronic devices, such as smartphones, tablets and PCs, to enjoy the real life, real conversation and offline jobs.

People who were fed up with constant need to be present online even created a National Off day in USA, that is celebrated each year in the beginning of March. During this day people don’t use their PCs or smartphones to have some offline activities instead.

So, what do we have in the end? The wish to get the information quickly, get the hot info that nobody has. At the same time people wish to switch off their digital presence and don’t be bothered again by companies that they were working before. And here we come to the main question.

How can we continue to set up dialogs with our clients and readers? How to conquer online once again?

For me, as a PR manager and representative of development studio, it’s important to work with people daily to make them wanna stay with us and work with our information. That is why this question became my top priority. This is also when and how we decided to change our model to quick responding one. We started to work closely with social networks and create stories on the edge of current hypes. I can give many examples from participating in various flash mobs to writing short notes about things that were really interesting to our clients.

The main thing to consider is that such quick responding needs to go beyond your PR and marketing activities. The whole company’s strategy needs to work around it. We changed the methods of our long-term strategy planning, because in some cases if you didn’t manage to respond quickly, you don’t need to bother starting this task at all.

How does the common strategy or company planning looks like? In general, there is a long-long plan written with all KPIs mentioned together with goals that you need to achieve in several years in advance. Afterwards, around this plan we manage our budgets. It’s often happens that many publications and their topics have been also written in this plan in advance. When you transform your approach to quick responding one, you cannot do that.

In this case it’s better to plan your goals for long-term while leaving space for correcting methods and tactics to achieve it anytime you want. You need to analyze every message, monitor reactions for every publication. It’s not just a matter of counting likes, you need to change you plan every time when you have your response analysis.

For example, if your design materials get the most responses, share and other social activity from your customers, then it’s better to change you plan for the next week and instead of writing a development article create the next design one around the topic that got the most of attention last time. You constantly need to heat up your audience interest instead of just smiling at some random successes and hypes.

The same goes for the sales. Even if you’re working with long B2B sales tunnel, you need to react right away and in the manner that is familiar to client. No wonder different chatbots and chats overall have become so popular. Our sales managers, for example, began to use Textback service to work on the leads. With this service every user can write the company directly in any social network he’s logged in without submitting an enquiry form or writing an e-mail. It’s so easy to use that our managers can respond at glance, and people will receive the answer from a real person, not just an automated reply.

You just need to remember that tomorrow nobody will need your answer, so you need to react now.

There was a great case on the subject in Russia. We have a national holiday on the March 8 (Women’s day). Somewhere in the morning on this holiday a person posted a picture of him with tulips in hand in his Instagram account. The message written under the picture was sarcastic and simple: if you don’t have a man and tulips to make a selfie with today, you can call me and rent for such a picture. This pic became a memo in an hour. Some people went deeper and created a landing page where you can ask for delivery of tulips with shawarma in the center of bouquet to make selfie that will stand out. There were even some variations of shawarma-bouquets.

This service worked for a day and was closed after the holiday, but on the hype and current trends its’ creators managed to earn some great money quickly just by creating a landing and employing several couriers (several hours task, actually, no more!).

The only difference from my story is that such case describes a holiday hype, but the companies need to react quickly all the time. To make it possible it’s better to oversee the future needs of your clients, to heat up the interest and respond right away. Of course, for such matter you need analysis. Using big data is a first thing that pops up in my mind.

Just look at some statistics from international companies. What Netflix and Amazon do analyze? It’s a great number of parameters and users’ reactions that help to get more relevant and precise leads in the future.

Of course, it’s great to look at the other experience, but even in our case the prognosis analysis, which we just started to include in our daily processes, got great impact — our lead generation increased up to 10%.

It’s also worth to mention that in times when people are fed up with their digital experience, you cannot create only such materials that will be useful for years. Even the successful case with shawarma mentioned above became irrelevant after March 8. That is why you need to focus on the materials that are useful right now, instantly, on this moment of time. As we did with Mannequin challenge flash mob, for example.

For those who doesn’t know where to start their quick responding campaign, I suggest opening your own Telegram channel. This instrument helps users to get the news instantly without bothering them with constant notifications.

Just don’t create newsacs and your audience and potential clients will be able to notice you even in the digital detox era.

For those, who want to know more about my own experience in quick responding, I prepared a presentation. If you liked this article, please, give it a heart.|||

When you’re always present and online in digital world, it’s hard to concentrate and think how and how quick you’re receiving the information. You’re just receiving it, sometimes even accidentally or…