When I think of myself and my relation to the universe, I envision that viral astrophysicist’s video of a journey from face to space. The three minute footage begins on a woman’s face. It then continuously zooms out, revealing a shot of the universe, one billion light years away from Earth.

The purpose of the video is  to visually explain the different scales of the universe. It certainly makes me feel small in an infinite universe. And then it makes me question so many things.

Stephen Hawing once urged: “Look up at the stars and not down at your feet. Try to make sense of what you see, and wonder about what makes the universe exist. Be curious.”

The complexity of the universe is immense — so much so that if we try to grasp it, even for a moment, it can make your head feel like it’s going to explode until you drop to your knees, flail your arms about, and look for the TV remote to find some meaningless entertainment. But this confusion is beautiful.

We strive to understand so much in our day-to-day lives, so much about ourselves, and so much about the world we live in, whether from the comfort of our living rooms or within the structure of a classroom.

What we know about the universe, as told by textbooks, barely begins to scratch the surface of its complexity. As a child, a part of me thought academia was set in stone. I trusted Christopher Columbus to always be celebrated, and I assumed Pluto was a forever planet. But today, I realize human error makes us, well, human. The universe is the biggest teacher of all, and we are merely trying to learn its lessons one day at a time, one textbook at a time, one online article at a time.

What is our reality? Is it our human flesh, our mortality, the capability of life on Mars? Yes. But it is also quantum entanglement, unified field of consciousness, free energy, superhuman abilities, singularity, parallel universes, and alternate realities. The universe is as simple as the smile on my face and as complex as the word “infinity.”

As an adult, I could perhaps rant forever about the complexities of the universe, but I also feel like I would just be a hamster on a wheel if I did that. Why? Because the adult brain is learned, and therefore it is pretty clouded. Would it be different if I could head back to my childhood years and try to put the complexity of the universe into words?

Perhaps what we need is a child to be bold enough to colour outside the lines. To use their ignorance as intelligence, with ignorance being the lack of boundaries society creates.

Max Laughlin may be just a kid, but he’s certainly not just any kid. Having become famous across the world for presenting his brilliant viewpoints on topics like the nature of the universe and alternate realities, listening to him will make your jaw drop.

In the below video, Laughlin presents a new theory that CERN — the European Organization for Nuclear Research, and one of the world’s largest and most respected centers for scientific research — destroyed our universe and we live in another universe that was parallel and closest to it.

Now if that doesn’t make your head hurt, or at least make you want to find out more, you’re not alone.|||

When I think of myself and my relation to the universe, I envision that viral astrophysicist’s video of a journey from face to space. The three minute footage begins on a woman’s face. It then continuously zooms out, revealing a shot of the universe, one billion light years away from Earth. The purpose of the video is  to […]