One of the most visually striking technologies to be enabled by the laser is the hologram. But holography doesn't have to use lasers. Indeed, depending on what you want to image, laser light might not be a good choice—lasers are notoriously bad at seeing through walls, for example. Wi-Fi signals, in contrast, go right through most walls, and there's now a nice demonstration of holography using a Wi-Fi router.

The basic idea behind holography is that when light is scattered from an object, it encodes the 3D structure of the object. We typically lose some of that information in the recording process. It's not just that we only capture a fraction of the scattered light, but we only record how bright the light is.

When we record the brightness of a light beam, we lose the phase of the light field. To put it at its most simple, although we may know the direction from which the light came and how bright it is, we do not know how far the light has travelled since it scattered from an object. While it's a little more subtle than that, this sort of information is what you actually need if you want a 3D image. The distance travelled is recovered by measuring the phase and amplitude of the light field.

Holography recovers the lost phase information by mixing two light fields: one has scattered from the object being imaged, while the other has not. The two light fields interfere. As with normal imaging, we can only record the brightness of the light, but the brightness is determined by two components: the amount of light scattered by the object and the relative phase between scattered and unscattered light.

The pattern then holds a 3D record of the object but in a 2D pattern.

You don't need a laser to create a hologram—you just need a good light source. Funnily enough, good microwave sources have been around far longer than the laser. Yet holography with microwaves and radar sources is not generally used.

In my description of holography above, the 2D pattern is formed from two light fields: one has only scattered from the object and one has not scattered at all. This is why we use lasers: the laser light is very bright, which makes up for the fact that visible light is not scattered very efficiently from most materials.

Microwaves, in contrast, are very efficiently reflected by metal. In an ordinary room with a single Wi-Fi transmitter, the signal recorded at a receiving antenna is already a mixture of Wi-Fi signals that have come from many different directions after scattering off of all the metallic objects in the room (nails, door handles, wall reinforcing, etc.).

For holography, the trick is to filter out the contributions from these reflections and ensure that your image is dominated by scattering from the object of interest. This turns out to be relatively simple with a Wi-Fi transmitter.

The researchers used a standard 5GHz Wi-Fi access point as a radiation source and an aluminum foil cross as an object. There are no cameras for Wi-Fi radiation, so the researchers used a single antenna, which was scanned over an area called "the image plane" while the signal was measured. The received signal was mixed with a second recording from the transmitter, which was obtained from an antenna sitting at a fixed location.

This gave the researchers a 2D interference pattern that they could then use to reconstruct a 3D image. At this point, though, the image would be pretty poor because there are lots of reflections from other bits of metal. The raw image is filled with bright and dark spots, called speckles, that obscure its subject. These speckles are the result of interference from waves that come from all sorts of different directions, but not from scattering off physical objects that are within the field of view of the hologram.

That means that the exact location the speckles are dependent on the frequency of the Wi-Fi radiation. They can be averaged out by taking several different holograms using different Wi-Fi channels and adding them all up. This creates an image that has a relatively evenly bright background with the cross appearing as a shadow.

This system can be improved further. After averaging the speckles, the biggest source of noise is radiation that comes directly from the transmitter without scattering off anything. The radiation reduces the image contrast, but the image contrast can be improved by eliminating the light that travels directly from emitter to receiver. Fortunately, this process can be done during the image reconstruction.

Basically, to reconstruct the image at a certain distance, you have to calculate how the light field would have propagated from that distance to the image plane at which you recorded the 2D pattern. But that is all in software, so you can set that distance to anything, including the distance from the transmitting antenna to the receiving antenna.

Do this and you get a picture of the transmitting antenna (it looks like a bright dot). This image can be used to eliminate the contribution from radiation that travels directly from the transmitter to the receiver, leaving only the radiation that scattered from objects within the field of view.

By doing that, the researchers show that you get a reasonably good picture of the object (a cross, in their case).

The researchers also used a computer simulation to show that it should be possible to image more complicated structures. They suggest that Wi-Fi holography could be used to track RFID tagged packages in warehouses and for internal navigation. And, of course, it can be used to localize objects inside a house. Yet another privacy issue may well be in our future.

At the moment, there is no quick way to create this sort of image, so it's rather safe. However, Wi-Fi holography shouldn't be difficult to implement in cell phone software. Cell phones already have Wi-Fi receivers that use amplitude and phase information for modulation purposes. As long as the operating system can be convinced to give up more detailed information about the Wi-Fi signal, a pair of cell phones could replace the two antennas used on the receiving side. Combine that with good time-stamped location data for both cell phones, and it should be possible to obtain rough images of metallic objects inside a building.

So yes, I think it is inevitable that someone tries to use Wi-Fi holography to snoop. And since the process works best at imaging metallic objects, a tin foil hat will actually make you easier to spot.|||

Wi-Fi transmitter used to create hologram, potentially sees through walls.