International calls to phone numbers outside VIPole for iOS and iPad users

In the 1.9.0 iOS release, those of our users who prefer iPhone and iPad get these features in addition to encrypted voice over IP calls. Check the calling rates for domestic and international numbers here. Transfer the numbers from the phone book on the device to your VIPole contact list, making all your connections, documents and photos organized in a single application.

Even if your friends live on the other side of the world, in VIPole it’s a one-tap thing to get connected. You may also take advantage of free encrypted video calls.

Get international calls at a reasonable price as they complement internal encrypted calls in VIPole secure messenger. VIPole for iOS now includes secure calls to mobile and landline numbers together with upgrading to the Pro account and renewing the subscription for any period. This makes paid services in VIPole available across all supported platforms: iOS, iPad, Android, Windows, Linux Mac OS, and you can use the maximum of the private messenger features and specials on all your favorite devices.

Calls to international and domestic numbers from VIPole for iOS app are a long awaited feature for the users who wish to stay in touch with everyone using a single app. To ensure maximum VoIP security, you can deploy the on premise VIPole Enterprise communication platform, which allows to keep confidential corporate communications securely stored on your own server, managed by your in-house system administrator.

The 1.9.0 iOS update allows VIPole users to upgrade to Pro. The Pro account owners get the full range of VIPole services and additional instruments and options for managing privacy and restricting access to their sensitive data.

The Pro subscription allows to ensure the maximum level of data protection across all devices with encrypted local storage, editing messages, the customizable message burning mode, smart message history management and controlling active sessions from all devices.

More about the features of Free, Pro and Team subscriptions in VIPole.|||

VIPole apps have become a more universal communication app, allowing users to connect with friends and co-workers both within the end-to-end encrypted VIPole ecosystem and beyond.