Writing about inspiration runs the risk of being distorted by the horribly false, popular image of inspiration. This distorted image is one of inspiration as a non-understandable, mystic process that can neither be controlled nor honed, due to its above-reality nature. Even worse, many people associate inspiration with drugs, undirected indulgence, laziness and other things that have nothing at all to do with it. This is BS and it’s harmful BS. So, I’d like to talk about inspiration in it’s actual, very real and concrete sense of an idea popping into one’s head with an action potential attached to it. Quiet simply, you have an idea and it has the quality of pulling you towards it with some force. I assume that everyone reading this knows the phenomenon from experience. From it’s definition two central questions arise: „How to get it?“ and „How to use it?“

The question of how to get inspiration to strike, has been well answered by Ayn Rand in her book „The Art of Non-Fiction“. The underlying point is that creativity ultimately stems from the unconscious and the unconscious feasts on those things that we put into it — the things we experience, the things we read, the things we think about etc. All these inputs enter out unconscious, get processed and eventually determine outputs. That is why mathematician Richard Hemming for instance wrote that, if faced with an exceptionally hard problem, he would literally starve his unconscious by not doing anything other than working on that particular problem, so that his unconscious didn’t even have a choice, but to labor on that particular problem. So, the matter of how to get inspiration is one that gets solved upstream. You don’t control the process directly, but indirectly by controlling inputs. So, the recipe is to have an appropriate „mental diet“ for your intended purpose. In addition it seems that mental relaxation plays an important role in accessing the outputs of the brewery that is the unconscious. During relaxation it become possible for unconscious outputs to come to the surface, so to speak. That’s what the entire „ideas-in-shower“ business is about. Without good inputs however there won’t be good outputs, no matter how many showers one takes. The second question is what to do once inspiration strikes.

The answer is simple. It is to give in. To temporarily drop all other things that are on one’s mental to-do list and go with whatever idea one just had (if at all possible, that is). This, one may think, should be really easy to do. To just go with the flow. How hard can that be? Quiet hard, I believe. Since day one, we’ve been taught that discipline, conscientiousness, self-control and so forth should be the central characteristics of one’s conduct. All of these have a linear quality. You work towards relatively well defined goals, doing what is required one step after another. What you engage in shouldn’t be determined by some seemingly random movement of the mind, but by a „rational“ evaluation of „what should be done“ next. It is because of this way of thinking, that we run the risk of either ignoring inspiration if it strikes, or of actively overriding it. Ignoring inspiration is wasteful, but actively overriding it is doubly wasteful, because for one, we forgo the considerable energy that inspiration carries and on top of that we expense energy in order to override it. Bad strategy. It’s like fighting hard not to be upgraded to business class. So, in a way, the more disciplined of us have to partially unlearn their intent focus, or more precisely have to learn when to give in and take the ride.

In a way it is funny that the somewhat passive-seeming process of „getting inspiration“ demands an active effort (controlling inputs into consciousness), whilst the somewhat active-seeming process of acting upon inspiration demands and act of resignation (giving in).|||

Writing about inspiration runs the risk of being distorted by the horribly false, popular image of inspiration. This distorted image is one of inspiration as a non-understandable, mystic process that…