For our purposes, it’s important to know that Mandelbrot and his students found loads of evidence that many complex phenomena follow power-law distributions. (There are a few technical caveats here, but I’ll omit them unless asked by an interested reader.)

To understand Gray Swans, it is important to understand a thing or two about Benoit Mandelbrot. Mandelbrot was an applied mathematician who developed a branch of mathematics called fractal geometry. Fractal geometry, loosely speaking, is the study of recursive patterns at different scales. Mandelbrot found that fractal geometry provides good models for many things we see in nature. For example, a tree branch looks a lot like a tree, just smaller. A small rocky outcropping looks a lot like a mountain, just smaller. Mandelbrot’s work has allowed for the discovery of patterns in what used to seem like chaos.

Never once, before reading the book, did I ever catch mention of Gray Swans. This surprises me, since I wondered early on in the book about the topics discussed by Taleb in relation to Gray Swans.

It is easy to see what most people leave with after reading this book: there are events, Black Swans, which are both extremely important and unpredictable.

The statement “almost everything” is debatable. Taleb’s examples cluster heavily in finance, and he does tend to extrapolate. Here is a more critical summary of the book:

It is difficult to sum up a book such as Taleb’s in a paragraph, since there are in fact many excellent and distinct ideas in the book. However, people like to simplify, and The Black Swan has been reduced to a single main idea. Here is the marketing statement on Amazon:

As I read Taleb’s book, many of the ideas felt familiar to me. Ironically, this is because of my study of economics, which Taleb criticizes vehemently. (Though, I think Taleb’s disgust is aimed at financial and macro economists more than applied micro, which is my domain.) I feel a kindred spirit in Taleb, because of his respect for uncertainty.

Nassim Taleb’s The Black Swan brought some obscure ideas in statistics, economics, and philosophy to a large audience. It’s been some time since he wrote the book, but I’ve only recently read it.

This chart merely shows the chances of different values, if those values were drawn from a power-law distribution. On the far left, you have low values, and they are very frequent. On the right, you have high values, and they are not so frequent.

As I was saying, power-law distributions are fractal. Suppose you draw a vertical line somewhere on the left-hand side of the above graph. Then zoom in and redraw the graph. I’d give you a new picture, but I don’t need to: it’d look almost the same as the one above. This is why power-law distributions are referred to as “scalable” or “fractal.” They exhibit repetition at different scales.

So what? Well, let’s think of this as a chart of income in the U.S. Well, the fractal nature of power-laws means that the inequality among the wealthiest 10% is just as pronounced as the inequality of the whole.

Back to Taleb’s Gray Swans, then. Gray Swans are analogous to someone with a net worth of $200 billion. (I just checked, and Bill Gates is at an estimated $87 billion right now. The list of richest people has been fluctuating a bit, recently.) Because of the power-law distribution, we all know that it could happen. Also, we know that it’s not crazy to think that someone might hit $500 billion, or even possibly $1 trillion sometime in the foreseeable future. If that happened, we wouldn’t be completely caught off guard. Thus, our knowledge has turned some Black Swans gray. They are not, however, completely white, because they are still unpredictable, and they matter a lot. Cue a statistic about how much wealth is controlled by the top 1% or whatever.

Now, the point of all this building up is to say that the difference between Gray and Black Swans is really important.

I grew up in Salt Lake City, and it is sitting right on a big fault line. Everybody knows that one day, maybe tomorrow, maybe 500 years from now, there will very likely be a giant earthquake along the Wasatch Front. So people have prepared, to some degree. At least, if it happened, nobody would say “I never saw thought this was possible.” Big earthquake in SLC: Gray Swan.

The 2008 financial crisis, on the other hand, was a Black Swan. A very small group of people may have seen it coming. Mostly though, it came out of nowhere. Or, more precisely, it approached from our blind spot. (The financial industry gets no credit for checking the blind spot, in my view. In fact, I’d say the complex modeling and “risk management” actually preserved the blind spot to a large degree. Triple A ratings carried a lot of weight. Who knew we had to go back and check Moody’s work?)

Black Swans are large magnitude events, and they aren’t just run-of-the-mill unpredictable. They have unpredictable causes. Remember the earthquake in SLC? We know an earthquake will happen, and we know what the cause will be, we just don’t know when. With Black Swans, we don’t even know what might happen.

Another, rather important distinction between Gray and Black Swans relates to a boring technical term: “the data generating process.” Basically, things in our world produce data. We often would like to know the underlying process that gave off the data, and we often can only find out by studying the data itself.

This is a tricky problem, and Taleb addresses it at length. A short example will suffice for me. Pretend you came home and see a smashed window and some valuables stolen from your bedroom. The window and valuables are data points. You’d really love to know the process that generated those data points. Even if you’re comfortable assuming it was a burglar that generated both facts (as opposed to, say, the combination of an earthquake and a family member who needed to borrow some jewelry), you still don’t know where the burglar came from. Why were you the target? Who’s next?

Gray Swans, again, are more tractable than Black ones on this front. As you observe more and more data points, you start to learn about the distribution of events. It is very slow, and there is still a great deal of uncertainty (when will we see a trillionaire?), but at least you can use previous data to make some educated guesses. With Black Swans, however, previous data is by nature not helpful. The reason is because Black Swans are generated from things outside your system of reasoning. They are risks outside your “model” of the world.

There is even more bad news with Black Swans, and it derives from the fact that they are so influential. Black Swans induce what economists sometimes refer to as “structural breaks,” or “regime changes.” Basically, this means they change the data generating process.

An example, again, this time recycled from Taleb. This is the turkey example. We have a turkey who learns over time that it is fed and cared for every day. The turkey may begin to feel that it is accumulating knowledge of the data generating process, until Thanksgiving occurs.

After Thanksgiving, we see that all of the data collection was useless. The pre-Thanksgiving data generating process tells us absolutely nothing about the process that starts on Thanksgiving.

A second example. The Black Swan of 2008 had a massive impact on the financial sector. Stress testing, mortgage reform, capital requirements, and austerity all featured in the reactions. Although some claim that society has changed nothing and is heading for a repeat, I feel comfortable claiming that we have made modifications to the financial system, and these modifications have impacted the data generating process after 2008. For this reason, looking at data from pre-2008 doesn’t tell us as much as we’d like about post-2008. People are living in a different world, precisely because of the Black Swan of 2008.

Taleb winds up The Black Swan with some discussion about what to do, and he continues in this vein with his subsequent work.

I’ll wind up by noting that I don’t think most people fully get the book. My example review from Amazon demonstrates this well. Uncertainty comes in many flavors. We should try to learn more about earthquake sizes. We should not, however, try to predict and avoid all possible bad things that could occur. It is fruitful to investigate Gray Swans, even if it doesn’t provide certainty. It is generally not nearly as fruitful to investigate Black Swans.

Another topic Taleb discusses involves protecting ourselves from negative Black Swans, as well as opportunities to profit from positive Black Swans. That is a topic for another essay, one that is coming soon.|||

Nassim Taleb’s The Black Swan brought some obscure ideas in statistics, economics, and philosophy to a large audience. It’s been some time since he wrote the book, but I’ve only recently read it. As…