But all too often, we find that our teams or team members are working in silos, not fully understanding what others are doing (or why). With our “What Matters” series, we’ll be digging into the various members of your team to help you understand and work better with them all.

A few developers working hard can get a lot done, but it takes a well-rounded team with different skills and roles to build and grow a successful software product and company.

This week, we’re talking to CTOs to see what matters the most to them. Most people have some idea what designers do, but not all designers are exactly the same — working in tech, you’re likely to run into…

Of course, there are often overlaps between these roles — it’s not uncommon for a UX designer to also do UI work, or for a UI designer to also do front-end development.

So what do designers want most out of their workday? Let’s find out:

Matthew Stumm, founder and creative director at Stark/Raving, wishes that more people understood the value of curiosity and following seemingly-random paths during the design process:

Using the language of the “brainswarming” method we’ve discussed before, software engineers are often “bottom-up” thinkers and want to immediately start with concrete solutions to a problem. On the other hand, designers are often perfectly happy being “top-down” thinkers and starting out by discussing the vague big-picture aspects of the problem and related tangents. Both types of thinkers are vital for problem solving — so let your designers run down rabbit holes when they need to, to come up with a solution.

Havana Nguyen, a UX designer, finds that freedom is useful only to a point:

To create a well-designed product, Havana (and other UX designers) needs the following pieces of information:

Zack Naylor is now co-founder and CEO at Aurelius, but was a designer for over ten years before that, and what matters to him is user research.

Zach notes that this helps remove office politics, emotions, and opinions from the design process, something that Havana also notes.

There’s always value in having design specialists on your team, but it’s also important to get the whole team involved in the design process.

Mike Finch, product designer at SpiderOak, has worked on teams ranging from huge engineering teams to lean startups — and there’s one thing they all have in common; they don’t tend to understand that design is a team sport:

Want to get your team up to speed on design thinking? IDEO has a free crash-course in design thinking, and Alexa Roman put together a handy UX primer, complete with books to read and influencers to follow.

If you’re a designer, we’d love to hear more about what matters most to you, and if you’d like to work on your products more effectively, try a free trial of Clubhouse today!|||

Ever wonder what motivates and drives designers to push out amazing products and concepts? This post is a short summary of what matters to designers.