Should designers code? This is an eternal question.

I believe designers and developers should both learn a bit about the profession of the other side. Armed with a holistic understanding of how design and engineering fit together to create great products, we will become better designers and better developers.

As a developer who’s benefited from learning design, I’m convinced that designers want to learn some coding as well. That is why I got so excited about creating a React Native course tailored for designers.

Wait a second. Am I just thinking in the vacuum though? I decided to ask Designer News. The result? I was totally blown away! The post has been the top story for more than a day and stayed on the front page for more than a week. Shortly after the post, 13 designers booked a call with me and wished to offer help. Wow! 13 real people were willing to spare 30 minutes out of their busy schedules to talk to a complete stranger – me. There must be something that resonates with them!



 [ My calendar got quickly filled up by meeting requests ]

This post is a report of the interviews that I’ve done so far. Hopefully you will be inspired to learn some React as well after reading about your peers’ opinions.

If you feel generous to help me shape the course too, I’m really excited to talk to you! Please schedule a call with me here! I will keep this post updated with your new thoughts and opinions.

I’ve asked quite a few questions and got great responses. They fall in the following 5 categories:

The main body of this post consists of quotes that I found interesting and my comments. Let’s now dive in!

Most interviewees are UX/UI designers working on mobile or web projects. A few of them said they have an engineering background but decided to pursue design as a career.

Nearly everyone I talked to uses Sketch for prototyping. After Effects and InVision are also frequently mentioned. To my surprise, nearly half of the interviewees use Framer which requires coding to take advantage of its full capability.

I also learned about a couple of tools that are popular but I’ve never heard of. They are Principle for prototyping and Zeplin for design hand-off.

Two interviewees have experience in full-stack development alongside design. But the majority of people I’ve talked to don’t have much coding experience. They have various experience in HTML and CSS, and are somewhat familiar with JavaScript.

Encouragingly, quite a few of them have tried some coding bootcamps or online tutorials to try to learn Swift, React etc.

What I found is that designers, at least those who I’ve talked to, are actually quite motivated to code. This doesn’t mean that they want to build everything on their own. But they are well aware of the benefits of involving coding into their workflow and want to learn more about technology.

Below are discussions that touch down the core problem of designer-developer collaboration, the benefits for a designers to understand technology and its implication on creativity.

More interestingly, some designers use coding, notably Framer, to do design itself. I believe this trend will have a profound impact on how UI design is done.

Before the interviews, I have an assumption that there is a communication gap between designers and developers. I’m trying to bridge this gap by helping designers understand a bit more about how a developer’s job is like.

It’s interesting to hear designers talking about their own pain points.

The most popular motivation is that they are working on a project that uses React (either ReactJS or React Native). They want to know how to work with developers better, and they want to have more direct influence on the project.

Interestingly, many people are not really aware of (or care about) the difference between React Native and ReactJS. I told them that the good news is React as a concept is the same. Once you learn one of the two, it’s straightforward to pick up the other.

There are also some really interesting discussions about including React into their design workflow:

There seems a consensus that designers want to learn about React in terms of what it can and cannot do at a high level. Meanwhile, a few interviewees have expressed the interest to learn how to build a full app since they want to build their own ideas.

Designers are really motivated in learning coding as self-improvement. They’ve taken online courses on sites such as Code School, CodeAcademy, Lynda, went to workshops, attended webinars etc. I’m proud of you, my friends!

Here are just a couple of examples:

I am thrilled! I think many designers are motivated to learn coding. React is one of their favorite topics.

Are you inspired to pick up some React as well? Sign up here, and I’ll send you an email when something is ready.

I’d like to thank everyone who spent your precious time to chat with me, made a comment or upvoted my post. Your insights will really have a huge influence on the course. Together, let’s create something truly useful for designers!

My special thanks to these fantastic folks (sorted by last name):|||

Should designers code? This is an eternal question.