When it comes to React development, fetch is almost the default choice for every React developer. From the example for React to Redux and even in React Native, fetch is used everywhere. Fetch is very popular because it is simple and it is available in most of modern browsers. Wherever it is not supported, you can use an polyfill. But is fetch the best way to handling HTTP request?

There are other HTTP clients like: Axios and superagent. Let’s find out why they are better than fetch.

Let”s start with fetch first. This is a typical code that we use to send HTTP request by fetch:

I actually have used fetch a lot in my project, but I have to admit that fetch is not the best way to handle HTTP request. Let’s see why.

So if you want handle a HTTP request properly with fetch, you have to write a cumbersome code. Now let’s look at other alternative for fetch.

The headline of superagent is:  Ajax with less suck. Superagent works on both front-end and backend. It is also made by a very well-known NodeJS developer – TJ

Here is an example usage of superagent that I copy from its homepage:

This code is straight forward and very easy to understand.

Superagent also comes with a lot of plugins which you can find on there homepage. That is one of the main strengths of superagent. There are a lot of plugins for superagent. For example superagent-promise-plugin can transform superagent into a Promise.

Axios is a “Promise based HTTP client for the browser and node.js”.

This code is also easy to understand. We send a POST request to /user, data is {firstName: ‘Fred’, lastName: ‘Flintstone’}. It’s return a Promise, and we handle response via then…catch.. methods.

What if you want to change request header and provide username and password for basic authentication? Well, we can configure it in the config object.

Oppose with superagent, we configure our HTTP request by a JSON object. I think it’s far easier to memorize and understand.

Another cool stuff from axios is the HTTP interceptor which is similar to interceptor in AngularJS.

From my perspective, axious is easier to use than both superagent and fetch.

Here is the result:

It’s no surprise that Axios is pickup by most developers while fetch comes at second place. I hope this post can help you to choose a suitable HTTP client for your project.

What is your opinion? Let me know in the comment section.|||

