The image above is an interactive mind map that can be viewed and explored.

When you click on any of the nodes in it, it will show you the best step by step guides you can use to learn the subject in depth.

If you think that there is a better way one can learn the subject or you wish something was added or you found a mistake, please say it.

There is also a fully open source search engine available that will jump to any point in this mind map.

You can bookmark it in your browser or set it as a home page to open every time you open a new tab if you wish to learn something new.

Both this project and the search engine is in active development. If you want to help improve this project in any way or want to join an ever growing community of learners, you can join our active slack group.

There are many layers to this mind map and underlied nodes are hyperlinks. You may see emojis attached to some nodes. Here is what they mean :

The arrows often represent relations. So if 'physics' has an arrow pointing to 'mathematics', it means that physics is related to it. Other times, arrows show direction and are used as a guide as can be seen here.

Certain nodes have a number attached to them which represent the order in which the material should ideally be covered. If nodes have the same number, then choose any as all may be good for learning at this level.

Certain nodes may have a numeric prefix like '17: ' which stands for the year in which the article/research paper was written or published in. '17: ' means that it was written in 2017. I abbreviate it for visual clarity.

The contents of the mind map can also be viewed in text if you prefer that although they may not always be up-to-date.

In the mind map above, you will find a little node named 'more' which acts as a gateway to all the research I do.

All together there is currently ~ 3000 mind maps. Aside from a pretty amazing search engine for them, there is also an alfred workflow that allows you to search through these mind maps at insane speeds.

As I learn more and more topics, I also make flash cards that I use to consolidate this knowledge.

This project started off as a single mind map but it grew too big.

If you want to help make this dream of visualising all of world's knowledge in this way a reality, you can help in many ways.

There are 43 nodes in the main mind map, each representing a topic of research.

Each topic has a dedicated issue page which you can help improve.

If for example, you think that computer science mind map should use a different resource for learning the subject, you can say it here.

Take a look and see how and where you can help.

Inside these 43 main mind maps, there are multiple more mind maps for each topic that can be improved.

Similar to above, there is an issue for every topic that can be improved. It will have a 'study plan' label attached to it as well as a label of where in the mind map this topic lies.

For example, there is a mind map for front end development, that is located in web development. If you want to propose a change to it and think that something should be added or removed, you can do so here. Since this mind map is in 'web development' branch, a label of 'web development' is attached to it.

Here is a list of all labels available. You can also make a search for the topic you are looking for here. If it is not found, just open a new issue and say what you wish was added or changed and where.

There are a few interesting mind maps in there that can be improved further. Most notably, books, courses and research papers.

Take a look at either the web pages of all the books, courses or research papers or the mind maps of them. I want to visualise and organise all the interesting books one can read, courses one can take and influential research papers one can read.

There is a lot included already but there's always something that will be missing.

If you have a favourite book or a course or research paper that you don't see included in these lists, please say what it is.

Aside from books, courses and research papers, you can help improve many other mind maps. Here are some of them :

Just add what you think is interesting and valuable and is appropriate to the topic. I cannot do this alone, but if we do it together, imagine what this could become.

We plan to ease the contributing process as much as possible so there is no friction in proposing to add changes and integrating them into the mind maps.

The focus of the search engine is to search through an open index of knowledge that all can see and explore and contribute to. It should categorise knowledge in a way that allows linear progression of learning each of the topics. There should be no black box nature where everything is hidden behind a search bar, if you want to explore, you can.

The end goal is to make an interactive mind map of all of world's knowledge that all can explore.

This project is still in its early stages but I am certain as it gets traction and people actually start both using and contributing content to it, the popularity will grow. As more people visit and spend time exploring these mind maps, the cost of maintaining and hosting thousands of these mind maps will grow. I would hate to shut down this project for these reasons.

I also don't want to put any advertisements or any 'sponsored' content in there that I don't think brings value. I want these study plans to present the most efficient ways one can learn any subject one may want to learn in a guided way.

If you do love using these mind maps, I have started a Patreon page where you can support this work, if you wish. There are also some really cool rewards that come with your support.

Aside from the active slack group, there is also a small newsletter that you can sign up for to get short emails with updates on this project.

I love writing. I find the act of writing really enjoyable as I try to condense information in a way that another person can understand.

I really love programming, building and sharing the things I have built.

If you have some specific questions about this project or about myself, my interests and my personal workflow. I would love to hear them and you can ask them either in the slack group or in my github ama. You can also view past questions that I have answered.|||

knowledge-map - 🌍  Search Interactive Mind Maps to learn anything