Hedge fund trading may be the highest paying job in the world, so to learn more, we spoke with a former manager at one of the world’s leading hedge funds. They gave us the following information, which allowed us to make a rough estimate of the typical earnings of hedge fund traders.

We also ran this document past several other people in the industry and asked them to point out mistakes.

We found that junior traders typically earn $300k – $3m per year, and it’s possible to reach these roles in 4 – 8 years. Senior portfolio managers can easily earn over $10m per year, though average earnings are probably lower. Read on for the details.

We’re interested in this option because it could allow you to donate a lot to charity – what we call “earning to give”. Whether or not that’s a good idea depends on many other factors, such as your reduced potential to good directly through your work, and even the possibility of causing harm. It’s also an extremely competitive option that won’t be a good fit for many. In this post, we only explore the question of how much staff in hedge funds earn. (Also note we’re focused more on discretionary traders than purely quantitative traders, which have a different career progression.)

Hedge funds trade in financial markets on behalf of clients in exchange for annual fees, and a cut of the profits. They’re similar to mutual funds but face fewer restrictions on what they can invest in, and can only be used by accredited investors.

The revenue of a hedge fund comes from the fees on the assets it manages. The typical fund charges a fee of 2% of assets under management per year, plus a performance fee. The performance fee is typically 20% of any returns it makes for the clients over and above the 2% base fee. So, if a fund makes 10% returns in a year, then the performance fee is 20% of (10% – 2%), or 1.6% of assets. Adding the base fee brings the total revenue to 3.6% of assets under management.

This means that a $1bn hedge fund returning 10% per year on its investments would have annual revenue of $36m. The clients would receive 6.4% per year on what they put in. These figures are fairly typical. 10% per year is a typical performance target, and similar to what hedge funds actually returned before fees over the last two decades. A few funds charge higher fees and some charge lower ones. Many people think typical fees in the industry have shrunk in recent years.

How is this revenue split between different employees at the fund?

20-40% goes to operational costs, including the premises, technology, and operational staff. The larger the fund the lower this percentage. About 10% will go to all the junior traders and analysts. About 40-55% will go to the senior portfolio manager (who manages the junior traders). What remains, 0-30%, goes to the owner of the hedge fund (often also the senior portfolio manager). Many of the costs don’t scale linearly with revenue (i.e. running a $10bn fund isn’t nearly ten times more expensive than running a $1bn fund), so the owner will earn a higher percentage the larger the fund. The percentage is also very sensitive to performance – the owner gets what’s left over after costs, which could easily be negative in a bad year. The traders and portfolio managers within the fund are usually paid as a percentage of their returns, typically 10-20%. E.g. if a manager returns 10% in a year, they’ll receive about 1-2% of the assets they manage within the fund. So if they were managing $100m of assets, then they’d earn $1-$2m in that year. In addition they get a base salary, but that will be a small proportion of their total pay (perhaps around $100,000). This means their total pay is very volatile. In some funds, the percentage the traders earn also depends on performance, making pay even more volatile. Note there are different compensation structures in different funds and roles (e.g. many quant hedge funds don’t tie pay directly to returns, especially at more junior levels), so this is just a rough guide.

From the above, we can estimate how much traders earn at each stage. The following is all very rough and could be greatly improved with more data. The extra information about the industry is based on my own judgements having talked to lots of people who work in finance.

Much of the above also applies to prop trading. Prop traders trade on behalf of their institution, rather than external clients. They usually exist within small partnerships and banks (though new regulation has reduced the amount of prop trading in banks). Often prop traders trade with a smaller amount of money, but make more aggressive bets. Prop traders typically receive a larger fraction of the returns they make e.g. 30% rather than 10-20%. This means they end up earning a similar amount per year as hedge fund traders.

Looking at the above, and making a very rough estimate, the mean earnings over an entire career in the job could easily be about $400k – $900k per year. This is based on an analyst salary, plus a 10-20% chance of making it as a junior trader, and a couple of percent chance of making it to a top role.

Does that range check out?

We found that the mean income in finance is about $245,000. This includes a wide range of jobs that are mostly much lower earning than trading positions, so it doesn’t seem unreasonable to think that the mean for trading could be several times higher.

We also found that the 99th percentile in finance (i.e. the highest-paid 10,000-20,000 finance workers in the US) earns $1.4m, so are figures are within this bound.

Some hedge funds have to disclose their total compensation, which means you can estimate the average compensation per staff member. Here is an analysis of 15 UK high-frequency hedge funds, which finds mean compensation from $200k-$1.4m. Many of these figures include support staff too, so they are underestimates of the trading salaries. This puts them in line with our estimates. Keep in mind that high-frequency firms generally offer higher pay than hedge funds.

The average employee at a top investment bank earns about $300,000, but “front office” staff like traders should earn more. The typical front office investment banker age 30 in London earns about $400,000. I’d expect hedge fund traders to earn more, so this is in line with the estimates above.

You’d also need to adjust for the chances of leaving the job. It’s common for people to go into more operational roles, other positions in finance, or entirely different industries, and these all usually have lower income.

You’d also need to adjust for the future prospects of the industry, and other issues we cover here.

Finally, your expected earnings will also be very sensitive to personal fit. If you have a higher than average chance of making it to the top roles, your expected earnings could be many times higher, and vice versa.

If the mean income of a hedge fund trader is $650,000, then that’s $20m over a 30 year career. If you donated half, that would be enough to cover the salaries of about 5 non-profit CEOs or 2-3 academic researchers, while still having a huge amount left to live on. This is why, if you’re a good fit for an option like this, ‘earning to give’ can be a high-impact career.

Of course, there’s a lot more to say about the pros and cons of earning to give. You can read more in our guide to earning to give.

To find out more about the job, read this interview with a hedge fund trader.

Read next: what are the highest-paying jobs in America?|||

