More often than not, push notifications are the best shot at increasing conversions in your app marketing strategy. Period.

The other times, not so much. Why? Maybe the timing is wrong, or the message, or sometimes they are being sent to wrong people. But even if you get all these three right, at present, chances of them being converted are low—why, you may ask—because your competitors are sending extremely rich push notifications to their users. When there are multiple push notifications pending in your phone and you’re about to spend time in reviewing them, ask yourself which one would you prefer considering your time is very important and you are busy? Yeah, thought so.

All of us know what rich push notifications are—just a recap—they help in attaching images, videos, HTML, GIFs, etc. with the short copy that you would you like to send to your users.  This totally opens a whole world of endless possibilities that allows app marketers to play with their creativity and break through the noise of infinite push notifications that users receive all the time. Of course, this is catching on and soon every other marketer will try and engage with their users using rich push notifications, but the beauty of this feature is that you have control over the aesthetics of the push notification and it is up to you how you utilize this medium to maximize conversions.

Also read: 5 Best Practices to Mastering Push Notifications

Here are 5 ways you can utilize the capability of rich push notifications to boost conversions in your app:

Also read: How to Write a Push Notification That Converts

This is it, this is finally it. Just the kind of combination app marketers had been waiting for, it’s been embraced by many app marketers across the world and if you haven’t already, it’s high time you should. In case you would like us to walk you through the platform using which you launch rich push campaigns, just fill up this form and we will get in touch with you.|||

The beauty of rich push notifications is that you have control over the aesthetics and it is up to you how you utilize this medium to maximize conversions.