During their last earnings report, Facebook claimed that they had 1.13 billion daily active users on their platform. In the same quarter, Twitter claimed that they had 328 million monthly active users.

The question is: just how many of these “active users” aren’t people at all? During the last six months there’s been a lot of clues left that point to these claims being one Big Lie built on the back of fake bot accounts.

As many as 48 million Twitter accounts aren’t people, says study.

Facebook reportedly has around 170 million fake users, and possibly many more that they aren’t quite aware of yet.

Facebook cracks down on 30,000 fake accounts in France.

Facebook Deletes Tens Of Thousands Of Accounts Ahead Of UK General Election

In light of this information surfacing over the past six months, there are many outstanding questions.

Related: The Far-Left Works With Silicon Valley To Fight Populism With Paid Shills And Censorship

These are important questions that at the moment have gone unanswered. The most important question of all is: when will this house of cards collapse?

Gab is a social network with a mission to empower individuals with the tools they need to create and shape their own experience, as we believe human beings are born of reason, a free mind and of sound cognition. We refuse to infantilize our users and treat them as juveniles like other social networking sites do. We are committed to free speech and expression. Some of our tools include the ability to mute words, phrases, hashtags, and other users they might perceive as undesirable.

Gab’s policy is to follow all applicable laws in The United States of America, the Constitution and the Supreme Court’s rulings on the First Amendment. We use the Court’s rulings, precedents and judgments as our guiding principles for protecting and empowering free speech and expression.|||

During their last earnings report, Facebook claimed that they had 1.13 billion daily active users on their platform. In the same quarter, Twitter claimed that they had 328 million monthly active…