A limited number of relay groups can see you enter and exit the Tor network (deanonymization).

TL;DR: If you want to get the list of relevant Tor relays go to the bold URL near the end of this page.

When a Tor client routes traffic through the Tor network he tries to select 3 “random” (mostly) relays (guard, middle and an exit relay). The number of relays is crucial. Using 3 hops should help reduce the risk that a single entity (excluding global passive adversaries) can “see” Alice’s real IP address and the fact that she is talking to Bob. Alice protection is lost should her Tor client use relays controlled by a single entity (there are multiple cases, we mainly talk about the worst-case: operator sees entry and exit connection.)

There are multiple safeguards and properties in the Tor client to help reduce the risk of Alice loosing Tor’s traffic analysis protection due to unlucky path selection:

Are there relay groups that despite these safeguards could be used in multiple positions in a circuit?

Yes, but I guess most are probably not in that position because they want to harm you.

To identify groups of relays one can use the ContactInfo field of relays. This is the easiest method, but keep in mind, that field is completely optional and a relay operator can provide an arbitrary string. That means anyone can setup relays with other people’s contact addresses. A relay operators would notice that when we contact them to update their family configuration.

We use the contact string to group relays with the same (or similar) contact. Once we find groups we check if they meet all the requirements for end-to-end correlation (multiple netblocks, no or incomplete family configuration, guard and exit probability > 0%).

Since this list changes over time it would be a bit pointless to list these relays here, instead I’m pointing you to the regularly updated list a my OrNetStats page:

Note: I’m not saying that these groups actually perform any deanonymization attacks but we should not have to trust any individual Tor relay operators (completely). That is a core principle of the Tor design.

If you use one of the relays in the above list as your entry guard relay (static over multiple months) than you might sooner or later also use one of their exit relays (changes frequently) as well.

To find out if you use them currently as your entry-guard you can search for these fingerprints in your Tor “state” file located in your Tor client’s “DataDirectory”. The probability that you use them is around ~0.9% as of 2017–05–09. Even if they are not in the state file this might affect you in the future when your guard is rotated.|||

TL;DR: If you want to get the list of relevant Tor relays go to the bold URL near the end of this page. When a Tor client routes traffic through the Tor network he tries to select 3 “random” (mostly…