A meme is a piece of media that, in its most typical form, combines a caption with a graphic image like a photo. They spread across the internet and carry a message, often a humorous message with mimicry or satire.

Since typical memes start with a photo, there are copyright issues. The photographer has the right to control the way his or her photo is used. His or her rights include the right to be credited as the photographer, to broadcast/publish the photo, public performance, republication of the photo to others, copying, and adapting it to other works (called derivative works). The photographer also has the right to object to distortion of his or her work if he or she believes the distortion will negatively affect his or her artistic reputation.

In almost every case, mere addition of a caption to a photo is copyright infringement. The doctrine of Fair Use may provide a safe harbor as an exception to the law of copyright infringement. Fair use includes use of a photo for the purpose of news, criticism, review, commentary and parody. This safe haven applies to most memes.

The newly-created meme is a new work of art. Who owns the copyright in the meme? In most cases, it will be jointly owned by the photographer and the meme creator. This can be complicated when determining future use of the work. Both are authorized to use it, and give permission to others to use it, without accounting to the other co-owner. This includes no obligation to share in royalties and profits!

Meme creators should be cautious, especially if the photo used is owned by an aggressive owner such as Getty Images, Shutterstock, Big Stop Photo or a major media corporation. In that situation, the meme creator could be hit with a cease and desist letter that includes a license amount for the past unauthorized use and legal fees. These could be thousands of dollars. What started as a humorous image quickly turns into a legal nightmare with significant expense.

If you don’t use a photo owned by one of the “big boys,”  the risk may be low if the meme  is used in a non-commercial way such as social media sharing. If you want to use the meme in your marketing and advertising, this could pose same legal challenges since it won’t be covered by the Fair Use safe haven.

How to avoid all of that complication when using a photo to create a meme for use in your business marketing? Take the time to acquire a license to use the photo for commercial purposes or to use a photo from a site with free images such as SXC, Stockvault or MorgueFile.

Many business owners want to know if memes can be trademarked. This is complicated, but the important question is actually one of branding strategy. Memes have a short-lived popularity. Is it prudent to base a business long-term branding strategy on a “ fad”?  If the answer is yes, a business seeking to use a meme as a trademark needs to be certain it has the necessary licenses or ownership rights in the meme and that it implements an advertising strategy that creates an association between the image and the business products or services. This is called secondary meaning and occurs when potential customers see the meme and immediately recognize it as a brand associated with a particular business. With those steps accomplished, you can register a meme as your business trademark.|||

