As per Computer Business Review, there is astronomical numbers of new devices coming online each year as connectivity is key. With 5G on the horizon, it’s looking more like a double edged sword, sacrificing our security for speed. According to ABI Research, by 2020 there will be 40.9 billion active wireless connected devices and this will largely be non-hub devices like sensors. IDC forecasts that by 2020 the worldwide market for IoT will surpass $3 trillion.

The growing number of hackers continues to be a major concern. Experts are still reeling under the effect of the DDoS attack of 2016. Everybody is curious to know what the future of cyber security looks like and Future of Everything had experts talking about it.

Our CEO, Rishi Khanna, quoted, “Cyber security is getting complex as the number of cyber threats are growing. The Internet of Things (IoT) is bound to add mountains of challenges for cyber security. There are more and more cyber specialists who are starting to search for a more mature approach to identify and deal with cyber attacks.

Most of the tools that are used are only capable of identifying threat signatures. As they do this, the tools try to identify a pattern that has been used in previous attacks. But these tools or approaches fail to identify the new threats.

Therefore, experts feel that one of most efficient ways to manage the looming threats, in the days to come, is through analytics and automation. The premise is to identify the cyber risks and intrusions, and detect attacks, with the help of predictive analytics. The ideal cyber security future environment will offer a combination of complex human and machine intelligence, automated and analytics-driven alerts and an effective security mechanism.”

In the same write-up, Konstantinos Karagianni, CTO of BT added, “Block chains are moving from the realm of just fueling cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin to providing smart contracts, identity management, and multiple ways of proving integrity of data. They may also hold the key to defending against IoT attacks.

Quantum computing will have possibly the biggest impact within 10 years. Most over-the-wire encrypted transmissions collected over the next decade will be readable, and even private keys will be reversible from public block chains (for example, you can spend someone else’s Bitcoin). Post-quantum safe crypto will be a must.

AI will be used to identify hacking flaws and patch them to stay ahead of malicious attackers.”

Steve Durbin, Managing Director of the Information Security Forum said, “Organizations will need to place a focus on shifting from promoting awareness of the security “problem” to creating solutions and embedding information security behaviors that aﬀect risk positively. The risks are real because people remain a ‘wild card’. Many organizations recognize people as their biggest asset, yet many still fail to recognize the need to secure ‘the human element’ of information security. In essence, people should be an organization’s strongest control.

Instead of merely making people aware of their information security responsibilities, and how they should respond, the answer for businesses of all sizes is to embed positive information security behaviors that will result in “stop and think” behavior and habits that become part of an organization’s information security culture. While many organizations have compliance activities which fall under the general heading of ‘security awareness’, the real commercial driver should be risk, and how new behaviors can reduce that risk.”

If cyber security is a growing concern for your organization, you can call North America: +1(888) 712-4344 and speak to one of our experts to find a solution to address it.

Tags: ABI research, Bitcoin, challenges for cyber security, computer business review, cyber risks and intrusions, cyber security, cyber specialists, cyber-attacks, effect of DDoS attack, future of cyber security, Future of Everything, hacking, Information Security Forum, Internet of Things (IoT), machine intelligence, predictive analytics

This entry was posted on Tuesday, May 9th, 2017 at 11:29 am and is filed under Managed Security Services, Technology. You can follow any responses to this entry through the RSS 2.0 feed. You can skip to the end and leave a response. Pinging is currently not allowed.|||

Cybersecurity is a fast-morphing technology, meaning that making any assumptions about what will be needed six months from now is difficult at best.