#013 – How to overcome the biggest challenges to your online business with patio11 Patrick McKenzie divulges his wisdom around how to develop promising business ideas, find your first customers, convince smart people to work with you, generate more revenue, and stay happy while doing it.

#012 – Traveling, Learning to Code, and Bootstrapping to $25k/mo with Tyler Tringas of Storemapper Tyler Tringas talks about the difference between good and bad ideas, launching new products in days not months, finding your first customers one at a time, hiring effectively, and more.

#011 – How Ryan Bednar Went from SEO Consulting to Building an SEO Product That Makes $80,000/mo Turning your skillset into a product that solves customers' problems is one of the best ways to start a business. Learn how Ryan Bedndar came up with an idea, iterated on his product, and found his first customers.

#010 – Growing Your Social Media Presence and Building an Audience with Laura Roeder of MeetEdgar The point of marketing is to draw new people in to your business every day, but how exactly do you go about doing that? Laura Roeder, who bootstrapped her business to $4M/year, explains how to build an audience.

#008 – Growing a $600,000/mo Business by Starting with Direct Sales with Nathan Barry of ConvertKit Learn how Nathan Barry grew his business by teaching what he knew, taking advantage of big competitors, showing up every day for two years, and treating direct sales as the answer to everything. Brought to you by Vettery.

#007 – Building an Open-Source Publishing Platform That Makes $63,000/mo with John O'Nolan of Ghost John O'Nolan explains how he used his industry experience to come up with a simple idea, built a landing page that converted 30,000 email subscribers, and raised $300,000 on Kickstarter. Brought to you by SparkPost.

#006 – Launching Your Product and Finding Customers Immediately with Josh Pigford of Baremetrics Josh Pigford went from having an idea to having paying customers in eight days. Less than six months later he was making $14,000/month. In this episode, you'll learn exactly how he did it. Brought to you by SparkPost.

#005 – How the VC Business Model Co-Opts Entrepreneurs' Visions with Bryce Roberts of Indie.vc Why is the VC narrative so dominant? Bryce Roberts, partner at Indie.vc, talks about why it's important to focus on generating revenue from the beginning. Brought to you by DixonAndMoe.com.

#004 – Succeeding in a Crowded Market by Building a Niche Business with Garrett Dimon of Sifter How do you cut through the noise and stand out among the competition so you can start landing your first customers? Garrett Dimon, the creator of Sifter, explains how he did it. Brought to you by SparkPost.

#003 – Bootstrapping a SaaS Business to $30,000,000/year with David Hauser of Grasshopper David Hauser explains how prioritizing selling early on, talking to customers, and rigorously testing marketing channels helped him bootstrap to $30M/year. Brought to you by DixonAndMoe.com.

#002 – Fueling Growth with SEO and Content Marketing with Chris Chen of Instapainting Learn how Instapainting founder Chris Chen used a combination of SEO and content marketing to grow his business to $32k/month in sales. Brought to you by ProductManagerHQ.com.

#001 – Building an Audience and Being Scrappy with Jason Grishkoff of SubmitHub Jason Grishkoff, the founder of SubmitHub, proves that being scrappy and doing things that don't scale (like sending 1000 emails) can lead to explosive growth. Brought to you by SparkPost.|||

Download past episodes or subscribe to future episodes of The Indie Hackers Podcast: How Developers are Bootstrapping, Marketing, and Growing Their Online Businesses by Courtland Allen: Full-Stack Developer, Designer, Marketer, MIT Grad, and Y Combinator Alum for free.