Email migration from one email client to another one becomes challenging if both the email client applications support different file formats. Think you were using IBM Notes (formerly known as Lotus Notes) previously. You have recently switched to Microsoft Outlook. Your old emails and other content are stored into NSF database files which can only be accessed on IBM Notes. But you are not using the IBM Notes now, and Outlook doesn’t support NSF format. What will do you to regain access of your crucial data? Exporting Louts Notes email from NSF database into Outlook PST file would be helpful for you. But do you know how to do that? Being a novice user, it would be difficult for you to perform this task. Don’t worry! I can share some information here which would be helpful for you.

But before that, let’s discuss the reasons which are responsible for email migration here. We all know that emails are excessively used all around the world. We can’t even imagine our lives without email. It has become a very essential part of our life. Be it an individual, organization or an enterprise, every single one of us is using email for communication purpose. This has increased the popularity of email client applications. When it comes about the popular email clients, the names which come first are: Microsoft Outlook, Apple Mail, IBM Notes, etc. Here we’ll discuss on MS Outlook and IBM Notes. MS Outlook is purely an email client application which also works as a personal information manager. Though it is primarily used for emails, but it contains other useful features as well, such as: calendaring, contact management, task management, notes taking, journal creation, web browsing, etc. But if we talk about IBM Notes client, we find that it is an all-in-one application. It is commonly used as an email client application in organizations and large enterprises.

Though both are email client applications, but support different file formats for storing mailbox content. MS Outlook creates Outlook data file in PST (Personal Storage Table) format while IBM Notes stores the data in NSF (Notes Storage Facility) format. Sometimes situation arises when you need to switch from one email client to another one due to personal reason or any corporate constraint.

Migration of NSF files’ data to PST format is essential if you have recently switched from Lotus Notes to MS Outlook. Luckily there are two ways by which you can export Lotus Notes email to PST file: a manual trick and a professional tool. The manual trick is the foremost option for which users must go before using any third-party professional tool.

The manual trick is divided into two different parts. In the first part, the Lotus Notes emails are exported. Follow the steps given below:

Step 1: Launch IBM Notes application on your system. IBM Notes was formerly known as Lotus Notes.

Step 3: From the menu bar, go to the File.

Step 4: Then click Export option to start the Export wizard.

Note: You will get several options to choose the format for the exported file from Lotus Notes.

Step 5: Choose Tabular Text or Structured Text. Both these formats are supported by Outlook.

Step 6: Now click Continue to go through the export process.

Step 7: Click Export to end the wizard and export the mail file.

Now you need to import the data into Outlook which were exported earlier. Follow the steps given below:

Step 2: Go to the File menu, click Open > Import.

Step 3: The Import and Export Wizard will pop up. Select Import from another program or file in the options. Click Next.

Step 4: Now select Comma Separated Values (Windows) in the options. Click Next.

Step 5: Browse the file in your system and select it. Also, select the options given there. Click Next.

Step 6: Now select the destination folder where you want to import the CSV file. Click Next.

Step 7: The process will be started and it will be completed within a few seconds. Click Finish.

The manual trick is definitely a time-consuming task. It will take enough time to make the task done completed. Also, sometimes it may fail or doesn’t work. In such situation, a third-party professional solution would be the best option for anyone. The NSF to PST Converter tool is programmed to export the entire mailbox content from NSF database into new PST files without causing any changes or alteration to the original data and files. It hardly takes a few minutes for making the conversion process done for you.|||

If you have recently switched to Outlook from Lotus Notes, you must be looking for something to export Lotus Notes email to PST files. Read this blog post..