National guidelines indicate that doctors should be doing both of these to help keep our population healthier[1,2].Over 8% of Americans have had a major depressive episode within the past year, and yet depression still is not treated with the level of attention necessary to get help to many people in need[3].

Using data from the Medicare & Medicaid Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS), we first take a look at how often medical practitioners report their rate of depression screening, and then dive into the screening rates themselves. The most recent data set is from 2014, and is available for download here: https://data.medicare.gov/data/physician-compare. For details on how we prepared the data, see the appendix.

PQRS is what’s known as a “pay-for-performance” program, which incentivizes individual medical professionals and group practices to report on their quality of care to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). In other words, not reporting data through PQRS means that the medical group will have to pay penalties to the government. In the PQRS guidelines, it is explained that participants are not expected to report on all measures. The measures they choose to report on are expected to reflect typical treatments with regard to their clinical setting and goals. Considering how common depression is in America, we’d like to see depression screening rates being reported to PQRS as frequently as other common health screenings (think tobacco use), and the screening rate itself to be similarly close. In order to understand the importance of both reporting and screening rates, consider this simplified example:

· Physician A reported to PQRS that she screened 100% of her patients for tobacco use and 0% of her patients for depression in 2014

· Physician B didn’t report any information to PQRS about tobacco screening, and reported screening 20% of his patients for depression in 2014

What does this data tell us about how depression and tobacco use are approached by this group of medical professionals? Physicians A + B both report data on screening for depression, making the reporting rate on screening for depression 100%. The reporting rate for screening for tobacco use is 50% (A reports, B does not). The average screening rate for depression is 10%, because Physician A screens 0% of the time, and Physician B screens 20% of the time. The average screening rate for tobacco use is 100%, as Physician A’s screening rate is the only data available. As you can see, both reporting and screening rates are important for understanding how medical professionals prioritize different conditions. While we can’t assume the reasons why a doctor may choose to report data on tobacco screening but not depression screening, keep in mind that the PQRS guidelines encourage participants to report on the conditions they consider relevant. Depression is a widely experienced condition that should be prioritized across a wide range of practices, and not restricted to mental health treatment facilities alone.

We used the approach outlined above to look at the actual figures from the 2014 PQRS dataset.

Medical professionals reported depression screening at an alarmingly low rate compared to other health screenings. The U.S. maps below show the percent of participants that report data on screening for four major health concerns using PQRS, and can give you an idea of how medical professionals in your state report on different health indicators.|||

National guidelines indicate that doctors should be doing both of these to help keep our population healthier[1,2].Over 8% of Americans have had a major depressive episode within the past year, and…