1. 360 reviews are more cruel than they are constructive. More often than not, these employee evaluations become personality profiles rather than performance profiles. Meanspirited and unhelpful criticism can damage an employee’s work morale, and create tension in the team dynamic; thereby, disabling office productivity and performance.

2. They are not as objective and impartial as they claim to be. When performance feedback is received, they are unmeasurable because it is always relational to the team member providing the feedback. That is to say, the performance evaluation of an employee is akin to the competencies with whom they are being compared to—not to their overall work ethic. Although the 360 reviews are meant to minimize subjectivity by taking feedback from all levels of an organization, the bottomline is that the data will always be bias, and therefore, unreliable. Which leads us to our next point:

3. Not all participants of the evaluative process are trained to make proper evaluations. This is the main reason why 360 reviews often end in cruel personal profiling, rather than constructive criticism. Ensure that your employees understand that the purpose of the exercise is to be professional and constructive, and most importantly, that they know how to offer such feedback.

4. 360 Reviews typically lack the main purpose of the evaluation: performance coaching. The 360 degree feedback system tends to be used only as a means to an end. For instance, evaluations are typically conducted when an employee is being considered for a promotion, or on the other end of the spectrum, when they are at risk of being fired. Instead, 360 reviews should be implemented periodically as part of a constructive process. This way, the feedback renders useful when assessing changes in productivity and to aid in performance coaching.

In fact, PepsiCo, the world’s second largest food and beverage leader, conducts four evaluative programmes in its 360 review: the 360 process, an upward feedback process, an employee survey, and a Hogan personality instrument. This global business claims that the four-tier process is essential in forming development plans and improving leadership behaviours across all markets. A case study conducted by ETS, the world’s largest private nonprofit educational testing and assessment organization, and long-term partner with PepsiCo found that, “up to 88% of its executives reported that using 360 feedback as a developmental tool was better than most previous developmental experiences”.

5. Underdogs’ passive resistance.  In instances where employers impose this system to weed out its subpar workers, 360 reviews become a method of throwing people under the bus to protect their own positions. In this way, the feedback system gets played through tactical voting, and bias reviews and personal animosities are quantified as reliable, accurate data.

6. Forgetting strengths and only focusing on weakness. Most employers tend to zero in on their employees’ weaknesses and aim to eliminate them, but forget to maintain and capitalize on their strengths. Though emphasizing the latter is equally as bad, it is important to find balance in coaching an employee on both their strengths and weaknesses.

7. The 360 review is often too vague. Most questionnaires are too generic and consist only of personal profiles. Ensure that the questions provided in the evaluation can translate into measurable and actionable information, that will serve constructive to the employee’s performance and overall productivity of the team.

These common errors found in the 360 degree feedback system, is what makes this evaluative process a time-consuming, damaging practice to both individuals and organizations. Meg Halverson, a management consultant and former employee of Amazon and Microsoft, writes in her New York Times article , that it is “probably because of the anonymous and generic nature of the [360] feedback, [that] the whole process misses the mark in terms of its goal: to make people better at their jobs.”



So how can we reconcile the intended purpose of the 360 degree feedback, with the manner in which is it employed?

Marcus Buckingham, an author, motivational speaker, and business consultant, offers this suggestion in his article for the Harvard Business Review: “Cut out all the statements that ask the rater to evaluate others on their behaviors, and replace them with statements that ask the rater to evaluate himself on his own feelings”. This will create a reliable 360 degree feedback system that raises self-awareness in an employee’s own strengths and weaknesses in the workplace, thereby, driving accelerated growth for a team overall.

Or as Halverson says, “ask for it directly after meetings, interviews and tough conversations with customers or employees”. Review sessions conducted in-person or following an important matter, will give way to constructive, specific, and relevant criticism, as opposed to generic, retrospective feedback.

Regardless of the method you wish to employ, it is important that the evaluation is grounded in actionable, performance-specific questions that guide the feedback you receive.  Open-ended and vague questions will only give you skewed data. Most importantly, it is crucial that the 360 degree feedback system is utilized as part of a process of performance coaching and is revisited periodically to track an employee’s progression. Only when this employee evaluation is structured to constructively encourage and develop a desired work ethic in your employees, will the 360 review serve beneficial for the company culture and overall productivity.|||

