You know how the last 100 miles of a roadtrip seem to stretch on forever? It’s because our attention is focusing on the goal. We are fixating on being stuck in the car and have a heightened awareness of every pain, every discomfort we are experiencing, fixating on the fact that we are here and not there. Goals are good, but not if they are making us miserable because we are in the process of achieving them. If you are on the freeway barreling towards home, what is gained by our anticipation and impatience? Why were we not this uncomfortable the entire time?

On the first 2,900 miles, we have an expectation of driving for days on end, so we let our attention wander. For the last 100, we have razor sharp focus on getting home. In these moments, that focus is exactly what makes our pain accute.

In the roadtrip of running a business, that fixation on the goal can cause so much misery that we quit under the pressure. It is a shame, because there is not a correlation between difficulty and success. If anything, difficulty tracks positively with success. Your business is making you miserable because at least some part of the business is working. If customers are angry, that’s proof that you can get customers!

I never put it together that my mindset was creating at least some of my misery at VGKids. I figured it out years later while I was running up a mile-long hill that my body thought was total bullshit.

I would try to run this hill regularly, and what I eventually figured out was that if I focused on running up the hill, I’d quit partway up. It was just too hard. The trick that worked for me was imagining the top of the hill to be a magnitude farther away than it actually was. I would pretend I was not running to the top of the hill by my house, instead I was running to the opposite coast. I was crossing the Rocky Mountains. I was running Kilimanjaro. The hill I was on right now was just a foothill on the path I was actually running. So when I got to the top of this mile-long climb, well hell. That was easy compared to what I was bracing myself for.

I’ve heard from other distance athletes that it doesn’t matter too much what you actually think about. The thing that makes the trick work is thinking about literally anything other than the finish line. You have to put yourself in a mental state of acceptance. You have to be at peace with the fact that this hard thing you are doing is going to be happening for a long time, so settle in.

And that “settle in” mentality needs to be matched by a strong belief that you will complete the task in the end. Not soon, so let’s not think of it. But someday, we will achieve our goal.

The people with this mindset, the people who are running a mountain so ignore the hill; those are the ones that make it.

And if you are running a mountain, the hill of redoing the monster pile of shirts you just finished ruining doesn’t seem like that big of a deal.|||

If I had one word to describe my emotional state at VGKids between 2002 and 2007 it would be desolation. As long as I am being melodramatic, let me say that the 2nd definition really speaks to me,…