Privacy? I don't have anything to hide.

Over the last 16 months, as I've debated this issue around the world, every single time somebody has said to me, "I don't really worry about invasions of privacy because I don't have anything to hide." I always say the same thing to them. I get out a pen, I write down my email address. I say, "Here's my email address. What I want you to do when you get home is email me the passwords to all of your email accounts, not just the nice, respectable work one in your name, but all of them, because I want to be able to just troll through what it is you're doing online, read what I want to read and publish whatever I find interesting. After all, if you're not a bad person, if you're doing nothing wrong, you should have nothing to hide." Not a single person has taken me up on that offer.

The UKUSA Agreement is an agreement between the United Kingdom, United States, Australia, Canada, and New Zealand to cooperatively collect, analyze, and share intelligence. Members of this group, known as the Five Eyes, focus on gathering and analyzing intelligence from different parts of the world. While Five Eyes countries have agreed to not spy on each other as adversaries, leaks by Snowden have revealed that some Five Eyes members monitor each other’s citizens and share intelligence to avoid breaking domestic laws that prohibit them from spying on their own citizens. The Five Eyes alliance also cooperates with groups of third party countries to share intelligence (forming the Nine Eyes and Fourteen Eyes), however Five Eyes and third party countries can and do spy on each other.

Services based in the United States are not recommended because of the country’s surveillance programs, use of National Security Letters (NSLs) and accompanying gag orders, which forbid the recipient from talking about the request. This combination allows the government to secretly force companies to grant complete access to customer data and transform the service into a tool of mass surveillance.

An example of this is Lavabit – a discontinued secure email service created by Ladar Levison. The FBI requested Snowden’s records after finding out that he used the service. Since Lavabit did not keep logs and email content was stored encrypted, the FBI served a subpoena (with a gag order) for the service’s SSL keys. Having the SSL keys would allow them to access communications (both metadata and unencrypted content) in real time for all of Lavabit’s customers, not just Snowden's.

Ultimately, Levison turned over the SSL keys and shut down the service at the same time. The US government then threatened Levison with arrest, saying that shutting down the service was a violation of the court order.

All providers listed here are outside the US, use encryption, accept Bitcoin, support OpenVPN and have a no logging policy.

Note: Using a VPN provider will not make you anonymous. But it will give you a better privacy. A VPN is not a tool for illegal activities. Don't rely on a "no log" policy.

A warrant canary is a posted document stating that an organization has not received any secret subpoenas during a specific period of time. If this document fails to be updated during the specified time then the user is to assume that the service has received such a subpoena and should stop using the service.

Your Browser sends information that makes you unique amongst millions of users and therefore easy to identify.

When you visit a web page, your browser voluntarily sends information about its configuration, such as available fonts, browser type, and add-ons. If this combination of information is unique, it may be possible to identify and track you without using cookies. EFF created a Tool called Panopticlick to test your browser to see how unique it is.

You need to find what most browsers are reporting, and then use those variables to bring your browser in the same population. This means having the same fonts, plugins, and extensions installed as the large installed base. You should have a spoofed user agent string to match what the large userbase has. You need have the same settings enabled and disabled, such as DNT and WebGL. You need your browser to look as common as everyone else. Disabling JavaScript, using Linux, or even the TBB, will make your browser stick out from the masses.

Modern web browsers have not been architected to assure personal web privacy. Rather than worrying about being fingerprinted, it seems more practical to use free software plugins like Privacy Badger, uBlock Origin and Disconnect. They not only respect your freedom, but your privacy also. You can get much further with these than trying to manipulate your browser's fingerprint.

WebRTC is a new communication protocol that relies on JavaScript that can leak your actual IP address from behind your VPN.

While software like NoScript prevents this, it's probably a good idea to block this protocol directly as well, just to be safe.

In short: Set "media.peerconnection.enabled" to "false" in "about:config".

If you want to make sure every single WebRTC related setting is really disabled change these settings:

Now you can be 100% sure WebRTC is disabled.

There is no known working solution, only a plugin that is easily circumvented. Please use Firefox instead.

Chrome on iOS, Internet Explorer and Safari does not implement WebRTC yet. But we recommend using Firefox on all devices.

Improve your privacy with these excellent Firefox add-ons.

An efficient wide-spectrum-blocker that's easy on memory, and yet can load and enforce thousands more filters than other popular blockers out there. It has no monetization strategy and is completely open source. We recommend Firefox but uBlock Origin also works in other browsers such as Safari, Opera, and Chromium. Unlike AdBlock Plus, uBlock does not allow so-called "acceptable ads". 

 https://addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/ublock-origin/

Automatically removes cookies when they are no longer used by open browser tabs. With the cookies, lingering sessions, as well as information used to spy on you, will be expunged. 

 https://addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/self-destructing-cookies/

A Firefox, Chrome, and Opera extension that encrypts your communications with many major websites, making your browsing more secure. A collaboration between The Tor Project and the Electronic Frontier Foundation. 

 https://www.eff.org/https-everywhere

Emulates Content Delivery Networks locally by intercepting requests, finding the required resource and injecting it into the environment. This all happens instantaneously, automatically, and no prior configuration is required. Source code: GitHub. 

 https://addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/decentraleyes/

The following add-ons require quite a lot of interaction from user to get things working. Some sites will not work properly until you have configured the add-ons.

Many websites integrate features which let other websites track you, such as Facebook Like Buttons or Google Analytics. uMatrix gives you control over the requests that websites make to other websites. This gives you greater and more fine grained control over the information that you leak online. 

 https://addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/umatrix/

Highly customizable plugin to selectively allow Javascript, Java, and Flash to run only on websites you trust. Not for casual users, it requires technical knowledge to configure. 

 https://addons.mozilla.org/firefox/addon/noscript/

This is a collection of privacy related about:config tweaks. We'll show you how to enhance the privacy of your Firefox browser.

Take it a step further and get control of your email with this easy-to-deploy mail server in a box. Mail-in-a-Box lets you become your own mail service provider in a few easy steps. It’s sort of like making your own gmail, but one you control from top to bottom. Technically, Mail-in-a-Box turns a fresh cloud computer into a working mail server. But you don’t need to be a technology expert to set it up. More: https://mailinabox.email/

If you are currently using a search engines like Google, Bing or Yahoo you should pick an alternative here.

If you are currently using an Instant Messenger like WhatsApp, Viber, LINE, Telegram or Threema you should pick an alternative here.

If you are currently using an Video & Voice Messenger like Skype, Viber or Google Hangouts you should pick an alternative here.

If you are currently using a Cloud Storage Services like Dropbox, Google Drive, Microsoft OneDrive or Apple iCloud you should pick an alternative here.

If you are currently using a Cloud Storage Services like Dropbox, Google Drive, Microsoft OneDrive or Apple iCloud you should think about hosting it on your own.

If you are currently using a password manager software like 1Password, LastPass, Roboform or iCloud Keychain you should pick an alternative here.

Mandatory key disclosure laws require individuals to turn over encryption keys to law enforcement conducting a criminal investigation. How these laws are implemented (who may be legally compelled to assist) vary from nation to nation, but a warrant is generally required. Defenses against key disclosure laws include steganography and encrypting data in a way that provides plausible deniability.

Steganography involves hiding sensitive information (which may be encrypted) inside of ordinary data (for example, encrypting an image file and then hiding it in an audio file). With plausible deniability, data is encrypted in a way that prevents an adversary from being able to prove that the information they are after exists (for example, one password may decrypt benign data and another password, used on the same file, could decrypt sensitive data).

If you are currently not using encryption software for your hard disk, emails or file archives you should pick an encryption software here.

If you are currently using Social Networks like Facebook, Twitter or Google+ you should pick an alternative here.

If you are currently using an application like Evernote, Google Keep or Microsoft OneNote you should pick an alternative here.

If you are currently using a operating system like Microsoft Windows or Apple Mac OS X you should pick an alternative here.

Microsoft introduced a lot of new features in Windows 10 such as Cortana. However, most of them are violating your privacy.

This tool uses some known methods that attempt to disable major tracking features in Windows 10.

For easy copy and paste. Share this text snippet.

It's important for a website like privacytools.io to be up-to-date. Keep an eye on software updates of the applications listed here. Follow recent news about providers that are recommended. We try our best to keep up but we're not perfect and the internet is changing fast. If you find an error, or you think a provider should not be listed here, or a qualified service provider is missing or a browser plugin is not the best choice anymore and anything else... Talk to us please.

This is a community project and we're aiming to deliver the best information available for a better privacy. Thank you for participating. This project needs you.

No Ads, No Google Analytics, No Affiliates, No Cross-Site Requests

privacytools.io is a socially motivated website that provides information for protecting your data security and privacy. never trust any company with your privacy, always encrypt.|||

You are being watched! Knowledge, encryption and privacy tools to protect you against global mass surveillance.