Searching for a suitable wedding venue has always been a daunting task. One needs to run from a pillar to post and takes care of so many facets. Starting from the logistics to the size, the location to the security, the list is endless. But now this task may seem a little easier to you as we have come up with a curated list of wedding venues in Mumbai. Like in our previous articles we spoke about the wedding venues in South Mumbai and Navi Mumbai, today we will be going to discuss the venues in and around Andheri.

One of the poshest suburban areas in Mumbai, this place is dotted with numerous wedding venues and banquet halls. Among them, we have handpicked a few that are sure to match your style, requirements, and budget. Have a look!

Welcome to this luxurious wedding venue – Holiday Inn. If you are someone who likes to balance between style and class, then this would be the perfect choice for you. Its rich interiors, well-carpeted flooring, and spacious seating arrangements will truly reflect your elegance and sophistication. It has an in-house team of caterers and other service providers who are known for offering delightful services and taking the wedding to a whole new level.

If looking for a venue that has the perfect blend of modern designs and traditional patterns, then this would be the right pick for you. Located at Ville Parle, Sahara Star is one of the grand wedding venues in the Western Suburb of Mumbai. With a touch of fashionable tone, it can well complement about any styles and requirements. It has a proficient culinary team for offering an in-house catering service and also has teams of other vendors who look into the essential elements of the ceremony.

There is no room for doubt that Hyatt Regency Mumbai can make your wedding the talk of the town. Featuring contemporary architecture  with a subtle touch of elegance, it is truly a hotspot for a grand wedding. It has an in-house culinary team known for providing you and your guests with signature dishes and also has a proficient management team who works hard to make your wedding a grand and memorable event.

Do you want to experience the most lavish wedding on earth? Welcome to The Leela hotel! With a great ambiance and an aesthetically beautiful interior, this venue is the ultimate choice for those who like to do everything in style. It has a team of in-house chefs, decorators, and other vendors who are always on their toes to deliver the best possible services.

FM Banquet, located at Goregaon is the perfect venue for a refined wedding Featuring gorgeous chandelier and distinct artwork on the sidewalls, this venue makes a great choice for those who want to keep it simple yet elegant. Rest assured that its youthful and talented team of vendors will put an effort to make your wedding grand and memorable.|||

Top 5 Wedding Venues in Andheri | Marriage Halls | Wedfine Blog