PTSD diagnosis significantly increased the risk for dementia diagnosis (HR = 1.35; [95% CI = 1.27–1.43]). However, there were significant interactions between PTSD diagnosis and use of SSRIs (P < .001), NAs (P = .014), and AAs (P < .001) on the risk for dementia diagnosis. HR for dementia diagnosis among veterans diagnosed with PTSD and not using psychotropic medications was 1.55 [1.45–1.67]. Among veterans diagnosed with PTSD prescribed SSRI, SNRI, or AA, HR for dementia diagnosis varied by drug class use ranging from 1.99 for SSRI to 4.21 for AA, relative to veterans without a PTSD diagnosis and no psychotropic medication receipt. BZAs or SNRIs use at baseline was associated with a significantly increased risk for dementia diagnosis independent of a PTSD diagnosis.

Thus, we hypothesized that use of various psychotropic medication classes among PTSD patients could be a significant effect modifier or potential confounder of the association between PTSD and the risk for dementia. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine the impact of psychotropic medication use on the association between PTSD and the risk for dementia in a nationally representative sample of US veterans aged 56 years and older.

Other psychotropic medication classes associated with cognitive effects and commonly encountered among veterans with PTSD[ 11 ] include benzodiazepines (BZA) and atypical antipsychotics (AA). Studies examining associations between BZA use and cognitive decline report mixed results;[ 27-30 ] however, a meta-analysis found long-term BZD use consistently resulted in significant impairments across a variety of cognitive domains.[ 31 ] In addition, long-term BZA use has been directly associated with a significantly increased risk for developing dementia.[ 31-36 ] In contrast to the BZA literature base, few studies have examined the impact of AA drug use on cognitive impairment among patients without schizophrenia. Instead, these studies have emphasized the negative impact of AA on cognitive functioning among individuals with known dementia.[ 37 ]

Yet, prior research failed to consider the potential impact of psychotropic medication use commonly encountered with a diagnosis of PTSD among US veterans.[ 9 ] Moreover, several recommended pharmacotherapies for PTSD, i.e., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) have been associated with improved cognitive functioning[ 10-13 ] and serotonin signaling has been implicated in the pathogenesis of dementia including decreased amyloid levels and plaques in both humans and animal models.[ 14, 15 ] However, other studies have linked these medications with impaired cognitive functioning,[ 16-21 ] increased risk for developing mild cognitive impairment,[ 22 ] and SSRIs, SNRIs, and both novel and older antidepressants have all been associated with an increased risk for developing dementia.[ 23-26 ]

Dementia is a chronic neurodegenerative disorder that affects approximately 45.7 million people worldwide[ 1 ] and is a leading cause of morbidity, mortality, disability, and institutionalization among individuals aged 65 years and older.[ 2-5 ] Emerging research indicates that posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) might be a major risk factor for the development of dementia among older adults. Yaffe et al.[ 6 ] found PTSD to be associated with a significantly higher 7-year cumulative incidence rate of dementia and an increased risk of developing dementia (hazard ratio [HR] = 1.77; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.70–1.85). Similarly, Qureshi et al.[ 7 ] and Meziab et al.[ 8 ] found PTSD significantly increased the risk of developing dementia among US veterans independent of war related injury (HR = 1.52; 95% CI = 1.41–1.64) and prisoner of war status (HR = 2.39; 95% CI = 1.84–3.11), respectively.

To determine the impact of psychotropic medication use on the association between PTSD and the risk of developing dementia, we used Cox proportional hazard models with age as time scale and performed the analysis in several steps. First, we adjusted for demographic characteristics including gender, race/ethnicity, and annual income. Second, we assessed for correlations among the medical and psychiatric comorbidities using phi coefficients and excluded one covariate from each pair of strongly correlated comorbidities (ɸ ≥ 0.7). Third, we adjusted for the remaining medical and psychiatric comorbidities, which included traumatic brain injury, hypertension, ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, atherosclerosis, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic kidney disease, chronic liver disease, and peptic ulcer disease/gastritis, major depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, anxiety, insomnia and alcohol and illicit drug abuse. Fourth, we adjusted for Charlson comorbidity score and number of primary care and mental health clinic visits. Fifth, we tested for effect modification of the association between PTSD and the risk for dementia by psychotropic medication use using interaction terms between PTSD and each of the psychotropic medications classes of interest. Finally, we developed a multivariate model that adjusted for demographic characteristics, medical and psychiatric comorbidity, Charlson comorbidity scores, number of mental and primary health clinic visits, psychotropic class medication use, and the significant interaction terms between PTSD and individual psychotropic medication class. To account for polypharmacy, all the models assessing for drug effects included all psychotropic medication classes of interest. The validity of the proportional hazard assumption was assessed and verified for all covariates in all the models using log-log survival curves and weighted Schoenfeld residuals.

We considered several covariates and potential confounders for our analyses: demographic characteristics (i.e., age, gender, race/ethnicity and annual income), medical comorbidity (i.e., traumatic brain injury, hypertension, ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, atherosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic kidney disease, chronic liver disease, and peptic ulcer disease/gastritis), and other psychiatric disorders (i.e., major depression, bipolar disorders, anxiety, insomnia, schizophrenia and alcohol, tobacco and illicit substance abuse). Additional measures included the enhanced ICD-9 Charlson comorbidity scores for administrative data[ 39 ] and estimates of healthcare utilization in primary or mental health clinics because the frequency of visits might influence likelihood of dementia detection and diagnosis. We extracted all variables from the PTF and OCF with the medical and psychiatric covariates identified using ICD-9 codes as listed in Supplementary Appendix S1, Tables 3 and 4.

Psychotropic medication use was determined during the baseline period (FY 2002–04) from receipt of a prescription in the DSS only if it occurred after a PTSD diagnosis and continued for at least 180 days. We selected 180 days as the cut-off based on previous analyses.[ 38 ] Psychotropic medication classes of interest included; (1) SSRI, (2) SNRI, (3) mixed class or novel antidepressants (NA), (4) BZA, and (5) AA. Supplementary Appendix S1, Table 2 provides a complete list of medications included in each drug class.

We collected data from the veterans’ medical records until a code for a dementia diagnosis appeared or until they met censoring criteria. Veterans were considered censored if they: (1) did not develop dementia by the end of the 9-year follow-up period, (2) ceased to have any contact with a VHA facility during the follow-up period or (3) died during the follow-up period.

The VHA national repository of databases supplied the data to conduct this study. These databases include: (1) the Patient Treatment File (PTF) Bed Section Files, (2) the Outpatient Care Files (OCF), and (3) Decision Support System (DSS)–National Data Extract national pharmacy database. The PTF Bed Section Files includes data elements such as demographic characteristics, principal and secondary ICD-9 diagnoses. The OCF database contains data including demographic characteristics and principal and secondary ICD-9 diagnoses for each outpatient encounter at all VHA facilities. The DSS contains drug names, dosages, and dates of prescription fill. Unique identifiers allowed the linkage of the individual databases in order to create a comprehensive longitudinal medical record for each veteran's health and health care utilization.

The sample population for this retrospective cohort study was composed of 3,139,780 veterans aged 56 years and older during fiscal year (FY) 2003 enrolled and receiving health care at any Veterans Health Administration (VHA) care facility, nationwide. Veterans were excluded (Figure 1 ) if: (1) they died or had clinical encounters containing International Classification of Diseases-9th edition (ICD-9) diagnosis codes for dementia or mild cognitive impairment (MCI) during the baseline observation period (i.e., from October 1, 2002 through September 31, 2004), (2) had less than one VHA encounter every 2 years during the follow-up period (FY 2004–2012), and (3) had an ICD-9 code for other neurodegenerative disorders, cancer, chronic inflammatory diseases, or conditions associated with potentially reversible or non-neurodegenerative cognitive impairments at any time during the study period (Supplementary Appendix S1, Table 1). Thus, the final sample consisted of 417,172 veterans with complete information on all variables of interest. The Institutional Review Board of the University of Iowa and the Research and Development Committee of the Iowa City Veterans Affairs Health Care System reviewed and approved this study.

In the final full model including all variables and psychotropic medication classes, PTSD diagnosis was associated with an increased risk for dementia diagnosis among individuals who were not using any psychotropic medications at baseline (HR = 1.55, [1.45–1.67]) (Table 4 ). However, veterans with a receipt of an SSRI were significantly more likely to be diagnosed with dementia compared to both those with and without a PTSD diagnosis and not using any psychotropic medications HR = 1.28; (1.11–1.47) and HR = 1.99; (1.72–2.29), respectively. Similarly, those receiving a NA were significantly more likely to be diagnosed with dementia compared to both those with and without a PTSD diagnosis and not using any psychotropic medications HR = 1.30; (1.15–1.48) and HR = 2.02; (1.78–2.30), respectively. Furthermore, patients diagnosed with PTSD and using AA were significantly more likely to be diagnosed with dementia compared to both those with and those without a PTSD diagnosis and not using psychotropic medications HR = 2.71; (2.39–3.06) and HR = 4.21 (3.72–4.76), respectively. Veterans using SNRI or BZA were more likely to be diagnosed with dementia regardless of PTSD diagnosis HR = 1.36 (1.26–1.47) and 1.34 (1.29–1.40), respectively.

The models examining for effect modification revealed statistically significant interactions between the use of SSRIs (P < .001), NAs (P = .014), and AAs (P < .001) with PTSD diagnosis on the risk for dementia diagnosis (Table 3 ). There were no significant interactions between PTSD diagnosis and the use of either SNRIs or BZAs on the association between PTSD diagnosis and the risk for dementia diagnosis.

We identified 25,639 (6.15%) veterans with an encounter with a dementia diagnosis during the 9-year follow up period. Unadjusted models revealed PTSD diagnosis was associated with a significantly increased risk for dementia diagnosis (HR = 2.0; [95% CI = 1.89–2.11]) (Table 2 ). Upon adjustment for demographic characteristics including gender, race, and annual income, the HR dropped to 1.75 (1.65–1.84). Further adjustment for medical comorbidity had minimal impact on the HR for PTSD diagnosis and dementia diagnosis (HR = 1.74; [1.64–1.83]); however, adjustment for psychiatric comorbidity substantially influenced the PTSD diagnosis HR estimate (HR = 1.28; [1.21–1.35]). In the model including demographics, medical and psychiatric comorbidities, comorbidity scores, and clinic utilization–but not psychotropic medications–PTSD diagnosis remained associated with a significantly increased risk for dementia diagnosis (HR = 1.36; [1.28–1.44]).

Veterans with a PTSD diagnosis, compared to those without, were significantly younger (mean age 61 vs 68, P < .001), and were significantly (P < .001) more likely to have diagnoses of certain medical and psychiatric conditions noted to be associated with the risk for dementia including traumatic brain injury, diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic liver disease, peptic ulcer disease, depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia and alcohol, tobacco, and illicit substance abuse. In addition, veterans with a PTSD diagnosis were more likely to use the psychotropic medications of interest compared to those without a PTSD diagnosis.

The average age of the veterans at baseline was 67.7 (±8.1) years and mean follow-up duration for all veterans was 9.03 (±1.13) years. The majority of veterans (97.9%) were male and 82% were white. Among veterans in this sample, 22,674 (5.4%) had a PTSD diagnosis at baseline. Table 1 provides a summary of baseline characteristics of the veterans with and without PTSD.

The purpose of this study was to determine the association between PTSD diagnosis and the risk for dementia diagnosis among US veterans 56 years of age and older. We also set out to determine the impact of psychotropic medications commonly used in the management of PTSD on this association. We found PTSD diagnosis was associated with a significantly increased risk for dementia diagnosis among veterans aged 56 years and older following comprehensive adjustment potential confounders. These results are in line with previous studies by Yaffe et al.,[6] Qureshi et al.,[7] and Meziab et al.,[8] who reported significant associations between PTSD and the risk of developing dementia among veterans after similar adjustments for potential confounders.

In addition, we found statistically significant interactions between PTSD diagnosis and the use of SSRI, NA, and AA on the risk of dementia diagnosis, suggesting that the associations between PTSD diagnosis and the risk of dementia diagnosis varies significantly according to receipt of these medication classes. Indeed, among veterans not using any such psychotropic medications at baseline, PTSD diagnosis was associated with a significantly increased risk of dementia diagnosis. However, patients diagnosed with PTSD using SSRI, NA, or AA were significantly more likely to be diagnosed with dementia compared to both those with and without a PTSD diagnosis but without any identified psychotropic medication use at baseline. Interestingly, we found no statistically significant interactions between PTSD diagnosis and either SNRI or BZA. Nevertheless, our analyses revealed that SNRI and BZA were associated with significant independent effects on the risk for dementia diagnosis suggesting that SNRI or BZA might be associated with an increased risk of dementia diagnosis regardless of PTSD diagnosis. A possible explanation for these findings is that use of the various psychotropic medications reflects PTSD treatment heterogeneity, which in turn, could influence the risk of dementia. Indeed, PTSD symptom severity has been associated with increased likelihood of receiving a prescription for psychotropic medications.[40] Moreover, our analyses showed the risk for dementia diagnosis significantly increased with increasing number of psychotropic medication classes perhaps reflective of PTSD severity. To our knowledge, no previous study has examined the association between PTSD severity and the risk for dementia diagnosis.

Alternatively, the independent and effect modifying impacts of psychotropic medication use on the risk of dementia might represent effects of other underlying psychiatric disorders. Several psychiatric disorders including depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety, insomnia, and schizophrenia commonly comorbid with PTSD[41, 42] have been associated with an increased risk for dementia.[43] Moreover, underlying psychiatric comorbidity strongly influences prescription of psychotropic pharmacotherapy for PTSD.[40, 44] Thus, because of these observations, we adjusted for these various psychiatric comorbidities in our study and the number of healthcare encounters.

Another possible explanation for the independent and effect modifying impacts of psychotropic medication use on the risk of dementia diagnosis is that psychotropic medications might independently affect the risk for dementia diagnosis. Our results showed that SNRI and BZA were associated with significantly increased risk of dementia regardless of PTSD status. This stood in contrast to our findings of the classes of SSRI, NA and AA being associated with a higher risk of dementia among both those with and without a PTSD diagnosis relative to those with and without a PTSD diagnosis and not using any psychotropic medications. Overall, despite the relatively limited research examining the association between psychotropic medication use and the risk for dementia, our findings are mirrored reports focused on associations between dementia and long-term BZA use. For example, in a 15-year prospective cohort study involving 1063 veterans without dementia and not using BZAs at baseline, both incident and ever use of BZAs during follow-up was associated with significantly increased risk of dementia HR = 1.60; (1.08–2.38) and HR = 1.55 (1.24–1.95), respectively.[33] Similarly in a nested case-control study of 3,777 elderly persons with adjustments made for age, gender, education level, living alone, wine consumption, psychiatric history, and depressive symptoms; any use of BZA was associated with a significantly increased risk of dementia (OR = 1.7; [1.2–2.4]).[35] In addition, in a prospective cohort study involving 1134 men, the regular use of BZAs significantly increased the risk of dementia (OR = 2.94; [1.16–7.46]) following adjustment for common confounders.[34]

Finally, Kessing et al.[23] examined the associations between the use of various antidepressants including SSRIs, non-SSRI and older antidepressants with the risk for dementia and found purchase of SSRIs, non-SSRI, and several older antidepressants at least once to be associated with an increased risk for dementia, (relative risk [RR] = 3.36[3.25–3.48], 4.74; [4.43–5.07]) and RR = 1.77; [1.67–1.86]), respectively. Similarly, Wang et al.[24] found SSRI and non-SSRI use to be associated with a significantly increased risk for dementia. In addition, there is theoretical evidence that both serotonergic and noradrenergic neurons play a significant role in cognition particularly, in memory and learning, and attention, respectively. Moreover, dementia neuropathology has been associated with both serotonergic and noradrenergic neuronal degeneration,[45] decreased serotonin and norepinephrine levels[46] and serotonergic receptor depletion.[47] Thus, because SSRI and SNRI sustain higher extracellular activity of serotonin, and serotonin and noradrenaline, respectively, these medications could possibly affect cognitive function and the risk of dementia among PTSD patients. To our knowledge, the association between AA drug use and the risk for dementia has not been previously determined.

Our study has several limitations. First, we used ICD-9 codes for diagnosis of dementia, PTSD and medical and psychiatric comorbidity. In addition, there is limited research on the sensitivity and specificity of using ICD-9 diagnostic codes to determine the presence of dementia in the VHA data which could result in under specification of clinically relevant cases of dementia thereby representing a possible misclassification bias in our analyses. Second, we did not adjust for genetic risk factors for dementia such as Apolipoprotein ε4 allele status, which is one of the major risk factors for dementia. Third, our assessment of the impact of psychotropic medication use on the association between PTSD and dementia focused on broad medication classes and thus were not able to determine the effects of individual drugs, which could differ somewhat from the overall drug class. Fourth, we did not include adjustments for dosage and duration of medication use. Fifth, our study did not include assessment for the potential effects of mood stabilizers particularly, lithium which has been linked to neuroprotective effects in molecular studies;[48] however, studies examining the associations between lithium use and the risk for dementia in humans have produced mixed results. For example, while Kessing et al.[49] found lithium use to be associated with a decreased risk for dementia, Dunn et al.[50] found lithium use to be associated with an increased risk for dementia. In addition, under-ascertainment of the potential confounders could limit the interpretation of our results; thus, these limitations could result in residual confounding in our analyses. Nevertheless, we adjusted for the many described potential confounders in the literature. Finally, we caution any extension of these results beyond populations of veterans or to populations of veterans who are not engaged in persistent care with the VHA system.

The strengths of this study included the retrospective cohort study design, large sample size, adjustment for various potential confounders and the use of the VHA database, which includes electronic medical records for all patient encounters at VHA facilities throughout the country. Thus, we believe our data is largely complete, accurate, and generally representative of enrolled, and VHA engaged veterans throughout the country.

After adjusting for potential confounders, PTSD diagnosis is associated with a significantly increased risk for dementia diagnosis among individuals not using psychotropic medications; however, patients diagnosed with PTSD and using SSRI, NA, or AA are significantly more likely to be diagnosed with dementia compared to both those with and without a PTSD diagnosis and not using any psychotropic medications. Patients using BZA or SNRI appear to have an elevated risk for dementia diagnosis regardless of a PTSD diagnosis. Although our results showed significant independent and effect modifying impacts, the association between psychotropic medication use and the risk of dementia remains an area for further inquiry. Thus, we recommend further research accounting for dosage, duration, and indications for use to determine whether the independent and the effect modifying impacts of psychotropic medication use on the risk for dementia are due to differences in PTSD severity and symptomatology, other psychiatric comorbidity, or whether they represent independent and direct effects on dementia neuropathogenesis.|||

