Using three samples of 5,000 outgoing clicks from Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter, I analysed the target websites. The resulting profiles of outgoing traffic, reveal widely diverging behaviours on each social network - which should give you strong clues for to how optimize your communication strategy (or ditch some platforms altogether).

Our tool tracks the time spent online on desktop browsers: if the user switches tabs, closes the browser, on steps away from the computer (no mouse movement or keyboard input for more than 15 seconds), the timer switches off. I took the time it took my sample of users to generate the 5000 clicks, and computed the following statistics:

People click on an outgoing link every 530 seconds on Facebook, every 63 seconds on LinkedIn, and every 17 seconds on Twitter. From this point of view, Twitter seems to be the most powerful platform for directing traffic. Indeed, Facebook (and to a lesser extent, LinkedIn), have much more features than Twitter - messaging, for one, is very time consuming. On Twitter on the other hand, all people do is click on links.

According to SimilarWeb, the monthly worldwide time spent on Facebook stands at 368 billion minutes, LinkedIn accounts for 5 billion minutes, and Twitter for 27 billion minutes. This led me to the following outgoing traffic estimates:

Despite a lower worldwide time spent, Twitter seems to stand on top. But before drawing any conclusions, let’s have a look at what kind of outgoing traffic we’re talking about.

I classified every website visited from Facebook, LinkedIn and Twitter into nine categories. While 5000 clicks aren’t a lot considering the gazillion of websites that are out there, they are more than enough to get statistically meaningful results for content categories.

Facebook is, by far, the most balanced in terms of types of outgoing traffic. The "Social" part is mostly other Facebook subdomains (apps.facebook.com, web.facebook.com, etc.). News is outstandingly high, especially considering that people only spend 4% of their time online reading news. This is in line with newspapers’ own admission that Facebook is now sending them close to half of their visitors (from that point of view, Facebook surpassed Google back in 2015). Entertainment content is relatively low, at 15% - below the Internet average of 25%.

Twitter is used mainly to look at girls in bikinis - and I’m barely exagerating. News at 6% is slightly above Internet average, but much below what people assume to be Twitter’s main function: to keep people informed. Even after adjusting for the fact that Twitter seems to generate twice the amount of clicks Facebook does, Facebook still stands way ahead on the news front.

LinkedIn doesn’t look too good. Barely generating 5 billion clicks per month, most of its content is from other social platforms. People don’t even bother pasting the original source, and just copy the "t.co" link from Twitter (or web.facebook.com from Fracebook). The 18% of "Informational" mainly stands for corporate websites and specialist blogs. Basically, people post on LinkedIn only for self-promotion purposes, and it shows in their outgoing traffic. But you probably knew that already.|||

Using three samples of 5,000 outgoing clicks from Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter, I analysed the target websites. The resulting profiles...