People spend a lot of time searching for information or materials they need on the Internet in order to resolve questions or to reference to work, or to refer to writing documents such as business plans, service plans, proposals, reports, articles and market research.

So far, we’ve used Bookmarks, Pocket, Evernote, etc. to store links that contain valuable information we’ve found. However, since these services simply store links, they are inconvenient and unfriendly services for people who systematically manage the stored links and use them later.

For example, if you need to write a report on the development of a robot for foreign language learning,

First, create a folder named “Robots for Foreign Language Learning” and save links to web pages that contain the information you need to create a report in this folder.

Second, for each link stored in this folder, please make notes such as “Consulting company data about the foreign language learning market size, blah”, “AI or robot trend for foreign language learning, blah”. You can create, edit, and delete notes at any time, and search for notes. This feature allows you to cut and paste important texts of the saved web page links into notes.

Third, when creating your report, please visit the folder in Granary.pro. Not only can you find data related to report creation in the folder at once, you can easily check why you saved the information by notes.

Finally, you can keep the links stored in the folder so that it can be presented as a basis for your report.

Granary.pro is a massive collective intelligence warehouse that stores links to web pages containing information that people find important. Granary.pro uses search to find the most popular web pages stored in Granary.pro. So you can easily see what other users are interested in with the same search query and what you might have missed.

No personal data is disclosed in other users’ search results, and that only title, URL, and search keywords of links to webpages are displayed. Your personal information is protected in any case and it will be confirmed in our Privacy Policy.

If you have any questions about Granary.pro, please contact ask@granary.pro.|||

People spend a lot of time searching for information or materials they need on the Internet in order to resolve questions or to reference to work, or to refer to writing documents such as business…