The hackers are snooping over the digital platforms such as e-commerce stores, government sites, health and insurance companies to gain the financial benefits. They theft customer sensitive information by using spamming techniques like Email Spam, Instant Messaging (IM) Spam, Forum and Comment Spam, Mobile Phone Spam. They make user tend to click on spam links and try to catch the confidential information such as credit card details or social insurance number. There are plenty of financial transactions used to happen on various platforms like the banking, financial institutions, government sectors need to protect essentially. An SSL certificate helps these networks to encrypt the transactions on the Internet.

An Extended Validation aka an EV SSL certificate assures complete website security solutions to encrypt the sensitive and digital information. Having a website with EV SSL enable, a user can see a green address with the company name in the browser address bar which indicates to customer’s that the website is completely authenticated and reliable for online transactions safety.

The best defenses of online frauds and scams generally rely on caution while on using the internet. Such as,

An Extended Validation (EV) SSL certificate helps the e-commerce owners to secure confidential data of the customer which transmits over the Internet. The certificate authority offers EV SSL certificates for the company owners to build the user and customer trust while shopping online and makes it safe, reliable and encrypted for every successful online transaction. The company entity is authentic for legitimacy before the issue of EV SSL certificate and so customers can be sure that they have on a reliable platform and their transactions are encrypted.

If you are running an e-commerce, banking or government website, it is important that your customers feel safe on a website and comfortable in giving you their sensitive information like credit card information. Using an EV SSL certificate is a common way to ensure such security.

To find the best and reliable SSL certificates from the trusted SSL certificate providers might be a very difficult in today’s competitive market. We will explore the list of certificate authority where you can the inexpensive certificate and efficient customer service. Take a look at here.

Symantec (formerly VeriSign) is a trusted third-party company that issues digital certificates which are used to create digital signatures and public-private key pairs. The Symantec’s authentication business is one of the most reliable and used by most popular e-commerce (like overstock, bluenile, ebags, etc.) and banking (like SBI Bank, HSBC Bank, Deutsche Bank, etc.) platforms on the internet.  Symantec SSL certificates support up to 256-bit encryption, including $1.5 million warranty and vulnerability assessment.

The Comodo is one of the most popular certificate authority which is “used by 15.2% of all the website and has 41.8% market share” reported by W3Techs. Comodo CA offers all types of SSL certificates which suited for individuals, home offices to businesses, enterprise and e-commerce businesses. The Comodo SSL certificate offers up to 256-bit encryption with unlimited server licenses and trusted by almost all web browsers as well as mobile devices. The issuance time of Comodo Domain Validation SSL certificate is under 5-10 minutes and it takes up to 7 days for extended validation SSL certificate. The Comodo CA is one of the most reputable and trusted certification authorities in the world.

DigiCert is trusted and highly recommended as an SSL certificate provider to companies around the world, including Microsoft, Facebook, Yahoo, PayPal, and Wikimedia. DigiCert is a WebTrust-Certified certificate authority and a member of the Better Business Bureau, which offer up to 2048-bit SSL certificates at inexpensive costs. They constantly work to improve their customer services rather than developing other products and therefore, their pricing scheme can be adjusted to more competitive prices.

If you think that Symantec is a bit more expensive than GeoTrust is an excellent choice for website owners which SSL certificates at economical prices. GeoTrust SSL comes with 256-bit encryption; warranty and expert support team are available 24/7 for all options. GeoTrust has more than 1,00,000 satisfied customers in 150 countries around the world.

GoDaddy is another option for an EV SSL certificate. GoDaddy is the biggest domain registrar and hosting company, but they also offer an SSL certificate for website security. Basic GoDaddy SSL certificate starts $69.99 and the price of the deluxe package is $89.99. Both packages are customizable as per your needs. The People are likely to put more trust into a name like GoDaddy and the customer enjoys their 24/7 support via live chat or phone call.

Your options are certainly not limited to above choices; you may find more SSL providers over the internet to be way better than the rest. If you are confusing and difficult to find the right SSL certificate for your business, then AboutSSL.org has a nice tool in its “SSL Wizard Tool” to help you make your decision better.|||

Get the power of green address bar & highest level of assurance with an EV SSL certificate designed for e-commerce sites to prevent phishing attacks.