"Transitioning to a single reservation system is a transformational milestone for Southwest, and in fact, it's the single largest technology initiative in our Company's history. I want to congratulate and thank thousands of our Employees and our partners who have worked tirelessly and diligently for several years to bring this home," said Gary Kelly, Southwest Airlines Chairman & CEO. "Our deepening partnership with Amadeus makes way for a bright future through new tools that empower our People to do what they do best, which is to provide world famous Hospitality."

As part of the ongoing partnership, the carrier began operating international flights through Amadeus Altéa PSS beginning in July 2014. On Dec. 6, 2016, Southwest continued to streamline operations into more of the Altéa Suite by channeling bookings beyond May 8, 2017, through a single reservation system.

"This is an exciting time at Southwest, and our work with Amadeus IT Group provides a foundation that propels us into the future," said Randy Sloan, Southwest Airlines Senior Vice President and CIO.

"Southwest is the largest carrier of passengers within the United States1, and we are delighted they entrusted Amadeus with developing the new cornerstone of its business," said Luis Maroto, President and CEO, Amadeus. "We pride ourselves in developing innovative and customized technologies to help our airline partners adapt and evolve their products to reflect the needs of travelers, and we are proud to be collaborating with this leading U.S. airline."

"We are thrilled to be continuing our relationship with Southwest, and we consider our partnership a testament to the quality of our technology and our people. Our Team is dedicated to helping airlines become next generation retailers," said Julia Sattel, Senior Vice President Airlines and Executive Committee Member Amadeus IT Group.

Teams for both companies continue to work behind the scenes and on the ground in several of the carrier's locations to support this transformational change.

1 Based on the U.S. Department of Transportation's most recent data, Southwest Airlines is the nation's largest carrier as measured by the number of originating domestic passengers boarded.

This news release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Specific forward-looking statements include, without limitation, statements related to (i) the Company's financial outlook and projected results of operations; and (ii) the Company's plans and expectations with respect to its new reservation system, and the Company's related multi-faceted financial and operational expectations and opportunities. These forward- looking statements are based on the Company's current intent, expectations, and projections and are not guarantees of future performance. These statements involve risks, uncertainties, assumptions, and other factors that are difficult to predict and that could cause actual results to vary materially from those expressed in or indicated by them. Factors include, among others, (i) changes in demand for the Company's services and other changes in consumer behavior; (ii) the impact of economic conditions, fuel prices, actions of competitors (including without limitation pricing, scheduling, capacity and network decisions, and consolidation and alliance activities), governmental actions, and other factors beyond the Company's control, on the Company's business decisions, plans, and strategies; (iii) the Company's dependence on third parties, in particular with respect to its technology plans and expectations; (iv) the Company's ability to timely and effectively implement, transition, and maintain the necessary information technology systems and infrastructure to support its operations and initiatives; (v) the impact of labor matters on the Company's business decisions, plans, strategies, and costs; and (vi) other factors, as described in the Company's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including the detailed factors discussed under the heading "Risk Factors" in the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016.

In its 46th year of service, Dallas-based  Southwest Airlines (NYSE: LUV) continues to differentiate itself from other air carriers with exemplary Customer Service delivered by more than 54,000 Employees to more than 100 million Customers annually.  Southwest proudly operates a network of 101 destinations in the United States and eight additional countries with more than 3,900 departures a day during peak travel season. Service to both Grand Cayman and Cincinnati begins June 4, 2017; and service to Turks and Caicos is expected to begin Nov. 5, 2017, subject to requisite government approvals.

Based on the U.S. Department of Transportation's most recent data, Southwest Airlines is the nation's largest carrier in terms of originating domestic passengers boarded. The Company operates the largest fleet of Boeing aircraft in the world, the majority of which are equipped with satellite-based WiFi providing gate-to-gate connectivity.  That connectivity enables Customers to use their personal devices to view video on-demand movies and television shows, as well as nearly 20 channels of free, live TV compliments of our valued Partners. Southwest created Transfarency®, a philosophy which treats Customers honestly and fairly, and in which low fares actually stay low. Southwest is the only major U.S. airline to offer bags fly free®  to everyone (first and second checked pieces of luggage, size and weight limits apply, some airlines may allow free checked bags on select routes or for qualified circumstances), and there are no change fees, though fare differences might apply. The airline proudly unveiled a bold new look:  Heart.  A new logo, aircraft livery, interior design featuring a new seat and Flight Attendant galley, Employee-designed uniforms, and an updated airport experience all showcase the dedication of Southwest Employees who connect Customers with what's important in their lives.

From its first flights on June 18, 1971, Southwest Airlines launched an era of unprecedented affordability in air travel described by the U.S. Department of Transportation as "The Southwest Effect," a lowering of fares and increase in passenger traffic whenever the carrier enters new markets.  With 44 consecutive years of profitability, Southwest is one of the most honored airlines in the world, known for a triple bottom line approach that contributes to the carrier's performance and productivity, the importance of its People and the communities they serve, and an overall commitment to efficiency and the planet. The 2015 Southwest Airlines One Report™ can be found at SouthwestOneReport.com.

Book Southwest Airlines' low fares online at Southwest.com or by phone at 800-I-FLY-SWA.

Amadeus is a leading provider of advanced technology solutions for the global travel industry. Customer groups include travel providers (e.g. airlines, hotels, rail and ferry operators, etc.), travel sellers (travel agencies and websites), and travel buyers (corporations and travel management companies).

The Amadeus group employs around 15,200 people worldwide, across central sites in Madrid (corporate headquarters), Nice (development) and Erding (operations), as well as over 70 local Amadeus Commercial Organisations globally and has a presence in more than 190 countries.

Amadeus is listed on the Spanish Stock Exchange under the symbol "AMS.MC" and is a component of the IBEX 35 index.

To find out more about Amadeus please visit www.amadeus.com, and www.amadeus.com/blog for more on the travel industry.

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/southwest-airlines-completes-transition-to-amadeus-altea-300454654.html|||

DALLAS and MADRID, May 9, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Southwest Airlines Completes Transition To Amadeus Altéa. New IT platform now gives carrier more flexibility...