Some consider camping an opportunity to enjoy nature, leaving all distractions and electronics behind. If you’re a techie, camping is an opportunity to enjoy nature with all the coolest and most high-tech gadgets out there that improve the efficiency of your trip, keep you safe and provide you new toys to play with.



 Best Quality Gear For The Outdoors Backpacking Survival or Travel

If you’re headed into the back country, packing light is a must. In lieu of a standard tent, pack a hammock for a lightweight alternative. Most hammocks have a stuff sack integrated into their design, making it much easier to set-up compared to a tent. Most hammocks have all the features of a tent including a rain fly and bug net. Not only will you sleep better and wake up feeling more energized in a hammock, clean-up in the morning can be done in record time.

Showering while camping is considered somewhat of a luxury and you’re lucky to find a camp site that provides showers for their guests. With the NEMO Helio Pressure Shower, an attached foot pump allows you to customize your portable shower’s pressure for your comfort. The 11-liter tank is made of black welded fabric and warms up quickly in the sun, allowing you to enjoy a warm, pressurized shower while out in the woods.

The BioLite Camp Stove not only allows you to cook while camping, it also charges your gadgets and reduces your carbon footprint. All you need are twigs, pine cones, wood chips or pellets to load into the stove’s fuel chamber, light it up and, just like magic, a natural heat source to cook gourmet meals. The science behind it starts with jets that circulate air through the fuel chamber, gasifying the wood for clean combustion. Boil a liter of water in 4.5 minutes and charge your electronics with the heat transferred from the stove’s thermoelectric generator, all in one portable device.

With Petzl’s Nao headlamp, there’s no need to adjust the shine of your light between various evening activities. This high-tech headlamp tweaks the light automatically with the help of a huge eye-like sensor above the LED. This sensor measures incoming light, determining the level of brightness you need as you point your head in different directions. This means you go from reading inside your tent to searching the woods for the perfect restroom spot, without having to adjust the light yourself.

Water is key to survival and, when you’re camping, there isn’t always a guaranteed source of clean drinking water. With the GRAYL Ultralight purifier water bottle, purified drinking water is ready in less than 15 seconds. Fill the bottle with water from a lake, stream or even pond, push the bottle on the ground while you press the filter down and get rid of contaminants such as viruses, bacteria, particulates, chemicals, protozoa and heavy metals.

Even if you can guarantee cell phone coverage where you’ll be camping, having a handheld GPS could get you out of a sticky situation. GPS features and prices vary depending on how advanced of functions you need. Switch Back Travel shared their favorite GPS devices which included the Garmin Oregon 600, a light, user friendly option and the Garmin EPIX, a GPS watch that packs all the functions of a standard handheld GPS onto your wrist.|||

Some consider camping an opportunity to enjoy nature, leaving all distractions and electronics behind. If you're a techie, camping is an opportunity to enj