As containers have become more important to businesses across the globe, it was necessary to create a system that would allow containers to scale out to meet the needs of enterprise-level deployments. That's where Kubernetes comes into play.

Unlike Docker, Kubernetes is a very robust ecosystem. Instead of deploying a single container, Kubernetes enables you to deploy multiple containers to multiple hosts, making it ideal for larger deployments and load balancing.

This smart person's guide is an easy way to get up to speed on Kubernetes. We'll update this guide periodically when news about Kubernetes is released.

SEE: All of TechRepublic's smart person's guides

Kubernetes is an open source system that allows you to run docker and other containers across multiple hosts, effectively offering the co-location of containers, service discovery, and replication control. It was originally called K8s and was designed by Google and donated to the Cloud Native Computing Foundation.

The primary functions of Kubernetes are:

Its features include the following.

Kubernetes allows you to easily:

Kubernetes, at its minimum, can schedule and run containerized applications on clusters of physical machines or virtual machines or a combination of physical and virtual machines; this allows developers to leave behind the traditional method of working with physical and virtual machines. Although this can be achieved with the simpler Docker Swarm, Kubernetes allows the deployment of much larger clusters, which can include docker containers. In other words, create your docker containers and then deploy them over a massive, load balanced cluster with Kubernetes.

Kubernetes consists of the following components.

Containers are a powerful and flexible way to safely and reliably deploy applications and microservices to extend and expand your company's services. When the need grows beyond a standard Docker deployment or you need to deploy/manage multiple containerized applications from different systems (such as Docker), you need a way to deploy and control such systems.

With the help of Docker Swarm, you can deploy containerized applications over a cluster, but you're limited to Docker-only containers and to only using the architecture security, registry of Docker, Inc. With Kubernetes, those containers can come from a number of sources (Docker, Windows Server Containers, etc.), making Kubernetes incredibly flexible and significantly more complex.

Kubernetes affects any company that needs to deploy massive rollouts of containerized applications and services; this means anyone involved with the deployment should be familiar with the Kubernetes tools and Docker. And considering Kubernetes is a rather complex system, administrators will need to do a fair amount of homework in order to successfully implement the technology.

The effect of Kubernetes goes well beyond those that administer the system—customers, clients, staff, and consumers...no one is immune to the effect of containerized applications. When we're talking about business and enterprise-level deployments, Kubernetes takes center stage.

Developers are also affected by Kubernetes. As of April 7, 2017 Kubernetes had 1,137 contributors from across varying industries, with over 31 branches and 46,332 commits on GitHub. Kubernetes also has more developers working on it than Docker Swarm, Mesos, and Cloud Foundry Diego combined.

Kubernetes was created by Joe Beda, Brendan Burns, and Craig McLuckie, who were soon joined by other Google engineers, and was first announced by Google in mid-2014. The original name for Kubernetes was Seven Of Nine (from Star Trek Borg fame). Once the Google lawyers swayed the original developers away from the original name, they agreed upon the name Kubernetes.

Kubernetes v1.0 was released July 21, 2015 and very quickly wound up in the top 0.01% in stars and number 1 in terms of activity on GitHub. That translates to significant development on the project.

Kubernetes can be deployed on numerous platforms, including:

For a full list of vendors/platforms supporting Kubernetes deployment, check out this spreadsheet.

You will need to set up:

The Master and Node can be on the same system, but traditionally they will be separated.

You will also need your containers. The most widely used containers deployed by Kubernetes are from Docker, which makes sense considering docker containers are the most widely used on the planet. Kubernetes must be installed on the Master and all hosts. If you're working with Red Hat, you can install Kubernetes with the command:

Once Kubernetes is installed, follow these steps.|||

Kubernetes is a series of open source projects for automating the deployment, scaling, and management of containerized applications. Find out why the ecosystem matters, how to use it, and more.