My account @gem_hunt is up to 146,ooo followers — yay! I grew it to over 100,000 followers in less an year so it is has been a very fast/fun journey. There are some key tools that I find very useful so I thought I would share them.

You can’t achieve your goals if you don’t set them, and you can’t get there if you don’t track of them. If you are keeping track of how many followers you are picking up everyday, week, or month in a excel sheet — well your prayers have been answered!

Social Blade shows you day by day your follower gains so you can see how you are tracking. You also can go back and check out your biggest gain days what content you posted. This is super helpful analysis to know what kind of content to post to grow your account. Additionally, Social Blade does projections for you (easy math, but hey you don’t have to do it) so you can see if you keep your growth rate up where you will be in a 30 days, 1 year, or even 5 years.

Social rank is an amazing tool! They way I like to best use it, is it shows you who is following you but ranked by their “social importance” aka some math on their number of followers/engagement. In laymen's, terms if shows you who is famous that follows you.

In my case Paris Hilton follows me — how is cool is that! This is a great tool for business development. You can find other accounts, bloggers, or celebrities that you can reach out to an build a relationship and you have a starting point from which to do so — they follow you! It also shows you who your most engaged followers are you so you can make sure you are rewarding them for all that time spent on your account by going back and building a relationship with them. Social Rank does way more than these two things but this is the main way I use it.

If you are reading this you probably know hashtags are a key to growing an Instagram but SM Audience takes hashtag research to another level. What it does, is it allows you to go back through your photos and see what hashtags you used that you hit the 9 top photo’s in.

If you hit the 9 top nine a hashtag that is fantastic for growing your account because it basically ensure’s depending how big that hashtag is — lots of impressions, impressions = likes, likes= new followers. This tool allows you level up your analysis of what hashtags are working. Bonus, you can also put in a similar or competitor account and see what hashtags they are using and which ones they are hitting the top 9 in. This allows you to really narrow in on what hashtags are working for you to grow your account. Yes you can do this manually, but I find this tool a lot faster.

Most of these companies do a lot more than what I mentioned, but often with a upgrade for a paying subscription. That said, everything I mentioned here you can do with their freemium models.

Follow my personal instagram, or follow me on twitter

You might also enjoy this article about Instagram growth strategies|||

My account @gem_hunt is up to 146,ooo followers — yay! I grew it to over 100,000 followers in less an year so it is has been a very fast/fun journey. There are some key tools that I find very useful…