Does google amp really Instantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

Google began integrating AMP listings into its mobile search results a year ago this week. Is your site AMP-enabled? Marc Schenker explains why it should be and how to do it.

AMP stands for Accelerated Mobile Project, and it’s Google’s contribution to making the internet fast for pages loading on mobile. Google’s open-source initiative ensures that publishers can create content that’s optimized for mobile the first time — and then have it load instantly all times thereafter.

We’re approaching a milestone in AMP history: This initiative’s first birthday is Feb. 24. Google began integrating AMP search results into its mobile search listings a year ago Thursday, thereby creating a quicker and more engaging mobile experience for everyone.

Noteworthy is Google’s focus on mobile through AMP, and it’s no surprise why. Studies show that people use mobile more than desktop; Google’s launch of AMP last February was prescient because, later that year, mobile users surpassed desktop users for the first time ever. With this rapid shift to mobile, Google had to act fast to make sure it was serving its customers well where its customers where going in droves: the mobile web.

Here’s all you’ll ever need to know about AMP.

In short, Google seeks to improve the mobile web’s performance with AMP. The mobile web is everything from you using your smartphone’s browser to read your favorite news site on the go to using your Starbucks app to order and pay for your frappuccino. Today, it’s where most people are accessing the internet from, so it only makes sense that Google wanted to improve the performance of pages in this way of accessing the web.

While explaining AMP can get pretty technical — a potential problem for anyone who’s not a developer — it boils down to this: AMP sizes all resources statically. What does that mean?

Any external resources (such as ads or images, for instance) have to reveal their size directly in HTML, so that AMP is able to determine the position and size of each element on the page before any resources are downloaded. AMP then proceeds right away to loading the layout of the whole page instead of waiting for these resources to download. Since AMP pages aren’t waiting on these images and ads to first load, the loading speed of pages is much faster.

In practical terms, you, the end user of the mobile web, get to see, hear and watch content quicker when you do so on AMP pages, leading to happier users and a much better user experience on mobile devices.

How this appears on mobile search results is that AMP pages will have a little lighting-bolt-inside-a-circle icon.

When people see this icon, they’re apt to click on the site, since it promises faster load times and generally, a better UX.

Anyone who has an interest in a mobile internet that continues to be free and accessible should implement AMP on their sites. This includes a broad range of parties, everyone from ad tech companies and publishers to straightforward publishers that present content to site visitors.

You see, the danger is that the mobile web could become fragmented as different parties develop different publishing standards for content, which would have the chilling effect of creating several closed and proprietary publishing formats. Translation: In the end, everyone would have to support these competing and unique publishing formats, just to have their content read. And for the end users, that means more chaos and less accessibility, which would be detrimental. So everyone who wants their content to be freely accessible should support AMP.

Here’s some recent proof: When Shz.de, one of the top news publishers in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany, enabled AMP inside their mobile app, pageviews per session increased 25 percent.

 AMP is not a ranking factor… yet

AMP is not a ranking factor in mobile search. Of course, this can and probably will change in the future, but as of now, don’t expect having AMP pages to increase your search visibility.

 AMP vs. responsive design

There are key differences between the two. Responsive design means your site will render and display properly on all devices: desktops, tablets and mobile. Responsive makes no reference to the actual speed with which the pages of your site load. You could have a great site that shows up beautifully and properly across all devices… yet still load slowly, to the point that frustrated users bounce right away.

the google Instantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 amp is theInstantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 tsfdf sa Instantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 af asf as fas s Instantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 rterw erw g gInstantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 jhkjh Instantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 ghjghfbn Instantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 Instantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 asd sa sd fsd fasInstantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 test teg df dfd fInstantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 uyhjhgf gh jghfj asd Instantly load websites in mobiles with google amp

 asdf asdasdc asd sInstantly load websites in mobiles with google amp|||

Instantly load websites in mobiles with google amp is the revolution of mobile responsive which is fast and reliable for mobile users.