Neural networks are becoming increasingly good at predicting and reproducing data. A great opportunity to have some silly fun!

news.ycombinator.com, better known as Hackernews, is a popular news site for technology and science related topics — as many of you probably already know. The titles on the startpage always seem to follow some sort of pattern, or that’s at least what it looks like to me. And because I wanted to look into text reproduction using neural networks anyway, I swiftly went ahead and scraped 2 MB of Hackernews headlines (from 2013–2016, always 1000 titles per month) using their API.

Although I always like the “learning-by-doing” approach, I decided that it was easier to use an existing application for this silly project. I went for word-rnn, a modification to Andrej Karpathy’s char-rnn, which uses the Torch machine learning framework. Under the hood it relies on so-called recurrent neural networks and trains them on the input data we feed it. The training will be conducted on my GPU.

After installing Torch (boy is it ever hard to get CUDA-dependent libraries to build), I collected all headlines into a single file and started the training:

After about 30 Minutes of training on my machine (4 x 3,5 GHz, GTX 860M) the loss was at about 1.4 — not bad, considering that the data isn’t even supposed to follow a pattern!

And indeed, some of the generated titles are surprisingly realistic. Some of my favorites:

Some of these actually made me laugh — both because they’re funny and because they seem so real. These is only the finest selection of course, most didn’t even make sense at all. If you really want to read through them, here you go.

It’s amazing how easy AI applications can be assembled these days. It took me about an hour and 10 lines of code to do this!

I’m not quite sure what amazing new insight one could draw from these results however. So I’m just going to end this article here, leaving you with a few new answers and probably a lot more questions. AI is fun!|||

Neural networks are becoming increasingly good at predicting and reproducing data. A great opportunity to have some silly fun! news.ycombinator.com, better known as Hackernews, is a popular news site…