Venture investors tend to live in a strange world of luxury products and niche interests. It can create a skewed perception of what consumers actually want, and by extension, a skewed perception of what markets are big and attractive and which ones are actually really narrow.

And where investment dollars go, so does the press.

Think about businesses like Wayfair, Zulily, Zappos, Jet, and Dollar Shave Club. They all have $1B+ enterprise values at IPO or exit — and they all focus on things that mass market consumers care about: price, selection, convenience, affordability. These companies were not positioned as aspirational brands, but brands that were relevant to everyone.

And, none of these companies were considered “hot” Silicon Valley startups during their rise.

In the past few weeks, two companies perfectly reflect what happens when you focus on mass vs luxury markets.

On one hand, you have Chewy.com, a Florida-based retailer of pet food and pet products. The business was unknown to most VCs for many years, grew a huge $1B revenue business and was acquired by PetSmart for over $3B. The company was known for being so price competitive that even the folks at Jet and Amazon were pulling their hair out trying to compete against them.

On the other hand, you had Juicero. For $400 and $7 a cup, you too can have the cold-pressed magical elixir of the Canyon Ranch crowd. This is not to say that luxury or high-end companies can’t be very attractive businesses.

Often, this is justified by the belief that eventually, these luxuries will be accessible to mass consumers, either through economies of scale that can bring down cost or through a systematic shift in cost that changes the economics of the industry. Indeed, this is effectively what Uber has done with UberX, and what Tesla is admirably trying to do in the autos category.

But more often than not, I think these kinds of investments demonstrate a disconnect between the perceptions of investors and journalists in affluent areas and the mass consumers that will drive the demand to make a real, sustainable, life-changing $1B+ company.|||

Venture investors tend to live in a strange world of luxury products and niche interests. It can create a skewed perception of what consumers actually want, and by extension, a skewed perception of…