If you’re like me and you’re building a social app and you don’t have a lot of marketing experience, one thing you may try to get traffic is reddit ads. And on reddit, people can comment on your promoted post.

The reddit community didn’t like my app idea and offered immediate and specific criticism. reddit is an unflushed toilet so look past the tone & language:

This user was talking about filter bubbles. I dashed off a reply using my profanity-free powers of debate, but have been thinking ever since – if large groups of people have the same information, is that a bad thing?

The ‘filter bubble’ is the idea that ranking tools use popularity & demographics as inputs, and therefore will lead to polarization of opinions on demographic lines.

Filter bubble pushers fear polarization, not manipulation. When mass media happened during and after World War 2, irresistible persuasion was the concern. I’m lifting from a 2017 survey of web search behavior run by the Quello Center at Michigan State:

The good news is that online news consumers are at least checking their references:

Paul Baran, a network engineer from the 60s who dabbled in sociology, was concerned by his own version of the filter bubble:

You can criticize news in general instead of algorithmic rankings. Francis Crick, best known for photographing chromatin with x-rays, was anti-news:

Nassim Taleb, the economist who wrote The Black Swan, is ‘anti-idea’ in that he believes social science theories are summaries that are less useful than their raw data. He may also be anti-news.

My take on Parisier vs Taleb (without having read much by either author):



 I saw a review of Taleb saying he’s “annoying but not completely wrong”.

Writing the news is a process of digesting facts into a compact package. I wonder if, like most digestive processes, the nutrients go to the person doing the digesting and not to the people who study the final output.

My read of Parisier’s take on information, though I doubt he writes this explicity, is that it tells people what to do and it had better tell everyone to do the same thing. Taleb’s take on information is that it supports creative, non-binary interpretations of problems and searches for solutions.

I used ‘collaborative filtering’ in the title of this post instead of ‘filter bubble’ because collaborative filtering is a more neutral take and also describes a wider variety of media with two common properties:

This post is about how reliance on summarized information can lead groups to disaster by delaying recognition of a problem and delaying corrective action.

What does it mean to say that groups make decisions?

While I was researching this post, news broke about a measles outbreak in a Somali immigrant community. There are high rates of autism in Minneapolis and so ‘anti-vaxxers’ gained a foothold there. And the Somalis were receptive to their message, bringing vaccination rates down to 40% for Somalis in the city.

This is a group decision because:

The case I decided to write about instead is the Flint water crisis, because there are clear timelines showing when information led to inaction and, eventually, action. If you don’t know the details: a financially motivated changeover from Detroit water to local water supply was mismanaged, leading to several instances of bacterial contamination (‘boil water advisories’) as well as acid-related corrosion that caused lead to leach out of lead pipes that were still installed on some blocks.

My point is to show that the trigger for change was one person, LeeAnne Walters, going through public data and learning about water treatment. She contacted the EPA and the team at Virginia Tech that did most of the water testing in 2015.

A Pew study shows water-related searches spiking after a boil water advisory in 2014. Interestingly, search activity is silent. If I’m having issues with my water and my neighbor is too, I want to be connected. Privacy is counter-productive here.

Flint in fact had two group decision events:

Historian Barbara Tuchman said that once a policy has been adopted and implemented by a government, all subsequent activity of that government becomes focused on justification of that policy. I prefer LeeAnne Walters’ grassroots leadership.

When De Tocqueville visited a young America he saw:

But between then and now we offloaded building and planning schools and roads to government. ‘Self-government’ and ‘government by the people’ mean something different in 2017 than they did in 1831 when De Tocqueville visited.

We’ve created an unfortunate divide between the planning, the labor, and the traffic; in 1831 it wouldn’t be unusual for the same people to design build & then use a road or public building. It’s unfortunate because when designers and users are disjoint sets it takes longer to understand what’s going wrong when something goes wrong. This is part of the appeal of open source software – it’s easier to fix – and the reason people are using Ukrainian viruses to hack their John Deere tractors.

I don’t know why the Flint water supply engineers got the corrosion treatments wrong and why they shouted down the EPA. I believe that if anyone living in the bad parts of Flint knew the ins and outs of municipal water systems, the problem would have been caught and fixed more quickly.

You can also consider this a consequence of the drawdown of local news. A recent Politico article claims that as print ad revenue goes away, local newsrooms in flyover country are the first to disappear. LeeAnne Walters’ investigative work would have been someone’s job 30 years ago, instead of requiring an Erin Brockovich-style local hero.

Never mind that he was justifying to Abigail why he isn’t sending her descriptions of the “Temples and Palaces, Paintings, Sculptures, Tapestry, Porcelaine, &c. &c. &c.”. It’s a great line. Read more of his brags in appendix 1.

If watching 4 hours of TV a day counts as studying painting and poetry, then as Americans in 2017 we’re doing it.

Some news is actionable in our daily lives but some of what we read, even stories that are thematically ‘politics & war’, is entertainment: stories about far-away events which probably won’t affect us and may not be under our control. At best they can tell us we’re in the wrong place, to change cities or jobs in order to escape a crisis; but crises have a way of sneaking up on us without advance warning.

Pliny the Elder said ‘Ex africa semper aliquid novi’ (out of africa always something new. There’s also a Meryl Streep movie about this, I think). I have a citation saying he’s borrowing from an Aristotle line “Always something fresh in Libya” which was a subtle way for Aristotle to say he didn’t believe a traveler’s fantastic report.

He was right to be skeptical. We can all afford to be a little more skeptical, at least about topics that affect our health & wealth. LeeAnne Williams studied investigative reporting so her children & neighbors would be able to study painting & poetry (and drink clean water). My point is that good information matters to us as much as good anything else.

The ’s Advanced Situation Awareness program, originated by NATO’s own Jim Mattis, aims to make Marines “keenly aware of the details in their surroundings” and “alert to unusual environmental changes” by teaching skills that used to come in to the corps through Boots who grew up hunting.

Hunter-gatherers at the edge of the neolithic revolution must have all been data scientists; paying attention to threats and where to gather food, moving from summer to winter range to cope with the seasons. Depending on where you grew up, you may not have the concept ‘this can kill you’, but people who have to catch what they eat, preserve it for the hard months, and live outside with dangerous animals are always thinking that.

There are consequences to screwing up.

For my job I’m around data and once in a while get the chance to open a dataset and explore with no agenda. When I do:

Both experiences are humbling and useful. Combining the ‘this can kill you’ perception skills of situational awareness training with the ability to understand datasets and remark on their changes is a way to free communities from the tyrrany of indifferent local news coverage by wire services.

We should add data dumps to the daily ritual of reading the news. Instead of tweets like ‘ what means’, we’ll see ‘ commuting 15 minutes later is safer and faster – from data’.

How much more quickly would lead testing have started in Flint if everyone was in the habit of using data to answer questions instead of pre-digested news? ‘Daily data’ is an experiment we should try as a society.

Source for all of these is the Jefferson-Adams letters. Start reading pg290 when they get back in touch as old men.

The thing to know about these guys is Adams wrote Jefferson twice as often and much of the exchange was Jefferson trying to keep up with Adams’ stilted metaphors and often vague requests for information about books and articles mentioned years ago in passing. The conversation was made more difficult by the inconsistency of the mail, so that letters could arrive out of order and letter+parcel might not arrive at the same time.|||

