First off, I would like to thank you all for visiting and helping me move this journey forward. I have received so many responses since my first post and I feel really humbled for all the support for #bringingagilitytoscience.

In today’s post, I wanted to highlight the first part to the BioScrum Series and announce that BioScrum LLC will be officially launching end of August 2017!!! To set the stage before launch, I wanted to highlight key scenarios and the importance of  planting the seeds for agility and using the right tools to grow your organization.

Flower seeds can come in all sorts of varieties. And even after planting these seeds in different locations, with the right environment, tools, and resources, you achieve the same product at the end: a colorful, blossomed flower.

This is similar to planting the agility seeds in an organization. With the right environment (which includes the “Agile Mindset“), the right tools (which include tools in the toolkit), and the right resources (which include coaches, mentors, stakeholders, and individuals playing the right role), all comes together forming your end product. In Biotech, this product is usually some panel analyzing selected genes and biomarkers. Precision Medicine and Genomics has a very bright future ahead, but what adds to the complexity to the workflow is the different stages the sample goes through and the resources it involves. Aside from the technicalities, we don’t see agility due to the impediments I mentioned in my second post. So how will BioScrum Processes help plant the seed when the soil has to many rocks and gravel (impediments) to begin with?

Well, one has to take the tiller/cultivator and redesign the process by understanding the compliance and regulatory issues we all face. They won’t go away, but with the right design, layout, and tools, you can accommodate this impediment. This is just one example of an impediment, but there are many more.

When you have rocky soil, you can always add layers of topsoil, choose the right plant seed, or start tilling until you have a plant bed good enough to work with. You can do the same in an organization!

One example we all see in our organizations, particularly biotech organizations, is how quickly our daily standup turns into status meetings. It’s all about the status. Sad, but reality is a lot of workers and scientists depend on each other daily for work that needs to be done. This brings up the second most asked question: What is done? It’s difficult to answer because in most places, another team rather than the source team is governing the definition of done. Why does this happen? Simple, we all are trying to plant our own seed, without analyzing the soil, and hoping that if we put them under the sun and give them the right amount of water (allocating resources), we will have a fully blossomed flower by the end of 3 months (Project Delivery). However, we just missed the whole point of agility, even though we semi-followed the instructions, and did all the ceremonies to grow the plant, we didn’t grow it properly. I think this relates to a lot of biotech/pharma organizations out there. Executives focused on sales, delivery, and customer/client relations sometimes tend to forget that culture, environment, team morale, and true collaboration are also very very important. Take some time out for those who water your plant everyday and acknowledge them (EMPOWER TRUST).

I hope you all enjoyed this post. Sorry in advance, but 2 blogs every week was not possible for me at this time, but with more agility we will get there :). I welcome you all and together lets all focus on #bringingagilitytoscience for delivering high quality science and high quality healthcare to all. Please follow my blog and feel free to reach out to me. If you have any comments/questions, just fill out the contact form and I will surely get back to you. For BioScrum LLC Updates follow us on LinkedIn: click here. Have a great week everyone and don’t forget to acknowledge someone!|||

Introduction First off, I would like to thank you all for visiting and helping me move this journey forward. I have received so many responses since my first post and I feel really humbled for all the support for #bringingagilitytoscience. In today's post, I wanted to highlight the first part to the BioScrum Series and announce…