This is the sixth interview of a series of interviews I’m doing with 10 experts of the worldwide bot scene. These interviews are part of my research which aims to find guidelines for designing messenger bots. If you want to read more about what I do and why you can do it in my previous article and also join the survey . You can also read the previous interviews with:

Thomas is founder & CEO of blossom, a software company based in Vienna. Around three years ago Thomas started to get his head around chat bots and is now one of the most important people we have here in the Bots Hub Vienna. He started the first incubator focusing on artificial intelligence chat bots. If you’re interested you can apply now for the next batch of Lemmings.io in summer 2017!

During his bot career he built several bots with Clojure and Datomic.

Which problems did you face while developing bots?

The development of apps on messenger platforms is generally much easier than for iOS or Android with the same functionality. It’s also relatively easy to port a bot from one platform to another as well as update and improve them. The development feels more like building a simple web app than a native app.

The challenges and stumbling stones are the same:

What kind of problems do you see in the interaction between people and bots?

Text based interfaces are often not the ideal interface. Luckily most messaging platforms allow us to send images, audio, video, the location or more complex data formats up to web views. We have to find new “best practices” and combine conversational UIs with the existing best practices of UX design.

How do you see the future of bots?

Messaging platforms are transforming our smartphones into magic wands. They will allow us to do things in the physical and virtual world we have never dreamed about.

Why is that? Because more people are reachable than ever before and there is more and better context based information than ever before.

What has to be improved so bots can work better?

I’d like to see improvements in payments and app discovery. What is also missing are success stories of exclusive apps like like what “Angry Birds” was for iOS back in the day.

What do you think about this statement?

What’s happening with bots right now on different messaging platforms like Facebook Messenger is that there are more and more features which are not really conversational. For example web views, payment or data formats that go beyond text, location, images and videos. Even multi player triple-A games with impressive 3D graphics are technically possible.

I think the most apps which are available in the app store or play store right now can easily be done on messaging platforms. Most of them with less work and with a better usability.

So bots are basically apps which run on a messaging platform instead of directly on an operating system. Users usually don’t care about how apps are created in detail. What is important for them is that they are available and that they work. If this is the case for messaging platforms then they will win.|||

This is the sixth interview of a series of interviews I’m doing with 10 experts of the worldwide bot scene. These interviews are part of my research which aims to find guidelines for designing…