This blog is on laptop from Acer’s aspire series. It is the Acer Aspire R15. Is this the laptop, with all you need? Let’s have a look over this laptop.

Best thing about the Acer Aspire R15 laptop is that it has a 360 Degree hinge display. It has a sort of cross brushed finish over the body. It looks pretty nice.

But of course, this is a pretty beefy laptop. So inside, We have a full 15.6 inch display. So what’s cool is that this is convertible.

So, you can use it just like the standard laptop, It has a solid trackpad, and it also has a touch screen, so you can scroll, click and use it by touch. But when you are ready, you can actually just flip the entire screen around.

To watch video, you can just flip the screen around 300 degree and watch video with display at tilt of over 120 degree, you can even flip it upside down and get the tent mode to watch videos with same 120 degree angle.

It is a pretty cool setup, I have to say that. Like, this is a little bit big to be used as a standard tablet, but if you flip the screen all the way closed at 360 degree angle, what you get here is what is essentially a 15 inch table. This laptop gives you a lot of flexibility.

So, say you want to use the laptop at a normal situation, just sit down, open it up and you can use it just like any other laptop. You have got the touch screen, you have your keyboard as well as your trackpad (Mousepad).

When it comes to watching video though, it is really helpful to be able to flip the screen around. I think that is the big advantage of the laptop.

Sure, if you want to use it as a standard, by all means, go ahead. But while having the flexibility to just flip the screen around 360 degree and use it in pretty much any orientation you want is a huge advantage.

The Acer Aspire R15 also has a pretty good screen. So this is a 15.6 inch display with a full 1080p resolution and not only is it IPS display, but it also has zero air gap, which especially helps with the viewing angles.

Which means you can view your movie or video at wide angle range. So, this is a good laptop to watch movie, it is a good experience to watch videos in this.

Having a good screen is important, as this is a very media-focused laptop. So you’re going to be watching video, playing games, and while yes, it would be nice if it had a 4K screen, but that would add a lot to the price. I think this is a good compromise.

Speakers are also not bad, so that’s important. Well sure, you’re probably going to want to plug in headphones for video editing or gaming, but it’s nice to be able to know that you have speakers that are going to work in pretty much any orientation.

Of course, the Acer Aspire R15 is running with Windows 10, but what’s cool is that it’s the signature edition. What that means is that there is no extra bloatware or junk that you have on the computer when you first get it.

And if you’re anything like me, you know that you usually have to spend 30 minutes getting rid of all the crap when you first get a brand new computer. But here it’s pretty much good to go out of the box.

And since it is Windows 10, it means we have things like Cortana. So for example, I can ask it, “Tell me an interesting fact.” And Cortana will replay with some amazing fact, for example, “Everyone has a unique tongue print just like the fingerprint”.

Warning: Don’t even thing about using your tongue instead of finger to unlock your Smartphone or laptop with Fingerprint reader. :p

You know, what is cool about Cortana? I feel like Cortana actually has probably like the best voice of any of these sort of assistants. Like Google Now and Siri.

There’s also support for Windows Hello as well as a built-in fingerprint reader and the trackpad. So something as simple as just trying to drop my finger on it, and we’re immediately logged in.

If you don’t know what is Windows Hello? then,

For your Info: Windows Hello is a more personal way to sign in to your Windows 10 devices with just a look or a touch. You’ll get enterprise-grade security without having to type in a password.

Now I feel like the more laptops I use that have fingerprint readers, the more I find that it’s actually a really useful feature. Inside the Acer Aspire R15, we have a Core i7-7500U, 12 GB of RAM, a 256 GB of SSD storage, as well as dedicated Nvidia 940MX graphics.

So with that Kaby Lake processor, not only are you getting the latest and greatest, but it also should be easy on battery. So there is 4K ProRes footage playing back inside DaVinci Resolve.

So, if you are using software like Davinci Resolve, to edit 4K ProRes footage, this is not going to be an amazing editing PC, for that I would really want a quad-core processor, but thanks to those Nvidia graphics you actually can do some fairly light editing. You can also do some gaming.

So, if you are playing games like Overwatch, League of Legends(LOL) or Counter Strike Global offensive at 1080p on low settings and you will get a really respectable 60 to 70 frames per second. So I think that’s one of the big advantages of the Acer Aspire R15.

Not only can you do stuff like gaming, but you can do video editing. It kind of will let you do a little bit of everything, especially because it has that SSD and plenty of memory. And while the graphics aren’t amazing or going to blow you away, they’re totally not bad.

You can definitely do a fair bit of gaming on the Acer Aspire R15. So, is this the laptop, which can give you all that you need from your computer?

For a lot of people, the answer is yeah. But what do you guys think? Let me know in the comments below.|||

This blog is on laptop from Acer's aspire series. It is the Acer Aspire R15. Is this the laptop, with all you need? Let's have a look over this laptop. Best thing about the Acer…