“Health is wealth.” Perhaps you’ve heard this expression before.

Usually, when we think of wealth in retirement, we think about all the money we’ll need to live comfortably or even add a bit of luxury to our lives.

Do not disregard your health, though. You do this at your peril, of course.

Far too many people make it to their golden years only to find them greatly abbreviated because they didn’t take care of themselves. Let’s run through some basics.

If you use tobacco, now is the time to stop. It’s as easy as that. he science has long since been in: smoking is terrible for your health.

Even if it doesn’t result in lung cancer, it can still have all kinds of deleterious effects you don’t want to be dealing with during retirement.

Begin kicking the habit today and you’ll be taking a big step toward retiring happy and healthy.

After dropping the smoking habit, the most important thing most Americans could do to ensure a long happy life would be to keep their blood pressure down.

According to the Center for Science in the Public Interest, 60% of Americans 60+ years of age have blood pressure that is so high it must be treated medically.

Millions more people are right on the cusp, too.

You are what you eat, remember?

If you consume garbage like salty, fatty, processed calorie-rich foods, your health is going to be a problem. Instead, make sure your diet has plenty of fruits, vegetables and whole grains in it.

Margaret Marshall has stressed in the HuffPost blog: “Care for, nourish, and love your body. It’s yours for life”

Most of us spend our adult lives with a bit of a spare tire, at the very least.

A large percentage of Americans – fully 1/3 – are significantly overweight, though. Whichever boat you’re in, start dialing things back. Being overweight makes it easier to suffer from any number of diseases, as well.

Along the same lines, excessive cholesterol levels mean you’re living on borrowed time.

Again, if you lose weight, your cholesterol will drop with it.

This is an easy way to make sure you stay on top of your health.

Thanks to modern technology, even a simple physical can catch a major problem you’re not even aware of yet.

Finally, just make sure you get more exercise.

Even if all you have the energy for is getting up and going for a walk, that can make a big difference.

Listen to a podcast, book on tape or just your favorite music to help pass the time.|||

Health is wealth.Perhaps you’ve heard this expression before. Do not disregard to improve health, when you think of wealth in retirement.