You decided to leave the iPhone for good and embracing Android, but had to leave your large music resources inside iPhone due to the lack of suitable file sharing options. What a pity! But don’t despair, actually, moving music from iPhone to Android devices doesn’t have to be complicated. Though iTunes can’t sync your music library to an Android device, there is a couple of alternatives will get the job done easily. Here we’ll show you how to transfer music from iPhone to Android phone with or without iTunes.

When it comes to copying music from iPhone to Android phone, the basic way is to sync your iPhone with your computer using iTunes first. Then you can simply drag and drop the songs from computer to your Android, or transfer the songs using the cloud-based Google Play service.

1. Connect your Android phone to the computer as an removable drive using a USB cable.

 2. Open the iTunes media folder, and then drag and drop the songs into your Android music folder.

1. Download and install the Google Music Manager app on your computer. (Make sure you sign in with the the same Google account you use with your Android phone.)

 2. Run Music Manager and select “iTunes” as the location of your music files, the app will upload all your iTunes songs to Google Play.

 3. Run Google Play Music app on your Android, tap the top bar to switch to “All Music”, you should be able to see all your iTunes songs that you uploaded to Google Play.

Sending music from iPhone to Android is a bit tricky, but not impossible. There are many third-party tools available which can help you to do what you want without iTunes. Take a look at Jihosoft Phone Transfer. This software provides a quick method to directly transfer music, photos, videos, as well as contacts and messages from iPhone to Android. Want to see how all this happen? Follow below given steps.

1. Download and install a free copy of this iPhone to Android Transfer tool on your PC. Then run it.

 2. Connect both your iPhone/iPod and Android phone to the PC via USB cables, the program will detect the devices automatically. (Make sure the iPhone is listed as “Source” and Android is listed as “Destination”.)

 3. Choose “Music” from the listed file types and click “Start Copy” to begin transferring music from iPhone/iPod to Android.

So easy, isn’t it? Just ensure your devices are connected to the computer all the time during the process. You can transfer music from all iOS devices including iPhone 3GS/4/4S/5/5S/6/6S/7/7 Plus to the latest hot Samsung Galaxy S7/S7 Edge/S6/S6 Edge. HTC One M10/M9, or LG G5/G4/G3 etc..|||

Go through this article and learn the easy ways to transfer music from iPhone/iPod to Android devices.