Negativity is a constant companion in sales, and even the most passionate and the most driven often find it difficult to move on from a failure or defeat. It takes an enormous amount of courage to get up and try again, but we cannot win a boxing match without absorbing a few blows.

Some of the greatest people in history have endured rejection and defeat, but instead of destroying them it helped them succeed. So the next time you feel depleted and find it difficult get out of the self-pitying ditch, read through the list of our favorite best sales quotes of all time to lift your spirit.

“Motivation is what gets you started. Habit is what keeps you going.” – Jim Rohn

Jim Rohn was an incredibly successful entrepreneur, motivational speaker, philosopher, and to many, an epitome of the American Dream. He worked his way up from a farm boy in Washington to a vice president of the largest direct-selling organization of Nurti-Bio in Canada. Habit, not motivation is what makes you a great sales associate. Motivation will last as long as you’ll be able to keep it alight, but a habit is for life. Repetition creates patterns, so make it a rule to contact ten clients before 10. Soon enough, you’ll be making those calls without a thought or the need of a motivational quote to start your day.

“The difference between a successful person and others is not a lack of strength, not a lack of knowledge, but rather a lack of will.” – Vince Lombardi

Lombardi’s discipline and an incredible winning record in the NFL have granted him the honor of being the greatest coach in American football’s history. In fact, he may be the greatest sports leader in the world. His perfectionism makes a great subject for inspirational sales quotes, to inspire discipline. The key to strengthening your willpower as a sales associate is to increase your capacity to pressure. Learn to tackle stressful situations by incorporating meditation into your daily work routine. A 3-minute breathing exercise can help you address the biggest sales challenges in your role.

“The mind is everything. What you think you become.” – Buddha

One of the favorite quotes amongst the Teamgate’s sales team is used to foster a winning mindset. Buddha is a founding figure of Buddhism and his stance of being free from mental obstructions to have been employed in all areas of life. Competition is thick in sales, but what separates the great sales associates from the ordinary is their determination, never wavering motivation and an absolute passion for what they do.

“A goal without a plan is just a wish.” ― Antoine de Saint-Exupéry

The man who has brought us The Little Prince, was a pioneering aviator, journalist, and poet before the outbreak of World War II. He joined the French Air Force and when his release from duty, traveled to Northern America to convince the government to adhere to the fight against Nazi Germany. He disappeared over the Mediterranean in 1944 while completing a mission with the Free French Air Force of Northern Africa. An unlikely fellow to come across amongst sales quotes, but his wise words resonate with many sales teams around the world. As a sales associate, you must prepare for any outcome. Never enter a sales negotiation without having a clue how you will close it.

“There’s no lotion or potion that will make sales faster and easier for you – unless your potion is hard work.” – Jeffrey Gitomer

Sales are tough, competitive and merciless. There is no room for laziness because only those who work tirelessly achieve their sales goals. No one knows more about perseverance and the struggle of a salesman than Jeffrey Gitomer. He is a best-selling author, motivational speaker, and business trainer. His motivational speeches have landed him on the Speakers Wall of Fame and produced some of the most inspiring sales quotes.

“You are what you repeatedly do. Excellence is not an event – it is a habit.” – Aristotle

Aristotle was a Greek philosopher, with sincere enthusiasm for philosophy, science, ethics, politics, and government among many other things. He pioneered philosophy and the study of human logic. Although you would not expect to see Aristotle’s ideas amongst sales quotes, his deep understanding of the human philosophy is paramount in sales. To achieve excellence in your role as a sales rep, you must surround yourself with it. Seek out and learn from the best people in sales, follow their blogs, connect with them on LinkedIn and attend their seminars. Sales are a competition, but you can’t win it if you don’t know the rules of the game.

“Treat objections as requests for further information.” – Brian Tracy

A world-renowned entrepreneur, motivational speaker and a personal and professional development guru Brian Tracy spent the last 30 years researching sales, philosophy, and psychology. His ideas on relationship building in sales and expert advice have helped the most successful business in the world to achieve their goals faster and easier. His ideas are often compressed in motivational sales quotes to provide reassurance and encouragement for sales teams. You can also achieve your goals faster if you follow up with your clients. Investigate the reasons for your rejection with a friendly call or email.

The above is a personal productivity booster from the sales team at Teamgate.  The author of the quote Shawn Corey Carter is more widely known as Jay-Z. He is a Grammy-winning rapper and a successful businessman. He recently launched a rival music sharing platform Tidal and is a co-founder of Roc-A-Feller Records.

To boost productivity and avoid depleting your energy reservoirs, you should set up productivity rituals. Start your day with a motivational sales quote and set a single critical goal to achieve that day. Having a goal will sharpen your focus and minimize distraction throughout your day.

A woman driven by passion, armed with an incredible attention to buying habits and her client’s desires is the creator of one the most successful retailers in America. Her business racks in a $3million profit a year and her ability to utilize data is astonishing. Katherine Barchetti’s sales quotes are often used to remind sales teams of the importance of acquiring clients and not sales alone.

As a sales rep, you must consider your client’s success equally as rewarding as your own. So do not abandon your customers as soon as you close the deal. Always follow up with a request for feedback or a tactical suggestion how they may improve their performance.

“It is not your customer’s job to remember you. It is your obligation and responsibility to make sure they don’t have the chance to forget you.” – Patricia Fripp

Patricia Fripp is one of the most electrifying motivational speakers on this planet. Her enormous experience in coaching sales representatives, speakers and businesses are what makes her advice golden. Her avid interest in movies and screenwriting adds flamboyance to her workshops not found anywhere else, which makes them an absolute delight to experience.

Her ideas are grounded and easily achieved, which makes them excellent candidates for motivational sales quotes. Take her expert advice and ensure you make time to stay in touch with your clients. A monthly email, a newsletter or a call as they are approaching a significant event will keep you fresh in their minds and on the tip of their tongue.

“If you listen better, you will sell more” – Jeffrey Gitomer

A man of many talents, Jeffrey Gitomer, has lent his expertise on every aspect of making a sale. His best-selling books, motivational speeches, and advice are all tremendously respected around the world and yield an exhaustive amount of sales quotes to inspire sales teams.

Do not leave the closing of a sale to chance. Probe your client’s views on your product and listen to what they are not saying. Actively ask questions about the problem they are having and provide solutions.

“Obstacles are necessary for success because in selling, as in all careers of importance, victory comes only after many struggles and countless defeats.” – Og Mandino

Og Mandino had a flair for journalism from an early age, which he put on hold after the outbreak of World War II, where he served as a bombardier. Soon after the war he battled with depression and alcoholism but found calling in self-help and motivational books on the night, he contemplated suicide. He eventually published a best-selling book The Greatest Salesman In The World and became a motivational speaker.

The most popular subject amongst sales quotes is the one of failure or defeat. It is so because failure is the only element of sales you will encounter as a sales rep. To conquer failure, you must understand why you failed. Critique yourself and write down the areas you must improve on your next sales call.

“Sales success comes after you stretch yourself past your limits on a daily basis.” – Omar Periu

A penniless immigrant from Cuba, Omar Periu was a billionaire at the age of 31. He is the owner of luxury health clubs and Omar Periu International, a leading wealth-training company. His expert advice on how to harness success stems from his poor background and often resurfaces at sales seminars and training sessions around the world.

The challenges you face as sales associate should not limit your ability to achieve your sales goals. Rejection is not indefinite, so do not close the door on your leads if you failed to convert them. Accept the defeat and get started with your next pitch. Revisit the clients that rejected you in the future and try again to close the deal.

“Success is walking from failure to failure with no loss of enthusiasm.” – Winston Churchill

Winston Churchill’s unwavering love for his country, leadership and daring speeches had helped Britain remain courageous and inspire resistance at a time when Britain stood alone in the fight against Nazi Germany in 1990-1. He headed many different offices in the British parliament, before succeeding to govern the country as a prime minister twice. He was a master of words, capable of captivating and transforming a crowd with his electrifying speeches.

It is therefore not surprising to find Churchill quoted to ignite the passion in sales teams. In fact, his quotes are excellent for inspiring courage and enthusiasm to keep trying. Do not allow the defeat to discourage you from trying innovative ways to approach your clients. Continue to experiment with different sales approaches until you find the one that fits your style of selling.

“Our greatest weakness lies in giving up. The most certain way to succeed is to try just one more time.” – Thomas Edison

The greatest inventor of all time was a self-taught American who held over 1000 patents to his name in America alone. The invention of the long-lasting light bulb, motion picture, and a car battery are the inventions that had life-changing effects across the world. Quotes on his attitude towards failure have not only inspired many to persevere but also has shifted the way we approach failure.

In sales, some of the defeats will be tougher to overcome than others, but you should never stop trying. Tackle your large problems by breaking it down into smaller pieces and take one piece at a time.

“Success seems to be connected with action. Successful people keep moving. They make mistakes, but they never quit.” – Conrad Hilton

Conrad Hilton, the mastermind behind Hilton Hotels had his first taste of entrepreneurship at an early age while helping his father at his small hotel. He always hoped to own a bank, but when his deal fell through, he acquired a small hotel in Texas instead. Hilton quickly expanded, and although he faced bankruptcy during the Great Depression, his hotel chain is still one of the largest in the world today.

Hilton’s quotes on success have been used worldwide to ignite the passion for sales, entrepreneurship, and business. With the passion for sales comes an overwhelming sense of purpose. Come to grips with the power your product holds to affect your clients lives positively, and you will discover the meaning of purpose that will help you push through defeat.

“If you are not taking care of your customer, your competitor will.” – Bob Hooey

“The Idea Man,” Bob Hooey is an all round entrepreneur – motivational speaker, business trainer and sales coach. His innovative ideas and award winning speeches have taken him around the globe, where he delivered presentations on leadership, sales, personal and professional development. His pearls of wisdom can are amongst the most powerful sales quotes of all time.

You cannot approach each lead with the same mindset and a ‘one-size-fits-all’ pitch. Personalize your pitches for each client by immersing yourself in information about them. Every client possesses unique pain points that will help you find a way to sell your product as a solution.

“Your unhappiest customers are your greatest sources of learning.” – Bill Gates

The man who has brought computers into our homes is also an author, investor and a philanthropist. He is the co-founder of the largest PC company in the world, Microsoft, and is the richest man on the planet. During his time at Microsoft, he held multiple positions and was the largest shareholder until May 2014. His quotes about customer-relationship building often circulate sales conferences and seminars.

Unhappy clients have misunderstood customers, and smart sales reps understand their client’s’ point of view. Start your sales pitch with your customer’s success in mind and you will not only close a sale but also gain their trust.

“Here is a simple but powerful rule … always give people more than they expect to get.” – Nelson Boswell

Nelson Boswell was a successful stockbroker who ran a motivational “Challenge and Response” radio show in Florida. He eventually used his material from the program and published his first best-selling self-help book “Successful Living Day By Day.”

Your role as a sales rep goes beyond selling. Some clients will be ideal for a fast sale, but you should strive for building a loyal relationship with them to reduce customer churn. The single way to achieve that is to research your prospective clients and identify how your product will deliver more benefits than your competitor.

“Give Value, Give Value, Give Value, And Then Ask For Business.” –  Gary Vee

Gary Vaynerchuk is an American entrepreneur and New York Times best-selling author. He’s a pioneer in social and digital media and is a frequent speaker at international technology conferences.

As a sales rep, you face the challenge of closing the deal and then retaining the client. Your customers will leave if you fail to provide value to their business. Instead of just swiftly checking-in with your customers aim to teach them something new every month.

“Remember, the universal language is not texted, emailed or spoken. It is felt.” – Angela Ahrendts

The current senior vice president of retail at Apple Inc, Angela Ahrendts is the single female senior executive at Apple. She was a CEO of Burberry from 2004 to 2016 and achieved tremendous business growth during her time there.

Ahrendt’s expertise is an obvious conversation starter and an excellent subject for motivational sales quotes. To sell your product, you must wholeheartedly believe in its value. Be an expert in what you sell by being an avid user of your product to sell its benefits to your clients successfully.

The flamboyant motivational speaker and life coach lent her expertise to some global organizations. She delivers highly energized, packed with content, unforgettable seminars. Her speeches achieved the highest honor, the “Oscar” of the speaking world, the Cadet Award. Sales reps often retrace back to sales quotes from her speeches for inspiration and clarity in their field.

As a sales rep, you either do make a deal, or you don’t. There is no room for trying – you must be patient and push forward to achieve results. When you don’t make a deal, open the possibility to build a relationship that may be beneficial later.

“Keep yourself positive, cheerful and goal-oriented. Sales Success is 80% attitude and only 20% aptitude.” – Brian Tracy

An awarded motivational speaker and the author of over 70 books on self-motivation, Brian Tracy is a world renown expert in sales and personal and professional development. Over the last 30 years, he has consulted over a hundred companies and addressed over 5,000,000 individuals. His quotes on sales, motivation, and achievement appear across many different disciplines of the business world.

It’s crucial to set yourself long and short term goals in sales. Benchmark yourself against the best people in sales and chase after your targets without fear of failing.

“Become the person who would attract the results you seek.” – Jim Cathcart

Jim Cathcart is a Sales & Marketing Hall of Famer for his lifelong publishing and motivational work. He is also listed in the Speaking Hall of Fame register and inducted as one of “The Legends of The Speaking Profession.” He is a highly decorated entrepreneur, author, and businessman, with regular appearances on TV and radio.

Every sales rep should create a buying persona and stick to it. Dive into your target audience, build your selling strategy around it and use it to identify most promising leads.

A driven entrepreneur who has successfully established a profitable photography company at the age of 18, Chris Grosser has a respectable reputation. Although his success is still fresh, his attitude about achieving it is a common subject of discussion at sales conferences around the globe.

People love to buy, but they will seldom come straight to you asking to be sold to. So develop a measurable lead-generation process which you can use to identify sales leads. A clear and quantifiable plan will help you identify your weak points and quickly find ways to improve them.

Don’t wish it were easier, wish you were better. – Jim Rohn

The talent to bring extraordinary insights to common elements has brought world-wide fame to Jim Rohn. His remarkable ability captures the imagination through his success philosophies, continue to have a global impact in sales, entrepreneurship, personal and professional development. His sales quotes are consistent reminders of the enormous legacy he left behind.

A great sales rep is first and foremost a great person. You are what you intend, so aim to be better, accept your worth and embrace change.

“Never put off till tomorrow what you can do today.” – Thomas Jefferson

An American Founding Father and the 3rd serving president of the United States, Thomas Jefferson is a figure of authority to many. Before becoming president, Jefferson was the first Secretary of State, advocated for religious freedom and was the primary author of the Declaration of Independence.

In sales, like in many areas of your life, you will face a demand for change, greatness or progress. So to keep your sanity, get organized. Approach your clients with a clear idea of the language you will use and the subjects you will emphasize. Plan your day and personal development to tackle the pain points of your sales approach. You can charm your clients, but without organization, you will find it difficult to maintain them.|||

Find it difficult to move on from a failure or defeat? Read through the list of our favorite sales quotes of all time to lift your spirit.