We like to call this place The Lost Boys’ Biggest Dream. Here we have The Giant Playground, generously furnished with beer fountains, ping-pong tables, and other useless shiz. Your Big Uncles provide you with all the money you need, and magic fairies take care of every boring part of your life (think: laundry, accounting, bureaucracy. They even take out the trash and change toiler rolls!) All you need to do is play: write code, design shiny graphics, make some buzz in social media. Pizza will be delivered right to your desk every afternoon.

Don’t worry about scratching your knees in the process. All your failures will be forgiven; it’s risky play, after all. If you fall, there, there, get some more money and you can start again.

Too good to be true? Well, we have seen quite a few little boys being successful, so we want to scale the model. Come and join us, life can be a fairy tale!

But remember, it’s all about quick wins. Your success needs to be immediate or it doesn’t count. What is your unfair advantage? Tell me your elevator pitch. How are you going to outsmart your competition? What, you still thinking? Pff, looser! I’m already three ideas ahead! C’mon, give me the answers! Give me the numbers! Now! Faster! More! Get big, get fast or get the fuck out NOW!

Wait, you got burned out? Depressed? Don’t want to play anymore? Oh, well. Work hard, play hard. Die young. These are the rules.

So, remember: if you are any different, if you are not aggressive, not dedicated, not masochistic enough, don’t even try to venture into The Giant Playground. You’ll drop out. You’ll look silly. Are you a woman trying to raise some investor’s money? Sorry, your idea is not boyish enough. Are you already in your thirties? Sorry, you don’t look good in boy’s shorts. If you are not a little boy, don’t try to become one. You can’t beat the Lost Boys in their own game.|||

Thinking about hacking the system to get away from all boring responsibility? I have good news for you. Secret passage to Neverland is open. Life gets boring once you finish higher education. Out of…