Constant connectivity, contextual relevance, and a multi-screen world are changing both online and offline shopping. As the digital and in-store experiences what a customer might need based on what, where, when and how they arrive at their site and let them help to decide how to respond to the queries.

Now a day, consumers don’t see a clear difference between online and offline shopping, whether it is an online search or walking main street shops and hanging out at local shopping mall. It is all shopping. In order to adapt to this competitive and challenging new reality; smart retailers are drawing on classic retailing truths of the past and comparing it with present.

The new retailers on the other hand are already embracing the new reality of using digital to maximize their storefronts exposure. We have studied top five ways on how shopping has changed and we would like to suggest marketers, how they can adapt to join the retail revolution.

1.       The knowledge of shoppers and a salesperson

People have to come out of their homes and visit stores with no knowledge of market and relied totally on a salesperson to advise them on what they are buying.

Today’s shoppers are smart, they have become accustomed of doing their own research and study to get the maximum value of every dollar they have to spend in little span of time and they feel secure about purchases they are making. But with shift of power comes a great responsibility for retailers too!

For those that use tools and insights from the inner web have the opportunity to close the gap between smart online consumer and traditional/offline retailers to stand out in a competitive marketplace. Every second in a consumer mood matters. To be successful in this, smart retailers have a need to there when inspiration strikes consumers and as they start researching for products online.

The term “retailing” became with shopkeepers who would greet people from their neighborhood and then learn their costumer’s needs and preferences.

In the era of global village and our world constantly, a device is just a proxy of what really matters i.e. getting to know your customers. That particular device (online customer) helps them learn what matters to a customer in a particular location and a particular time.  Coupled with the intent provided by online search, this is no doubt an incredible power. The benefit to retailers is that it can help retailers to deliver relevant suggestions essentially recreating those shopkeeper conversations at large scale.



 The right message at the right moment is the next level in customer service – it has the ability to quickly and easily turn an intent into action.

This also allows retailers to better anticipate what a customer might need based on what, where, when and how they arrive at their site and let them help to decide how to respond to the queries. People/consumer are constantly looking for product information, best deals, availability and discounts online and those who cannot respond to right information when asked simply lose out.

Availability of information for finding store that matches your product depends totally on familiarity or simply serendipity.

The era of digital footprint, it is time to go mobile. Retailers are integrating mobile apps into brick and mortar store experience. Customers look for map directions when search for store name or category and expect to see phone number that have easy click to call special offers that match their preferences.

Take example of Adidas. They have worked with their agency iProspect to evaluate how mobile clicks on their store locator links were driving in store sales and have found that an investment of one million dollars have brought store locator clicks in mobile ads generated a whopping 1.6 million in sales!

It does not end there, once the customer walks in to a store, the options are limitless. On the other end, we have been lost in supermarket searching for elusive items.

Mobile is your map, a shopping list, a salesperson and a deal finder all at once.

4.       An idea carry more weight than ever before

Back then retail therapy was a regular activity shared by friends and family — and word of mouth was a social force transformed new products into a must have, converting small shops into retail empires.

This thing has gone to next level. With social networks, people are now sharing their opinion on products not just with friend and followers list but with billions of people online. That’s why online shoppers incorporate reviews and introduced shortlists to make it easy for people to discuss products and purchases with friends and loved ones.

Retailers are recognizing the opportunities that lie in digital world where instead of biasing campaigns on the broadest reach possible. Now they can zero in and speak directly with the individuals or communities of fans, who love products the most. Shop owners are also seizing the opportunities around online comments by advertising against terms like reviews and working hard to promote the positive aspects and minimize the negative ones.

5.       Products can now jump off screen

Before era of digital age, the internet was just fine for researching, but sadly there was no replacement for holding the feeling, inspecting a physical product on a store shelf or showroom floor.

A lot has changed since. 4k videos, 360 view, motion and gesture controls are now just a few of the options bringing products alive on the screen. Each and every digital stride opens exciting opportunities to lock in the gap between an on-screen image and that experience of holding a product in store.

Some innovative retailers are even offering shoppers virtual try-ons. Eye-glasses retailer Warby Parker, for example, invites customers to mix and match frames against their photo.

When retailers promote products online in a unique way, they open up huge opportunities for their valued customers to interact with products on emotional level.

When customers’ emotions are activated, boom, their desire to buy is sparked. It is only the beginning to see possibilities.

As a trend, “digital” weaves deeper into the fabric of our lives, smart and intelligent retailers now understand making the most of new opportunities is not just about good gadgets. It is about human nature.

Retailers should be looking at how they are interweaving digital tools like mobile, context, and video with maximum sales, marketing and customer service. When these things are well used, the technology becomes almost invisible. Customers simply see retailers as being very good at giving them exactly what they want.|||

