Are you a creative technology leader with at least ten years experience designing, building, testing and running enterprise platforms for demanding businesses?

Are you an enthusiastic collaborator with people of all disciplines?

Do you have a flair for communicating with users and stakeholders to reveal their real needs?

If so, we’re keen to meet you.

This is the kind of person we're after

You're friendly and like to help people. Empathy comes easy for you. You’re a passionate software craftsman and advocate for the best user experience. You love learning and you're curious about the world around you. You're not afraid to say "I don't know” or “I don't understand". You’re a self-starter and not afraid to cut some clean code. You give back to your team and wider community. Maybe you contribute to open source, write blog posts, tell stories about experiences at conferences. You like fruit, sunshine and conversations that aren’t about work. We're not droids.

Joining the Energized Work crew is an opportunity to experience one team of design thinkers, business innovators, impact entrepreneurs and creative technologists operating in the whitespace between traditional roles. Together we imagine possibilities, develop concepts, shape visions, prototype strategies and launch digital ventures.

Working with our client you’ll develop a deep understanding of their business, policies, processes and organisation, including their objectives and challenges. You will own the relationships with our client's technical stakeholders, and with Magellan-like ability you will navigate their organisation, removing obstacles and influencing people to create a shared technical vision You'll roll your sleeves up and work in our team to lead the creation of technical solutions that ensure delivery of business outcomes, delighted users, and the lowest total cost of ownership. You'll lead the capture and definition of security, performance, availability and other non-functional requirements.

These are the things you must have

These are things you don’t need to have but it’d be great if you had some of them|||

Are you a creative technology leader with at least ten years experience designing, building, testing  and running enterprise platforms for demanding businesses?

Are you an enthusiastic collaborator with people of all disciplines?

Do you have a flair for communicating with users and stakeholders to reveal their real needs?

If so, we&rsquo;re keen to meet you.

What we&rsquo;re looking for

This is the kind of person we&#39;re after


	
	You&#39;re friendly and like to help people. Empathy comes easy for you.
	
	
	You&rsquo;re a passionate software craftsman and advocate for the best user experience.
	
	
	You&rsquo;re a great communicator.
	
	
	You love learning and you&#39;re curious about the world around you. You&#39;re not afraid to say &quot;I don&#39;t know&rdquo; or &ldquo;I don&#39;t understand&quot;.
	
	
	You&rsquo;re a self-starter and not afraid to cut some clean code.
	
	
	You&rsquo;re a champion of agile and lean principles.
	
	
	You give back to your team and wider community. Maybe you contribute to open source, write blog posts, tell stories about experiences at conferences.
	
	
	You like fruit, sunshine and conversations that aren&rsquo;t about work. We&#39;re not droids.
	


Joining the Energized Work crew is an opportunity to experience one team of design thinkers, business innovators, impact entrepreneurs and creative technologists operating in the whitespace between traditional roles. Together we imagine possibilities, develop concepts, shape visions, prototype strategies and launch digital ventures.

What you&#39;ll be doing


	
	Working with our client you&rsquo;ll develop a deep understanding of their business, policies, processes and organisation, including their objectives and challenges.
	
	
	You will own the relationships with our client&#39;s technical stakeholders, and with Magellan-like ability you will navigate their organisation, removing obstacles and influencing people to create a shared technical vision
	
	
	You&#39;ll roll your sleeves up and work in our team to lead the creation of technical solutions that ensure delivery of business outcomes, delighted users, and the lowest total cost of ownership.
	
	
	You&#39;ll lead the capture and definition of security, performance, availability and other non-functional requirements.
	
	
	You&#39;ll proactively identify major technical risks and mitigation strategies ahead of implementation.
	


What we expect

These are the things you must have


	
	You&#39;re an enthusiastic collaborator with people of all disciplines and develop great working  relationships, especially with the client&rsquo;s technical stakeholders and domain experts.
	
	
	You&rsquo;ve got the confidence and technical chops to collaborate in a high-performing Extreme Programming (XP) team, debate a position with experienced engineers and senior business  stakeholders, and facilitate architecture decisions towards consensus agreement.
	
	
	You use a disciplined approach to creating robust solutions and delightful experiences with clean code in fast-changing business environments.
	
	
	You have awesome fu in test-driven development, continuous integration, pair programming and refactoring.
	
	
	You know what you&rsquo;re doing when it comes to the design and development of RESTful web services.
	
	
	You&#39;re a top hand at designing, storing and protecting data, be it in relational databases or other data stores.
	
	
	You have crack skills in building and optimising automated testing and continuous delivery pipelines.
	
	
	You&#39;re a whizz automating deployment, configuration, scaling and monitoring of Cloud infrastructure.
	


Key Tools &amp; Technology


	Public clouds, e.g. AWS or Azure
	Linux, ideally CoreOS
	Java 8 and the JVM ecosystem
	TCP/IP / HTTP / REST / DNS / SSL/TLS
	At least one popular relational database technology
	At least one popular messaging technology
	OWASP / OAuth 2


Beneficial Knowledge or Experience

These are things you don&rsquo;t need to have but it&rsquo;d be great if you had some of them


	Domain Driven Design (DDD) and Clean Code
	Event Sourcing
	TypeScript
	Ratpack or Dropwizard and Guice
	Groovy
	Gradle
	Experience with Heroku or Docker-based deployment architectures (e.g. Docker Swarm)
	Infrastructure automation tools e.g. Terraform, Puppet, Ansible
	PostgreSQL
	JSON API
	Old-school integration patterns and technologies, e.g. SOAP, FTP, RPC
	Non-relational data store experience


Details


	Contract.
	Day rate up to &pound;700 depending on experience.