You may have the best-looking, super-efficient luxury car in town, but it’s still old driving skills that will get you out of a tight spot – and save you from a lot of embarrassment.

A drone footage shared online recently showed how a driver of a Tesla Model X sport utility vehicle had to painstakingly maneuver his bulky electric car past a double-decker bus on a narrow vehicular access on Tai Tam Reservoir in the eastern part of Hong Kong Island, hk01.com reports.

According to the news portal, the road on top of the dam is only five meters wide, and with a 2.5 meter wide bus pulling over on one side, the remaining space is quite marginal for a Tesla Model X, which is 2.27 meters wide, to go through.

Theoretically, the space on each side of the Model X is only 11.5 centimeters, which is the height of a can of soda.

For a red taxicab, negotiating the narrow space was a breeze, as shown on the video clip.

But when it was Tesla’s turn to pass through, even guidance from the bus driver, who had to impatiently wave his hand outside the vehicle, was of little use.

The Tesla driver appeared to be hesitant and unsure of himself. His car went forward and back several times without much success, causing long queues of cars on both sides.

The situation was finally resolved when two men from other vehicles got off to help the Tesla driver “watch his spots” and the electric car finally got through unscathed.

Many netizens criticized the Tesla driver for his poor technique, while others remarked that he simply lacked the nerve to get on with the task.

Dr. Ringo Lee Yiu-pui, chairman of The Institute of The Motor Industry Hong Kong, said it was understandable for the Tesla driver to make repeated attempts to go through.

Regardless of his driving experience, Lee said, a person needs to make multiple attempts to get out of such a situation.

Lee suggested that the government set up temporary traffic lights at both ends of the narrow road to temporarily turn it into a single lane whenever large vehicles have to drive through.

In the long run, the government should consider building an alternative road or allow only narrow-bodied buses to use the road.|||

» Tesla driver caught in embarrassing spot at Tai Tam  On the pulse