Dublin’s developers make up nearly 10 percent of the city’s working population, the highest proportion of all cities in the UK and Ireland according to a new report.

The Q1 Developer Ecosystem Report by Stack Overflow and its findings include information about cities in the UK and Ireland where developers are based. According to the study, there are over 970,000 developers employed in the UK and Ireland. London has the largest tech community with over 365,736 developers based in the city. However, this represents around 7 percent of London’s working population. Edinburgh, Bristol and Belfast make up the rest of the top five.

The report also identified the most commonly used technologies in each tech hub. Python, .Net and Java are used by the largest number of developers. Some regional differences are also noted in the findings. For example, the Bristol and the Greater Cambridge areas are also home to large communities of developers proficient in Node.Js., while in Birmingham and the Greater Manchester area, there is a large population of PHP specialists.

The data provides an overview of the availability of tech talent across the UK and Ireland, enabling employers to make data-based decisions on where to base their technology teams.

Kevin Troy, Director of Insights at Stack Overflow, said about the report: “With developers forming an increasingly large proportion of the UK and Ireland’s working population, it is becoming even more important for recruiters and HR professionals to understand what matters to these highly-skilled employees. Stack Overflow’s Q1 Developer Ecosystem report is designed to address this by arming people managers with the information they need to succeed.”

This report is the first in a series by Stack Overflow that take a close look at the developer ecosystem in the UK and Ireland. Each will explore a distinct theme within the tech community: the first focuses on tech hiring – how software engineers find jobs, what matters to them when considering a new position, and the tips they want to give to recruiters who are hiring their future colleagues.

The reports are created using a combination of proprietary data captured from Stack Overflow’s machine learning platform and qualitative data from Stack Overflow’s annual user survey.

The Developer Ecosystem Report: Tech Hiring Edition can be downloaded from here: s.tk/dev-ecosystem-tech-hiring.

If you would like to have your company featured in the Irish Tech News Business Showcase, get in contact with us at [email protected] or on Twitter: @SimonCocking|||

By Eimear Dodd Journalism MA student, @TheCity_Dublin editor, @Irish_TechNews Dublin’s developers make up nearly 10 percent of the city’s working population, the highest proportion of all cities in the UK and Ireland according to a new report.