It’s the buzz of the racing world. F1 legend Michael Schumacher will be honored at the "Champions for Charity" football match in Mainz, Germany, on July 3. The seven-time F1 world champion has not been seen in public since a  nearly fatal accident at a skiing resort in France in 2013.

The "Champions for Charity" football match, which was first introduced in 2016, brings big celebrities from the sports world together to raise money for various charity efforts. Last year’s "Champions for Charity" football match attracted around 25,000 spectators to raise money for the various charitable works.

This year’s “Champions for Charity" football match will honor the seven-time F1 world champion Michael Schumacher, who sustained serious head injuries in a nearly fatal accident in 2013, by raising money for the Keep Fighting Initiative set up by Schumacher’s family and manager, according to Motorsport.com.

The 48-year-old Schumacher first made his debut in F1 racing at the 1991 Belgian Grand Prix, where he raced for the Jordan-Ford F1 racing team. The year 1994 saw Schumacher's first Drivers' Championship. The German-born F1 driver has won six of the first seven races and was leading the Spanish Grand Prix, finishing the race in second place.

In 1995, the seven-time F1 world champion successfully defended his F1 title with the Whitney-based outfit, Benetton Formula 1 racing team. The German driver accumulated 33 more points than second-placed Damon Hill and helped drive Benetton to its first Constructors' Championship. At Benetton, he won two titles in 1994 and 1995, before moving to Scuderia Ferrari where he stayed and raced for almost eleven years. At Ferrari, he managed to score five consecutive titles between 2000 and 2004.

Overall, Schumacher holds most of F1's driver records. These include records for the most championships, race victories, fastest laps, pole positions, and even races won in a single F1 season. The German driver has also become the only driver in F1 history to finish in the top three in every race of an F1 season. He also set the record for most consecutive podium finishes in F1 racing and has become the youngest two-time World Champion in F1 history. Additionally, Schumacher has also won the prestigious Laureus World Sportsman of the Year twice.

Schumacher’s son, Mick Schumacher, is also following his footsteps as the young Schumacher competes in the highly competitive F3 racing series. Mick will also be taking part in the upcoming "Champions for Charity" football event. The younger Schumacher will be joined by other sporting celebrities stars such as F1 legend Mika Hakkinen, football star Miroslav Klose, and NBA star Dirk Nowitzki.

In addition to raising support for the German Dirk Nowitzki Foundation, funds will also be raised for Schumacher's Keep Fighting Initiative. And Mick Schumacher has already announced plans to compete in an event to raise funds for the Schumacher Keep Fighting Initiative.|||

It’s the buzz of the racing world. F1 legend Michael Schumacher will be honored at the "Champions for Charity" football match in Mainz, Germany, on July 3. The seven-time F1 world champion has not been seen in public since a  nearly fatal accident at...