AWS Simple Storage Service (S3) is one of the most popular AWS services offered under the umbrella of storage. For most enterprises, AWS S3 spend is one of the top five biggest spends among all AWS offerings. There are three primary costs associated with S3: The storage cost charged per GB per month or per hour, API cost for operation of files where write requests are ten fold expensive, and data transfer cost outside of AWS region.

Despite expenses, however, S3 cannot be ignored. It offers a durability of 99.999999999% compared to other object storage. Plus, it has a simple web interface to store and retrieve any amount of data.

If you’re a operations manager or a cloud engineer, you probably already know that data read/write or data moved in/out are also considered as moving billable parts of S3 storage. So, AWS S3 billing has something more in it beyond just the storage cost. Hence, a detailed analysis of all these can help you keep AWS S3 bill shock to a minimum.

Enterprises who use S3 for content delivery build up a huge cost on S3. Especially media-tech companies. As mentioned earlier, S3 cost may differ on storage, data transfer and many other attributes. If you, however, drill down deeper into attributes such as various S3 services, instances, tags, etc., and analyze them, you can help curtail AWS S3 bill shock to a great extent.

That’s why Botmetric built AWS S3 Cost Analyzer. This analyzer has built-in extensive filters that help drill down by:

With Botmetric S3 Cost Analyzer, you get a complete clarity on S3 usage and AWS S3 spend.

With Botmetric S3 Cost Analyzer, you can view your overall S3 spend by day or current month with ease. This drill down helps in understanding your current S3 cost involvement.

Data/objects in S3 is stored in buckets created under S3 service. A bucket is a logical unit of storage in AWS’ object storage service, S3. Buckets are used to store objects, which consist of data and metadata that describes the data. There is no limit to the number of objects you can store in a bucket. By default, you can create up to 100 buckets in each of your AWS accounts. If you need additional buckets, you can increase your bucket limit by submitting a service limit increase.

Thus, Botmetric S3 Cost Analyzer can help you get a complete overview and break up of cost on each individual bucket. You can further drill down using filters to have a better understanding of your AWS spend for S3 bucket-wise. What’s more? You can view the data with organized and graphical view of your choice (bar chart, pie chart, line chart, or table format) too.

If you are an organization who have categorized your business units as different accounts, then getting an understanding of S3 spend by each of these business units is very essential to understand usage patterns of these accounts in your organization. Botmetric S3 Cost Analyzer caters to these needs of organizations with beautiful graphical view of your choice.

If you look deep into AWS S3 cost, it depends on the sub services usage too. Hence, Botmetric S3 Cost Analyzer provides deep drill down into several services, like:

With a drill down of sub-services you can understand individual cost items associated to these sub-services. Plus, you get to look at all these data-driven insights in beautiful graphical forms of your choice.

Tags are one of the most important custom feature AWS offers to its users. Tags helps you define infrastructure identifiers with your own naming. Many AWS users are more interested in pulling reports via tags as these reports give them a better understanding of spend via environment.

With Botmetric S3 Analyzer, you can now drill down to S3 costs associated to various configured tags in your environment and see them in graphical view without data overload.

The best of all, with Botmetric S3 Cost Analyzer, you can export or download different breakdown of S3 cost into CSV files so you can circulate it among your team members and use it for any internal analysis. The data export option allows you to visualize the cost breakdown by buckets, sub-services, accounts, tags, and more.

For many businesses, S3 has been a primary storage for cloud native applications such as bulk repository, data lake for analytics, target for backup and disaster recovery, serverless computing and many more. So, it’s pivotal to keep a check on Amazon S3 billing.

AWS provides a Simple Monthly Calculator to calculate cost. But you need to have complete knowledge and know the dynamics surrounding your AWS S3 usage and how S3 billing is done. With Botmetric S3 Cost Analyzer, you can easily analyze as well as optimize S3 billing split by month or day, in formats you love, without data overload.

Apart from S3 Cost Analyzer, Botmetric also helps analyze other major AWS services, EC2, RDS cost in detail.|||

AWS Simple Storage Service (S3) is one of the most popular AWS services offered under the umbrella of storage. For most enterprises, AWS S3 spend is one of the top five biggest spends among all AWS…