Movement is the new marketing, and videos are emerging as the most dependable footholds in an increasingly chaotic ad space. How dependable, you ask? Forbes recently highlighted an INC study that predicts a staggering 90% of all web traffic will be video-based by 2019, while Google-owned video powerhouse YouTube reports mobile video consumption sees 100% growth each year. With those kinds of numbers reinforcing the popularity of this relatively new marketing tool, it's little wonder that Facebook is climbing on board the video marketing train.

Facebook video headers are an exciting new frontier for companies eager to cater to bounce-happy social media users, offering an instantly-visible platform for everything they need to communicate. While Facebook video covers will play without sound until the user opts to turn it on, lush visuals can still communicate everything from a knife gliding through a restaurant's succulent cut of gourmet steak to dancing sunbeams on a happy child at play with a new toy. Movement is a natural way to capture attention - it's the reason why neuromarketers rely so heavily on eye movement to determine what works. Imagine walking through an art gallery of traditional oil paintings when a flash of movement shows in your peripheral vision. How will you react? You will turn to investigate it, it's just human nature.  That reflex is why header videos work so well - and with the engagement that already exists on Facebook, it's a marketing home run waiting to happen.

These video headers will be a way to remove the effort of reading and simply show your customers what you can do for them. Service industries can use before and after camera pans to show successful results, food and drink sector companies can show off everything from beers pouring to bread rising, and other products can be demonstrated right before a viewer's eyes. Other video-based ads may feel disruptive on side bars, or annoying when displayed mid-entertainment content, but these Facebook video headers would appear when a customer actively seeks out the company, effectively eliminating dissonance. Customers will enter the page already primed to know more about the product, and without jarring loud music or sluggish loading times that plague traditional video placement, they'll be completely focused on the message. That kind of buy-in rarely happens in traditional marketing, let alone multimedia presentations.

Google and Facebook didn't get to be the companies they are by ignoring the trends. While video covers are still relatively new, history has shown that the social media giant puts a heavy preference on video in terms of visibility in the general feed. Knowing that, it's not a huge leap of faith to imagine that video covers will likely get a little more time in the limelight over their static counterparts. The user experience is ultimately what draws Facebook members to keep returning to the platform. From there, those users view and buy the products offered for sale by Facebook's advertisers, resulting in more ad sales and thus more revenue. If a company smartly and elegantly deploys video headers on their Facebook page, it stands to reason that they'll be rewarded for their efforts in contributing to that media-rich, visually compelling user experience, either directly through sales or indirectly through exposure.

While interaction with the new headers is mostly restricted to familiar video controls - stop, play, pause, and so on - it's worth noting that the functionality for additional engagement is already in place. Facebook live videos, for example, allow brand fans to post emoji reaction faces at specific points within the video, which appear and drift across the screen as they occur. Will this functionality extend to the video headers as well? One thing is certain: companies and brands that want to stay on the forefront of two must-have marketing sectors - video and social media - will need to start designing their own video headers as soon as possible.|||

Facebook video covers are an exciting new frontier for companies eager to cater to bounce-happy social media users, offering an instantly-visible platform.