To understand why there’s so much support behind LIDAR today, it’s important to look at other similar technologies which have similar goals. The original depth-sensing robot was the humble Bat (50 million years old!). A bat (or dolphin, among others) is able to perform some of the same capabilities as LIDAR using echolocation, otherwise known as Sonar (sound navigation and ranging). Instead of measuring light beams like LIDAR, Sonar measures distance using sound waves. After 50 million years of biological exclusivity, World War 1 advanced the timeline of the first major deployment of man-made Sonar sensors, with the advent of submarine warfare. Sonar works excellently in water, where sound travels far better than light or radio waves (more on that in a second). Sonar sensors are in active use on cars today, primarily in the form of parking sensors. These short-range (~5m) sensors enable a cheap way to know just how far that wall is behind your car. Sonar hasn’t been proven to work at the kinds of ranges a self-driving car demands (60m+). In this instance, the Bat is the sender/receiver Radar (radio direction and ranging), much like Sonar, was another technology developed during an infamous World War (WW2, this time). Instead of using light or sound waves, it instead utilizes radio waves to measure distance. We make use of a lot of Radar (using Delphi sensors) on Homer, and it’s a tried-and-tested method that can accurately detect and track objects as far as 200m away. Radar has very little in terms of downside. It performs well in extreme weather conditions and is available at an affordable pricepoint. Radar is heavily used not only for detection of objects, but tracking them too (ex: understanding how fast a car is going and in which direction). Radar doesn’t necessarily give you granularity of LIDAR, but Radar and LIDAR are very complimentary, and it’s definitely not either/or.

LIDAR was born in the 1960s, just after the advent of the laser. During the Apollo 15 mission in 1971, astronauts mapped the surface of the moon, giving the public the first glimpse of what LIDAR could do. Before LIDAR was even considered for automotive and self-driving use, one of the popular use-cases of LIDAR was archeology. LIDAR provides a ton of value for mapping large-scale swaths of land, and both archeology and agriculture benefitted tremendously from it.

Stanley, the winner of the 2005 Grand DARPA Challenge, made use of 5 SICK LIDAR sensors mounted on the roof, in addition to a military-grade GPS, gyroscopes, accelerometers and a forward-facing camera looking out 80m+. All of this was powered by six 1.6GHz Pentium Linux PCs sitting in the trunk. The fundamental challenge with the SICK LIDARs (which powered a significant portion of the 2005 challenge vehicles) is that each laser scan is essentially a cut made by a single plane, and so you had to be methodical in how you pointed them. Many teams mounted them on tilting stages, in order to use them to “sweep” a segment of space. In simple terms: SICK was a 2D LIDAR (a few beams of light in one direction) vs. the modern 3D LIDARs (tons of beams of light in all directions) we know today. Velodyne has long been the market leader in LIDAR, however they didn’t start out life that way. Velodyne began life as an audio company in 1983, specializing in low-frequency sound and subwoofer technology. The subwoofers contained custom sensors, DSPs and custom DSP control algorithms. Velodyne became the LIDAR company we know today at the same time as Stanley’s debut. Velodyne founders David and Bruce Hall first entered the 2004 DARPA competition as Team DAD (Digital Audio Drive). For the second race In 2005, David Hall invented and patented the 3D laser-based real-time system that laid the foundation for Velodyne’s current LIDAR products today. By the 3rd DARPA challenge in 2007, the majority of teams used this technology as the basis of their perception system. David Hall’s invention is now in the Smithsonian as a foundational breakthrough enabling autonomous driving. The first Velodyne LIDAR scanner was about 30 inches in diameter and weighed close to 100 pounds. Choosing to commercialize the LIDAR scanner instead of competing in subsequent challenge events, Velodyne was able to dramatically reduce the sensor’s size and weight while also improving performance. Velodyne’s HDL-64E LIDAR sensor was the primary means of terrain map construction and obstacle detection for all the top DARPA Urban Challenge teams in 2007 and used by five out of six of the finishing teams, including the winning and second-place teams. Some teams relied exclusively on the LIDAR for the information about the environment used to navigate an autonomous vehicle through a simulated urban environment. – Wikipedia|||

At Voyage we recently shared the news of Homer, our first self-driving taxi. Homer is outfitted with a whole range of sensors to aid in understanding and navigating the world, key to which is LIDAR…