I’ve been thinking a lot about what I called “Getting Better at Getting Better” in my book. It’s the idea of accelerating machine intelligence, where computers aren’t just getting better at solving problems, but the pace at which they get better increases drastically. I think this comes in two forms:

I’m also reading a book called What to Think About Machines That Think, which is a collection of short thoughts by dozens of experts in various fields on whether computers will soon be able to think like—or better than—humans.

This spawned a few ideas of my own on the topic, but not being an expert in the area I was at first reluctant to capture them. But then I remembered that it’s ok to have raw thoughts as long as you have an appropriate respect for your limitations. So here are my current ideas on the topic of Thinking Machines.

So when we talk about the mystery of human intelligence, or thinking machines (which usually means something that reminds us of ourselves), we’re really talking about three things:

The key is realizing how distinct these three things are, and that our “humanness” seems to emanate from the combination of these things, not from one of them in particular.

So, human intelligence is just a matter of sufficient complexity, which we’re quickly approaching and will soon exceed. Consciousness is separate from intelligence, and will turn out to be a rather unremarkable hack caused by different parts of the brain working independently from each other. And the most difficult component of this entire “replicate humans” equation—instead of super-intelligence or consciousness—will actually end up being the creation of human-like (and human-aligned) goals.

OSS: Intelligence is easy, consciousness is a red-herring, and the hard problem is actually goal creation.

This is my current, non-expert prediction for how the “Thinking Machines” story will play out in coming years and decades.|||

I've been thinking a lot about what I called "Getting Better at Getting Better" in my book. It's the idea of accelerating machine intelligence, where compu