What: Blockstack is proud to announce a new developer program, "Decentralized Summer", running from June 1st - August 31st. The focus is on building decentralized applications that use identity, storage, and payments on the decentralized internet powered by Blockstack.

During this time you will build one of the first ten apps, like a decentralized twitter, uber, or voting system, that will be featured to over 70,000 decentralized app users.

The Blockstack core team will work with you step-by-step via slack and weekly check-ins.

As a participant you will receive $6,000/month for 2 months (choose the 2 months that work for you within the alotted 3) to work on the decentralized application you desire. Participants would be expected to focus on building their app to completion but also likely be expected to contribute somewhat to the OSS in order to do so.

Where: You can work from anywhere in the world, unless you want to work alongside the core team HQ’d in New York City!

Who: We will accept the top 3 submissions into the summer program. Winners will be announced as they are selected after May 22.

Send an email to rfs+summer@blockstack.org with:

You can submit as many ideas as you'd like (one email per submission please)! We’d love to hear from you!

Accepted Applicant Announcement: We plan to announce winners on or after Monday May 22, 2017 on twitter at @BlockstackOrg.

Blockstack is a full stack for building decentralized apps where users control their data and apps run without remote servers. Building on Blockstack starts with single-page applications built in Javascript that are downloaded onto user devices. Developers plug into blockstack.js, which provides API’s for authenticating the user, grabbing application data from the user, and storing new application data with the user (encrypted and backed up to cloud storage). The blockchain is utilized to maintain a cross-application identity system, securely mapping user IDs to usernames, public keys, and data storage URIs. Developers don’t have to worry about running servers, maintaining databases, or building out user management systems, and decentralized, serverless applications can be built more simply than their traditional counterparts.

To get started, follow along with the step-by-step Hello Blockstack tutorial blockstack.org/tutorials/hello-blockstack and check out the product roadmap blockstack.org/roadmap.|||

Eventbrite - Blockstack Org presents Blockstack's Decentralized Summer -  - Find event and ticket information.