It has now been just over a month since I started working on my new project, nanna. As we move forward, I am going to take a page out of Courtland Allen’s playbook (at Indie Hackers) and try to write up a monthly progress update on lessons learned, challenges and changes at nanna. There aren’t (m)any transparent, honest, first-hand accounts of building a startup in Switzerland — hopefully these monthly updates will be of some use to new founders (even if they serve only as a ‘what not to do’ guide).

At my last startup, Gymhopper, I noticed a massive gap in the photo/video content generation market. Over the last 10 years, the kind and amount of photos a marketing team needs has completely changed — whereas we used to need just a few, very-high quality images for adverts and print media, today we need 10x as many photos and videos for social media, newsletters, web-content and more. The requirements have shifted from pixel-perfect to good-quality, authentic and channel-suitable.

Yet the professional photography market hasn’t adapted to this change at all. Even today, if you don’t have an in-house photographer, you’re left with the choice of generic stock-photos (which are ignored), poorly taken iphone-photos or (in Switzerland) a professional photographer who charges upwards of $1000/shoot and delivers your photos a week later.

Nanna is my solution to this problem. We make getting great marketing photos 10x easier and 10x cheaper. On our website you can book the perfect photographer for your business needs in just 30 seconds. There are no hourly/hidden costs — simply pay CHF20.- per professionally-edited photo you order (after the shoot).

We can deliver the final results within 30mins of the shoot/event finishing. Currently, we have over 50 partner photographers based in Zurich, and are trusted by companies such as AXA and Sharoo to provide great visual content.

It’s common knowledge that no new product survives contact with first customers. Getting first customers for my first startup, Gymhopper, three years ago was a very difficult and time consuming process, so I was expecting the same with nanna. Luckily, we seem to have hit on a more urgent problem than we were trying to solve at Gymhopper, and the initial sales process has been more of a market-pull than a hard push. Here are some key points:

It’s important to look back and reflect honestly on what went well and where there is room for improvement. Often, the most important and difficult task to tackle next is the one I keep putting off.

Here’s what we learnt from our first 30 days and will be putting into production in the near future:

Want to know more about a particular topic or have some questions/feedback? I’d love to hear from you at 

nanna [ at-symbol] discovered [dot] ch|||

It has now been just over a month since I started working on my new project, nanna. As we move forward, I am going to take a page out of Courtland Allen’s playbook (at Indie Hackers) and try to write…