Sticky Sidebar is jQuery plugin for making intelligent and high performance sticky sidebar, works with sidebar if it’s bigger or smaller than viewport, has resize sensor to re-calculate its dimensions automatically when size of sidebar or its container is changed, supports multiply sidebars in once and compatible with Firefox, Chrome, Safari, and IE9+. Source can be found on Github.

Just call on the elements that you want to be sticky when scrolling up/down inside their parent.

Sticky sidebar smart enough to handle sidebar when it’s taller than viewport. You don’t have to worry about content, it will scroll sidebar independently up and down.

Can handle multiply sidebars, by calling on all elements at once.

Or if you want to give each sidebar different options, by calling.

You can install sticky sidebar jquery plugin from Bower, NPM or just simply download it from Github than put file in your project folder.

If you are using bower as package manager:

If you are using NPM as package manager:

Your website’s html structure has to be similer to this in order to work:

Note that inner sidebar wrapper is optional but highly recommended, if you don’t write it yourself, the script will create one for you. but this may cause many problems.

For the above example, you can use the following JavaScript:

Make sure to include script file after .

To easily configure sticky sidebar to any element on the document using attributes, just add attribute with no value to element that you want to make it sticky. You can also configure its options, for example option add it as attribute on element like that

Either by configure container of sticky element by adding attribute to container of sticky element. Below code will give you overview.

Next you are going to need some CSS just to improve performance and prevent repainting on scrolling. Sticky sidebar plugin doesn’t add below style as inline style so you need to add it manually in main stylesheet.

Sticky sidebar plugins cames with options to configure how it works. All options below is optional.

Additional top spacing of the element when it becomes sticky. .

Additional bottom spacing of the element when it becomes sticky. .

Container sidebar selector to know what the beginning and end of sticky element. Defaults to the closest parent of the sticky element. Highly recommend to define container selector.

Inner wrapper class of sticky sidebar, if the plugin is not found this wrapper inside sidebar element will create one. Highly recommended to write inner wrapper of sidebar yourself than add its class name to this option. .

Sticky sidebar has resize sensor feature when size of sidebar or its container element is changed the plugin will re-calculate all dimensions. This option allow you to enable or disable resize sensor feature. .

The name of CSS class to sidebar element when it has become stuck. .

The sidebar returns to its normal position if minimum width of window below this value. .

Sticky sidebar jQuery plugin has various of events are trigger when changing affix state.

— The event fires immediately before the sticky sidebar plugin has been initialized.

— The event fires immediately after sticky sidebar plugin has been initialized.

— The event fires immdiately before the element has been affixed top of viewport.

— The event fires immdiately after the element has been affixed top of viewport.

— The event fires immdiately before the element has been affixed bottom of viewport.

— The event fires immdiately after the element has been affixed bottom of viewport.

— The event fires immdiately before the element has been affixed bottom of container.

— The event fires immdiately after the element has been affixed bottom of container.

— This event fires immdiately before the element is no longer bottomed out.

— This event fires immdiately after the element is no longer bottomed out.

— The event fires immdiately before the element has been returned to its position.

— The event fires immdiately after the element has been returned to its position.

— Trigger this event will cause force to re-calculate all cached dimentions of sticky sidebar plugin.

For example if you want to detect when element sticks top and bottom we might do:

- Force re-calculate all cached dimensions of sidebar, container and viewport. The same function of trigger event read about events above.

Sticky sidebar plugin takes scrolling preformance very seriously, It’s built from the ground up to let you have sticky elements without incurring scroll lag or jank.

The biggest cause of scrolling jank is has a lot of work. But in this plugin we cached all dimensions and all animate functions inside function, as well as adding and working with instead of increases performance significantly, We built Sticky sidebar plugin prevents repainting and reflow to make it smooth as much as possible.

Sometimes sticky sidebar plugin conflict with other plugins. In this case, namespace collisions can occasionally occur. if this happens, you may call on the plugin to revert the value of .|||

