Today I logged into our AppFigures account for the first time in nearly 6 months. Running Buildbox has taken up most of my time this year, and I was shocked to see we crossed a major milestone without knowing it. As of last week, we have received more than 55 Million downloads of our games on iPhone, iPad and Android devices.

We’ve released a multitude of games on mobile devices like Jump Pack, Monster Magic, Maze+, The Pit, Phases, The Line Zen, Endless Sky and more. On our journey we’ve made many smart moves and even more mistakes. In this article, I’m going to detail the most important ones from both sides of the fence. This is for the entrepreneurs, app creators and indie game lovers that are wanting to create businesses. These are the things I wish I knew before I started.

I’m starting with this one, because it’s the most important for beginners. Your first app or game is most likely going to bomb. You probably won’t think it will, but this has happened to every single app entrepreneur I know, including myself. Actually, I was just talking with David Reichelt today who created Color Switch. Before Color Switch, he completed 40 games that bombed. 40 games. Then of course Color Switch went on to be the most downloaded game of 2016.

Very rarely do you nail it right the first time. What you need to crush it is real world experience. You’ll need the bitter taste of failure to show you why it didn’t do well. Was it too hard? Too simple? Bad user interface? Too complex to use? Your biggest teacher is your last mistake, and you will learn more from that first experience than anything you could possibly consume online. Once you have conditioned yourself to not fear failure, things get a lot easier.

A common mistake with app creators is cluttering the design. This is extremely typical with new developers. They want to fit everything into their product, so they attempt to do so thinking they are improving the experience. You’ve heard it many times, and it’s very true. Less is definitely more.

A great example of simplicity is The Line Zen. This is a game I created that was published by Ketchapp. The Line Zen was the number one game in multiple countries including the United States, and as you can see below, it is very simple.

It was a sequel to an already minimal game, and after many iterations I decided to keep only 4 colors: red, blue, beige and green. Instead of focusing on a complex design, I put forth more effort into the gameplay and music in the game. Those elements became the star of the show. In the beginning, our games were much more complex. As we will discuss, this narrowed the demographics for the game and also complicated much of the process for users.

Any element of your app experience can be simplified, and you will typically see an increased amount of usage if you do it correctly. The User Interface is the worst offender for complicating design. Only display the most essential information on the screen of any app or game when it’s needed. If you are creating games, then don’t forget to simplify your gameplay. Make it easy to learn and very accesible on mobile. The recently announced Super Mario Brothers Run game coming to iOS is fully focused on one-touch controls. They obviously have a lot going on graphic-wise, but chose to simplify the gameplay.

This is an important one that took us a while to truly understand, and is a great reason why so many technology companies are simplifying every aspect of their app and game design.

If your game makes it to the top of the app store, then it will be sitting in front of a truly mass audience. Every possible demographic range will see the app, and if your app is not wide enough, it will fall very fast. With our game, The Pit, we engineered it from the beginning to be completely open demographically.

First, we tried to use english words as sparingly as possible inside the game. We knew our international audience would appreciate animations that explain gameplay and icons instead of text. We also tried to create characters, backgrounds and objects that would resonate with all age groups and genders. The plan worked and the game broke the Top 25 of the app store.

This is an important one. In 2011, we released a game called Jump Pack. This game was the second freemium game to be released on the app store that was not a social game. We saw that social games had proven the concept worked, and we acted fast and put a full freemium economy in our game before release. We identified this freemium trend early and took advantage of it. This allowed us to purchase traffic and actually have a positive ROI, unlike all of our competitors, and we used this to push the game into the Top 25.

We took advantage of another trend early on with another game called Maze+. Apple had just released an option to use their Game Center service to create live multiplayer. This allowed two people to play a game at the same time anywhere in the world. This might be common now, but in 2011 when we released Maze+, we were one of the very first ones to do it. The game was featured by Apple and broke the Top 10 of the app store virally because so many people were sharing the game with friends to try multiplayer.

These examples would not work now, but worked flawlessly when we identified the trend early. Timing is extremely important with trends as their shelf life can be limited. What would work right now? Well, exactly what we are doing: We create a game that we think will have mass appeal and be fun for a wide audience, and then we partner with a publisher who can push the game to the top of the charts. There are lots of great publishers out there for the mobile game world, some we recommend are Ketchapp, Nanovation, Appsolute Games and Umbrella Games. We pick a publisher, we analyze their roster, and try to create a game specifically for them that we think they will like.

Unlike the other examples, this is one we believe will be working for years to come, but it will work even better if you can fuse it with new trends that are on the rise.

After making Maze+ and seeing success, we decided to do something very stupid. Instead of making a sequel to any of our popular games — or expanding on what had made those work — we decided to try and make a true platformer style game that was not popular at all on mobile devices. And, to top it off, we decided to do the opposite of keeping it simple. We also screwed up the #1 item on this list, launching new things fast. Instead, we took almost one year and created countless variations of the game. We broke every rule, and even though the game was beautiful, it never felt right.

I let this game drag on for way to long before finally killing it. We spent thousands of dollars on development we won’t get back, but that doesn’t bother me as much as the time wasted. We could have easily finished two successful projects in the time we worked on this one.

Why did I spend so much time on it? Because it is a beautiful game. I look at it now and still want to finish it, but the truth is, nothing flowed with this game after the first two weeks. I should have folded sooner.

In the Milo example above, why did I focus so much energy on a game that wasn’t shaping up well? Because I was emotionally involved. When humans become emotionally attached, rationale quickly goes out of the window. While emotions are a strong force, they are not usually a negative force. Contrary, they are usually very positive. If Milo’s development would have been cohesive, it would have been unstoppable. You can use this same unstoppable force in your business.

Creating a positive emotion through an experience in your app or game will most definitely increase retention. This emotion does not have to be visual, it can be because you are sharing experiences like Snapchat, connecting with friends like WhatsApp or simply hearing beautiful music that causes an emotion.

Using music to bring out emotion has worked really well for us. Both my game, The Line Zen, and our CTO’s game, Endless Sky, focused on ethereal music to make the game feel more meaningful.

Be warned though, while music can definitely add a specific feeling to your game, it can also detract. People are very peculiar about their music. Just because you might like dubstep, doesn’t mean the general population at the top of the app store will. For example, I have noticed a trend where most of the top games in the app store have no music at all. That is a very interesting data point, and like all data points, there must be a reason behind it.

I just mentioned a strange trend I have been noticing: most of the top free games in the app store do not have background music. This is not information I am relaying, but information I noticed while doing my own research.

Every successful entrepreneur I know is in a constant research phase within their industry. It’s an imperative skill to have and can wildly set you apart from the competition. Why? Because this is how you build a competitive advantage. No, taking out music won’t make or break your game, but when you combine multiple tips you’ve found from research, it can make a huge difference.

Let me give you an example besides music. Do you know which App Category is the most competitive? That’s an important question to ask. To get top chart placement, you first have to get sub-chart placement. If you are in an extremely competitive subcategory, it’s going to be tougher to rank in that subcategory and get viewership.

Do you know which day of the week has the most releases? What about which day of the week has the least amount of releases? What day do you think gets the most downloads? If you found a pattern there, such as Sunday has the second most downloads of the week, but the least amount of apps released, do you think that could help give you a push? Sure it could, and that is why doing research is so important.

Now a legitimate question might be, “How do I do research? That is a broad statement to make”. I totally agree, so let’s get to specifics. To do the research, you first need to know the variables. What variables are there in play for the app store? There are many, but I can list a few here for you now: App name, company name, app keywords, category, subcategory, launch day, launch month, icon and description. This is off the top of my head, but if you really dig deep you can find many more variations like trending search, social media traffic, etc.

After you have these data points, you need to start asking questions. Don’t know what to ask? Start with a simple formula: What is the best + X + why?

You can literally plug any of those data points into this equation and get a great question:

Now it’s time to find answers to these questions. To do this, you spy on the competition. I could write another full article on this, but a good place to start is to find someone you think is answering your question well. Now research them heavily. Learn everything you can find about their business. Take screenshots of their app flow, find out their keywords, find out if they have a publisher, look at their previous apps and do the research.

If you keep this up, you can have a mountain of information to build your business on that others do not. That can be an amazing competitive advantage.

These last three tips are not exclusive to an app or game business, they are general business tips that we’ve always come back to in my company. They have been extremely important to us and are deeply ingrained into our company culture. They are simple, yet crucial rules for any successful long term business.

The first one, is to always move forward. Your job, as a manager, as a business owner and as an entrepreneur, is to make a decision and move things forward. Now listen, because here is the weird part. It doesn’t even have to be the right decision. At least not immediately. And yes, I’m specifically saying that making a lot of bad decisions is much better than making no decisions at all.

Why? Because each of those bad decisions moves you forward. You collect new data points. You learn new things about the process. You educate yourself about a new problem. You learn from it.

Let’s say you received two designs for an app and you aren’t sure which one to go with. Don’t put it off, make a plan and move forward. Either make the call yourself, or construct a plan that will get you results. Maybe that plan is running traffic from Facebook to a blind test or asking your mother-in-law. It doesn’t matter, but make a plan and put it to work. Regardless of your decision, you will have new data points in your arsenal. After launching you will be able to read reviews from your users, analyze the design and learn from the experience.

Let’s say you hired an employee that deep down you know is not working out. Fire them. It’s not easy, everyone hates doing it, and he or she will hate being on the receiving end even more… but it has to be done. There is absolutely no way delaying the process will improve it. You will learn from this as well. You’ll have new data points for the next time you hire. Move fast. Not reckless, but fast.

This won’t kill your business short term, but it most definitely will kill it long term. I’ve seen this happen to many business friends over the years.

Business in the tech realm is changing extremely fast. Faster than I have ever seen. Even the way people interact with each other is changing on a yearly basis. What is working today might not work tomorrow. You have to evolve with your industry or your business could quickly be left in the dust.

A current example is Snapchat. I’ve seen many people over 30 putting down the service or joking they “have no idea what those kids are doing”. Listen, if you find yourself not getting why the most popular app in the app store is popular, you are getting left behind. This doesn’t mean you have to post on Snapchat every day, but you should understand why it’s popular. You need to know why it’s so addicting and why a complete generation of kids are leaving Facebook in droves to use it. When a shift that large happens in an industry you are involved in, it is extremely important for your business that you understand why.

One of the biggest shifts in the mobile industry was premium to freemium. If you look at the Top 100 grossing right now, 99% of the apps are now freemium. Love it or hate it, there is no question that this monetization style is the most effective. When this transition took place back in 2012, many companies were completely left in the dust. Another big transition was when social games evolved into real multiplayer experiences. Multiple companies that were making top social games did not evolve and disappeared from the map.

You should already be identifying trends, so now you look for the shift. If you feel an industry changing, then start testing out the shift early, before everyone else. Move early, and while others are scrambling, your company will already be adjusted.

Finally, you absolutely have to keep the excitement up with not only your company, but the industry as a whole. It’s the only way to truly make great experiences, do the right research, move forward and evolve. If you start getting bored of your own business, then you need to either exit, pivot or hire someone who is excited to run it.

A great way to stay excited is deeply involve yourself with the industry. Download apps every single week. Find out what Apple and Android are featuring, and most importantly, be extremely curious. The curiosity of it all is probably the most fun part. Try to figure out why some things work and others do not. Analyze the top apps and figure out why they are the top apps. Surround yourself with people who have the same interest. Meet people online, go to conferences, have fun and try to create more things. Stay excited.|||

Today I logged into our AppFigures account for the first time in nearly 6 months. Running Buildbox has taken up most of my time this year, and I was shocked to see we crossed a major milestone…