The EU €1-Billion-Flagship Human Brain Project (HBP) has passed its midterm evaluation with flying colours. Noone knows exactly what the objectives of this bombastic project is, as members of the evaluation panel indicated to me, while others refused to answer this question. The HBP leadership sure keeps the exact definition of these objectives secret, or maybe they don’t know them themselves. Which is easy to understand, because given the leniency HBP keeps receiving from those supposed to evaluate it, its real objective becomes perfectly clear: to secure the public funding. There, HBP succeeded indeed, the €1 Billion seems rather safe. It is none of the public’s business where the money will go, but it can rest assured it will certainly go somewhere. The public should also not expect any deliverables or return on its research investment, this the HBP leadership already made perfectly clear. I am showing below what a farce the recent HBP evaluations were, while the positive outcome was much hailed as evidence for excellent scientific performance.

The HBP Flagship will go down in history by demonstrating the EU’s capability to give a mind-boggling amount of money to a bunch of engineers and computational neuroscientists without any plan or even pretence of a concept (see my earlier report here). The idea of simulating the brain and its diseases in a supercomputer is dropped under the table whenever any serious experts start asking questions, and is brought forth again when politicians, funders or consortium members themselves are to be duped.

To make it all even more confusing, the original Brain Simulation objective became just one of 12 sub-platforms, probably because the task of making a “brain-in-a-box” was deemed as too trivial, so HBP sought another 11 challenges. What exactly any one of these branches has achieved scientifically so far, is none of our business. The official goal of HBP, as described in the much trumpeted paper by Amunts et al 2016, published not somewhere, but “in the prestigious journal Neuron” of Cell Press (impressed, aren’t you? When did you last publish in Neuron? See?)  is:

This infrastructure will apparently primarily focus on securing its EU funding, while pursuing a rather generally described goal: “ to decode the human brain”.  What does this “decode” mean? Don’t ask.

That a brain is not a giant supercomputer, and that as a biological system inseparably integrated into a living organism it operates utterly differently from our digital computers, is seen inside the HBP cult as a deranged heresy of incompetent looneys who rightfully shall never get any proper funding. Regardless of HBP position, brains do not compute in a way we understand computing, just as hearts and livers do not compute. No human computer ever simulated the neural system of a snail, and it most likely never will, but so what? Who cares about stupid snails? To HBP, even a mouse brain is just a small supercomputer (named Blue Brain, allegedly as good as up and running in its virtual cage in the Swiss federal university EPFL, the digital pet’s owner is the dethroned HBP emperor Henry Markram). You only need to simulate a small bunch of neurons in a computer (or pretend that you did), upscale it million-fold, and there you have a functioning in silico brain of a rodent. Upscale it even higher, using bigger supercomputers, and it will suddenly develop consciousness of a human (though mice and other animals have their kinds of consciousness as well, but HBP simply decreed they don’t).

In this HBP cult thinking, a monkey’s brain is a slightly bigger supercomputer than that of a rodent (no consciousness there, obviously), and the mighty human brain is the biggest one there is and costs exactly €1 Billion to build (or, in newspeak, to “decode”). Or maybe more, and it will be all politicians’ fault if HBP never delivers, because they failed to cough up another half a billion or so when they will be asked for it in around 2020.

Just like the HBP cult members, the gullible EU politicians seem to follow the notion that in order to “decode” and simulate a human brain, you only need to give enough money to some very self-important scientists and voila, pardon Viola:

I once attempted to corner one of the heads of HBP, Wolfgang Marquardt, at a journalist conference in Bremen and get him to divulge to me in public what the objectives of HBP are. Officially, Marquart is thought to have nothing to do with HBP, aside of being the mediator of the past Markram-mutiny. In fact, even the current Flagship evaluation report refers to his mediation as “independent”. Except that he is representing Germany in HBP’s stakeholder board and the Forschungszentrum Jülich which he heads is now in control of HBP’s scientific orientation (see my past report). The following Twitter thread is the pathetic outcome of my Marquardt questioning. The objectives of HBP are none of public’s business. And yes, he doesn’t promise to deliver anything at all but will need more money.

Now that you understood that HBP is more similar to a cult of research funding worshippers than to an actual research project, you will also understand that it cannot be assessed scientifically. No matter what HBP does or does not do, it will always be evaluated positively, because its success was already predetermined by the EU when they chose Marquardt’s biased mediation over honest admittance of error, dissolution of HBP and redistribution of its funding. All EU evaluations of HBP and the Flagship concept in general are now nothing but smokescreens you are allowed to peek at through a keyhole. The last one was certainly exactly that.

As Maria Chiara Carrozza, Chair of the Flagship evaluation commission and rector at Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna (SSSA) in Pisa, Italy, told me:

That earlier scientific evaluation report of HBP, which was performed in June-July 2016 by a panel of unnamed “18 independent experts”, is secret (unlike the previous one, for 2013-2015, which is public). The EU only published in September 2016 a very confusing summary which reads like someone desperately tried to turn failures and lack of progress into something positive, and didn’t make a good job there either. This is what according to that highlights summary the HBP’s brain simulation platform achieved, namely exactly nothing at all but some obscure theory:

Apparently also Carrozza did not know what the objectives of HBP are, since she replied to me in this regard:

Why didn’t she ask him that at her evaluation meetings? Was it irrelevant?

Anyway, this is the official report of the Carrozza commission, published in February 2017 (I made my own backup copies, just in case). It evaluated both HBP and its sibling Graphene, which apparently ran into trouble of its own by failing to raise enough industrial interest, against all expectations:

In regard to HBP, the Flagship evaluation panel found (highlight mine):

In plain speak, HBP sucks excellence-wise, certainly at its current stage, even the evaluation panel could not hide this well enough. The only section of HBP worth anything is apparently its Neuromorphic Computing platform:

It is yet another question what brain simulation has to do with neuromorphic computer chip technology. The real challenge with the latter is to try and translate the basic function principles of a simple biological neuronal networks to a computer chip, to escape the technical limitations and noise susceptibility of the digital 1/0 computation. Because this is complicated enough, with feasibility unclear, the focus was moved to a more prestigious model to emulate: the mammalian brain. Sure, why not. If one fails here, it won’t be for the lack of ambition.

Regardless of all this, the Panel advised (highlights mine):

Mark Humphries, research fellow at the Division of Neuroscience & Experimental Psychology of University of Manchester, commented to me after reading the Panel report:

In fact, it was indeed. HBP was asked at a meeting on February 1st 2016 to submit a self-assessment report (meeting minutes here). The HBP coordinator Philippe Gillet (as well as his Graphene colleague Jari Kinaret) were asked to

Guess what? HBP could not be bothered, they delivered no such thing, as evidenced by the meeting minutes from July 8th :

Nobody in the Flagship evaluation commission ever asked for this self-assessment ever again, this I was told by an inside source. Did Gillet and his HBP colleagues already know they will be positively evaluated no matter what? It certainly seems so.

Now remember when the scientific evaluation of HBP was performed: June-July 2016. Which means, its results were not available to the Carrozza Commission at their July 8th conference. The next meeting of her Panel was on December 9th 2016, and according to the meeting minutes, the report was basically finalised by then:

Thus, the Carrozza Panel certainly never discussed or likely never even read the scientific evaluation report of HBP, but in their own final report they claimed something else:

There is nothing at all in the minutes of the three Panel meetings from February, July or December to indicate that any scientific review experts were invited to give their insights. Given the overlapping time frames, their reports could never have served as basis for the Flagship interim evaluation. We all have been duped here.

Who were these people doing the EU Flagship evaluation? In the February 2017 report, they are named, and for the first time we know the names of the reviewers. Maybe this is because the committee’s composition was made public elsewhere long ago, e.g. here (the Flagship offices nevertheless refused to confirm to me the exact identities and affiliations of the Panel members).

The Panel Chair was Maria Chiara Carrozza, who is professor at The BioRobotics Institute in Pisa, Italy. By a freak coincident her colleague and co-author on several papers Cecilia Laschi is member of HBP in its SP10 Neurorobotics Platform. By another freak coincident, exactly this Neurorobotics Platform was explicitly criticised in the scientific evaluation report as seriously under-performing:

Well, now thanks to Carrozza we know that all HBP platforms work and deliver sufficiently good. Carrozza herself explained to me:

Other Panel members were: Michal Kleiber, Head of the Computational Science Department at the Polish Academy of Sciences; Matthias Kleiner, President of the Leibniz Association (a German research society which comprises a large network of research institutes); Charlotte Brogren, Director General of the Swedish Governmental Agency for Innovation Systems, VINNOVA (Update 28.02.2017: see Brogren’s insights into HBP evaluation below); and Ruth McKernan, General Director of the United Kingdom Government Executive Agency for innovation (Innovate UK). Both Brogren and McKernan came to their current jobs from the positions of senior industry executives, the former with the robotics division of the electrical company ABB and the latter with the pharma giants Pfizer and Merck.

They were joined by the science enthusiast and book author Paul T Kidd (who describes himself as “Scriptovisualist”) as Rapporteur. Kidd was employed by the EU solely to write the Panel’s report, while following the discussions of the Panel members and bringing their profound thoughts on HBP and Graphene to paper. Thus, he was not part of the evaluation committee, but employed for his professional protocol writing service which he performed already several times for the EU.

The most embarrassing bit of smokescreening is about the so-called “Senior Advisors”. You might expect some well-respected international academic scientists to be listed here, whose expert advice the panel members sought when evaluating the Flagships. Nothing is further from the truth. The Panel members simply brought their personal assistants with them, to interview the Flagship executives, to keep track of the paperwork and schedule and probably also in charge of fetching coffee and biscuits. In fact, in the meeting minutes those “Senior Advisors” were merely referred to as “panel research assistants”.

Carrozza brought in tow Calogero M Oddo, her student protégée and now assistant professor under her at The BioRobotics Institute. The Leibniz director Kleiner arrived with his head secretary, Caroline Lodemann. The funding chief executives Brogren and McKernan were assisted by their agencies’ respective EU-liaison officers, namely  Johan Lindberg and Sivasegaram Manimaaran. Only Kleiber did not bring anyone to assist him. I asked him why, but he did not reply. Was the Polish professor forced to get his own coffee then?

The HBP meanwhile are celebrating their tremendous success in being positively evaluated, just when the report appeared they organised a workshop in the Spanish beach city of Malaga:

In fact, workshopping is where HBP really succeeded. For their “ramp-up” phase 2013-2016 they promised to EU fifty workshops, and performed already 73, even though they recruited less potential participants (PhD students and postdocs) than the rather modest number scheduled. The EU was apparently warned not to expect any patents at all on this €1 Billion investment, so as a pleasant surprise, HBP patented something already (one patent exactly). Another reassuring advance: instead of just 4 (yes, just four!) scheduled academic or industry collaborations, HBP already established 124! Whoo-hoo! The trick is to set your official goals really low, everything becomes a success then.

There were unfortunately less “mentions in public media” than projected, and HBP for some reason did not bother to categorize those into positive and negative. I wonder if my own article was included there.

Meanwhile, the EU already announced the next €1 billion Flagship project: The Quantum Technology Flagship. The announcement came in May 2016, long before this Flagship evaluation was performed, which now recommended to start new Flagships. It seems in the EU all research funding decisions are first made, and then justified and evaluated retrospectively.|||

The EU €1-Billion-Flagship Human Brain Project (HBP) has passed its midterm evaluation with flying colours. Noone knows exactly what the objectives of this bombastic project is, as members of the evaluation panel indicated to me, while others refused to answer this question. The HBP leadership sure keeps the exact definition of these objectives secret, or…