The main purpose of dating is all about having fun and finding someone who you feel comfortable with. No group defines this fun dating scene better than chubby chasers, men looking for chubby women for love, romance and relationship. Here are some online dating tips help you how to flirt with a chubby woman online, and how to find that great date that you are looking for.

1. Prove that you like yourself rather than that you love yourself. There is a fine line to walk online between coming off too poor or too confident. If you come across a lot of issues in your life, this will be a turn off and like-wise if you come off too confident this will be a big turn off. So you need to prove that you are comfortable with yourself and having fun with yourself, it will lower chubby women’s defenses and you are able to be in.

2. Be a bit of a tease. Chubby women find a little playful teasing a sign of comfort and acceptance. Never tease about physical features, instead stay more general. For example, if she is a Mets fan and you are a Yankees fan you can tease her about her team.

3. Pay attention to detail. This is KEY! The best flirting technique is to show your chubby women that you are interested in her as a person. Comment on something specific from her profile or her messages to you. For example, did she mention that she goes to school, has a dog or loves to vacation at the beach? Use this information when you respond to her. For example, "You mentioned you love the beach, one of my favorite childhood memories was when we went to the beach, and..." This is like gold for a chubby woman.

4. Be fun. The number one quality that catches the attention of a chubby woman online is a sense of humor. Be yourself and show your fun and playful side, and you will guarantee yourself a successful online chubby dating experience.

In fact, dating is not as difficult as you imagine for chubby chasers. If you are a man happen to be a chubby chaser and looking for chubby women, those online chubby dating tips will help you a lot.|||

Here are some online chubby chasers dating tips help you how to flirt with a chubby woman online, and how to find that great date that you are looking for.