Magic Leap might finally be closer to its long-awaited launch — so it needs more developers to help prep the software that will run on the mysterious augmented reality platform.

The much-hyped company has been largely under wraps since its founding in 2011, minus some seriously impressive demo videos and massive rounds of funding from giants like Google and Alibaba.

But unless you're Beyoncé (you're not), few in the public have seen any evidence that the platform actually exists other than a disappointing leaked photo, causing many to dismiss the once-exciting company as just another piece of vaporware destroyed by the hypetrain.

But Magic Leap might finally be gearing up for release, if new movement to attract talent is any indication. The company's founder and CEO, Rony Abovitz, tweeted out a call to arms to creators to sign up to work on new content for the platform.

The developers page asks visitors to imagine just what they might be able to do with the Magic Leap's powerful AR platform and potentially becoming "one of the first to help transform the world forever."

Then, again, the company maintained its secrecy:

"For the time being, we're being a little tight-lipped in what we're communicating publicly, but under the appropriate non-disclosures, we'd love to talk possibilities."

The sign-up form consists of some standard questions about personal information and previous work experience, along with some extra fields concerned with higher level technical info.

If developers are actually about to get their hands on a new Magic Leap software developers kit (SDK), that could mean that the platform could be given to them to test out their creations. While that might not mean its any further than a prototype or beta version, it could mean Magic Leap is close to being ready for its big debut.

When asked if the message to developers means Magic Leap is any closer finally being unveiled to the public, a company spokesperson was coy, providing only this statement via email:

We've received a lot of enthusiastic responses from developers and creators who share our vision for the future of computing. We are currently working with a handful of select developer and creator partners, but will be opening up wider access to our platform throughout the year. Registering now helps us better plan for our early access programs, creator events, and production. We look forward to supporting the creation of new worlds, social experiences, and amazing new applications.

This isn't the first time Magic Leap has opened itself up to developers, so this might just be another false alarm. The company first said it would offer invites (again, under NDA conditions) for access to its SDK back in 2015. This time, after false starts, leaks, and promises to not let us down, Magic Leap will hopefully come through with some real progress.|||

Magic Leap CEO Rony Abovitz tweeted out an invite to creators to help develop new software for the company's long-awaited AR platform.