2017 will be an exciting year for DevOps engineers. The astounding rise of containers, microservice architectures, and proliferation of machine intelligence is helping them solve their everyday problems. To this end, Ops & Automation is much simpler now. And with the fast-moving innovation paradigm that has set in over the years, the Ops community has seen the operational tasks evolving from traditional operations to new age DevOps. Primarily to suffice the need for more agility and productivity. But with the rise of machine intelligence, another new trend is treading currently: DevOps to NoOps.

In the words of Botmetric CEO Vijay Rayapati, “NoOps is a logical progression of DevOps with the philosophy: Humans should solve new problems and the Machines should solve known problems!”

Vijay adds, “NoOps is an era of using intelligent automation for your operational tasks so you can eliminate the need for humans to manage operations, save precious engineering time, and solve known problems. As machines can make decisions on known problems and can provide diagnostic information for the new problems to reduce the operational overhead for engineers.”

Here’re the top five DevOps to NoOps adoption trends that every cloud engineer should know:

1. Serverless Programming: This programming and deployment paradigm will significantly eliminate the DevOps requirement for provisioning and configuration management. The cloud world will only see a growth trajectory for NoOps movement as all cloud vendors mature their serverless offerings.

2. Containerization: The containers like Docker will further abstract the dependencies and resource sharing between different components by leveraging cluster management and orchestration solutions like Kubernetes, Mesos, ECS, Nomad, etc. to provide a common view of underlying infrastructure.

3. Microservices Architecture: It will help engineers and companies to decouple the complexity of monolithic systems into small yet manageable components handling specific responsibility. As containerization becomes standard way of deploying components in the cloud, it will see rapid adoption.

4. Intelligent and Unified Operations: Static tooling with (no intelligence) is slowly growing on to the engineers and getting on their nerves To this end, there has been a rise in the use of machine intelligence, and increased adoption of deep learning. Consequently, the industry will see more adoption of dynamic tooling that can ultimately help them in day-to-day operations.

5. Self Healing and Auto Remediation: Earlier, DevOps world was limited to build, deployment and provisioning while the day-to-day operations were handled in a manual or semi-automated fashion. Now it’s about time, engineers embrace NoOps where machines can resolve known, repetitive problems and engineers can solve new problems.

To delve further deep into DevOps to NoOps trends, read the post by Botmetric CEO Vijay Rayapati, where Vijay will throw light on the details of all the five trends shaping the cloud world in 2017 and beyond.

Which other technologies do you think will trend this year in the cloud arena? Do drop in your thoughts in the comment section below or tweet to us at @BotmetricHQ.

Editor’s Note: This exclusive blog post is an adaption of the original article, The 2017 Cloud Trends: DevOps to NoOps, penned by Botmetric CEO Vijay Rayapati.|||

2017 will be an exciting year for DevOps engineers. The astounding rise of containers, microservice architectures, and proliferation of machine intelligence is helping them solve their everyday…