The new release of Aspose.Pdf for .NET 17.4.0 has hit the download section with lots of exciting improvements. In this version, we have specifically focused towards stability of existing features for PDF files creation as well as manipulation.

Aspose.Pdf for .NET is widely being used by many customers and trusted name due to its robustness and reliability on various platforms. Therefore apart from standard desktop versions of Windows, it is equally supported on Server editions of Windows and you can use it in Desktop and Web Enterprise Applications. Keeping same aspects of stability and reliability in mind, with every new release, we are introducing some exciting new features as well as we strive to bring more stability to existing features of API. Therefore in this new release, we have made improvements in PDF to PDF/A conversion feature to cater more customers scenarios and to handle documents with different structure and complexity.

This API is also amazing in Text manipulation, whether its Text Addition, Text extraction, Text Search or Text replacement. However in this release, we have specifically improved the Text extraction feature and many of the customers reported issues related to this feature have been fixed in this release version. Furthermore, the PDF file conversion to other supported file formats is also improved.

Ever since the release of the first MergedAPI version of Aspose.Pdf for .NET 6.0.0 in July-2011, we included the Classes and Enumerations from legacy Aspose.Pdf for .NET under Aspose.Pdf.Generator namespace, the Classes and Enumerations of legacy Aspose.Pdf.Kit for .NET under Aspose.Pdf.Facades namespace and a new Document Object Model for PDF files creation as well as manipulation under Aspose.Pdf namespace. The legacy Aspose.Pdf.Generator only provided the capabilities to create PDF documents from scratch and legacy Aspose.Pdf.Kit for .NET provided the functionality to manipulate existing PDF files. But the new DOM approach of Aspose.Pdf namespace facilitates the creation of PDF files from scratch; as well as manipulation of existing PDF files. So in order to minimize / eliminate the confusion of customers to stumbled upon between legacy Aspose.Pdf.Generator and new Aspose.Pdf namespace, starting next release of Aspose.Pdf for .NET 17.5.0, we are going to discontinue Aspose.Pdf.Generator namespace from our API. Nevertheless, the new DOM approach contains all the features offered by legacy Aspose.Pdf.Generator.

This change may impact some customers who haven’t yet migrated their code from legacy Aspose.Pdf.Generator to new DOM approach, but we are always delighted to help our customers and would love to facilitate them regarding their migration towards new DOM. Also please note that with this change, the size of product binaries will also be reduced.

As well as the enhancements and features discussed above, there are other improvements in API. Please download and try the latest release of Aspose.Pdf for .NET 17.4.0.|||

Get an improved and optimized PDF to PDF/A conversion feature and Text manipulation including text extraction and stable API release for PDF files creation and manipulation.