Last year my dad finally gave in and sold his surgery practice to a hospital. His emotions were mixed — “I’ve been operating the same way for 30 years and I want my cases set up the way I’m used to,” he told me. He’s not alone. Surgeons spend their first decade in medical practice refining their tastes in everything from the gloves they wear to the implants they use. Once they get a feel for the medical inventory they like, they often stick with it for a very long time. Given what’s at stake for patients on the operating table, these are incredibly important decisions. And yet surgeons like my dad still actively worry that they’ll show up for a case at a hospital and find the wrong equipment waiting for them. It’s dangerous for patients, frustating for surgeons, and costs hospitals around $2.9m per operating room per year in delays and waste. The challenge of coordinating surgery resources affects nearly every function in a hospital — to solve it, we created an operating system for surgery called SurgeryOS.

Our mission with SurgeryOS is to make surgery teams safer and more efficient. Our operating system supports software applications for surgery teams in hospitals and ambulatory surgery centers. Where most operating systems coordinate computer hardware and software resources, SurgeryOS also contemplates medical inventory and staff. And instead of relying on generic application development standards, we’ve included performance parameters specific to surgery — we only support applications that improve patient safety and surgery team efficiency. For convenience, surgery teams can access SurgeryOS through their own computers using our secure web and mobile applications.

At the center of SurgeryOS is a particular view of how effective surgery teams operate. Our system is surgeon-centric by design and matches specifications established by our clinical advisory board, which features practicing surgeons from institutions like Cleveland Clinic, Mass General and Mount Sinai. To start, SurgeryOS gives surgeons greater control over medical inventory and staff for their cases. Over time, it becomes the central nervous system for surgery teams and coordinates every case end-to-end, reducing delays and waste by a full order of magnitude. We structured the system to benefit surgery teams across specialties while complementing existing IT systems. By rule, our applications can only increase patient safety and surgery team efficiency.|||

Last year my dad finally gave in and sold his surgery practice to a hospital. His emotions were mixed — “I’ve been operating the same way for 30 years and I want my cases set up the way I’m used to,…