There are a lot of ways to encrypt a file and most popular way is making password protected RAR file. If someone wants to access the RAR file and try to extract the file it requires the password.

You can protect your files easily using this method. In most of the cases, users forgot the password of RAR file. Also, you might have an RAR password protected file you’ve downloaded online. Most of the uploaders encrypt their files with passwords so that only authorized users can access the file.

In case you forgot the password of RAR file you can remove WinRAR password using some methods. There are many RAR password unlocker software and tools available to remove the password from WinRar files. There are many ways to do this thing. You can use online RAR password remover tool or can do it offline yourself with few tools and some tricks.

Also: Is It Possible To Crack WiFi Password?

Unlocking RAR files might have many ways and methods but let’s talk about how RAR files are encrypted and what you can’t do to unlock this kind of files.

We create two RAR files. They are just text documents with “hello” written in them and one of them is password protected RAR archive and other was not password protected.

We drag and drop those files inside the text document to check whether there’s something useful we’ll find in them.

Most of the blogs claim that there are few codes or something you’ll find inside the RAR file and if you open the RAR files with text document and then change some values it will unlock RAR archive.

But wait! Look the image given below:

As we mentioned above inside both text documents we have written “hello” inside them and then compress them to RAR archive. One is protected and other is not protected with the password.

Image above clearly shows that 2nd doc.txt has “hello” written but 1st doc.txt shows some values. Means those values are encrypted.

It broke the claim that most of the blogs do that editing RAR archive through notepad will unlock it. So opening RAR files without password isn’t possible by notepad clearly.

Also, changing the format from .rar to .zip or using any tool will not work. Extractor tool will still require the password.

Whole the data inside the RAR is encrypted. Not only it frames the file with password level but encrypts the whole data. There are a lot of things that needed to concern with RAR file encryption which is not related to your problem.

You’re here to unlock the RAR archive without knowing the password.

Well, there is only two success way to unlock or find the RAR archive password. Both of them works on brute force technique.

Also, there’re many free/paid websites who claims that they’ll unlock your RAR file. So, let’s get started in opening a password protected WinRar archive.

This is an advance thing. Isn’t it? You can create your own RAR password finder/unlocker. All you need is few codes and a notepad editor. But remember that this works only for RAR archive protected with a numeric password.

Follow The Steps Given Below:

In our case, the password is “1”. If your password is very long it will take a lot of time. It depends on your PC/Laptops performance and speed. Faster your PC runs, less time will be taken to find the password. So, Be patience!

In most of the cases, RAR archive is protected with keywords, numeric and special characters. So, to find the password of that archive you need any free/paid RAR password unlocker tool.

There are tons of tools available online. So, you can try any tool/software according to their specifications and features. As all those tools work on brute force technique.

Bruteforce technique is a way to repeat a bunch of passwords from any dictionary or self-generated passwords.

We’re showing you a software (RAR Password Genius) which is paid but you can enjoy its free trial with limited features.

Finally, we hope you’ll get your RAR password and will open your archive. We showed our little study and possible ways to crack a WinRar password.

However, you can use any free tool or any paid tool to crack RAR password. Also, there’re many services online where you can pay them to crack the password of RAR file. But we recommend you to buy a software instead doing that. Maybe you’re spammed or will not get your RAR unlocked.

Also, Read Guide About Increasing Data Transfer Speed Of Pendrive|||

WinRar file is highly secured if protected by a password. There are few ways to unlock RAR file without password. Unlock your RAR file without password