When it comes to travel, customers tend to be very particular about convenience. Whether it is for business or for leisure, travellers demand the extra mile that only the best travel service providers can offer. While smaller agencies can definitely work towards providing their customers a personalized experience that’ll keep the latter coming in for more, it is for the larger organizations to deliver a memorable experience to their clients and that takes some doing, considering the volume involved.

With Gamooga’s highly customizable solutions, travel and accommodation providers can generate new leads and grow their brand with automated and targeted email, SMS text message and push notifications. These brands can further use automated travel marketing to reach out to each individual traveller with highly targeted campaigns based on his/her personal needs and preferences. These, in turn, help build loyalty and the easy-to-use, configure and operate marketing automation technology significantly reduces your daily workload.

To help our readers from the travel industry about how Gamooga’s intuitive solutions can be beneficial to their business both in the long term as well as in the short term, here are a few industry-relevant use cases meant to focus on customer convenience and foster brand loyalty, recall and retention:

Hotels can offer guests the option to check-in on their mobile phones when they land or as they are approaching the property. By geofencing the airport or the hotel parking lot, the hotel or travel app can send a location-based push notification with a mobile deep link to the check-in page or the app can automatically pull up the check-in page. Upon checking in, guests receive their room number and instructions on where to pick up their room keys, such as the Express check-in desk. When checking out, guests can approve the summary of charges for their room via mobile and confirm check-out. Sending guests off with a departing message as they exit the property, such as “Hope you enjoyed your stay, John. Come visit us again soon,” adds a personal finishing touch.

Hoteliers can also segment location-based notifications or offers based on hotel rewards or guest loyalty programs. For example, gold members can receive an offer to book discounted tickets to tonight’s show. Platinum members can be rewarded with a later check-out time or be shown booking specials for future dates.

When a guest arrives at their room, prompt them with a message like “How can we serve you?” They can order room service, book a massage or schedule a spa appointment all from their mobile phones. Geofencing can also help you anticipate your guests’ needs. By setting a geofence to be active only during dinner time, a hotel can send a push notification with today’s specials to guests who are in their rooms.

The beauty of geofencing is that it can extend beyond any resort’s physical location. By setting geofences around popular tourist attractions or key points of interest, a hotel or travel app can offer mobile coupons and track offline attribution. Apps can set the geofences to trigger recommendations based on each individual’s search history.

Whether it’s about scheduling staff, collecting reports from pilots & crew, marketing a special offer on a tour, or book a hotel room, messaging lends itself easily to multiple applications in the travel service sector to allow suppliers and customers alike to control their own bookings and travel arrangements, coordinating staff and improving customer satisfaction levels.

On a case-to-case basis, there are many other applications, uses and possibilities for push notifications that can deliver superlative customer experience and have the customer become your brand patron for life.

For more information on how Gamooga can help your business, don’t hesitate to contact us at any time.|||

When it comes to travel, customers tend to be very particular about convenience. Whether it is for business or for leisure, travellers demand the extra mile that only the best travel service…