This is going to be an honest review of Sam Bakkers JVZoo Academy which is the only product that is officially endorsed by JVZoo itself.

The JVZoo Academy will be getting a ton of publicity because obviously JVZoo endorsed it, and have been literally promoting the heck out of it.

For weeks straight I have seen this product being promoted on the homepage of the JVZoo network.

So why am I qualified to do this review?

Well first off, I bought the JVZoo Academy, and I am going to tell you in this review if I think you should buy it as well.

Secondly, reviews are a big part of this blog and this product is getting mass attention, so i want you to be informed before you make a decision on if you want to buy the JVZoo Academy or not.

So, lets’s get started here.

Let me first start off with the product creator Sam Bakker.

He has made close to $4 million dollars on the JVZoo network both as an affiliate, and product creator.

JVZoo basically approached him since he is one of there top earners to put together a training course that teaches students how he makes so much money with his particular income system.

Since JVZoo has been noticing for quite some time that a small percentage of affiliates make the lions share of the money online.

This leaves a limited pool of qualified affiliate marketers to make money promoting all the great products on the JVZoo network.

Sort of evening the field a bit in JVZoos eyes.

JVZoo seen it as a win, win, for everyone involved.

So Sam Bakker got to work for a whole 6 months and the JVZoo Academy was born.

Out of wedlock I might add:)

Ok, lets dive into the nuts and bolts of the JVZoo Academy.

After all this is what you will be paying for.

lets get down to business.

The Front End product ( core training ) of the JVZoo Academy is the basics for everything else that you will learn within the JVZoo Academy if you bought the upsells.

The videos are pretty short but that is to basically guide you on what you will learning inside the p.d.f. ebooks which have a lot of good information inside.

So, my point is do not let the short two minute videos scare you the videos are basically add-ons.

The P.D.F. ebooks which is the core of the front end course is basically what you are paying for.

I went through the ebook training guides top to bottom they had some really good information inside, especially for the low front end price point.

So, my point is do not let the short two minute videos scare you the videos are basically add-ons the ebooks which is the core of the front end course that you are paying for.

Important: When you first login to the JVZoo Academy members area make sure you click the small start here link at the top left corner to access your training material.

This confused me a bit because I kept hitting the wrong step and wondering where the training was at.

Well, I am not Einstein but I figured it out.

Just hit the start here link and you will have access to the front end training.

Remember, everything revolves around the front end training so make sure you start there.

If you purchase the JVZoo Academy upsells work your way forward.

Another thing that i noticed that added a ton of value to the front end course of the JVZoo Academy are the interviews with some of the top JVZoo super affiliate marketers that are included with your purchase.

These top internet marketers are giving you a lot of insight into there multi-million dollar JVZoo businesses.

Try getting that anywhere for $19.00 bucks.

You will be getting two interviews with the top JVZoo affiliates, as well as 2 interviews with JVZoo top sellers as well.

So 4 interviews in total where you will be getting a look into these internet marketers multi-million dollar yearly internet marketing businesses.

These interviews are really good, I will leave it at that.

I also highly recommend that if you are going to buy the front end training splurge a bit and definitely get the first upsell if not all of them to get the most out of this course.

I look at anything that I do online as an investment.

If i spend a few hundred bucks for example can my investment make me a lot more money than I spend?

That is always the question that I ask myself before i buy anything.

If the answer is yes then I won’t hesitate to buy that product, whatever it may be.

Recently, I picked up Michael Cheneys 7 Figure Franchise because although it was expensive, it was a good investment.

Everything was done for me and I could make $1,000 commissions on the backend.

You get the point:)

I could make a lot more money than you spend, I see it as an investment, and will hit the buy now button.

So, the upsells add a tremendous amount of value to the front end training.

My Point: If you can afford it buy it.

Consider it an investment.

If not stick with the core product at least to get some value from the training.

There are three core parts to the main product the JVZoo Academy.

Upsell 1:  $47.00m/ $197.00 one time fee. The first upsell is a 60 day action plan complete with a daily video to keep your ass on track:) tells you what you should be doing daily to build your online business. This is just like having your personal affiliate marketing coach or mentor without spending a fortune.

Upsell 3: JVZoo coaching that the product creator has never offered before.

*This will really kick your butt into high gear and show you exactly what you should be doing to make money online as a JVZoo affiliate marketer*

How about I add my own affiliate marketing training products for free for anyone who purchases the JVZoo Academy through any link on this blog post you will get my 35 step by step tutorial videos free of charge.

Here is the salespage to give you an idea of what you will be getting: http://helpingusucceed.myproduct.store/salespage/92/

I will also give you access to all my free affiliate marketing training guides and everything on my site as well if you buy at least the first upsell.

You can check that out here as well: http://helpingusucceed.myproduct.store/

You can pick up the JVZoo Academy and all my bonuses by clicking the link directly below.

Keep in mind you will also be getting all the sweet bonuses from the product vendor Sam Bakker as well that you will see on the salespage.

5 stars from me – This perfect rating is based on all the upsells as a whole.

Not perfect, but a very good buy for the low price.

You will get the most out of your investment by investing in the upsells that is where the really good learning material is going to be.

Highly recommended affiliate marketing training complete with coaching, 60 day action plans, and killer software to get you up and running to start making money on the JVZoo affiliate network, or any other affiliate network for that matter.

Pick it up you’ll like what you learn inside, and it’s very affordable even with all the upsells.|||

JVZoo Academy Review. This is going to be an honest review of Sam Bakkers JVZoo Academy which is the only product that is officially endorsed by JVZoo itself...