The riot outside New York City's Astor Opera House was the most violent theatre riot in the city.

The carnage left at least 18 people dead at the scene and at least four later died from their wounds.

And all this bloodshed was immediately catalyzed by a production of Shakespeare's 'Macbeth,' a show about murder and tyranny.

Dueling actors Edwin Forrest, an American, and Englishman William Charles Macready came to embody conflicting ideals of what New York was meant to be.

Was it a city for the wealthy, 'Anglophile' class that wanted to make itself in the image of the English aristocracy, embodied by the traditional acting of Macready?

Or was it a city for the immigrants, many of whom had just fled Ireland due to the potato famine, and the workers, who idolized Forrest's 'natural spirit?'

Such questions would come to a violent head at Macready's May 10, 1849 performance in 'Macbeth.'

On that fateful evening, Macready gave a performance as 'Macbeth,' while Forrest portrayed Roman general Spartacus in 'The Gladiator' nearby at the Broadway Theatre (spelled in British English).

The Astor Opera House was packed predominantly with Macready's aristocratic supporters, who clamored to see who was then considered the best English Shakespearean actor in a sold-out performance.

But supporters of Edwin Forrest had other ideas.

Driven by what they considered to be Macready's slights against Forrest, a smaller contingent of theatergoers hissed at him when he came on stage and yelled: 'Out with him!'

Meanwhile, a crowd of around 20,000 people, who mostly supported Forrest, had gathered outside the Astor Opera House, lining the streets between the Bowery and Broadway.

At one point, a shot was fired and around 60 outsiders stormed the theatre, while inside rumors traveled fast throughout the audience that there was an assault on the theatre.

Military personnel called to the scene included the National Guard and Governor's Guards, who expected minor disturbances but were not expecting the mass riot that followed.

All told, around 600 peacekeeping forces were called to the scene to maintain order.

Direct accounts of the destruction are difficult to come by, but The Albany Evening Journal summed up the chaos of what was immediately known the following day.

It proclaimed: 'The Military called out!—10 or 15 Persons Killed!!

'25 or 30 Wounded, among whom are several Citizens, spectators, and one or two Women!!!

People shouted 'Oh, horrible! horrible!' and 'Where will it all end?' as people as young as 15 were left lying in the streets.

Many of those who died -  estimates are frequently between 22 and 25 and go up to 30 - were innocent bystanders and were shot by militia.

While theater riots were not an infrequent occurrence, as people protested against anything from dress codes to musical choices, none were quite as violent as this.

By the time the dust settled, the city of New York was left to grapple with what caused the riot: a rivalry between two very different actors that illustrated enormous societal divides.

Edwin Forrest (1806-1872) was an American actor born to a Scottish immigrant father and German-American mother.

His relatively impoverished upbringing in Philadelphia was marked by his love of theatre; from the age of 11 he performed in local productions.

Legend has it that he secured an audition for Philadelphia's famed Walnut Street Theatre (spelled in British English) due to a soliloquy he performed of Shakespeare's 'Richard III' while under the influence of nitrous oxide for a volunteer experiment.

His performance impressed one of the experiment's observers, and he went on to achieve enormous international success.

William Macready (1793-1873) was born in London to a family of actors.

He was meant to become a lawyer and was educated at an independent school, but financial difficulty besot the family and he needed to help manage his father's theater company.

He later embraced acting and his performances of iconic Shakespeare roles including Macbeth, King Lear and Richard III.

Forrest and Macready began to be compared in the 1820s.

Critics took note of Forrest's 'natural spirit' in opposition to Macready's 'refined and artistic' approach to Shakespeare, according to newspaper accounts from the time.

Their rivalry reached a flash point when Forrest, watching Macready perform as Hamlet in Edinburgh, hissed at him.

An account that appeared in the Times reads that Forrest, ‘occupying a prominent position in the house, made himself unenviably conspicuous by loud and repeated solitary hissing, with the view of expressing his disapproval.’

British newspapers wrote incredulously of how an American could display such poor manners.

Meanwhile, Forrest’s supporters were offended that he was not invited to Macready’s home while traveling through Britain and so threatened Macready when he returned to America in 1848.

By May 1849, their rivalry had reached a fever pitch as Macready appeared at the Astor Opera House to play ‘Macbeth.’

On May 7, Forrest’s supporters attended Macready’s show and through repeated interruptions including tossed rotten eggs and fruit, prevented the Englishman from performing.

On May 9, the rivals even portrayed Macbeth less than a mile from each other, as Forrest took on the role at a theater nearby.

Then the fateful night of May 10, Forrest portrayed ‘The Gladiator’ at the Broadway Theatre while Macready, after entreaties from Americans including Washington Irving and Herman Melville, agreed to stay in New York to give a performance one last chance.

Macready later said: ‘My God, has my appearance led to the sacrifice of human life!

‘I wish I had adhered to my first resolution, and not yielded to the solicitation of my friends.

‘They assured me there would be no difficulty.’

Newspapers of the time grappled with the question of what caused the bloody theater riot.

Some wondered whether the violence was solely due to Forrest’s supporters, many of whom would have been working-class patrons of theatres such as the Bowery.

Others considered a deeper class-based analysis that acknowledged an entrenched class system in New York City despite American ideals of equality.

In this analysis, the riot became a struggle in which working-class New Yorkers, both recent arrivals and otherwise, fought for a vision of a distinctly ‘American’ actor, and by extension society, as manifested in Forrest.

Meanwhile, the ‘Anglophile’ Americans who frequented the Astor Opera House wanted to effect an upper-class society in an English image.

The opera house's fancy dress code and high prices served as a slap in the face to the notion that theatre should be enjoyed by all.

Regardless of one’s interpretation, the Astor Opera House could never quite recover from its association with the violent night of May 10 and despite opening in 1847 was boarded up by 1853.

The posh square of Astor Place briefly fell into disrepute, tarnished by the violent reputation of the ‘Dis-Astor Place Opera House.’

The site where the Astor Opera House once stood is now 21 Astor Place, which was built in 1890 as the New York Mercantile Library, or ‘Clinton Hall,’ and now houses condominiums.

1890 as the New York Mercantile Library, or ‘Clinton Hall,’ and now houses condominiums.

Jared Kushner, Ivanka Trump's husband, sold his two-bedroom unit in the building for $3.9m back in 2011.

Today, Astor Place is a busy square and intersection consisting of commercial buildings and apartments.|||

Today, Astor Place is a busy intersection of Lower Manhattan, New York City. But in 1849, it was the site of the city's bloodiest theater riot that left up to 30 people dead.