As Bitcoin gains significant traction in Japan and Korea and its price once again rallies to new highs, the currency is revealing some friction in Asia’s banking systems not easily visible to outsiders before.

As the price of a Bitcoin has, on average, increased almost 50% over the past month, it has diverged drastically between markets as traders find it increasingly difficult to move traditional currencies, or fiat, across borders.

A lawsuit filed on April 5, 2017 by Bitfinex, a B.V.I.-incorporated Bitcoin exchange, revealed that U.S. bank Wells Fargo had stopped processing U.S. dollars between Bitfinex’ Taiwanese partner banks its customers worldwide. As a private company, Wells Fargo is free to do business with whoever they please, but as the sole bank available for U.S. dollar clearance to many Taiwanese banks, getting shut out of the dollar market is a highly painful, if not existential incident.

As trading continued on Bitfinex, customers eager to remove their assets from the exchange only had the opportunity to buy and withdraw Bitcoins, driving the price of the cryptocurrency to new highs and raising unseen premiums in other exchanges and markets. A competing cryptocurrency exchange with bank accounts in Taiwan, OKCoin, also reported problems with clearing and had to limit withdrawals and deposits.

While Taiwan, with its diverse and competitive banking system, remains attractive for fintech startups and blockchain ventures, it is highly dependent on a small amount of monopolistic U.S. banks for international transfers, which can shut down business models at will.

Some traders, however, found a workaround. Those with access to both Taiwanese forex and Hong Kong bank accounts are able to withdraw Taiwan dollars into their Taiwanese bank accounts, from where they are able to convert it to Hong Kong dollars and send the funds to Hong Kong, where they can buy Bitcoins at the cheaper, international rate and sell it for the higher rate on the Taiwanese exchanges, repeating the cycle until the arbitrage opportunity has faded.

Users are essentially incentivized to solve the problem on behalf of the exchange, keeping rates on par with the global market.

Such premiums are not unfamiliar to anybody following the markets for a long time. As Bitcoin gained popularity in China in 2013, it was common to see Chinese exchanges lead market rallies by up to 20%. It was not uncommon for individual traders to move back and forth between Hong Kong and Shenzhen, making money through an arbitrage by selling Bitcoin through their smartphone on Chinese exchanges, withdrawing the money through bank accounts or Alipay, and buying back Bitcoin on the Hong Kong side, where prices were more in line with international levels.

Up until a few months ago, Chinese traders and exchanges heavily dominated the global markets, with Goldman Sachs estimating that about 80% of all trades were conducted in the BTC/CNY trading pair.

However, as the price of a Bitcoin increased to the psychological level of that of an ounce of gold ($1,225 USD), the People’s Bank of China interfered and called for hasty meetings with Chinese exchanges. Chinese users have since been unable to withdraw Bitcoins or other cryptocurrencies. This leads traders uncomfortable with or unable to keeping assets on exchanges to sell these Bitcoins and withdraw CNY instead.|||

Bitcoin prices have diverged massively between markets in Asia, revealing problems in the underlying banking and regulatory structures.