Our mission is to make the world better through design. We have dedicated the last year and a half to this mission and created a marketplace to bring companies and designers together.

While, we have helped hundreds of companies find and work with great design talent through our platform, not everything has been working as planned.

After much deliberation, we have concluded Design Inc. isn’t growing at the pace we had hoped. Our current business model isn’t the right one to support where we believe the business should ultimately go. As of today, we have made the excruciating decision to close the Design Inc. platform.

We are going to take some time to figure out the answer to this question. We have learned volumes and want to apply these learnings to our mission with fresh eyes and explore all options on moving forward. We are not going anywhere just yet :)

Thank you so much, your support and kind words mean the world.

First, let me personally thank you for being a part of Design Inc. We hope the platform and the community has helped you in your life. We will be refunding outstanding credits over the next week and all accounts and your profile will be removed.

Thank you for giving Design Inc. a shot, we are so grateful you used our service. We hope you have received some proposals for your project and you should be able to access those proposals through your email. You can reach out to me personally if you have any questions marc@designinc.com and I will make sure you get taken care of.

We have loved producing the Design Inc. UNDO show, you can see past episodes at here. We will not be continuing with the show. A huge thank you to all our guests and especially to Joel Beukelman for being my co-host on the show.

Yes of course we can. Please reach out and lets talk about it marc@designinc.com|||

Our mission is to make the world better through design. We have dedicated the last year and a half to this mission and created a marketplace to bring companies and designers together. While, we have…