Don’t despair. Here’s why. I just got back from my annual spring pilgrimage to the arid lands of Southern California, where I divide my time between desert solitude and hanging out in social spaces like coffee houses, public libraries and such, places that are conducive to coding, guitar playing, and conversing with strangers.

Cahuilla Indian Country in the Western Colorado Desert of Southern California

This year, for the first time, I was dreading the social part of the trip. How was I going to deal with the inevitable onslaught of noisy, dissonant antagonism, of sinnloses, nervtötendes Gezeter, as the Germans so aptly put it, that seems to have usurped our political discourse? Escapism, perhaps, as in, “Oh, enough of politics already, let’s talk about collecting stamps.” No. Or the conciliatory approach, as in, “Come on people now, let’s all listen to each other and meet in the middle.” Yeah, right, meeting halfway between reason and absurdity, that has got to be the solution.

To my stunning surprise, my fear turned out to be unfounded. I kept bumping into people left, right and center who were eager to talk and to listen, were well-informed, spoke thoughtfully, with originality, understanding and insight, and, perhaps most impressively and surprisingly, kept asking me, with genuine interest, what I thought and what my experience had taught me on whatever subject we were talking about.

I won’t try and summarize any of my conversations here. That’s not the point. The point is that it was a form of discourse and communication that was entirely different from what I have come to expect. I can’t even say that I fully understand what is afoot here. But I think I do understand it all from a 30,000’ point of view.

As is often the case, to understand we must first recall that Kirkman’s Law holds universally true.

Kirkman’s Law: Every organization, movement, or system designed and run by humans will eventually be taken over by assholes.

That is perfectly normal. What is perhaps not normal is that we live in a day and age where there seems to be an odd convergence, like a cluster, of this phenomenon. An unusually large number of organizations, movements, and systems, representing a wide spectrum of belief systems, are experiencing accelerated assholization at the same time. Examples are capitalism, the country of Venezuela, the conservative right, and the liberal/progressive left.

The good news is that this is no reason to despair. It is no reason to despair because assholism, although apparently uneradicable, is also unsustainable. There is overwhelming historical evidence that the old, assholized organizations, movements, and systems always fall by the wayside, and entirely new, better ones emerge in their stead. [1] That’s called human progress, and it has always worked that way. Here are some examples: everything. Name one reason why that should end tomorrow. So don’t despair. Everything will be all right. Every little thing is going to be all right.

And if you will allow me just one bit of preachiness, I’ll leave you with this quote by the late Robert M. Pirsig: “The place to improve the world is first in one’s own heart and head and hands, and then work outward from there.”

[1] One could say that this is the purpose of assholes in the grand scheme of things: by taking over everything they make the status quo so unbearable that the rest of us start looking for entirely new ways, which, being creatures of complacency, we might not have otherwise done.|||

Dear Humanity,