Three years ago Carnival UK, home to P&O Cruises and Cunard, began an exciting journey to modernise marketing for two brands that were delivering a product that customers loved. The brands have a great breadth of data, and over this time we’ve transformed the way Carnival UK uses it to drive marketing.

I was invited to present at a conference recently on “What business strategies can be used to move from reporting to predictive analytics that drives sales and marketing?” A topic that chimed well with discussions at the conference around how to move past ‘big data’ hype, focussing on embedding analytics to drive real benefit. To answer this question I looked back at our journey at Carnival. Whilst not called out at the time, what was clear to me was that a lot of our success has either been helped by the application of design thinking, or sit well within this approach.

If you’re unfamiliar, design thinking is most often applied to product development; I learned it when designing products at Procter and Gamble. It’s less often applied within the analytics world, but for me data is like a new material that is transforming the way we create great products and experiences, so it makes sense to apply design thinking.

There is no recipe book, but more a set of approaches that can be applied to different situations. It’s down to the designer’s experience which is best to use. Design thinking approaches that we’ve applied at Carnival include:

Storytelling is also a key design thinking approach, so I’d like to share some stories on the intersection between design thinking and analytics.

The most interesting analytical challenges have people at the centre of them, whether consumers or colleagues. Within the analytics world common questions are ‘What drove this behaviour?’ or ‘What behaviour is this likely to drive?’. These are important questions, the answers to which deliver value through a product or experience. This could be personalised marketing, an improved product offering or a tool that others will use to deliver this.

When embarking on answering these questions, it’s important to understand people and their motivations. Analytics is more suited to answering the ‘What’ than the ‘Why’, so when developing analytical solutions it’s important to spend as much time understanding the ‘Why’ before embarking on solving the analytical ‘What’. Design thinkers will invest their time speaking with people, either formally via market research techniques or informally, to first understand the ‘Why’ before developing prototypes that seek to explore the ‘What’.

One of the most difficult and surprising challenges I’ve seen in this area was from the team who develop nappies (diapers) for the Pampers brand at P&G. Babies have no history and no habits, and aren’t particularly willing to fill out surveys. Applying modelling and analytics to this needed a very strong understanding of the consumer ‘Why’, both for babies and their parents. This informed an amazing capability that answered the ‘What’ a particular design would deliver.

If babies were the most challenging, then it’ll be no surprise that the older generation have been the easiest to model. They have a lot of history, are habitual and are generous with their views. The ‘Why’ is simple – helping people have a holiday that exceeds their expectations. The challenge is much more in what and the how analytics can deliver to this promise.

In design thinking, changes start with a prototype as it’s not always clear what a solution could be until you see it. At Carnival, we had materials with which to create a prototype, with the broad range of data that comes with running a small floating city full of highly engaged customers. We also had a belief value comes from measuring, predicting and driving behavior. The two major constraints were 175 years of legacy systems and a track history of ‘analysis paralysis’. Many had proposed investment in systems, but these all came with a large price tag and even larger doubt they would deliver.

Rather than battle with these constraints, we embraced them and looked for value that could be delivered without a large investment. After a few false starts an opportunity emerged in CRM: measuring the uplift from communications, predicting booking behavior and personalizing communications. This was achieved with a lot of manual hard work. Using what was to hand and understanding the needs of both our customers and internal leaders, we demonstrated significant revenue uplift from applying behavioural analytics.

To fully realise the opportunity, investment in technology was needed, but with a prototype in hand, the conversation to secure this funding was successful. This not only allowed us to automate the CRM customer journey with predictive analytics, but also build a data science capability.

Design thinking best suits problems that don’t have a clear solution from the outset. This might be because needs aren’t clear, or new technical solutions need to be developed. If you’re lucky it’s a combination of both. A designer relishes problems like this, planning to explore them to better understand what could be. A key approach to better understand needs is to build a prototype (rubbish ones are best) – presenting this to people helps them better articulate what they want and what could work for them.

Physical prototypes are often created in sheds. In building a data science capability, I was looking to create a shed that would have all the tools we’d need to build and then scale predictive analytics. It would be able to store and version source data, allow scientists to apply data science to predict behaviour and then share the outputs in a scalable way. To create this shed would take a lot of effort and maintenance - difficult to justify. Luckily Domino Data Lab has an off-the-shelf data science platform which bought.

The data science shed has been a great foundation: through CRM, demand forecasting, econometrics and voice of the guest work we’re driving significant benefits in marketing and product development. But what about the future?

Whilst Carnival’s brand have an amazing history, the future is even more exciting. Carnival has developed a technology that allows us to better serve guests’ needs on board our ships. The Ocean Medallion is a small wearable device that will allow guests to provide preferences that detail their wants, needs and desires so that their on board experience can be personalized. It’s paired with the Ocean Compass, a personal digital experience concierge accessible by all guests using interactive displays throughout the ship, on stateroom TVs or via guests’ own mobile devices. Check out the following video which explains more:

This technology debuts on the Regal Princess November 2017, with it comes a great opportunity to design a truly seamless experience at sea with data.

Does this resonate with you? If you would be interested in working for us, take a look at our latest vacancies here: www.carnivalukcareers.co.uk|||

