Launched last month, LOT is a clothing subscription service that sends you a monthly package of fashion and grooming products. For $49 a month, it promises a selection of all-black wardrobe staples—socks, tees, underwear, pants, shoes, a sweatshirt, and so forth. For an extra $50 you’ll receive an additional “self-care product” or accessory—like a black toothbrush, a hair bleach kit, or, um, a tattoo gun—per month. The site’s visuals were so stark that it had people wondering if it was a real company or a design-nerd prank, maybe even an alternate reality game. While monthly clothing and grooming packages sounds familiar to Trunk Club and Birchbox subscribers, that’s about all LOT has in common with those mainstream services. Other brands curate boxes of approachable things you need, and plenty you didn’t realize you needed. They’re essentially Amazon Prime meets pushy girlfriend: Silicon Valley’s way of making dressing and grooming easy for shop-a-phobic men. (Do those still exist?)

LOT’s bare-bones assortment of all-black wardrobe staples takes the concept of techno-simplicity to it’s logical conclusion. Think: Goth Steve Jobs. That’s what the basic plan gets you: an unbranded uniform replenished at a reasonable rate every month. But the accessories reserved for advanced subscribers range from standard to hardcore. LOT seems to promise something way outside convenience—something more like a new lifestyle.

Despite the internet debate, LOT is very real, the latest project of Vadik Marmeladov. “It’s real, of course,” said Marmeladov. “Why don’t people want to believe it is real? This is the realest thing that should exist.” Marmeladov was in Shenzhen, China when I called. He splits his time between the manufacturing city and LA, moving between the two offices of Ruki, the hardware incubator he founded last year. Marmeladov grew up in Russia and was involved in Moscow’s burgeoning fashion and publishing scene “a long time ago.” He went on to start the design firm Lapka in 2012, which was known for transforming environmental sensors into stylish, wearable accessories. Airbnb purchased Lapka in 2015 for an undisclosed sum, and Marmeladov ran their in-house concept design team until leaving late last year.

Given Marmeladov’s industrial design background, he has lofty goals for LOT that go beyond designing the perfect black uniform—and that should end the message board speculation. “It’s a very limited line of clothing and accessories, so we’ll be able to update it every month; we can start with simple stuff and eventually make it better,” says Marmeladov. “The idea is that eventually every product will grow according to you.” Plenty of subscription services tailor their selections to your style preferences, but to hear Marmeladov tell it, the goal is more expansive: To use individual data and feedback to make each product highly personalized. “Not in terms of color,” Marmeladov says, “but in terms of how you use it.” (If black’s not for you, you’re out of luck.) Though circumspect in revealing too many details, Marmeladov—in a rare moment of Silicon Valley-ness—suggests this will be accomplished by perfecting the supply chain, comparing LOT to the one thing besides clothes we use every day. “The iPhone is not about the phone, it’s about the back end,” says Marmeladov. “What we see in fashion now is just the same shit they were doing hundreds of years. Fashion thinks if they start to use technology, it won’t be as beautiful or as deep or as luxury. Actually it will be so much better, so much more luxury, so much more beautiful.” But before all that can happen, of course, people need to start using it.

Though Marmeladov wouldn’t reveal subscriber numbers, there are enough that the first delivery is happening June 1. The top subscription tier (which comes with exclusive “team-only” accessories for $299 a month) is full. After all, the design that inspired many to think LOT was not real is also what makes it most appealing: the promise of a new lifestyle, or at least a more exhilarating one. The all-black uniform embodies the twin 21st-century values of anonymity and rebelliousness. The blank ID bracelets and SoundCloud mixes (subscribers get one every three months) are tools of a late-night rave. Impulsivity and bad decisions are certainly offered, especially if you know how to handle a tattoo gun. It’s a way to disappear—to change your hair color—but also to let loose. It feels vaguely sinister, sure, but it feels even more timely.

In LOT there are echoes of one of Marmeladov’s most widely-used products, a breathalyzer by his former company, Lapka, that he calls a “totem of youth and nightlife.” There’s nothing restrictive about the sexy cylindrical device, dubbed Lapka BAM, which came with an accompanying app that would tell you to “Go Mingle” at the right level of intoxication. (It also told you when it was probably time to call it a night.) “I remember some investor asked me something like what the target age was of the breathalyzer. I said 16,” says Marmeladov. “He said, Oh that’s not legal you can’t say this. BAM was all about your night, it was about your friends, it was about you drinking at 16 and it’s OK, about all this stuff.” The idea was why use technology to warn against a buzz when, in a stylish package, it can empower it?

That’s the balancing act LOT has moving forward, making the technological side talks to the clothing in a way that appeals to users, whether that’s maintaining the vibe that the initial rollout has created, or delivering a kick-ass, convenient service, or both. Regardless of the outcome, Marmeladov seems intent on making a lasting mark on fashion. “If brands and technology can find a way to cooperate it’ll be the most beautiful thing ever,” he says. “Because fashion is the most beautiful thing ever, and technology is very important. But it’s just never mixed in a popular way.” Time will tell if LOT and its moody style proves to be the exception.|||

The story behind the all-black fashion subscription service the internet is obsessed with.