These are my notes on the AEternity blockchain project, I’m not affiliated with the AEternity team.

Aeternity is a new blockchain project that is pre-launch. The headline goal is to securely facilitate large volumes of smart-contracts which interface with external data sources. This is made possible via a decentralised oracle based on prediction markets. These terms are explained below. The AEternity project has proposed several notable technical features:

A smart contract is a way to execute a contract without an intermediary (middle-man) and without confilct. The smart contract is a protocol which is stored and executed on a blockchain, executing transactions (outputs) based on specific inputs and programmable logic automatically. The logic often mirrors that contained in clauses of a written contract. State channels are payment networks that exchange funds off-chain and periodically settle up accounts with the main blockchain. (The Bitcoin Lightning Network is creating a system for routing Bitcoin payments through state channels.) State channels increase scalability by making groups of transactions independent of each other. This allows them to be processed in parallel. Aeternity proposes executing smart-contracts in turing-complete state channels (Turing complete means, colloquially, real-world and general purpose), which should allow greater volumes of transactions, and make the smart contracts more secure and easier to analyse.

This is because executing the smart-contracts off-chain makes them private and the code used to execute the smart contract won’t need to be broadcast to the primary blockchain. This should increase processing capacity by allowing contracts to execute in parallel.

Disadvantages to the state-channel approach include reduced transparency, as running smart contracts in state channels requires more trust in both the contract creator and the node running it.|||

These are my notes on the AEternity blockchain project, I’m not affiliated with the AEternity team. Aeternity is a new blockchain project that is pre-launch. The headline goal is to securely...