Oppo Find 7, was the last one launched in the company’s Find series, which was four long years ago. The Oppo’s Find series, gathered a very good reception and reputation for the company, back then. And that is exactly the reason for the Find 9, which is alleged to be the next one, in line of the series, is being caught-up in the rumor mill, consistently.

Today we have a leaked render of the Oppo Find 9, which is truly eye-catching, and worth a shot for the company, considering it to be true. Emerging in the Chinese website Weibo, posted by tipster @kjuma, the render looks unique, when compared with the previous launches in the Find line. It wears ultra-thin bezels on all the sides, while the upper one is notably narrow.

Talking about the credibility of this newly leaked render, it doesn’t seems to be so much convincing. Though, we couldn’t say that for sure, it is likely to consider the render to be a fan-made one. Moreover, the company haven’t spilled any official words about a new phone to the series, even though there have been too many hoax online, over the years.

In reality, there have also been reports, claiming that the company would dump the Find series, as the success of their R-series phones, defined their path in another direction. However, the fan-base, the Find 7 have created, doesn’t lets the news about the Find 9, fade away.

Coming back to the renders, the phone with narrow bezels, renders a high screen-to-body ratio, which is an amazing thing, in the design aspects. Other than that, the bottom bezel is also too narrow to hold a physical home button.

Hence, there are chances for a fingerprint scanner to be placed at the back of the device. But unfortunately, the latest render doesn’t covers the device’s back side. However, there could also be a chance for a fingerprint scanner embedded in the display, enabling it by the use of ultrasonic technology.

The only thing, the new render carries in line with the previous Find series phones, is the straight lower and upper edges.

Finally, the rumors about the Find 9 seems to go never-ending, which obviously shows that there is too much of anticipations for it. Let’s wait and see, if the company is going to put an end to it.|||

OPPO Find 9 New Render Pictures Leaked on Weibo by tipster @kjuma. The images shows full screen and awesome design as well.