Not happy with its previous record of nine Critical vulnerabilities, the Android platform has one-upped itself with 10. Some of these affect Nexus and/or Pixel devices, while others are applied to all devices running Android 4.4.4 all the way to 7.1.2. Let's take a look at the Critical flaw highlights, as detailed in the May 2017 Android Security bulletin.Check your security release

Before we highlight what's included with the May 2017 Android Security Bulletin, it's always good to know what security release is installed on your device. Of the Android devices I use regularly, both the Verizon-branded Nexus 6, running Android 7.0, and the OnePlus 3, running Android 7.1.1, are still running the March security patch (Figure A).

Let's take a look at those Critical vulnerabilities affecting the Android platform.

Color me not surprised that we have a holdover critical issue for the oft-plagued Mediaserver. Yet again the much-maligned Mediaserver system includes a remote code execution vulnerability that could enable an attacker, using a specially-crafted file, to cause memory corruption during media file and data processing. Because of the possibility of remote code execution, this issue has been rated as Critical.

GIFLIB, a library and utilities for processing GIFs, has been found to contain a remote code execution vulnerability that could enable an attacker, using a specially crafted file, to cause memory corruption during media file and data processing. Because of the possibility of remote code execution, this issue has been rated as Critical.

Another holdover from last month's bulletin is found in the MediaTek touchscreen driver. This system has been found to contain an elevation of privilege vulnerability that could enable a local malicious application to execute arbitrary code within the kernel. Because of the possibility of device compromise (which could require reflashing the operating system to repair the device), this issue has been rated as Critical.

NOTE: The patch for the A-30202412 bug is not publicly available and can be found within the latest binary drivers for Nexus devices from the Google Developer site.

The Qualcomm bootloader has been found to contain an elevation of privilege vulnerability that could enable a local malicious application to execute arbitrary code within the context of the kernel. Because of the possibility of a local permanent device compromise, which may require reflashing the operating system to repair the device, this issue has been rated as Critical.

* This issue only affects the Nexus 5X, Nexus 6, the Pixel and Pixel XL, and Android One devices.

** This issue only affects the Nexus 5X, Nexus 6P, Pixel, and Pixel XL devices.

The kernel sound subsystem has been found to contain an elevation of privilege vulnerability that could enable a local malicious application to execute arbitrary (and possibly malicious) code within the context of the kernel. Because of the possibility of a local device compromise (which would require reflashing the operating system to repair the affected device), this issue has been rated as Critical.

This issue only affects the Nexus 5X, Nexus 6, Nexus 6P, Nexus 9, Pixel, Pixel XL, Pixel C, Android One, Nexus Player devices.

The Motorola bootloader has been found to contain an elevation of privilege vulnerability that could enable a local malicious application to execute arbitrary (and possibly malicious) code during the bootload process. Because of the possibility of a local device compromise (which would require reflashing the operating system to repair the affected device), this issue has been rated as Critical.

NOTE: The patch for the A-33840490 bug is not publicly available and can be found within the latest binary drivers for Nexus devices from the Google Developer site.

The NVIDIA video driver has been found to contain an elevation of privilege vulnerability that could enable a local malicious application to execute arbitrary code within the context of the kernel. Because of the possibility of a local device compromise (which would require reflashing the operating system to repair the affected device), this issue has been rated as Critical.

NOTE: The patch for the A-34113000 bug is not publicly available and can be found within the latest binary drivers for Nexus devices from the Google Developer site.

The Qualcomm power driver has been discovered to contain an elevation of privilege vulnerability that could enable a local malicious application to execute arbitrary code within the context of the kernel. Because of the possibility of a local device compromise (which would require reflashing the operating system to repair the affected device), this issue has been rated as Critical.

NOTE: All Google devices running Android 7.1.1 or later, that have installed all updates, are not affected by this issue.

The kernel trace subsystem (a system used for debugging the kernel) has been found to contain an elevation of privilege vulnerability that could enable a local malicious application to execute arbitrary code within the context of the kernel. Because of the possibility of a local device compromise (which would require reflashing the operating system to repair the affected device), this issue has been rated as Critical.

This issue only affects the Nexus 5X, Nexus 6, Nexus 6P, Nexus 9, Pixel, Pixel XL, Pixel C, Android One, Nexus Player devices.

Two critical vulnerabilities have been found to affect Qualcomm components. These bugs are addressed, in detail, in the Qualcomm AMSS October 2016 security bulletin.

NOTE: The patch for both the A-31628601 and the A-35358527 bugs is not publicly available and can be found within the latest binary drivers for Nexus devices from the Google Developer site.

* This issue only affects the Nexus 6P device.

The developers will work diligently to patch the vulnerabilities, but it is up to the end users to ensure the fixes find their way to devices. Make sure you not only check for updates, but that you apply them as soon as they are available. To see the full listing of vulnerabilities (which includes a number of high and moderate issues), check out the May 2017 Android Security Bulletin.|||

The May 2017 Android Security Bulletin shatters its previous record of critical vulnerabilities. Get the highlights.