OpenVPN v2.4.0 was audited for security vulnerabilities independently by Quarkslabs (funded by OSTIF) and Cryptography Engineering (funded by Private Internet Access) between December 2016 and April 2017. The primary findings were two remote denial-of-service vulnerabilities. These have been fixed in OpenVPN 2.4.2 . Our official security announcement is here

Compared to OpenVPN 2.3 this is a major update with a large number of new features, improvements and fixes. Some of the major features are AEAD (GCM) cipher and Elliptic Curve DH key exchange support, improved IPv4/IPv6 dual stack support and more seamless connection migration when client's IP address changes (Peer-ID). Also, the new --tls-crypt feature can be used to increase users' connection privacy.

Compared to OpenVPN 2.4.1 there are several bugfixes and small enhancements. A summary of the changes is available in Changes.rst, and a full list of changes is available here.

OpenVPN GUI bundled with the Windows installer has a large number of new features compared to the one bundled with OpenVPN 2.3. One of major features is the ability to run OpenVPN GUI without administrator privileges. For full details, see the changelog. The new OpenVPN GUI features are documented here.

Please note that OpenVPN 2.4 installers will not work on Windows XP.

If you find a bug in this release, please file a bug report to our Trac bug tracker. In uncertain cases please contact our developers first, either using the openvpn-devel mailinglist or the developer IRC channel (#openvpn-devel at irc.freenode.net). For generic help take a look at our official documentation, wiki, forums, openvpn-users mailing list and user IRC channel (#openvpn at irc.freenode.net).



NOTE: the GPG key used to sign the release files has been changed since OpenVPN 2.4.0. Instructions for verifying the signatures, as well as the new GPG public key are available here.

We also provide static URLs pointing to latest releases to ease automation. For a list of files look here.

This release is also available in our own software repositories for Debian and Ubuntu, Supported architectures are i386 and amd64. For details. look here.

You can use EasyRSA 2 or EasyRSA 3 for generating your own certificate authority. The former is bundled with Windows installers and is also available in our apt repos. The latter is a more modern alternative for UNIX-like operating systems.

The Windows installers are bundled with OpenVPN-GUI - its source code is available on its project page and as tarballs on our alternative download server.

OpenVPN v2.4.0 was audited for security vulnerabilities independently by Quarkslabs (funded by OSTIF) and Cryptography Engineering (funded by Private Internet Access) between December 2016 and April 2017. The primary findings were two remote denial-of-service vulnerabilities. Fixes to them have been backported to v2.3.15. Our official security announcement is here.

This release is the latest old stable release, and the last major release to support Windows XP. Normally you should use the latest stable release (2.4.x) instead.

Older OpenVPN releases not explicitly listed above can be downloaded from here (alternate link).

WARNING: The Windows installers for these old releases may contain OpenSSL versions that have the heartbleed vulnerability or other serious security issues. You should not use any of these old OpenVPN Windows installers, unless you are absolutely sure it's safe in your use case. If you depend on an old OpenVPN version make sure you build the Windows binaries yourself and link them to an up-to-date OpenSSL version.

OpenVPN is available in repositories of most open source operating systems such as Debian, Ubuntu, Fedora, FreeBSD and Maemo. Some of them may have several versions available, e.g. one for latest beta branch, one for latest development code and one for stable releases. Using these OS-provider versions is usually easiest. However the OpenVPN project also packages latest OpenVPN releases for some open source operating systems. Take a look here to see if these packages are available for your OS.





OpenVPN uses TAP-windows to provide virtual tap device functionality on Windows. Normally you don't need to install TAP-windows separately, as OpenVPN installers include it. The tap-windows driver comes in two flavours: the NDIS 5 driver (tap-windows, version 9.9.x) for Windows XP and NDIS 6 (tap-windows6, version 9.21.x) for Windows Vista and above. Source code for both tap-windows drivers is available on GitHub.

NOTE: If you have 9.9.x installed, you need to uninstall it before installing 9.21.x, as there are known issues with doing an upgrade.

Most other operating systems have virtual tap device functionality in their kernels.

Official Windows binary packages are cross-compiled on Linux using mingw_w64 and the openvpn-build buildsystem. For details, look at the Wiki documentation.



|||

OpenVPN - The Open Source VPN