The last quarter of 2016 saw eBay’s GMV to be at $22.3 billion and these types of astounding results are the mark of 25 million strong online sellers community selling on ebay, making “How to sync your local shop with eBay fairly common”.

Thus this document addresses all the intermediary steps involved when syncing your shop with eBay. Actually, integration with eBay or connecting your woocommerce to ebay requires extensive information of your business.

The multi-layered information needed has many aspects to it and each one has its distinguished applications and importance. All the steps, that require information, are:

Aforementioned categories requires data necessary to perform all the selling related operations and automating the sale.

This step requires you to provide eBay with your store’s location, take authorization from ebay, provide shipping carrier or logistic partner detail and the mode of the payment and your payment Id. It also includes defining your Return and Refund Policy. As soon as this information is provided and step completed comes Category Mapping.

Now since syncing enables transferring of data from your woocommerce store to eBay, mapping the appropriate category of your stores with that of defined by eBay becomes uber important. Any mistake may lead your products to be listed in the category where they ideally they shouldn’t be and neither their buyers are. Therefore it is one important part of the process.

One of the best ways to avoid to manual work is to create various profiles of different product types – electronic and appliances, gadgets, health and beauty, and apparels etc. Creation of these profiles in advance enables you to bypass all the future efforts of creating the same information time and again. Simply assign the corresponding profile against the similar product to feed the information.

This step involves creation eBay ready products in compliance with eBay’s products guidelines and rules. Also, from this step, all the verification regarding the product/item data is done and the errors fixed and profile created in the previous steps can be assigned to the products. Also, in this step, you can see all the product ready to be uploaded at eBay.

As evident from the name, this step enables to upload your local shop’s items on eBay in mass. The bulk uploading can be done in two ways – Bulk Product Upload or Upload queue. In the previous step – Manage Products – you also can add products to the queue. Moreover, the profile can also be assigned in bulk to the products.

eBay offers great flexibility when it comes to deciding how your product page should look like. You have total control over it as eBay provides various Product description templates. Also, it gives the option to online sellers willing to sell on eBay to come with their own unique and innovative product display methods. For it, you can add new product display templates as well.

Connecting your store with eBay can be a real revenue booster for your Wooocommerce store. And you could be the part of 25 million strong online sellers community.

What’s more, now you can offer your Woocommerce 3.0.0 store products on eBay for free.|||

woocommerce to ebay selling is highly popular among the woocommerce store users. Now sync your store and offer the products at eBay for free.