Ice cream is one of Americans most loved desserts. It goes well with virtually anything and for hard-core ice cream lovers, not even the cold winter weather can keep them from enjoying this frozen dessert. In the old times when ice cream makers first made appearance in the market, making ice cream meant tedious work hand cranking it in a barrel with rock salt. Since then, these machines have seen significant improvements. Today you only need to press a button to make ice cream. But what if you are looking to purchase the best ice cream maker; do you have to review each of the models one by one? Luckily for you, the answer is no. This article will give you a detailed review of the best 2 ice cream machines to pick. Just read on

With its great combination of manual and electric settings, Maxi-Matic Gourmet ice cream maker gives the nostalgia of vintage, with the added benefits of automatic setting that are easy to use. This machine is great in making ice cream, sorbet, gelato and yogurt treats. It uses rock salts an ice instead of the insulated frozen canisters.

This ice cream maker allows you to select whether to use its powerful electric motor or the manual hand crank option. From experience, if you hand crank the ice cream from the automatic make, it only get better and harder. Actually, it’s hard to obtain the quality of ice cream you will get from any other machine. It makes more than 4 quarts of ice cream in less than 40 minutes. Softer treats such as yogurt and sorbet take less times.

Maxi-Matic Elite gourmet Ice Cream Maker is a great purchase for those individuals who like stepping back in time, and make ice cream treats that will remind their family of picnics and holidays of the old gone days. The machine provides the best of both worlds; modern and ancient.

If you like this ice cream maker, you may also buy;

This is a 2 quart automatic Ice cream, sorbet and frozen yogurt Maker. It is also great in making treats such as sorbet and yogurt within less than 30 minutes. It comes with a double insulated bowl that enables you to make treats with no residual mess. Simply place the bowl in the freezer until movement between the insulated bowl stops. By then, you can be sure the centre is frozen. After this, add your ingredient, press the start button, set back, and watch ice cream being made. Just don’t forget to add mix-ins at the end of the process if desired. The frozen treats from this machine are creamy and delicious, and clean-up is nothing to worry about. Cuisinart-ICE-21 is the ice cream maker to get in 2014. What’s more, it comes with a 3 year warranty.

If you like this ice cream maker, you may also see;|||

Ice cream is one of Americans most loved desserts. It goes well with virtually anything and for hard-core ice cream lovers, not even the cold winter weather can keep them from enjoying this frozen dessert