Over the last few years, Machine Learning has grown much faster than anyone could have imagined. People are rapidly starting to focus more and more on machine learning research which leads me to my point Machine Learning, how rapidly it has grown is the present, not the future. This revolution is happening now! not in the near future.

First of all lets start with a brief introduction of machine learning for anyone who isn’t aware of the term since the rate at which it is making progress, everyone must have a basic idea of the significance of this rapidly growing branch of Computer Science.

Machine Learning is basically the idea that a Machine can learn from the available data by the clustering technique. Although it relies on many complex algorithms, the basic idea is to cluster a set of factors (or independent variables) which have effect on the cause (the main unknown dependent variable) from the available data. The basic idea is making a machine able to analyze the data and learn from this data to provide results for unknown data. A Machine Learning powered engine is capable of learning more and more from new and new data creating clusters and probabilities of the results for each data set and essentially “learn” as more and more data is provided

If you have heard about machine learning you probably would also have heard about Deep Learning. Lets talk about what Deep Learning is. Machine Learning is a vast field and Deep Learning is a branch of Machine Learning which is directly linked with Neural Networks and Data science. Deep Learning is the branch of Machine Learning focused on Large Data sets and deeper Learning ie “Thinking”. Machine Learning is basically the use of neural networks to simulate human thinking, making a machine capable of learning like humans essentially increasing its knowledge based on mistakes it makes, learning from experience.

Machine Learning over the past few years has grown so rapidly that few years back what technology could only be thought a small possibility in the future. Research in machine learning has lead to create triumphs and huge progress in the field of ML has been seen. You might be aware of some of these highly anticipated technologies but might not have an idea that these are based on Machine Learning Concepts.

These are just some of the examples of the variety of applications of Machine Learning that are happening now.

Machine Learning is progressing faster than ever. The applications are limit less and fast research and progress has lead to huge real world applications in Machine Learning. Great works have been and are being done in machine learning making it the thing of today, not tomorrow. Google has an entire department for machine learning developments and research known as Google’s DeepMind. From huge AI systems to mobile keyboard applications, everything is being powered by deep learning engines.|||

Over the last few years, Machine Learning has grown much faster than anyone could have imagined. People are rapidly starting to focus more and more on machine learning research which leads me to my point Machine Learning, how rapidly it has grown is the present, not the future. This revolution is happening now! not in…