Ruby is an object-oriented programming language that is best known as a language for Web Applications. Ruby is also very popular as a scripting language. Ruby On Rails is a framework built on Ruby.  Ruby on Rails is probably the mostly popular web-application framework. It is without a doubt one of the most used frameworks today, especially in Startups. Both these technologies are among the most in-demand skills for any developer. Do keep in mind some of these books may be outdated by the time you read them, but the fundamental concepts should be the same. Bookmark and check back to stay updated with the best programming books that will help you improve your code!

The Well-Grounded Rubyist by David A. Black  is a beautiful guide to the Ruby language that will teach you all you need to know. David A. Black is an internationally-known software developer, author, trainer, speaker, and event organizer.

The Well-Grounded Rubyist is masterfully written and focuses on Ruby and all its concepts and how to use them. This book deepens your knowledge of all things Ruby and focuses on concepts such as keywords, enumerators, etc. The Well-Grounded Rubyist consists of 3 parts: 1) Foundations, 2)Class & Modules & 3)Dynamics. Within these three sections you will learn everything you need to become adept at Ruby.

The Well-Grounded Rubyist is great for both beginners and even [people who have used Ruby for a while. This is a well written book that is very through and will makes you familiar with all things Ruby.

Effective Ruby: 48 Specific Ways to Write Better Ruby by Peter J. Jones consists of 48 tips & tricks that will make your Ruby code better. Peter J. Jones is a freelance software developer and a senior instructor



Effective Ruby is jam packed with 48 tips & tricks that will make your Ruby code more elegant and can be implemented instantly. This is a very practical book that will improve your code by making it more maintainable and robust. Practical testing, avoiding dependency issues and many other problems everyday Ruby developers face are all tackled in these tips. Effective Ruby is filled with code examples that show and explain how to use these tips & tricks.

Effective Ruby is filled with specific and actionable tips that any Ruby developer can follow along and start using. This is a book that shows you multiple ways to become a better Ruby developer.

The Ruby Way: Solutions and Techniques in Ruby Programming by Hal Fulton & André Arko is a classic how to guide on writing great Ruby code using the Ruby way. Hal Fulton first began using Ruby in 1999 and André Arko is a consultant.



The Ruby Way is packed with over hundreds of examples in a question & answer format. The answers are highly detailed, walking you through why and how to use that particular solution. Everything and anything related to Ruby is handled here. things such as “What kind of tools to use” or “using Ruby objects” and everything in-between is asked and answered in this book. Being organized by topic making it easy to find whatever Ruby related thing you are looking for, this book is a Ruby encyclopedia.

The Ruby Way is a book for intermediate or above level Ruby developers. Beginners maybe overwhelmed by this book given the size and amount of information. However, once you have mastered the basics of Ruby, The Ruby Way will guide you on the path to becoming a master Ruby developer.

Both Ruby & Ruby on Rails are immensely popular and for good reason. Ruby is great for scripting while Ruby on Rails is one of the best ways to build a web application. Whatever type of web application you want to build, there is no doubt you can probably build it using Ruby and Ruby on Rails.

Check out the best JavaScript books, CSS books, ReactJS books and React Native books to further expand your programming knowledge and apply these best practices to write elegant applications.

Amazon Associates Disclosure: We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites.|||

Best Ruby & Ruby on Rails books 2017