A small Taiwanese NGO is providing its severely disabled clients with a special kind of helping hand

The group, "Hand Angels," was founded by Vincent, a middle-aged man who developed polio when he was an infant. While Vincent still has the use of his hands, the experience made him realize that others do not, and so have no way of satisfying their physical and emotional needs. Vincent told the BBC that the realization inspired him to establish his group of volunteers that provide sexual services to the disabled. The group even managed to snag an appropriate URL: http://www.handjobtw.org/

While the session itself lasts only 90 minutes or so -- "from touching the person to helping them reach orgasm," Vincent says -- six months of planning and meetings go into the encounter beforehand.

One of the group's sex volunteers, Daan, said that he goes into the sessions as if he was "going for a one night stand with a girl I met online." Daan said that his client, a woman named Mei Nu, was extremely nervous because she had never been naked in front of anyone before except for her caregivers.

"In the process I was actually pretty satisfied and I felt like what I couldn't get before now I could get, so I was happy," the woman said about the experience afterward.

Of course, some have accused the group of prostitution. However, the Hand Angels believe that they are providing a necessary service for a segment of the population that has been completely desexualized, but has the same needs and desires as everyone else.

"Other foundations, most of the time are founded by religious or parent groups and they would think how to help them get a job or live by their own, but they don't think of their sex right, and that's what we do," a female volunteer said.

Watch the BBC's video on the group below:

As you might expect, this idea seems to have originated in Japan. Back in 2013, VICE chronicled a Japanese activist group providing sexual services to the disabled.

Meanwhile, VICE has also talked with a group in Sweden that makes disability-friendly sex toys.|||

