Walk along almost any street in one of the world’s global cities and you will be lucky not to bump into a smartphone user, head down, planning or checking their journey on one of the plethora of public transport apps available. These apps are helping us to navigate around increasingly complex public transport networks as well as provide alerts to transport problems as they happen.

This trend however is only possible due to the authorities making available what was once closed data to a willing army of developers hard at work designing and building apps. It’s a team effort: the authorities provide the data but leave the app ideas to the market.

One of the organisations at the forefront of this movement and generally considered a model for other global cities is Transport for London (TfL), the local government body responsible for managing the transport system in the capital. TfL provides comprehensive data covering everything from multi-mode journey planning to roadworks information and even data on availability of the ever popular shared bike scheme fondly referred to as Boris bikes.

The next phase of open data development in London, as announced last year at a developer event, is focused on tackling the increasing congestion on the network. Every week a tube train equivalent of people arrives in the capital and this is putting increasing strain on the network, particularly at the busiest times. TfL’s recent research though has unearthed some findings which many Londoners may find surprising: a large majority of passengers are infrequent and irregular and the prospect of a comfortable journey holds equal importance to the cost and duration of the journey. Many passengers therefore can, and are willing, to alter their travel patterns if it means a less crowded and more comfortable journey.

The question is: how can open data help us find that elusive comfortable journey?

TfL will soon be extending its data platform to offer two new datasets: counts of passengers entering and exiting stations based on data collected via the Oyster smartcard payment system as well as data on how full tube trains and platforms are at various times of the day. The data indicating how full a train is, comes from a surprising source, the train braking system. The weight of a train affects braking efficiency and vibration therefore the suspension system is constantly being calibrated with respect to the current weight. So, as more passengers board, the suspension adjusts and produces a signal. The train then aggregates these signals to produce an overall weight, which together with location data can show how full a train is as it enters and leaves a station. Initially these new datasets will be released as historic data but eventually, TfL promise, real-time and predicted data will be available to developers.

Collecting the data however is only part of the story. With App Store saturation and the struggle for self-sustaining apps, do developers still have the appetite to put this new data into the hands of the public? And with all the current issues around data security, TfL need to ensure that journey data exposing individual travel patterns never finds its way into the public domain.

Assuming developers start utilising this new data, what could the impact of all this be?

Coming soon to your smartphone journey planner could be the option to not only choose the fastest route but also the least crowded and hopefully more comfortable. Being able to see in real-time which trains and buses are full as well as which stations and platforms are crowded could ultimately lead to more consistent demand on the network and more comfortable journeys for all.|||

Walk along almost any street in one of the world’s global cities and you will be lucky not to bump into a smartphone user, head down, planning or checking their journey on one of the plethora of…