Erlang and Elixir's popularity is growing but it's not always clear what off-the-shelf software is useful in production quality systems. In this track you will learn what existing production systems' maintainers are using to monitor and test their systems. This track will include the war stories and experience reports of novice and expert users alike. You will also learn from the leading experts and committers about new and leading frameworks such as (but not limited to) Phoenix, MongooseIM, Nerves and RabbitMQ. You will find out how these frameworks work, how to best use them and where not to use them.

Every new domain that Erlang and Elixir pushes into brings a new class of problems and a new class of solutions. In this track we'll learn from other's experience, where things have been peachy and where they haven't been so much. We'll all walk away with a more clear idea of how to build highly reliable software.

In this track you will learn from the leading experts and Erlang committers about new language constructs, virtual machine implementations and powerful libraries which together form the Erlang eco-system. Esoteric VM implementations are presented, alongside improvements and enhancements to the existing ones. You will learn how many of its features work and how to best use them to write fast and efficient code.

Scaling vertically by adding more powerful hardware is a thing of the past. We scaled horizontally, by adding more commodity hardware. With the coming of age of mega-core architectures, we have the choice of either adding more hardware or more cores, or both. Erlang style concurrency puts us ahead of the game when it comes to scaling with both approaches.

Whether it’s embedded devices, distributed systems or scaling, research is always at the heart of the BEAM community. In this track we’ll look at the most critical problems in the industry as a whole and possible solutions that can scale to millions of people.

The web and mobile applications landscape requires technologies that embrace change and multiple paradigms. In this track we’ll look at the state of the art in the Erlang and Elixir world to produce performant and resilient applications that stand the test of time, both in terms of scale and requirements.|||

Erlang User Conference 2017
The Erlang User Conference is back on 7-9 June with six exciting tracks and a day of tutorials.
Join leading Erlang, Elixir and other Distributed and Concurrent programming developer at EUC17 Stockholm - Early Bird has begun, register today and be part of a growing community. We have sold out in the past so be sure to secure your place today.