My first year of middle school, I was shocked to find my principal — a warm-looking lady who always wore flower-print dresses — had transformed overnight.

A team of surgeons had sliced her stomach, split it into two separate pouches, and reconstructed her small intestine so that it attached to both.

Then, the second operation.

A series of straw-like tubes were inserted into her stomach, her thighs, her who-knows-whatses. With a brrrrrrrrrr, a medical vacuum then slurped the fat from her body with tremendous force.

Just like that, she was thin.

This was terribly unsettling. I felt like our principal had cheated, taken the easy way out.

But, after some more thought, I couldn’t find a real reason to be so unsettled. After all, she got what she wanted.

On the surface, exercise and gastric bypass surgery (with a follow-up dose of liposuction) might look the same. After all, when done well, they both “fix” your obesity.

But are they really the same?

In A Guide to the Good Life, philosopher William B. Irvine takes up a similar question.

When faced with anxiety, should we choose the difficult path — fix our psychology by practicing Stoicism — or the easy one, medication?

The same person that takes surgery for obesity might argue that we use Xanax (a drug) to fix anxiety:

What’s happening when people think Xanax is easier, says Irvine, is that we are missing the long-term consequences of our actions:

Even ignoring the risks of drugs, taking the more difficult path can (1) solve our problem AND (2) help us more in the long run.

The person who takes the shortcut (Xanax) gets a different set of consequences:

I think that’s what bothered me about my principal. She “solved her problem,” but she didn’t fix the underlying problems.

If her obesity was a function of stress, diet, lifestyle, or hormonal balance, fixing her obesity would not solve much of nothing at all.

The body is still broken.

And when the body is broken, it lets us know.

Obesity and anxiety are extreme examples, of course. No true doctor suggests surgery before exercise.

But let’s look somewhere less obvious, to the idea “shortcuts.”

Our society loves easy answers: fifteen-minute abs, four-hour work weeks, 60-second microwave meals — pick your poison. We’re always looking for the THING — the trick, the prescription, the tool that will, finally, answer everything.

Few of us realize that this is an escape.

Continuing with our theme of Stoicism, let’s look at an extract from Letter XXVIII of Seneca’s Moral Letters.

Seneca writes to his friend Lucilius, who has not found happiness despite trying to escape from his problems in travel:

Magic powder solutions may bring moments of peace. But, if you don’t solve the REAL problem, the primary cause, then the problems keep coming back.

The shortcut wasn’t much of a shortcut at all.

Here’s one of my greatest fears.

Someday, life will present me with a choice. It will put me in front of my loved ones — my friends, my wife, my kids. Life will ask, “Low road, or high road. Which will you take?”

I don’t want to be caught taking the easy way out.|||

My first year of middle school, I was shocked to find my principal — a warm-looking lady who always wore flower-print dresses — had transformed overnight. A team of surgeons had sliced her stomach…