You’ve probably read about LinuxKit and the Moby Project. If you haven’t it’s recommended that you do before we start.

Moby is a framework to assemble specialized container systems. It has a library of containerized components and a framework for assembling these components into a standalone container platform. Currently Docker is being broken into modular components. In the future Docker will be assembled from these components that are packaged by Moby.

LinuxKit is a toolkit for building minimal Linux distributions. It uses Moby to build the distro images and the LinuxKit tool to run them. It is designed to be secure by default.

Now let's get started. You’ll need to have Docker and Golang installed. If you need help then read Installing Docker and Installing Golang.



 Can’t find the LinuxKit repository? No problem. Just clone the repository from GitHub again.

This command pulls a Linux kernel, adds the components mentioned in the YAML file and builds a standalone Linux distribution. If you get any errors just run the command again. I had to run it 5 times. Here’s the output.



 This command boots into the Linux image created by Moby. Here’s the output. It’s a minimal Linux distro. You can type commands and try it out. Use the command to terminate the console.

On some careful observation our minimal distro turned out to be Alpine Linux. See it yourself using the following command.

It gives the following output.

Next we can see what’s installed in our minimal system.

So we successfully built our own minimal Linux distribution using LinuxKit and Moby. You can edit the YAML configuration file as per your needs and build secure and lean Linux distros to run your containerized applications on.

LinuxKit and Moby are great but do you need it? If you need to build custom Linux distributions then this is super and saves you a ton of time. But if you’re just looking to run your apps on containers then you don’t have to necessarily tinker around with Moby. Docker will work fine for you.|||

Build and run a minimal Linux distro.