You already know this, but it bears repeating – APIs matter.

Because of new legislation, there is a noticeable shift in our understanding and use case for APIs. Additionally, API economies to meet user demand, not just the practical needs of businesses.  This is an exceptional time to work with APIs, Microservices, and similar topical areas. In truth, even more traditional businesses, like banks, are beginning to adopt technology as a core business asset.

By January 2018, every European financial institution must comply with  a new set of of laws known as the Payments Service Directive (PSD2). At it’s core, PSD2 is a directive that  banks must give third-party payment providers access to their systems and client current accounts.

In a recent article, Oliver Lynch, Business Development Director, Comtrade Digital Services breaks down the top ten things you need to know about this new legislation from the business perspective.

As highlighted in his article,

On a fundamental level, the use case for APIs have become central to one of the most regulated industries. Also, This presents an incredible opportunity for users and developers alike.

For the every day consumer, they are not concerned with APIs. They do not see the inner workings or what’s inside the black box. Consumers see an explosion of integrated apps, features and payment methods available that make banking more accessible.

Additionally, Consumers will see banking fees go away as the competition for their time and attention heats up. For example, some of their favorite stores could process their own payments without having to rely on the more traditional way of doing it.

If executed properly, consumers will be tremendous winners from this type of legislation.

Developers love a good challenge and navigating the complex web of financial and privacy regulations is no exception. There is a lot of information out right now about the consumer experience, but very little about what implications PSD2 has for developers.

…and we’re just getting started. However; P2D2 only affects Europe. Why would developers or companies focused on the North American market care?

Nabeel Siddiqui, American Banker, presents a new perspective on the state of API adoption in the United States.

In truth, failure to adopt innovation, collaborate with the startup ecosystem and foster frontier technologies is a recipe for disaster. Developers and consumers deserve opportunities to experience and create new experiences. However; APIs represent only part of the solution.

Let’s be honest – building APIs is not enough. Scalable infrastructure is also a primary consideration when it comes to creating built to last companies and applications.

Missing from the recent news and articles is this: difficulty in updating and changing existing infrastructure is one of the primary causes of slowing banks down. Monolithic infrastructure becomes outdated. As a result, developers face challenges in being able to integrate with legacy systems.

Modularity is more than just a buzzword.

If you are building or developing for the FinTech industry, do not let the idea of legacy systems slow you down.

Token, a Silicon Valley based startup, provides a great example for this concept.

By serving as the gateway to banks, Token is one of the first (but not the last) to position themselves in a strategic way that provides value to consumers, banks and third parties like merchants in response to PSD2. #winning|||

How does a sexy buzzword overheard at Developer conferences change the world? You already know this, but it bears repeating - APIs Matter.