The MP3: A History Of Innovation And Betrayal

"I don't like the title 'The Father of MP3,'" says Karlheinz Brandenburg. But he kinda is. "Certainly I was involved all the time from basic research [to] getting it into the market."

Brandenburg was part of the group that gave the MP3 its name. The Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) lent its name to the process of digital encoding by which audio and video is compressed into a file small enough to be transferred easily. That process — MPEG Audio Layer III — and the resulting file — the MP3 — is ubiquitous today. But the development wasn't simple, and its outcome wasn't inevitable.

The story of the MP3 is the story of how intellectual property became the commodity over which the Internet's greatest wars would be fought, and also how the work that goes into innovating can be forgotten in the face of a technology's rapid spread. Google "history of the MP3" today, and you'll find two options, neither satisfying: brief timelines that privilege the user experience over the process of invention and relentlessly technical, acronym-studded descriptions of the differences between various algorithms.

Today, Brandenburg is a professor at Ilmenau Technical University at the Fraunhofer Institute for Digital Media Technology – the same organization that funded his efforts as part of the MPEG. Joel Rose spoke with him about the story of the MP3, and we jumped at the opportunity to get the professor to walk us through the history of the format. As he told Joel, that story begins almost three decades ago and ends in 1999, at the dawn of the file-sharing network.

1982: Brandenburg's involvement in the process begins with a challenge: his PhD thesis advisor wants to patent a process of transferring data that, at the time, is considered impossible. So he asks Brandenburg for help.

The process still took quite a bit of time to perfect. "It's not that easy [to explain]," says Brandenburg. Here comes the technical bit: Early encoding processes were designed to filter a signal into layers of sound which could each be saved or discarded depending on relative significance. But the system was "very structured and inflexible." So a new system was proposed that would exploit the limitations of human hearing.

1988: An international team is convened after the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) calls for standards in audio encoding. That team was called the Moving Picture Experts Group, abbreviated MPEG. Brandenburg credits a colleague, Leonardo Chiariglione, with "the vision that such standards could be useful."

"In a standards group, people have to get consensus on a good idea for a system. ... That was the original starting point for work of MPEGs. And at that time, everybody working on the subject around the world thought, 'Okay, that's our chance, let's contribute to the standard.' "The idea of Leonardo Chiariglione and other people was originally to bring video to CD-Rom. That was the first application — but the list of applications at that time already listed everything else we now use compressed video and audio for ... So we had the audio subgroup within the motion pictures group ... In the end we all together had a compromise worked out which had different modes, so-called Layer I, Layer II, Layer III ... And most of our ideas went into the modes of compression in MPEG audio ... which was the most complex one and the one giving best quality at low bitrates — that was called Layer III."

More collaboration followed. Brandenburg worked with Jim Johnston of AT&T on different psycho-acoustic models and data coding, to try and fix the encoding system and save Vega's voice.

1992: MP3 is a reality. The ISO includes it as one of a number of possibilities for encoding audio. But for some time, Brandenburg says, it didn't catch on.

1993 - 1994: The system is in place. Where are the users?

To answer your question: Yes. In 2005, there was a birthday party for the MP3.

The Internet emerges as the MP3's true home, and the source of what Fraunhofer hoped would be a workable business model. Here's how that business model would work: encoding tools – to be used by large companies – would be expensive. But decoding tools – which would take the encoded digital files made using the MPEG Audio Layer III process and turn them back into audio that people could hear – would be available cheaply.

1997: As MPEG's encoding system got out into the world, it began to spark the imagination of users who definitely weren't thinking of Fraunhofer's bottom line. Before its second birthday, the MP3 was setting fires that its creators couldn't put out. The story of how the technology was hijacked and adapted for widespread consumers contains not only the roots of the war that the music industry would later wage over the tiny, compressed, user-friendly files, but also echoes of some of the very ideas that war was fought over: intellectual property, copyright, technology, theft, control and the free distribution of ideas and products that had taken years to realize.

"There were more and more people using this technology to store music on their hard discs. The idea was [originally] that encoders would be much more expensive. ... In, I think it was '97, some Australian student bought professional grade — from our point of view — encoding software for MP3 from a small company in Germany. He paid with a stolen credit card number from Taiwan. He looked at the software, found that we had used some Microsoft internal application programming interface ... racked everything up into an archive and wired some Swedish side, [and] put that to a U.S. university FTP site together with a read-me file saying, 'This is freeware thanks to Fraunhofer.' "He gave away our business model. We were completely not amused. We tried to hunt him down. We told everybody, 'This is stolen software so don't distribute it,' but still the business model to have expensive encoders and cheap decoders [was] done. From that time on, we reduced the cost for encoders. There was a company, Music Match, which allowed people early on to take a CD's music, read it into the computer and then have their own music jukebox on that. And they were legal, they paid for the patent fees so that was fine. "When we found out that people used our technology to do unauthorized distribution of music over the Net — that was not our intention, very clearly. I have to say, I don't say that everything the music industry does is correct or good, but still I think we should have respect for the work of the artists and everybody involved and it's only fair that they get paid for it. "It was in '97 when I got the impression that the avalanche was rolling and no one could stop it anymore. But even then I still sometimes have the feeling like is this all a dream or is it real, so it's clearly beyond the dreams of earlier times."

For the music industry, it would be a nightmare, but one of those nightmares where – when it starts — you have no idea how bad things are going to get.

1999 – 2000: Napster is invented in 1999, and even in its slow early days, allows the transfer of digital files from the hard drive of one user to another, with no regard to geography. Another group was convened in 1999 and 2000 to define methods for "secure, legal distribution of music over the Internet," Brandenburg says.

In the end, convenience won out.|||

The father of the MP3 talks about the race to invent the format and how it sped out of control.