As we all know, DVD is one of the good ways for people to store various data for a long term. So have you ever thought to burn your homemade videos or loved TV series to DVD for store or backup? If you want to burn your videos to DVD, you have to find a professional software to do the burning job.

Sothink DVD Creator is an excellent and powerful tool that can help you burn or convert all popular video formats such as MKV, MP4, AVI, M2TS and more to DVD on Windows quickly and effortlessly. It also allows you to burn several videos to DVD and to create your own DVD menu. The following is a step-by-step guide to show you how to burn video to DVD with Sothink DVD Creator.

Double click Sothink Media Toolkit icon to run it, choose DVD Creator and load the source.

Step 2: Choose the output size and select an output directory

Click the drop-down list box under “Output” to decide the output as DVD 5 or DVD 9. And then move to the bottom of the interface to select an output directory: click the drop-down list box to select your optical drive as the directory is to burn the video to a blank DVD; click the “folder” icon to select a directory is to convert the video to DVD folder; click the “image” icon to select a directory is to convert the video to ISO file.

Click the “Next” button to customize your own menu. Here you can choose the picture you like, relocate the widgets and change the font color, style and size. If you don’t want a menu, please choose no menu.

Click “Next” button to do some advanced settings. Here you can change the volume label, choose the TV Standard, Aspect Ratio and decide the way you would like to play your DVD.

Click the “Start” button to begin the burning process.

You see, it is very simple to burn video to DVD.

Until now, Sothink DVD Creator only has a Windows version, but a mac version will be released in the near future. If you really need a tool to convert video to DVD on your mac now, you can use Google to find a suitable one.

Note: If you choose to burn video to a blank DVD disc, you will be promoted to insert a compatible media to your optical drive when you click “Start” button. Just insert a blank DVD disc to continue the burning process.|||

How to Burn Video to DVD? This article is a step-by-step guide to show you how to convert video to DVD on Windows with Sothink DVD Creator easily and freely.