2 years ago, I stumbled across something that was a total game changer when it came to setting up web development environments. Today, whenever I need a development environment for a website or web app, I just click a few buttons, execute a command and I am ready to go within 5 minutes. And you know what’s cool? I can pick and choose between various web servers, database servers, programming languages and much more. But it does not end there: I can also share those environments with anybody. All they have to do is execute a command and they are ready to go as well. Hooked? I sure was. Before you ask, no, you don’t need to be a DevOps specialist. Ready? Lets go.

VirtualBox is an open-source hypervisor that allows you to run a completely isolated operating system inside of your current operating system. However, besides installing VirtualBox, you won’t really have to do anything else with it. This is where Vagrant enters the picture: Vagrant is an open-source tool that lets you easily build and maintain complete server environments. In the context of this tutorial you can think of it as a remote control for VirtualBox. Vagrant just needs one simple configuration file to do its thing. And before you thought life couldn’t get any easier: you don’t even need to create that configuration file yourself. Welcome to paradise. Before we continue, please download and install VirtualBox and Vagrant.

Vagrant is very flexible and powerful. You can, for example, use it to set up a web development environment that exactly matches your production environment. However, if you just want to get started quickly, you can create a Vagrant configuration file with a web app called PuPHPet. To make things easier for you, I have created a simple PuPHPet configuration file that you can drag and drop into the PuPHPet web app. From there, you can edit the settings as required or leave everything as is if you only need a web server, PHP and a MySQL database. PuPHPet tries to do a lot of things for you, so don’t get intimidated by all the settings.

After you have downloaded and extracted the PuPHPet configuration package, you will need to open a terminal of your choice and change the working directory to the extracted folder. In Windows 10, you can accomplish this by opening the extracted folder and entering in the Explorer address bar. In macOS, you can just drag the folder onto the Terminal application icon. After the terminal window is open, enter and watch the magic unfold. In a few minutes, a complete web development environment will be waiting for you.

Before you can go play in your new web development environment, you will need to take a few more easy steps. If you have customized my PuPHPet configuration, adjust the following step accordingly:

You can also send the folder to your peers or push it to a version control system. People will only have to install VirtualBox and Vagrant, run and follow step 2 above to get an identical web development environment.

While this tutorial introduces everything you need to set up portable web development environments, it only scratches the surface of what is possible with Vagrant. Would you like to learn more? The Vagrant documentation will show you how to use all the advanced features, and if you have any questions, feel free to reach out to me.|||

Quickly learn how to use Vagrant and VirtualBox to set up portable development environments for your web projects.