Whoever says healthy eating is more expensive is making up excuses as to why they can’t start eating in the correct way. Do you really need to have to break the bank to eat a balanced diet? Lets find out.

We live in a world where practicality is key to the consumer. Supermarkets are full of ready meals, junk food, and pre-made sandwiches. There are fast food joints on every road, and there are more coffee shops these days than there are people.

Humans have been programmed to pick up a coffee on the way to work, grab a sandwich on their lunch break, and purchase a ready meal or takeaway for when they get home. This is one expensive habit that is not only damaging your bank balance but damaging your body.

It is time to eat well and feel better about yourself. Eating a nutritious balanced diet doesn’t have to be expensive, you can do it on any budget.

Lets look at ways you can eat way for less by switching the way you shop and the foods you eat.

Water instead of coffee, sodas, or alcohol

Not exactly a food however water is a crucial component in the healthy lifestyle machine. Water is easily accessible and is free out of the tap if you live in a country with a good water source. If you don’t then big bottles of water are a fraction of the cost of sodas, coffees, and alcohol.

Read our article on ‘Why water is so important’ here.

Buy a whole chicken instead of packaged fillets

These days supermarkets charge you based on practicality rather than for the amount of food you purchase. Buying a small portion of chicken mini fillets can cost the same as a whole large chicken. By purchasing a whole chicken you will have numerous meals for the week and you can make a variety of meals with it.

You can use the left over chicken for your lunches at work by making a chicken salad, or a chicken wrap. If you really want to use the whole chicken and get your moneys worth then you can even make a homemade soup.

One thing that is practical and can contain a variety of fruits or vegetables is a couscous salad. You can pick a big bag of cous cous up for a minimal fee and the likes of cucumbers, tomatoes, beetroot, onions, and peppers also cost a small amount.

This is a great thing to keep in the fridge and can last for days. This will help prevent you from being poorly organised and grabbing a poor choice of food. It is also a great way to make sure that you are consuming a variety of fruit and vegetables.

Read our article on ‘Why you should eat a rainbow of fruit and vegetables’ here.

Porridge instead of cereals or granola

Ditch the poor quality cereals for porridge and you will save a lot of money over a year. Porridge is a greater source of carbohydrates and does not contain the refined sugars added to cereals. This makes it a more satisfying, nutritious, and greater way to start your days activities.

You can add bananas or berries to your porridge, although banana is a cheaper source if you are looking to eat well for less.

Sweet Potato instead of rice or pasta

This one doesn’t necessarily save you money however switching your rice or pasta for sweet potato will be a better way to eat well.

Sweet potatoes are rich in fibre, vitamins A, C, and B6 and are a better source of carbohydrates than pasta or rice. The beauty behind a sweet potato is that you can do so much more with it. You can make mash, fries, roast them, or throw them in a healthy curry.

Yes pre packaged items may be more practical however how long does it take to chop up some vegetables. By making your own salads, cutting up your own vegetables, or making your own meals will save you a lot of money. You will also know what is going in to your meals and be able to make your own decisions.

Pre packaged meals such as ready meals tend to contained added preservatives, sugars,  fats, and salts to pro long shelf life and add taste.

Take a read of ‘Food….the biggest addiction’ to understand the issue with added salts, fats, and sugars here

This may seem like a crazy one to a number of you however the freezing process can actually mean that your food is fresher and contains more nutrients.

Frozen fruits such as berries are a cheaper option than buying fresh and they are also there when you need them so you don’t need to worry about the expiry date.

Fish can be expensive if bought fresh and it could be sat on the shelves of the supermarket for a number of days before you buy it which means that it may not be as fresh as you think it is. Buying frozen fish will be much cheaper and they are frozen 1-2 days after the fish is caught which means that although it is frozen, it can be fresher than fish in the fridge section.

When cheaper supermarkets first started appearing, many were sceptical about the quality of meats, dairy, fruits, and vegetables.

There are many more around town these days and people have realised that they are still receiving good quality food for a fraction of the cost.

Pay these supermarkets a visit and you can pick up a variety of fruits and vegetables meaning that you can eat well for less.

Overall eating well doesn’t have to be expensive, this is because it isn’t at all. Hopefully this article has given you a greater understanding on how you can eat well for less. By making these changes you will save a lot of money, live a healthier lifestyle, and feel better knowing that both your body and bank account will be better for it.|||

Eat well for less by making changes in your eating habits to lead a healthier lifestyle. Good sources of food don't have to be expensive and you can eat well for less quite easily.