In today’s world where email is an essential part of our life, Microsoft Outlook has become the foremost choice for computer users. When it comes about emailing, Outlook is the first name what users look for. We all very well know about Microsoft Outlook. Generally users are found calling it an email client application, which is absolutely correct. But as a matter of fact, it’s not just an email client. Yes, you heard me right. In fact, it is a personal information manager tool containing various features other than emailing. It includes calendar, task manager, contact manager, note taking, journal, and web browsing.

Outlook is the part of a well-known Office suite, called Microsoft Office. Also, it comes as a separate application. It is commonly used as a stand-alone application for individual purpose. But in organizations and large enterprises, it is used with Exchange Server for multiple users. Being a part of Microsoft Exchange Server, users can easily share their mailbox data with one another.

Microsoft Outlook allows users to work in offline mode if they are not connected with the Exchange Server or Internet connection is not available. For this, Outlook creates a copy of mailbox data on a local system, called OST aka Offline Storage Table. In case you are not connected with Exchange Server, Outlook stores the mailbox data into an Outlook data file, called PST or Personal Storage Table.

Sometimes it becomes an essential task to convert OST into PST format. The most common reasons are discussed below:

There could be few more reasons for OST to PST conversion. But now the question is how to do that. There are few manual tricks suggested by Outlook professionals which can be used for exporting Outlook mailbox data from OST to PST. Also, many software companies provide professional tools for converting OST files into PST format. However, you should always try the manual tricks first as they require no 3rd party tool or any other cost.

Before you can start exporting Outlook mailbox from OST to PST format via manual tricks, you need to make sure few things:

The Import and Export feature of Outlook is considered to be the best way to export mailbox data. You can this feature in this way:

Step 3: In the Import and Export Wizard, choose an action to perform: Export to a file. Then hit Next.

Step 4: Now select Outlook data file (.pst) in the list, and again hit Next to continue the process.

Step 5: Here you need to select the mailbox folder to export from. You may also include the subfolders. Hit Next one more time.

Step 6: Now define a location where you want to save the new PST file. Also, check other options given there before exporting Outlook mailbox data. Click Finish to start the process.

Step 7: Within a couple of minutes (usually depends on the size of mailbox), the process is completed. You can now check the new Outlook data file at the location you defined earlier.

Few other manual tricks include Outlook’s archive feature, Move to the items to new PST file, etc. Manual tricks are helpful, but you can’t use them if the OST files are corrupt. In case of corruption, you can run scanost.exe, the Integrity check tool to scan the corrupt files.

3rd party professional tools are the best alternative in this situation. A professional OST to PST Converter is programmed to support normal as well as corrupt OST files, and convert them into PST format within a few mouse clicks. Manual tricks are always time-consuming and tricky for novice users. But if you employ a professional tool, the file conversion process becomes an easy task to perform without taking much time, i.e. hardly a couple of minutes would be enough for the entire operation.|||

Do you need to convert OST to PST format? You can do it yourself with an easy manual trick. You can also try a professional OST to PST converter Tool.