Business, Internet and Businesses Online, Self Improvement, Reference and Education

Feeling down drains your energy, hope, and drive, making it difficult to do what you need to have a better life. But you cannot avoid change because the more you resist it, the harder your life become.

It has this uncanny ability to catch up with you when it is the least expected and can create an uneasy feeling or a joyous one in your life. At those moments, you are faced with having to make a choice or being forced to do it.

Changing your life for a better one is not a quick or easy fix, but it is not an impossible feat. Unpredicted circumstances are also not something you can just snap out of, but you can have more power than you realize.

You should know that your conscious processing mind travels at 100 miles per hour around your brain while your unconscious processing travels about 100,000 miles per hour around it. It is such an astonishing feat, isn’t it?

So, it means that your conscious is just an observer to what your unconscious dictates as it is the one making all the decisions before you even thought of making a choice. You still don’t believe me?

A recent discovery reveals that your unconscious mind often predicts the decision or the response you were going to make, up to seven seconds before your conscious mind is aware of what is going on.

So while you may think that you have just made a choice, seven seconds before that, your unconscious has already looked at all the options and created the decision you made.

What can you do? The key is to realize that you have a time frame of seven seconds.

I suggest you watch this “7 seconds to change your life” video on a TEDx talk by Alistair Horscroft, an Australian speaker known for his TV series "The Life Guru" to have the answer.

Change is like a Catch-22! It requires action, but taking action when you are hit or hurt is not easy.

Change usually arises in your life as a result of a choice or a crisis, or by chance. It is not always easy, surely when you come to find yourself at a low point. It is then that you need to understand how to adjust your perspective to bring you back up.

Since circumstances, situations or problems in your existence show up uninvited; they knock you off balance with a feeling of confusion, at times in fear, and leave you wounded, some time to the core.

You cannot avoid unexpected events from happening, control them, or know why you are experiencing such challenging moments. However, you can choose how to respond to them. Your decisions are what are enabling you to make changes for the better or not.

What follows are some tips on how to change your life, day by day, to find yourself coping better with unforeseen circumstances and situations that arise.

When problems hit us, our tendency is to withdraw and isolate. It often feels more comfortable to retreat into our shell. Instead, take that time to know what is important in your life.

Focus on your dreams. Think of what makes you happy. By keeping your dreams alive, it will give you a purpose and sense of direction on how to make the changes you want to live a better life. If you do not, you will spend the rest of your life drifting through it pointlessly with no dreams, path, focus, or purpose.

You should also know that social support is essential to what happens to you. Find ways, big and small, to help others by getting involved in volunteer work, be a listening ear for a friend in difficulty, spend time with an animal or do something nice for someone.

As a child, you believed that anything was possible. You would daydream all the time. You were skilled at dreaming and visualizing what you would be when you grew up.

We all lose that ability as we develop into adulthood. Your thoughts and ideas get hidden by the responsibilities you get, and you start to forget or believe that achieving your dreams is impossible.

Making a Vision Board is a great incentive for you to start accomplishing and trusting in your dreams again. Picturing your desires each day on a vision board will bring positive changes to life. We then begin to have faith in the probability of making them come true.

You cannot force yourself to have fun or experience pleasure, but you can push yourself to do certain things, even if you do not feel like it.

Even if change does not come away right away, you will gradually feel better and more energetic so as to make time to focus on solutions rather than problems.

Practice meditation. It can help relieve depression, reduce the stress you have accumulated, and boost up positive feelings, joy, and well-being. Reward yourself with moments of happiness and appreciate and show gratitude on a daily basis.

It is one of the ways to change your life for better. You should not miss some great instants because you are too busy focusing on your difficulties raised by change.

Once your dream life looks alive again, you have to take action and set long-term, medium, and short-term goals. It is acting on these objectives that enable you to achieve change for the better.

Remember your life may change as events occur unexpectedly, but you should always be flexible in adjusting your sails with the wind that blows and reflect on these changes.

The small steps which you are taking generate the motion for change to happen in your life.

Watch this motivational video and how to change your life.

When you experience or learn something new, you improve your knowledge and with it come more confidence. It makes you more adaptable and flexible to new circumstances in your life.

Therefore, by getting out of your comfort zone, you get more comfortable with the unknown.

Reading books is a wonderful way for you to learn. You should never stop searching and acquiring more knowledge because it gives your life meaning and to change your existence, it is worthwhile.

You should know that regrets are events of the past and if you spend your time thinking about it, you will miss great things in the present as the future is not yet written.

You know you cannot change what you did or do not do in previous times, so let it go. The only thing you have now control over is the way you choose to live your present and future life.

Here is a simple way to get rid of regrets: Get some balloons and blow them up. Then write on each of them a thing you regretted and then let them go. As you see them going off into the sky, say goodbye to those regrets forever.

If you want to change your life for better, you should learn how to dominate your fears so they cannot have power over you any longer. They are simply thoughts you set in your mind which are not real; you just believe that they are true.

You should understand that it is your fears in life that stop you from living your life to the fullest. But once you face your fears, you take back your power to decide and choose how you want to live your life and when to do this, you do change your existence forever.

You could make a list of scary things that you would kind of like to do but are too afraid to. Put a plan in place and take a step to do them.

Watch this short video about facing your fears and how to change your life.

To close, you should know that the only person who is going to make a change in your existence is you and only you. So now, I leave you with a choice to make, on how you want to change your life for better. If you take action on my message, it will without a doubt change your life forever.

Sergei VanBellinghen, Founder & CEO of First-Class Lifestyle and sergeivanbellinghen.com, Success & Self-Improvement Consultant, Freedom entrepreneur & business partner of Stuart Ross, also counselor in East Europe-West relationships, a passionate Globetrotter and an avid audio booker|||

Every new day is a chance to change your life for better 
and make a choice on how to face circumstances that life 
throws at you.