After a long wait, the CoolPad has officially released its new smartphone, Cool Play 6 in their home country, China. They have primarily claimed this handset, to be gaming phone, with amazing hardware aspects and design features.

To get your hands on the Cool Play 6, you have to pay 1499 Yuan, which is pretty close to $217 and the choice of color options are either Black or Soft Gold. If you are interested to buy this new gaming device, start your registration process, but rush up, as the process is already on; and the phone is set to arrive from May 16, exactly at 10:AM in Jingdong.

Let’s have a detailed look on the design and specs details of this handset.

The device flaunts a metal body and there are bezels on all the four sides. Though, there is no physical home button on the device’s chin, the bottom bezel is quite large.

On the other hand, in the rear side the handset is adorned with a vertically arranged dual cameras and a fingerprint sensor is placed just below it. The placement of the speaker grills at the bottom edge brings a pretty look for the Cool Play 6.

Let’s have the short look on the specs: It has a 5-inch display; powered by a 64-bit Qualcomm Snapdragon 653 processor; and holds a 6GB RAM and 64GB internal storage.

For photography, an 8MP sensor is placed in the front for the selfie shooter. In the rear, it has a dual camera – in which, one is 13MP sensor with 6P lens, f/2.0 aperture and auto focus; while the other one is a black and white sensor.

The company touts that, the massive 4060mAh battery can withstand up to 252 hours of normal usage, 8 hours of watching HD videos , 9 hours of  internet surfing and 6 hours for playing games. The coolest part is, the device doesn’t get heated up, while playing games, even for a long time; as it comes with a built-in temperature control technology. It supports Wi-Fi too.

Wow! CoolPad have given out too many surprising features, with this new phone. And that doesn’t ends there; we have some more amazing things on it. CoolPad has made an agreement with Tencent, to offer excellent freebies, for all the Cool Play 6 users. Correspondingly, you can play live games by accessing the FreshDay game content platform.|||

CoolPad announced Cool Play 6 in the China at price of 1499 Yuan. A Perfect Gaming Smartphone with 6GB RAM, 4060mAh battery and Snapdragon 653 processor.