IMPACT is very thrilled to organize a special remote hackathon in New York City for an entire week, from Thursday, June 1st to Wednesday, June 7th.

You will have the opportunity to work and play around one of 2 great APIs (CogniK, Deep Algo) or around design innovation (eJust, Mazen). Pick your hack!



The challenge is open to everyone willing to play and create. On top of the amazing people you'll meet and the great work you'll achieve, you will compete for one of the 2 prizes valued at more than $1000 each. Participants must attend the opening (June 1st) and closing event (June 7th) in New York City. It's going to be a lot of fun!

How to participate ? 

- Please register on this Eventbrite 

- Then register on Agorize platform (to be disclosed)

Use one of the two featured APIs to create brand new use cases. Your project must significantly rely on the API.

We are looking for innovative ways for participants to use our personalization platform to build amazing products. CogniK is a personalization platform designed for publishers to deliver a personalized recommendation for each user. At the heart of it, CogniK's platform provides an intelligent way to connect users with the best content matching their user's interest. The CogniK platform can be used to personalize websites, mobile apps, newsletters and chatbots.

What ? Build amazing products (chatbot, web widgets ...etc) using our personalization platform

Who ? Open to anyone familiar with API and how to interact with them, CogniK platform being driven by a RESTful API

What's in it for you ? Gain Experience with Personalization - Develop prototyping skills

- PROJECT 2: Algorithm Visualization: we need oversight and transparency ! with Deep Algo

We believe that in our data obsessed world, nobody would tolerate opaque algorithms to decide : we need oversight and transparency. Deep Algo is a powerful tool to get a deep insight into your code. Deep Algo helps you to document, validate and ensure the transparency of algorithms. Join our community and embrace our quest !

What ? Build use cases around Deep Algo API

Who ? Open to Ruby/Java/C#/Javascript developers and UX designers

What's in it for you ? Gain experience in advanced Ruby and designing a product - Coaching from our R&D engineers - Using Deep Algo Free and Integrating Deep Algo into the workflow of your open-source project - Hiring opportunities

Use one of the two Saas software to develop new design innovation ideas.Your project must significantly rely on the UX design.

- PROJECT 1: Designing the court of the future with eJust

eJust is an online arbitration center. Critical UX phases are on boarding of the claimant and on boarding of the defendant, if users undertake wrongly these initial steps it misleads the whole process. Resulting in a less effective dispute resolution.

What ? Create usage scenarios for the users' on boarding phase

Who ? Open to UX designers

What's in it for you ? Gain experience in UX design - Hiring Opportunities

We developed the first SEO software dedicated to save web marketers' time. Creating and optimizing digital content is a big part of today's web marketing. Unfortunately, existing Content Management Systems (CMS) are not designed with web marketers challenges in mind. Our mission is to solve one of their biggest challenge: save time by finding innovative ways to avoid them time consuming, low value tasks. We would like to allow web marketers to work on what really matters, such as content creation and strategy, and thus find technical and UX answers to more trivial tasks, such as finding information, creating layouts, automating content structure (title and sub titles). This new WYSIWYG has to be universal and integrate with existing CMS (such as Wordpress).

What ? Come up with ux design ideas for their new feature (WYSIWYG) through interfaces and mock ups 

Who ? Open to UX designers, designers and anyone with a creative mindset.

What's in it for you ? Gain experience by working on a UX project for a Saas software and gain visibility in your field (if selected, they will namely showcase your work).

1 PRIZE valued at more than $1000 for the best API-based use case.

1 PRIZE valued at more than $1000 for the best design innovation.

6pm Let's share pizza and beers!

6:15pm IMPACT Opening

6:30pm eJust, Mazen, CogniK & Deep Algo presentations

7:00pm Q&A

7:20pm Reminder of the rules

8:00pm Let’s hack! Beginning of the hackathon - social time

The Agorize platform (to be disclosed) is available to submit your code during the whole week.

10:00 am Final Coding and Submission Deadline

6:00 pm Project presentations – Judging and voting begins

7:00 pm Panel deliberations / mingle and snacks for participants

8:00 pm Awards

9:00 pm Closing

There are two challenges and two projects per challenge. 

Everyone needs to subscribe to the event and Agorize platform. From that platform, you will be able to form your teams (creating a team with people you already know or finding other participants on the platform).

Teams must be between 1 to 4 people. Your team must select and compete in one project only, there will be separate prizes for each project.

All code developed as part of the IMPACT hackathon must be fresh. To keep things fair, all codes must be written during the length of the hackathon starting at 8:15pm on Thursday, June 1st. Other than that, almost anything goes and you can use any coding languages, open-source libraries, and APIs.

Each team is required to submit their project on Agorize no later than 10am on Wednesday, June 7th. On Wednesday evening, accepted submissions will be given 2 minutes to pitch their functioning solution in front of the judges followed by a 1 minute Q&A session. Your presentation format is up to you, but it is recommended to share a very brief visual, e.g. PowerPoint or a video combined with a demo of the solution developed. We will provide you with projection equipment.

Hackers who can’t attend the closing event in San Francisco will not be eligible for the prizes.

You will have to sign a participation agreement on the day the Hackathon begins. Both hackers and makers will be required to sign the agreements.

Who owns the IP? Depends of each startups (see 1- Challenges)

The ideas are judged based on 4 criteria from a panel of judges:

Includes the degree of innovation demonstrated using the API and the extent to which the API is key in the solution.

Includes how beautiful and elegant the solution is in terms of how it looks to the user and how easy it is to use.

Includes the extent to which the solution does what it is supposed to do and how good the code is written in a performance point of view.

Includes how compelling the solution is and how likely people are to be excited about it.

We thank our sponsor OVH. With a community of over 1,000,000 customers, OVH is the third internet hosting company in the world.|||

Eventbrite - Bpifrance and Business France presents Impact Hackathon NYC: API & UX Design - Thursday, June 1, 2017 | Wednesday, June 7, 2017 at Galvanize, New York, NY. Find event and ticket information.