Nowadays many Android devices have enough internal memory to store their daily data without SD card. Here this tutorial will show you how to recover Android data from internal memory without backup.There are a lot of Android data recovery tools in the market. You must select a professional one like Jihosoft Android Data Recovery software. Here we can have a test to check whether it can retrieve deleted or lost data from Android internal memory like it says.1.Download it from its professional website and install it on your PC or Mac.2.Run it and choose the file types you need. Only selecting what you need instead of all can save a lot time of scanning and recovering.3.Identify your Android device by connecting it to your computer via USB cable and turn on the USB debugging 4.Scan lost or deleted data from your Android internal memory. This may take a few minutes. All depends on the amount of your Android data.5.Preview the scanning result and selectively restore what you want.When you complete the whole recovery process, your lost Android data should be back on your computer. You can check and view them on your PC or Mac. If you want to transfer data from computer to your Android, you need Phone Data Transfer . If you need print messages, contacts, call log and etc from computer, you cam also export them out as CSV or HTML format.Main Characteristics of Android Data Recovery SoftwareIt works on most Android brands like Samsung, HTC, LG, Sony, HUAWEI, OnePlus, Lenovo, Motorola, Google and etc.It recovers a lot Android file types such as photos, contacts, text messages, videos, audios, call history, WhatsApp, Viber, documents and etc.It recovers data from Android internal memory due to unintentional deletion, factory reset, system crash, virus attack, system upgrade, broken screen and etc.It recovers lost data from Android internal memory as well as SD card.From the above steps, we can see that Jihosoft Android Data Recovery is an all-in-one software. You can count on it to perform Android data recovery without backup. If you have any problems in data recovery from Android, contact support@jihosoft.com Before recovery, stop using your Android device. Any new data written into your phone or tablet might overwrite your lost data and make them unrecoverable.|||

Data Recovery from Android Internal Memory. Nowadays many Android devices have enough internal memory to store their daily data without SD card. Here this tutorial will show you how to recover Android...