Let me tell you a story about a neighboring metropolitan powerhouse triggering the mass-migration of skilled labor while dethroning itself as the global leader. Let me tell you how this was fueled by a rising intolerance towards people of other backgrounds and beliefs. No, this is not about London, this is a story about the events that set the gears in motion to what would ultimately become the Dutch Golden age.

The Dutch Golden Age was the result of the welcoming climate towards foreigners combined with a tectonic shift in the geopolitical landscape of western Europe. Prior to the Dutch golden age, the Netherlands was under Spanish control. At some point the power of the religiously intolerant, catholic king Philip II waned. The people of the Netherlands were displeased by the way the country was ruled. And so, armed with a list of requests and complaints, a cohort of Dutch noblemen traveled to the palace of the Duchess of Parma.

Upon arrival, her councillors scoffed the noblemen and called them beggars before sending them off. That name stuck and was embraced by a group of Dutch privateers and pirates that made a hobby out of plundering Spaniards. These sailors became known as the "water geuzen" or water beggars. The water beggars started attacking Spanish settlements. This boosted the morale of the people, uniting the country against the Spanish oppressors. They were given an official letter of marque from William of Orange, but it was no smooth sailing for the Dutch. The Spanish army reconquered the cities of Antwerp, Gent and Brugge. At the time, Antwerp was the global economic center and the most important port in the world. Antwerp was then what London is today.

Okay, so maybe it is about London, but here is where the story gets interesting. Under the terms of surrender in Antwerp, the protestant population was commanded to move out of the region within four years. Protestants, often skilled workers, artisans, academics or wealthy merchants, moved north and settled in Amsterdam, triggering its golden age. The tolerant city became a safe haven for refugees from other areas such as the huguenots of France and the Sephardi Jews of Portugal and Spain.

Sounds familiar? The plot is eerily similar to the Brexit: The multi-year process of purging minorities due to rising intolerance coincidentally drives away the academic and business elite to the next-best location. Intolerance only breeds wanderlust amongst footloose academic and entrepreneurial pilgrims. The proximity and identity of Amsterdam has a massive pull for the global intelligentsia, and with it, the Dutch are setting the stage for a new golden age.

Time and time again, golden ages were not fueled by the settlement of foreign companies but by the mass migration of skilled workers. One needs only look at the Dutch golden age in the 17th century, the rise of Wallstreet in the 80s or Silicon Valley at the height of the dot com era. At the heart of any Golden Age are the many nationalities that work to build a bright and tolerant future together.

"There is no other city in the world where you can find as many nationalities as Amsterdam; the city’s 800,000 residents represent 178 nationalities. They are the beating heart of the city and now this image has been visualized for all to see. A heart shines in the center of Amsterdam where the water of the Amstel and the Zwanenburgwal meet."

The artwork was inspired by the famous words of former city councilor, Floor Wibaut (1859-1936) whose statue can be seen standing around the corner from the City Hall: “There's only one land: earth. There's only one nation: humankind. There's only one faith: love.”|||

