Craftsy, a darling of the Denver tech community known for how-to cooking and sewing videos online, agreed to be acquired by Comcast NBCUniversal on Wednesday in a move that will elevate its crafting might with one of the most powerful companies in the video world.

In a letter to employees shared with The Denver Post, Craftsy CEO John Levisay called its new owner “an ideal destination for Craftsy” and assured its staff of 190 employees that the company can look forward to aggressive growth, including hiring, and staying put in its current office in downtown Denver. The company posted a similar letter on its blog to the crafting community to say little will change for members.

“We have had multiple overtures to buy Craftsy over the years. When I met the team at NBCU last year, something felt different. Their leadership team is committed to innovation and leading the way in changing the way people receive content,” Levisay said. “It will provide us tremendous resources and a massive distribution platform to further pursue our vision of becoming an iconic brand in the maker space via ‘edutainment,’ lifestyle learning and supplies.”

Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed.

Craftsy, which launched in 2011, is considered one of Denver’s leaders in this decade’s group of fast-growing tech startups. It has raised $103 million in venture capital to date and recently expanded into selling its own fabrics and yarns.

For Craftsy, this means access to NBCUniversal’s video resources and cable entertainment network. For Comcast, the move would dovetail with reports that it is creating its own rival to Netflix as a service separate from what it offers its cable TV customers.

Comcast also shared a statement, saying it planned “to build Craftsy’s brand awareness exponentially, … an exciting prospect considering that the crafts retail market alone is estimated to be a $30 (billion) to $40 billion business,” according to a letter signed by Bonnie Hammer, chairman of NBCUniversal’s Cable Entertainment Group. “As Craftsy expands its own entertainment content, it can benefit from access to NBCUniversal’s lineup of talent and properties. Imagine synergies with shows like Bravo’s ‘Top Chef’ and Syfy’s ‘Face Off’ and opportunities to develop creative new content for kids on Sprout.”

Dave Howe, president of strategy and commercial growth for NBCUniversal’s Cable Entertainment Group, will be the Comcast executive in charge of Craftsy, with Levisay reporting to Howe. Levisay and Craftsy co-founders Todd Tobin and Bret Hanna have agreed to stay with Craftsy for four years.

Leading up to Craftsy, its co-founders knew a lot about online commerce. They came from companies such as eBay, Priceline and the company now called HomeAdvisor. But they knew little about crafting. The business started as Sympoz, which produced educational videos, and morphed as it discovered the passionate community of quilters and knitting circles. It hired experts in the field, flew them to Denver to record training videos and sent them back home. Sympoz stopped producing videos on wine appreciation, personal finance and fatherhood, and adopted the name Craftsy in 2011.

Kirk Holland, managing director at Access Venture Capital in Westminster, was among the early investors in Craftsy, back when it had fewer than a dozen online video classes. (It now has more than 1,300.) He says the acquisition bodes well for investors, the company and its employees, and the Denver tech community.

“Mergers and acquisitions can be really bad or really great. This one is really great,” Holland said. “I’ve been doing this for 20 years, and, obviously, it’s financially providing a very big return. The outcome is going to be one of the bigger acquisitions in the state in quite a while.”

In an interview last fall with The Denver Post, Levisay said the company’s e-commerce business has grown to about 40 percent of total revenues, which neared $60 million annually. At the time, the company employed 220 people, including 50 at a new factory that opened in Indianapolis in June. It also had about 10 million registered users but was not profitable.

“The business can be profitable when we want it to be,” Levisay said last fall.

There has been a lot of interest in crafting. According to the Craft & Hobby Association, industry revenues are $30 billion annually, propelled by avid makers that helped create companies such as Etsy, which went public in 2015, and caused Amazon to tap into the market with its “Handmade at Amazon” market later that year. Last week, however, Etsy fired its CEO and cut 80 jobs after not seeing a profit.

Holland pointed to Comcast’s past acquisitions, such as GolfNow.com in 2008. The site focused on golf-related content but aimed to become a golf-reservation system. Comcast invested millions, and the brand is now used all over NBC’s channels and properties.

“When you have a big, exciting company like NBC and Comcast, they’re really stepping up and believe Craftsy to be a phenomenal consumer brand, one they want to continue to grow and invest in. It’s probably now a billion-dollar brand,” Holland said. “I hope NBC puts that behind Craftsy. I don’t think they’re trying to buy it and bury it.”

That’s the hope of area tech leaders, including Greg Greenwood, executive director of the Blackstone Entrepreneurs Network Colorado. It was created in 2014 to find and guide local startups, such as Craftsy, that have billion-dollar potential. The idea isn’t to grow companies to get acquired and move away, but to build a Colorado ecosystem where the billion-dollar firms reinvest locally to feed a new cycle of entrepreneurs and growth.

“My continued hope is that we don’t necessarily have just tent-pole companies (that don’t invest back into local operations) but the Zayos that are built here and become billion-dollar companies,” Greenwood said. “But we also have the Googles and the Amazons investing in our companies. My hope is they will continue to invest and bring talent from the coast to fuel (local) companies. That’s what I’ve had direct conversations with Google about. And now Amazon is putting a big investment in town, too. Facebook is big in the water.”

For Comcast, this offers evidence that the company is moving to compete with the new breed of online-video services. In recent months, this world of OTT world — short for over-the-top video that is viewed outside the traditional TV space — has welcomed increased competition from Hulu, which announced a live-TV streaming service with 50 cable and local channels for $40 a month. Also last week, HBO said it would end its streaming deal with Amazon in 2018 to focus on its growing standalone service.

Comcast does offer internet video, but only to paying cable customers via services such as TV Everywhere. With competition from internet TV services, including Dish Network’s Sling TV and AT&T’s DirecTV Now, plus the pressure of HBO veering away from a reliance on cable TV providers, Comcast is being forced to do something more, said Tim Siglin, Media Strategy Principal at ReelSolver, a market analysis firm.

“I do think we can say that clearly, OTT has suddenly become of interest, whereas before, they were happy and content to do TV Everywhere, where (streaming) is tied to your cable subscription,” Siglin said. “OTT is yet another medium to reach out beyond your physical infrastructure and into markets where you’re not. It lets you jump to a national or atmospherical presence.”

For now, Comcast only offers access to streaming to paying cable customers. Craig Moffett, an analyst with MoffettNathanson, doesn’t think Comcast will venture out beyond its region. But the company is obviously still investing in digital media.

“Comcast has been very clear that they have no intention of launching an out-of-region OTT video service,” Moffett said. “That said, they have always been very active investors in digital media, and they do a great deal of digital media distribution to their customers, both in the home and out of it.”|||

Craftsy, a darling of the Denver tech community known for how-to cooking and sewing videos online, agreed to be acquired by Comcast NBCUniversal on Wednesday in a move that will elevate its crafting might with one of the most powerful companies in the video world.