I’m a big fan of professor Clayton Christensen for more than a decade.

I even bought all the copies on the shelf of one book store and gave them to my employees to inspire them when I was running a startup. I think the actual number should have been 10 to 15 copies by the way.

Anyway I watched a youtube video which I watched similar video maybe a few years ago gain. The professor was talking about why empowering innovation was super important to society.

Let me summarize his points.

There are 3 types of innovations and only one of which can contribute to our society actually.

He explained in the video in detail why only empowering innovation make a society or country wealthy. But magically all once great companies is compelled to focus on sustaining and efficiency innovation in the end.

So I agree with his points.

I also start wondering how we can fix the problem.

Since the US has Silicon Valley, the situation is way better than other developed countries but the professor was worried even for the US.

For the former, professor Christensen even published a book called Competing Against Luck to make empowering innovation predictable and controllable. This book is kind of how-to book for that.

I read it and the book is really really good. I even purchased 2 copies and gave them to my co founders. But I also feel we or I still need help.

Most startup founders and innovators can not use the theory well.

Because….

Understanding the abstract is okay but it’s not easy to understand the theory deeply unless you’re a big fan of the theory. I purchased more than 20 copies in my life and distributed them to my employees and co founders. but most of them didn’t quite understand theory. 

I hope it’s not only me who can not use the theory correctly…

By the way when I was looking for articles or videos which the professor was talking about policy, I found an article.

In the article, professor said we should change tax law to encourage long term investment and penalize short time investment.

While policy is out of my hand, creating or joining in empowering innovator’s community may be doable. If there are such communities, please let me know. Thanks in advance.|||

I even bought all the copies on the shelf of one book store and gave them to my employees to inspire them when I was running a startup. I think the actual number should have been 10 to 15 copies by…