Being a renter used to mean something. Back when living on a block meant belonging to a community —to something bigger — “renter” was a shared identity. And we stuck together: in 1907, a 16 year-old Pauline Newman started a rent-strike that grew to 10,000 families, all of whom had the same message for their landlords: the rent is too damn high. These sorts of strikes happened again & again, well into the 1970s.

Now, “renter” means something different. Rent’s still too high (by some estimates, every county in the U.S. has an affordable housing problem), and while the portion of people renting continues to rise, the strength of community among renters does anything but.

For all its potential, tech’s done little to help here. If you’re renting an apartment in 2017, you’re not doing it much differently than your parents were in 1997: find an advertisement, contact an agent, view a place for six minutes, then sign-away an unspeakable portion of your annual income. Thanks, tech.

But, hey: at least tech’s brought on a golden age of landlording. With instant background checks, credit reports, and even social media scraping (modern-day redlining, for you students of history), tech has systematically de-risked the rental property industry. When Blackstone decides to jump into an industry with both feet, you know it’s lucrative.

It was onto this scene that a young startup, Rentberry, saw a golden opportunity: instead of listing your property for a price, why not let people bid against each other, in real time?

At its heart, auction-style pricing isn’t much different than how apartments are priced already. When a landlord lists a unit, they consult the local market & try to price their unit close to comparable apartments in the area. Realtors are a big help here: with an understanding of how a place stacks-up against other listings, they act as a check against a landlord’s potentially (and often) unrealistic expectations.

Auctions take a different approach to finding fair-market value. Where the traditional model has seasoned realtors estimate the worth of a unit, the auction model simply asks would-be renters what they’re willing to pay. In the Rentberry model, a landlord schedules an open-house, prospective tenants visit at the prescribed time, then, later that day, anyone interested places a bid on the Rentberry platform. It’s open bidding, too, so users can see what others are bidding & compete in real-time.

While not as hotly contested as certain black/blue dresses, this auction system’s sparked some controversy. Proponents will tell you that efficient pricing is intrinsically good, and higher prices mean more incentive for developers to build. Detractors of the auction system argue that rents don’t really need any help rising, and that we ought not be so cavalier about squeezing inefficiencies out of a market that 111,000,000 people call ‘home.’

Whatever the merits of their arguments, though, both sides miss the most troubling part of the model.

For its part, Rentberry’s waffled on its impact, claiming both that landlords can expect 5% hikes in rent, and that renters will see a 5% reduction in their rent. Like so much startup math, this is tough to decipher, so let’s agree for now that the broad economic impact of rent auctions is yet to be determined.

The clear & present danger in a system like this has to do with norms & transparency. Instead of realtors advising landlords on pricing, auctions call for renters to determine the value. If this were eBay, fine: just Google whatever trinket or action figure you’re buying to see if the seller’s price is fair. But real estate & apartments are incredibly hard to price, and asking renters to do so isn’t much different than the pushy car salesman insisting you don’t need to call your uncle who’s good with cars, because, what — don’t you trust him? Apartment auctions are the same hard-sell, but with a high-tech veneer (again: thanks, tech).

The most insulting part, though, is the staging. To “stage” a unit, in real estate lingo, means to polish it up — to cover blemishes, add a few nice pieces of furniture, maybe a scented candle or two. In the conventional apartment-finding process, you may only get six minutes to see an apartment before signing a lease, but at least it’s an honest six minutes —since viewings are sporadic, it’s impractical to stage a unit, so you get a chance to scrutinize your would-be next home in its natural state (and, if you’re lucky, to ask a question-or-two of the current tenants & neighbors).

By letting companies like Rentberry ‘streamline’ away what little transparency the rental process has, we’re being asked to spend more while being given less. While tech brings new levels of transparency to the landlord’s side of the transaction, life as a renter gets dimmer & dimmer.

We started Wayhome with the quaint belief that dropping 30% of your salary on an apartment entitles you to better than being pitted against your fellow renter in hopes of winning an apartment you know nothing about. Our solution is simple: use Wayhome to search for your apartment, then let us share what you learn about places with other apartment-hunters— just a simple courtesy for a fellow renter, like holding a door or leaving the light on.

We think the era of rent-strikes is probably behind us. But, if enough renters leave the light on, finding an apartment will get a lot less dark. We think Ms. Newman would’ve liked that.|||

Being a renter used to mean something. Back when living on a block meant belonging to a community —to something bigger — “renter” was a shared identity. And we stuck together: in 1907, a 16 year-old…