For some projects, clients have told us they want to work with a freelancer within their country. Maybe these projects require localized knowledge (like legal or marketing projects), the possibility of on-site coordination, or specific compliance needs that make it easier to work with someone in their own country.

Unfortunately, doing this today on Upwork can be tricky. Clients have some ability to select regional preferences, but many have said this isn’t good enough. To meet this need, we’re rolling out enhanced location selection with new clients in the coming weeks.



We’ll be testing this initially with new clients in the U.S. and based on the results will consider expanding to other areas.

New clients who prefer the flexibility of hiring freelancers in any location will have the option to set their hiring preference accordingly, and it will work for them just like it does today.



New clients who prefer to hire within their country will have the option of setting their freelancer search and job post visibility to freelancers in the U.S. only, with the ability to refine their search further by time zone or state.  And, only freelancers with a U.S. location in their profile settings (verified by bank account or other means) will see these job posts and be able to submit proposals. Keep in mind if a client changes their mind or chooses to invite a freelancer outside of the U.S., they can do so at any time.

What this means for you:

If you’re a freelancer based in the U.S., you may start seeing some jobs with a location requirement in your job search results, indicated like this:

You may be asked to verify your location the first time you submit a proposal for a project with a location requirement.

For all freelancers and clients on Upwork today, be assured that this test will not impact your existing contracts or relationships.

We’ll share an update on our progress here in the Community in the coming months. We hope to report back that these enhanced features attract new clients to try Upwork, creating more opportunities for freelancers to build their business.|||

For some projects, clients have told us they want to work with a freelancer within their country. Maybe these projects require localized knowledge