It takes a lot of tools to get the job done. To help connect them all to Asana, we’ve been growing the Asana platform to include more integrations. Over the past few months, we’ve launched seven new integrations to connect more of your tools to Asana so you can streamline and customize your team’s workflows. Let’s dive into what’s new.

Microsoft Teams is a chat-based workspace for Office 365 that lets you bring your Asana projects into your conversations so everyone’s on the same page. With this integration, you can quickly create tasks for next steps and follow-ups — turning your discussions into actionable work.

Everhour is a time tracking app that integrates directly into Asana tasks so you can see estimates and total hours spent on work without even leaving the task.  This helps teams provide accurate timing for projects and get more clarity around people’s workloads.

Tray.io is a cloud data integration platform that helps you connect Asana to over 60 different enterprise software tools. Two of tray.io’s most popular pre-built integrations for Asana are with Salesforce and Google Forms, but the options are endless. And the best part? The flexible drag-and-drop platform means no technical skills required.

Zenefits brings together everything businesses need to manage their HR, payroll, and benefits. Now you can add and remove Asana accounts directly within Zenefits. With this integration, you can also create and assign Asana tasks within common HR workflow in Zenefits to streamline the employee onboarding process.

Unito is a synchronization platform that brings your favorite project and work management tools together. Either use basic synchronization or customize exactly what and how you want to sync your work between Asana and other tools. Now your marketing team who works in Asana can work with your engineering team that uses JIRA.

For Asana Enterprise customers, we’re excited to announce that we’re expanding our integrations with Okta and OneLogin to include SCIM. With SCIM functionality, IT admins can quickly and easily provision and deprovision users in Asana right from their identity management provider. Gone are the days of manually adding users to Asana; with SCIM you can quickly deploy Asana organization-wide.

These are just a few of our integrations, so don’t forget to check out our apps directory for a full list. And if you don’t see an integration you’re looking for, you can build your own with our open API. Have a favorite Asana integration? Let us know in the comments!|||

Asana has partnered up with Microsoft Teams, Okta, OneLogin, Everhour, Zenefits, Tray.io, and Unito to give you 7 new Asana integrations for you to try.