The timing of your fundraising can have a big impact on the outcome. Here’s how you know if it’s the right time to raise your seed round.

Great Situation — You’ve been growing at 20%/month on revenue (or a comparable metric) for 6 months.

Okay Situation — Your startup has been growing at 15%/month on revenue (or a comparable metric) for 3 months.

Bad Situation — If your company’s revenue numbers (or comparable metrics) are trending down, you should wait to raise. Most investors will focus their attention on growing companies.

Great Situation — You have clear evidence your technology beats existing offerings by an order of magnitude. For example, when Skype launched in 2003, they made expensive international calls free.

Okay Situation — It appears you have technology that will beat the market but the evidence is limited, e.g. you have an impressive demo but it’s not live with a customer yet.

Bad Situation — You have research and prototypes indicating a potential market advantage but you are yet to run your own end-to-end tests.

Great Situation — You have signed contracts with customers who are already live. The contracts are worth $500k+/year and the payments will start within 60 days.

Okay Situation — You have live trials with potential customers who are happy with the product. The contracts would be worth $250k+/year but terms are not finalized.

Bad Situation — You have no live trials, customers are interested but financial terms have not been discussed.

Great Situation — You have a team with globally recognized skills, applicable to a massive market. E.g. you’re a drone company and the founders recently won the International Aerial Robotics Competition.

Okay Situation — Your team has academic and/or industry expertise relevant to a big market, with a strong history of performance. For example, you’re building a fintech company after working at Goldman Sachs for a decade.

Bad Situation — If your team’s expertise is from an industry different to your startup and you’re not a serial entrepreneur, you should expect to demonstrate traction or a tech breakthrough before being fundable.|||

The timing of your fundraising can have a big impact on the outcome. Here’s how you know if it’s the right time to raise your seed round.