Ticketmaster has added a new feature to its website and mobile apps, offering users a preview of the exact view from their seats. The sneak peek was made possible through a partnership with IOMedia and its 3D Virtual Venue technology. Users can get a sense of how they’ll see the game at over 110 venues across North America and Australia, including Madison Square Garden, AT&T Stadium, and the LA Coliseum.

Virtual Venue will show you different layouts depending on the event at the arena. For example, New York Knicks games, New York Rangers games, and concerts at Madison Square Garden will each have their own distinct layout and design. Users can easily pan and look around the venue from their selected seat on both the website and mobile app.

The technology will help remove the guessing game as to what your view will actually look like, especially if you haven’t been to a particular arena or concert hall before. Surprisingly, the company says Virtual Venue helps speed up purchasing times, as it makes people commit quicker to their selection since they can see exactly where they will sit.

“Everything we do is to remove friction,” Ismail El Shareef, VP of open platform and innovation at Ticketmaster told The Verge. “It helps us offer a seamless, informative, immersive, and interactive experience for our fans. Offering this realistic perspective of what the seats are going to look like, what the stage is going to look like, that perspective helps fans make decisions faster.”

Ticketmaster says it will continue to expand the Virtual Venue offering, bringing more sites online and improving the quality of the renderings. It takes a few weeks for IOMedia to map and add a venue, as it builds off a 3D wireframe model and adds the gyroscopic and panoramic actions before adding textures and proper branding.

Right now every event at the supported venues isn’t included — for example you can see what a Knicks game would look like, but you won’t see the Virtual Venue for Billy Joel’s upcoming concerts at MSG. Ticketmaster says it is continuously adding events as it moves forward. The company says it’s also in the early stages of building out 3D models for venues in Europe as well.

Hopefully it won’t be too long before Ticketmaster gets every major arena and concert supported by Virtual Venue, and we can finally get rid of the outdated overhead view.|||

Ticketmaster has added a new feature to its website and mobile apps, offering users a preview of the exact view from their seats. The sneak peek was made possible through a partnership with IOMedia...