Let’s focus on privacy and get rid of the clutter

We live in Information Society in which the creation and distribution of information has become the most significant economic and cultural activity. Right now a satellite or a passing drone might snap your picture. In other words, there is essentially no such thing as total privacy, online or otherwise.

Personally I like sharing thoughts and opinions with a wider audience online. And I like the convenience of using my computer, phone, or tablet to communicate, find directions, and make purchases anywhere in the world. 



On the contrary, common-sense strategies, the Internet equivalent of drawing the curtains and locking your door, can significantly reduce the risk of having your personal information fall into unwelcome hands. 



Many times I have heard the phrase: “I have nothing to hide”, it’s just an absurd statement. I’m sure you’re an honest, moral, law-abiding citizen. But if you tell me you have nothing to hide, I’m going to laugh in your face. 



We all have secrets, and that’s as it should be. But you may not realize how much you want to keep private and how you might inadvertently give it away online.



I’m sure your are aware that every Web site you visit, every Web search, every video you watch, and every file you download leaves a trail, which includes information about your location, your device, and your browser, among other things. Parts of this trail are stored on your own computer or mobile devices as histories, caches, and cookies. Some parts are stored on the servers of search providers, advertisers, and other entities. 



You should be aware that browsing the Web typically results in at least the following information being stored, for each browser you use:



- Browsing history: A list of every Web page you’ve visited, in each browser.



- Download history: A list of every file you’ve downloaded again, in each browser.



- Cookies: Textual information stored on your device by the sites you visit, or by the companies who place ads or other code on those sites. Cookies are most often simple settings or random-looking strings of characters that identify your browser uniquely, but they can also include your username, password, loca­tion, or any number of other details.



- Zombie cookies: Conventional HTTP cookies aren’t the only way browsers can store persistent data about your behavior. Records similar to cookies can be stored separately when you visit sites with content that uses Flash, Silverlight, HTML5 Web storage, etc. In some cases, the effect is to recreate cookies even after you’ve deleted them so that’s why we call them by nickname “zombie cookies”.



- Web cache(s): The contents of pages you’ve visited recently, especially images (so the page can load more quickly if you return to it) and favicons (the little icons that appear in your browser’s address bar next to the URL). Some browsers also store thumbnail images of the pages you’ve visited and similar data.

The above is only a partial list. Some sites use even sneakier techniques to squirrel away various information about you in a variety of places. In addition to all these things, your device may store a global cache of recent DNS lookups - somewhere outside your browser there may be a list of the domain names you (or your apps) most recently visited along with their IP addresses. 



Web activities can follow you everywhere. That’s why the big corporate companies like Google, Microsoft, Facebook and others want to track you across accounts and devices (to get the most information about their users).



Mozilla on the other hand is a non-profit organization striving to fight for Open Web. We recently introduced Firefox Focus, private mobile browser. Firefox Focus is already available for iPhone users on App Store. Firefox Focus for Android is also close to being released.

So how is Firefox Focus different from any other mobile browser?

Focus automatically blocks trackers that follow you around the web. You can browser freely for that engagement rings, flights to Las Vegas or expensive cigars that you don’t want anybody to know about.



Firefox Focus is super simple: no tabs, no bookmarks, no pop-ups - just URL bar and extremely fast and user friendly browsing experience.

Browse like no one’s watching. The new Firefox Focus automatically blocks a wide range of online trackers — from the moment you launch it to the second you leave it. Easily erase your history, passwords and cookies, so you won’t get followed by things like unwanted ads. 



Accessibility of information is one of the most powerful aspects of the Web. It is all the more powerful when anonymity is protected. 



We know from copious user research and constant community feedback that being able to browse the web without stressing about being tracked or served unwanted ads is a big deal. 



For the last few weeks I have been using Firefox Focus on daily basis on Android device. I’m really happy to see that even pre-release version is stable and extremely fast. Here is a sneak peak of Firefox Focus localized for Slovenian market.

On iOS Firefox Focus is already available in more than 27 languages, covering billions of users around the world. 



Be sure to follow me for more updates about Firefox Focus for Android and the date when it will be released on Google Play.|||

Nino Vranešič, elnino blog