Recently, I was part of the hiring process for a front end developer at our early stage start-up (http://wearepercent.com/). Our requirements were simple, we wanted someone to come in and start from scratch. This meant that they could pick any technology stack, organise and deploy the technology however they wanted and most importantly they had to be able to work independently. Outside of any framework or other high-level library requirements, we needed someone who knew:

We advertised on few job portals over a three week time period. We made sure that our advert sounded fun, unconventional, and reflected our team culture. We were surprised to see that we attracted way over 150 applications from all over the world.

But, what was most striking were the stats we collected during this process. These statistics gave us an important insight into the next generation of programmers:

As you can see, most don’t come from conventional CS schools. More than 20% of applicants were self-taught and when you combine red and green bars they comprise of over 50%.

Self certification websites like freecodecamp, codecademy, code.org etc. are making more programmers, from diverse backgrounds and quicker than the conventional CS schools. Time and time again we saw these learning services mentioned in our applicants’ CVs.

When we interviewed these self-taught programmers I was struck with their technical ability, enthusiasm and strong desire to learn more. They were all craving for their first coding career break. The passion to take on any challenge and a mind of their own are clearly evident and with the right learning opportunity they could be on par with any developer.

Self-taught developers are not necessarily fresh graduates. We received applications from people whose backgrounds are Finance, Business, Journalism, Engineering, Film Industry, Tax and Accounting, etc. Some of them are highly experienced and doing very well in their current jobs. They all learnt programming purely because they all love to learn something new and challenging. As they are not purely computer science background, they could lend their expertise on other aspects of your business, and thats what makes them very special.

These are specialist on other fields who are looking to apply for junior-mid level computer science jobs. A job portal dedicated to match their requirements is very important.

It was the realisation that there is an abundance of talented, hungry self-taught developers out there that gave me the idea to create a job portal specifically for them.

After a cursory Google search I realised that this service didn’t currently exist.

Today I have created hackercareers.co.uk. It is a meeting ground for employers who want to hire hungry, self-taught programmers from diverse backgrounds and self-taught programmers who want to find relevant jobs. Its absolutely FREE to advertise jobs and costs only £25 to feature* your job advert (this helps me keep the site up and running). There is no need for sign ups or subscriptions.

I made hackercareers thinking that it will contribute to tech industry in a positive way and impact the products that we collectively make. Better products makes better world!

💛 Please like and share if you think its useful to you or your friends. 💛

PS: I just copied OldGeekJobs UX. I think John Wheeler got the UX right for a job portal. Simple to navigate and understand.

* Featuring a job means it makes the job advert stand out, and places it at the top of the webpage. This means more people could discover your advert.|||

Recently, I was part of the hiring process for a front end developer at our early stage start-up (http://wearepercent.com/). Our requirements were simple, we wanted someone to come in and start from…