Now that we've discussed how businesses are failing hard at mobile speed benchmarks, it's time to take a look at actions we can all take to improve mobile website speed, and win that coveted mobile user attention. Here are the tactics most effective across the board.

PageSpeed Insights is a simple little tool from Google that allows you to plug in your website on a mobile device and see how it performs. The tool then gives you a basic breakdown of how the website did, what you really need to fix, and what you should consider fixing. It only works page by page, but it's totally free and a great place to begin if you aren't sure how to analyze mobile performance in a way that's easy for everyone to understand.

Browser caching is a very popular technique to speed up mobile pages without necessarily changing how they look. Mobile browsers are well-equipped to save web data on the physical mobile device to use for later, vastly speeding up the loading process for popular sites. If you set some of your images or CSS content to cache, then load times will improve. However, there are a couple problems with this setup. First, it doesn't work nearly as well for brand new visitors. Second, this isn't a popular move from the user perspective, and could be untenable in a few years.

Images just aren't as important on mobile devices: In fact, an increasingly popular tactic is to get rid of almost every image but the business logo and what images are needed for menus when optimizing a mobile site. That's not always possible for every brand, but you can still do a look. Compress your images, resize for mobile, and simplify them in as many ways as possible.

A couple of years ago, Google mentioned that it wants to see server response time below 200ms. We promise you, that number hasn't grown any higher in the intervening time: If it looks like your server is handling mobile pages poorly, it may be time to upgrade to a better package or switch to a different service. Also consider reducing HTTP requests to the server so that the server doesn't need to process as much data: Once again, the key here is simplifying and reducing the number of components so requests fall too.

If you've recently changed up your website, take a look at redirects, or how your website takes care of old links that go to the wrong (usually broken) web pages. Redirects scoop users up and plop them on the right page so you don't have to go back to every bit of content with the old link and change it. However, redirects are very, very bad news for mobile sites, because they take a whole lot of time to occur in the mobile world. It's best to avoid redirects entirely whenever possible.

Google's AMP (accelerated mobile pages) project is all about creating an open standard for businesses to create their mobile pages, using ultra-minimalistic HTML without pulling third party scripts. Look, there are a lot of different coding tricks you can use to re-deploy your website and make it faster. That includes avoiding external CSS, using newer HTML formats, and replacing JavaScript with something more mobile-friendly. But AMP pages are a far more complete measure that will make even more difference. If you are committed to making some serious background changes to your site, why not go all the way and use the standard that's specifically design for your goals?

Uneasy about switching to AMP? You may still have to make major changes in the future, but there are less extreme measures you can take right now. Minification is the process of going through traditionally clunky site components like heavy-handed HTML, JavaScript, and CSS to make them...less complicated. Basically, it means going through your coding with a fine-toothed comb and removing all text (including spaces) that the page doesn't technically need. If you haven't done it yet, now is the time to start!|||

Seven actions to improve mobile website speed to win coveted mobile user attention. Most effective tips used to speed up your mobile site for user experience.