Should I skip the rest of the page and just read this FAQ?

No! Definitely read the whole page :) This is just where we're putting responses to some common questions.

Where is the money coming from?

Fight for the Future for now, and we're looking for more funding for more teams, and longer runs.

Are you funding other things, like films, TV shows, books, software projects, journalism, community spaces, etc?

There are many other valid ways to change the world of course, but we think this particular one (A-Teams) is very effective and not getting used as much as it should. We want to change that, and our resources are limited, so we have to stay focused on this singular mission.

Are you a boring nonprofit trying to steal my ideas?

No! Please don't send us your ideas :) I mean, we're always curious, but we actually don't think ideas themselves are very valuable. We're looking for people who can come up with audacious ideas in the moment, and turn them into reality, again and again.

Do I really have to fill out an application?

No. If you're clearly awesome at this, just introduce yourself. ateams@fightforthefuture.org

What's your metric for success, for a team?

Ultimately, policy change, or a significant shift in the national debate. Or, on a shorter timeline, at least the precursors to policy change: visible, palpable political pressure on important targets.

What's your metric for success, for yourselves?

Being able to make a dozen solid new A-Teams happen on top issues while continuing work in our issue area (Internet freedom) would be a solid success. If that works, we think we’ll be able to go much farther. We think the limiting thing will be finding the right people, and the right structure.

How many groups will you try to create?

As many as we can, but we want to have some significant level of contact with each group in the first months/year at least so probably a dozen teams in the first 6 months.

Is the $15k a one shot grant, or the first of many grants?

If you are granted $15k, there’s no guarantee of further funding. That being said, we’d work with teams to develop a fundraising plan for what happens after that. If we find people who are awesome at this and they’re working on a primary issue like one of the ones we listed above, we’re hopeful that we can get them ongoing funding. There’s some risk we won’t be able to, but we think it’s more likely than not that we will. For many of the same reasons you're reading this, there are a lot of people who are willing to help fund creative approaches to political change these days! So the hard part isn't funding. The hard part is finding things to fund that are unusually and self-evidently effective.

Are you funding teams outside the US?

Yes, possibly. If you're working in the Internet freedom space, definitely be in touch. Otherwise, we'd love to talk, but funding is unlikely in the short term. It's just too hard for us to evaluate teams and strategy.

Not yet, but the world moves fast. Apply soon.

No, but don't take our word for it. Please take the time to carefully Google us and our work. (Understanding us and our work will probably help with your application too, if you choose to apply.)

Do A-Teams have to use the Internet in some way?

What do you get out of this?

Epic victories we will die knowing we helped make happen. Also, more company! We're committed to remaining small. This is our way to grow: helping start other A-Teams.

Our stretch goal is that we can make starting an A-Team a thing people know they can do, the way doing a startup, working for a community-based nonprofit, or going to grad school are things people do.

What if my team doesn't get picked for funding?

Please, find some way to keep doing it anyway. The world needs you.|||

A-Teams (activism teams) are a new way to change the world. Here we explain how to join one, start one, and apply for funding. If you're looking for an effective way to tackle massive political and social challenges and win, read this.