Former CIA Counter-Terrorism expert Phil Giraldi does not mince his words about Israel spying activities in the US. Follow us on Twitter: @INTEL_TODAY

According to Giraldi, Israel is stealing vast quantities of American tax payer funded technology and selling it to  the enemies of the United States. The former CIA analyst believes that the most dangerous foe to the sovereignty of the United States is Israel.

In a 2012 op-piece, the former CIA analyst explained his dislike for Israel.

Former President Moshe Katsav was convicted of rape, while almost every recent head of government, including the current one, has been investigated for corruption. Further, the Israeli government is a rogue regime by most international standards, engaging as it does in torture, arbitrary imprisonment, and continued occupation of territories seized by its military. Worse still, it has successfully manipulated my country, the United States, and has done terrible damage both to our political system and to the American people, a crime that I just cannot forgive, condone, or explain away. And then there are the reasons to dislike Israel and what it represents that go way back. In 1952’s Lavon Affair, the Israelis were prepared to blow up a U.S. Information Center in Alexandria and blame it on the Egyptians. In 1967, the Israelis attacked and nearly sank the USS Liberty, killing 34 crewmen, and then used their power over President Lyndon Johnson to block an investigation into what had occurred. In 1987, Jonathan Pollard was convicted of spying for Israel with investigators determining that he had been the most damaging spy in the history of the United States. In the 1960s, Israelis stole uranium from a lab in Pennsylvania to construct a secret nuclear arsenal. And the spying and theft of U.S. technology continues. Israel is the most active “friendly nation” when it comes to stealing U.S. secrets, and when its spies are caught, they are either sent home or, if they are Americans, receive a slap on the wrist. And Israel gets away with killing American citizens — literally — in the cases of Rachel Corrie and Furkan Dogan of the Mavi Marmara. And let’s not forget Israel’s treatment of the Palestinians which has made the United States complicit in a crime against humanity. Tel Aviv has also played a key role in Washington’s going to war against Iraq, in promulgating a U.S.-led global war on terror against the Muslim world, and in crying wolf over Iran, all of which have served no U.S. interest.

Philip Giraldi is a former counter-terrorism specialist and military intelligence officer of the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and a columnist and television commentator who is the Executive Director of the Council for the National Interest, a group that advocates for more even-handed policies by the U.S. government in the Middle East. [WIKIPEDIA]|||

"Placing Israeli citizens in key industries is a secret to Israel's success." Former CIA Phil Giraldi Former CIA Counter-Terrorism expert Phil Giraldi does not mince his words about Israel spying activities in the US. Follow us on Twitter: @INTEL_TODAY According to Giraldi, Israel is stealing vast quantities of American tax payer funded technology and selling…