Practice — It’s time to put your knowledge and ideas into action. Again, don’t be afraid, although it might seem difficult to start, it’s also exciting to finally turn all that effort and time you had invested into learning, and start seeing actual results. Start to experiment with building the main structure or frame of a website (this can be your first portfolio webpage). Familiarize yourself with the language. Don’t think too much about its technical meaning at first, just know what it does when you use it. Technical knowledge will come by itself later on. You will realize that something you might have thought is impossible to achieve, will eventually come to your understanding through continual practicing, and actual development of websites.

If you don’t have any idea were to start, I suggest that you go ahead and start by building your own website. My personal recommendation would be to build a minimalistic portfolio page, and a blog page. It might seem impossible at first; How will I be able to create this design? Will my website break on one of the browsers? Is this semantic HTML? Am I following the right standards?

All of these questions can make you sceptical, and keep you from taking your first step. If you are at this stage, I would encourage you to go ahead and spend at least an hour experimenting with the knowledge you already have. You might think that practising just a little everyday is useless, but you may not realize you are already getting comfortable with how actually all web developers work today. Here’s how my daily work (as a front-end developer) goes in a few brief steps:

As you can see, no matter how much experience you have, the web development industry keeps growing everyday. New updates, features, and technologies are released on a daily basis. It does not matter how much experience you have today, the steps listed above will become a recurring event in your web development career. The basics will stay the same, and starting new projects will not feel as hefty as they were in the very beginning. But if you want to keep moving forward, you should not be afraid to start by messing around with code today.|||

It felt like I never had the courage to start. I was constantly thinking that I’m not ready yet, that I have to continue reading and make sure that when I start coding, I would have enough knowledge…