Some Q’s out loud and theory time.

Since 2000: Computer Science degrees awarded are up 14,000, but Social Science degrees awarded are up 66,000 and Psychology up 41,000. There’s ostensibly more demand for programmers than ever, yet CS degrees haven’t even recovered from their 2004 high.

Why, in spite of high wages and cultural/economic importance of tech, has the number of CS majors has been basically flat for 15 years?

Women have outnumbered men since 1982 in undergrad, but as the second graph[1] shows:

The share of bachelor’s degrees awarded to women declined in CS by 10%. Colleges and middle schools have been trying harder and harder to increase women’s attendance in CS programs, and its only getting worse. Why?

Lots of people have attempted to answer question #2, but very few of them ever reach a conclusion that also satisfies the important corollary: What motivates males to pursue CS?

It’s known that in some more patriarchal societies, like Turkey, Iran, Russia,* there are a larger number of women engineers and CS graduates. What gives? Coupled with question #2, this seems to give the impression that the more liberal a society, the less likely women are to become engineers or CS grads, but I suspect some weirder force is at play, or that its too multivariate to parse out.

* not trying to pick on these countries in particular, I just think most readers will agree that they are more patriarchal than the US.

The simplest and quite depressing theory is that CS enrollment is flat because aptitude is flat. 2000 was the peak of the dot com bubble so 2004 was the peak of degrees awarded.

What supports this theory? Can we prove aptitude is flat? Kinda. In 1970s 1-in-2 college grads aced Wordsum test. Today 1-in-6 do.[2] Using that as a proxy for IQ of the median college grad, in the 70’s it was ~112, now its ~100.

In other words we have more people going to college than ever, but the “average grad” is less intelligent than ever. Degrees are increasingly diluted yet expensive. You can pay more money than ever to show that you are of average intelligence.

CS is flat because its hard and not easy to fake your way through. Very large numbers of people may more or less be faking other degrees and probably never would have graduated if college was “as hard” as it was in the 1970’s. I’m not just talking about grade inflation, some of the largest college systems (CSU, CUNY) are including what used to be remedial courses in degrees.[3] The whole stack is getting dumbed down to get more people into the pipeline and produce worse graduates than before.

Why on Earth does this worry so few people? Everyone is marching ahead with “the more degrees the better” even though kids are paying 80–200k to basically complete high school but with more drugs and on a slower timeline.

(Related mini theory that nobody disagrees with: Loan collapse coming, but who knows when. That part worries some people. But it actually gives a lot of people who accidentally turned into indentured servants some hope.)

 

Minor note for non-CS people: CS degrees are not necessary for most programming jobs, and programmers might be the most self taught professional discipline. So CS degrees !== programming jobs, but its an OK heuristic.

[1] The graphs are from here:

[2] I’m using the data here: http://sda.berkeley.edu/cgi-bin/hsda?harcsda+gss16

[3] With the CSU remedial overhaul they are redefining “college readiness” as “willingness to pay the cash”. They are giving college credit for courses that 8th graders could complete. This is the most provable reduction in academic rigor I’ve seen, and it’s happening in the largest college system in the US. If anyone can explain why we shouldn’t be unhappy with a future of thousands of college grads with 8th grade reading skills, I’m all ears for the optimism.

What’s weirder, their stated reasons for doing this are to “raise graduation rates.” That’s it. More dollars in the door, more college grads with 8th grade reading levels out.

> CUNY administrators acknowledged that there has been some resistance, particularly from some members of the math faculty who believe algebra to be foundational, something all educated adults should master.

Rage against the dying of the light, professor.|||

Questions and Theories about degrees