With Enterprise Mobility, Organisations aim to improve the productivity and the interaction between the people, product and the business processes. One important aspect could be driving collaboration and sharing effective and efficient practices across your internal teams and business partners.

Secondly, and the most attractive aspects of enterprise mobility is to boost revenues and find new business delivery opportunities. According to a recent study by ARXAN, the leaders have mentioned ROI, productivity as their major concerns or say goals along with improving the business process, saving costs or taking an advantage over competitors.

At this point, many few leaders would argue about the importance of a robust mobile strategy- everyone understands that having a smart mobility solutions is indispensable for a modern workforce and rapid evolving business processes. But, it’s much of a concern to measure the overall effectiveness, costs, productivity shift, and the return on the initiatives.

Enterprise Mobility can offer huge benefits such as productivity gains, simpler collaboration, improved process enablement. Each components of your mobile infrastructure helps you define a holistic environment that benefit you, your employees, partners and your customers. But to truly reap these benefits, you’ll need to keep your business goals in mind and keep innovating- adopting mobility would be one.

But, the question remains, how would you use different values to check against the costs and benefits of the implementing mobility solutions. These following metrics would be of help:

Mobility solutions definitely reduces the time to market or production to sales time for organizations. In order to calculate overall financial benefits, you need to map out all the components of the your mobility strategy and put the qualitative costs against monetary benefits such as increased sales vs the cost of implementation.

Usage metrics and numbers typically help in assessing behavioral patterns, ease of use, average time to complete specific tasks, time spent or saved. Whilst these metrics will provide enough information to analyse the usage habits of users and employees, but you definitely need an advance reporting solution(Such as Power BI or Sharepoint) for deep insights to convert these qualitative numbers into ROI.

The next ROI measurable for enterprise mobility initiatives is productivity.  Does the solution provide employees with a greater opportunity to up the quality of their work?

While you might miss accurate numbers here, but it is perhaps easier to gauge with their mood and output.

There is always a cost associated with the supporting of any mobility initiatives. Historically, organisations has had to take on the cost of supplying all hardware and solution that is being used to access and manage information related to business processes and revenue generation activities.

Besides the cost, the benefits of the solution can be accurately illustrated in numbers such as percentage increase in cost savings, time saved in the process and better customer engagement.

Other qualitative which are intangible in nature can not be overlooked, but have been discussed above.

The last thing, you would like to measure is the adaptability in your target customers and employees. By looking at the metrics of how quickly the solutions are being adopted, you can calculate the effectiveness of the strategy. However, according to Gartner reports, experts argue that measuring ROI by adoption rate is the bottom line between the budget and ROI.

Lastly, we agree that determining the accurate revenue numbers(besides the visible sales numbers) of your mobility strategy can be slippery at moments and depends on a number of factors. But the key is- your own definition of success alongside the ROI goals of your business.

If you have already implemented a mobility strategy, your focus would be on the innovation and uncovering new opportunities. If not, you should look at how these enterprises are evolving dynamically with customized enterprise mobility initiatives.|||

