STUFF YOU MAY LIKE

What do you know about social media advertising and which of the social media platforms can help your business to quickly reach its marketing goals?

The undeniable fact is that social media platforms are traditionally meant for networking and meeting people. It wasn’t originally planned to be an avenue for business marketing.

But today, social media has been transformed into a business marketing platform thanks to its capability to enable businesses to reach millions of potential customers within a short period of time.

SEE ALSO: Essential Social Media Marketing Factors Businesses Usually Forget

When we talk about online advertising or marketing, display ads and paid search ads both will always have their place, but social media advertising has also come to play a powerful role.

Social media advertising helps businesses find new potential clients by using users’ own shared information to identify interest.

Rather than re-actively targeting users who search a certain term – as in paid search ads, social media advertising proactively targets relevant users before they even begin their search.

Social networking sites offer good options for advertisers because of the advanced targeting options, reliable conversion tracking, and prevalence on mobile devices.

Top brands understand the power of social media; they know it’s more than just a platform to connect with families and make new friends. In fact, social media has already had game-changing effects on online advertising.

So, which of the social media advertising platforms is good for your business? Can you too leverage social media for your business marketing? Below are top 7 social media advertising platforms your business should be using right now and why.

The amazing journey of Facebook as a social networking site began in 2004. Facebook has one of the more complex social media advertising platforms, with a whole array of targeting options.

The platform allows advertisers to target users based on past purchases and demographics, even outside of Facebook. The popularity of Facebook hasn’t reached the peak yet and this is why Facebook will continue to dominate social ecommerce.

Twitter advertising can be targeted based on what users search for and what they reveal in their profiles. It is arguably one of the best social media advertising platforms for generating leads at one-third the cost of other marketing channels and has an 8 to 24 times higher clickthrough rate than Facebook ads.

The social media platform also allows targeting according to what users have done online, outside of Twitter. We earlier posted an infographic on Twitter as a marketing tool and how your business can easily gain from using it. Check it out!

No doubt about it, Instagram offers better results when it comes to brand marketing and users engagement. Instagram users engagement is second to none for businesses looking to improve their brand visibility on the platform.

Instagram is becoming a valuable marketing platform and this is why businesses should take advantage of Instagram marketing now that it’s getting bigger even than Twitter. Recently started to allow advertisers to include links to their own products and websites from posts.

Each of the LinkedIn advertising options offers you the flexibility and affordability to reach your target audience, whether you are generating leads, growing your network, recruiting new employees, or growing your company page membership.

LinkedIn recently launched a tool similar to Facebook’s Atlas, which allows advertisers to target LinkedIn users outside the platform. So what can your business gain from LinkedIn?

Pinterest is one of the world’s most popular social bookmarking websites that is capable of driving web traffic to a business website on a regular basis. This is why Pinterest advertising is becoming a necessity, especially for top brands.

There are quite some interesting Pinterest stats for marketers that show how effective it could be especially for e-commerce marketing. Pinterest offers advertisers access to the ‘Pinstitute’, a programme that teaches users how to create successful ‘Pins’.

Snapchat’s Discover paved the way for exciting new developments in social and mobile advertising. Discovery is a unique media distribution platform where publishers such as the Daily Mail, Vice, Yahoo, CNN and ESPN display stories.

Companies can buy ad space around this content. Adweek reported that advertising on a ‘my story’ could cost brands $750,000 a day. This is unconfirmed by Snapchat.

Video marketing is becoming one of the most effective means of business marketing in today’s digital marketing era and no platform can do the job better than YouTube advertising.

When it comes to viral video content marketing, YouTube helps you deliver your message to the right people and at the right time with video ads. This platform is especially good for eCommerce businesses as virtually almost everyone that has a smartphone also has access to YouTube where product videos are sampled before people do their shopping.



 So which one of these platforms do you think is the best and why? Please let us know in the comment below!



 . . . . . . . .

 * CPM can vary greatly according to different campaigns. Figures should be considered indicative only. Sources: eMarketer; InSites Consulting; Pew Research Centre; Maija Palmer; FT research.|||

Best performing social media advertising platforms your business should be using now. Social media advertising platforms that offer so much potentials.