We've been running our global ping statistics for years. Every hour we have every server on our network ping every other server, and record that data in MySQL. In fact, generating these ping stats led to one of our first blog posts. But as our network has grown, so has the burden of keeping all that data around – currently ~1B rows or ~30GB of data with ~15GB of indexes.

"So you have a lot of data", you say. Indeed we do! And it's affecting us in a few ways:

So we wanted to reduce the burden on our systems without deleting the interesting ping data. It seemed like there must be a good cloud solution for this, but we weren't quite sure what it was. I asked my followers on twitter, and we received two great suggestions: AWS with Simple Storage Service (S3) & Athena, and Google Big Query. The two products looked to offer similar solutions. We're already using S3 in our backup system, so that's the direction we went.

These tools are pretty great. S3 allows you to upload arbitrary files to buckets. These files can be private, public, or managed through complicated Access Control Lists (ACLs. We use them for backups and for our global screenshot service, ShotSherpa. Amazon's Athena allows you to upload files to S3 as CSV, json, apache common log, etc. files, then query those files as if they were a well-indexed database. It's kind of magic really.

We decided to shard our data into CSV files by date (e.g. ). We originally considered grouping data by month (2016-01.csv) which would have given us far fewer files, but would have either: A) had us overwriting the current month's data every day, or B) left us unable to access this month's data in Athena.

To do the upload, we bit the bullet and let MySQL index the column for a few hours, then got our export together, which resembled the following:

The export file is then ready to be uploaded to S3, we use the incredibly handy s3cmd.

uploads the file to s3 and deletes the local file. To upload all of our legacy data, we scripted the export.

Using Athena is remarkably similar to using any regular SQL system: first you define tables, and then you can query the data. The only difference from normal SQL workflows is that you never insert data.

Defining the tables was a bit of a pain: I found the AWS documentation on the available datatypes hard to use and harder to find (eventually ending up at hive documentation). Eventually I was able to define my table in the same form as it exists locally.

We had a few years of data to migrate and didn't want to babysit the process. Bash to the rescue!

A day's migration took about 6 minutes. Surprisingly, the script took a little less time as it got closer to the present: more data, but easier for MySQL to find I guess.

We ran into a number of problems along the way:

We're incredibly happy with how things stand now:

We wanted the data off our infrastructure, that was certainly accomplished. During the process we also loaded our MySQL server in new and interesting ways, which led to better monitoring and reporting. We're also reducing our backup cost (ping data is backed up once, not every single night forever), which is nice. As an unexpected bonus we've also managed to make our ping data much more accessible, queries that would take hours now execute in seconds.|||

