At the close of the summer of 2016, there was no more perfect metaphor for user acquisition than the mobile game Pokémon Go by Nintendo. Users and their devices spent hours, if not whole days, hunting and collecting Pokémon. If you are still unfamiliar with Pokémon Go, well…welcome back from your lengthy sojourn in the desert!

The game itself aptly tapped into Millennial nostalgia. Millennials grew up playing Pokemon and the release of this game during a slow time of the year created an opportunity for many to re-connect to their youth. (Aside: Should we expect to see a similar game based on Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them? If anyone has an augmented reality (“AR”) idea for Quidditch, please write me.)

App store performance and user acquisition were impressive. In Japan, Pokémon Go reached 10 million downloads on its first day. In the United States, Pokémon Go reached 10 million downloads faster than any app ever and broke through Candy Crush’s high water mark of 20 million DAU (daily active users). This popularity quickly brought in revenue exceeding $100 million from in-game purchases. App Annie, the application analysts, estimated game revenue to be $10 million per day. To put this in context, Super Cell, the Finnish game maker, received on average around $6 million per day in 2015 across its whole portfolio of games including hit titles like Boom Beach and Clash of Clans.

Nintendo’s performance was extremely impressive. Especially so in the current climate where mobile device owners are suffering app fatigue. It is increasingly challenging for game developers to find new audience and persuade users to download. Complacency and habit has set in across the world as users are typically engaged with an ever-smaller number of apps and spending more time with them. Instagram, Facebook Messenger, What’s App, Google Maps, and Gmail – if those apps are not familiar to you then you are probably a visiting Alien and not a human living on Earth. Those apps are consistently among the top twenty downloads leaving little space for others and they are all owned by Google and Facebook. It should not be surprising that Facebook and Google attract over 80% of digital advertising spend.

Of the top paid and top grossing apps not owned by Google and Facebook, most are games. Aside from Netflix and Pandora, the app lists are dominated by mobile game titles. Aliens might conclude that we are a species that lives on entertainment.

For the rest of the year, I think we can expect that brands will endorse the freemium model and create ad-fueled experiences for their audiences with plenty of opportunities for in-app purchases. Given the immense popularity of augmented reality features, it seems very likely that branded AR experiences will be regularly released within games throughout 2017. As a result, we are anticipating new data sets fill with geo-location information. App development like this is expensive so it will have to be supported by additional revenues which might include relevant and targeted ads served by sophisticated ad tech.

Importantly, in a mobile first world, it becomes increasingly less important for brands to target premium inventory. Rather, it is MUCH more important for bands to understand their audience and reach the right people regardless of they app or inventory they are using.

Meet us in Austin, Texas for the Personagraph SXSW Cocktail Hour – Thursday, March 16th >|||

It's becoming less relevant for brands to target mobile premium inventory It’s MUCH more important they understand their audience and reach the right people