Take a look at these two pictures:

The angry man’s mistake was missing the invisible.

Here’s the rest of the story, told in Creating the Vital Organization :

A man once interrupted Picasso at his evening meal. Pulling a napkin from his pocket, the man said,

How many seconds are between them?

But a few seconds is all Lu Xiaojun needs to throw 388lbs (over twice his bodyweight) over his head and, arms quivering, support the bar for a few, precious seconds….

The seconds he needs to secure the world record.

It only took a few seconds to lift that bar. But nobody sees Xiaojun’s and calls him an “overnight success.” We all know what it took to get there.

Yet, when it comes to ourselves, we sometimes forget.

In the first quarter of 2012, a little company called Rovio went public with an announcement.

It had just taken $32 million in funding for one of it’s mobile games. The name of the game? Angry Birds.

In every sense, the explosive growth of Angry Birds seemed like an overnight success.

But — just like with Picasso or Xiaojun — there’s a lot more than what is immediately visible.

Before Angry Birds, Rovio built games for 8 years. In that time, they made 51 games, and none of them was particularly successful. The company nearly went bankrupt. Even after the launch of Angry Birds, sales were slow.

Rovio could have quit many times.

Angry Birds’ growth — the visible — was explosive, but the decade of failure, learning and experimentation — the invisible — was not.

The Myth of the Overnight Success comes from an information asymmetry.

We only get news when people or startups are doing well. But, when these same companies are struggling, learning, growing and biding their time, we hear nothing at all.

“Great,” you say, “so instead of an overnight success, now I have to work for a decade for something that may or may not happen. Thanks a bunch.”

Well, that’s not the whole story.

By understanding that overnight success is something that happens when you collect small, invisible victories, we have a new “model” for how to live our life…

Each time you start a new project, make it a win-win situation.

Even if you don’t get the big win (your personal “Angry Birds”), make sure you still profit from everything you do.

This is what Nassim Taleb (author of Incerto) means when he says,

Make use of that failure, and you haven’t lost anything at all.|||

But a few seconds is all Lu Xiaojun needs to throw 388lbs (over twice his bodyweight) over his head and, arms quivering, support the bar for a few, precious seconds…. It only took a few seconds to…