At 21 Handshake, we have been keeping an eye on Google Fred algorithm update since it appeared to happen a couple months ago: Because Google is operating more on a real-time update basis, many wondered if we'd ever see a major update again, or what it might portend. But so far it looks like the Fred update really did happen, and it's time to talk about the effects this has had on page ranking for sites around the web – including yours.

The Fred update appears to have occurred around March 8th, 2017. Like most Google updates in the past few years, it's designed to hit hard against websites that have what Google deems poor SEO practices that lower the general quality of online content in pursuit of higher rankings. Google tends to be unforgiving on this point.

What is the impact of being hit by the Fred update? Not pretty! Sites found to be offending the latest standards and practices set in place by the Google update saw their internet traffic dip by as much as 80%. This isn't the sort of update you can just ignore or assume will be harmless to your own site.

So, what is Google frowning on with Fred? Fred appears to be focused on several popular techniques that were once upon a time more in the "gray hat" column, or a little manipulative but certainly not illegal or unprofessional. Google has now, using its position as leader of internet searches, pushed such practices into the black hat category. This includes:

Don't worry too much. If you were going to be hit by Fred, it would have probably already happened. But this is a good time to get your digital house in order and avoid all the problems listed above. Focus on quality, and don't try to cheat the system.

If the problem appears to be your content, then it's time to clean house. Get rid of old content, especially content that is repetitious, filled with too many links, or generally over-optimized. Start creating new content more focused on appealing to users rather than to Google's algorithm. Be patience, and wait for improvement.

If the problem appears to be your linking problems, the solution is faster and more automated. Check for broken links, then repair and remove them. Make sure your affiliate links aren't out of control, and remove any if necessary. If you have a ton of internal links on each page, you should start avoiding that practice in the future, too. If you want to get rid of a host of links across a domain, use the Disavow tool from Google.|||

Five website practices that are getting slammed by latest Google Fred algorithm update. What you need to know to fix it if your page rankings have plummeted.