Azure Cosmos DB is designed from the ground up with global distribution in mind for every data model. It is designed to offer predictable low latency guarantees, a 99.99% availability SLA, and multiple well-defined relaxed consistency models. Currently, Azure Cosmos DB provides five consistency levels: strong, bounded-staleness, session, and eventual.

Besides strong and eventual consistency models commonly offered by distributed databases, Azure Cosmos DB offers three more carefully codified and operationalized consistency models, and has validated their usefulness against real world use cases. These are the bounded staleness, session, and consistent prefix consistency levels. Collectively these five consistency levels enable you to make well-reasoned trade-offs between consistency, availability, and latency.

Commercial distributed databases fall into two categories: databases that do not offer well-defined, provable consistency choices at all, and databases which offer two extreme programmability choices (strong vs. eventual consistency).

The former burdens application developers with minutia of their replication protocols and expects them to make difficult tradeoffs between consistency, availability, latency, and throughput. The latter puts a pressure to choose one of the two extremes. Despite the abundance of research and proposals for more than 50 consistency models, the distributed database community has not been able to commercialize consistency levels beyond strong and eventual consistency. Cosmos DB allows developers to choose between five well-defined consistency models along the consistency spectrum – strong, bounded staleness, session, consistent prefix, and eventual.

The following table illustrates the specific guarantees each consistency level provides.

You can configure the default consistency level on your Cosmos DB account (and later override the consistency on a specific read request). Internally, the default consistency level applies to data within the partition sets which may be span regions. About 73% of our tenants use session consistency and 20% prefer bounded staleness. We observe that approximately 3% of our customers experiment with various consistency levels initially before settling on a specific consistency choice for their application. We also observe that only 2% of our tenants override consistency levels on a per request basis.

In Cosmos DB, reads served at session, consistent prefix and eventual consistency are twice as cheap as reads with strong or bounded staleness consistency. Cosmos DB has industry leading comprehensive 99.99% SLAs including consistency guarantees along with availability, throughput, and latency. We employ a linearizability checker, which continuously operates over our service telemetry and openly reports any consistency violations to you. For bounded staleness, we monitor and report any violations to k and t bounds. For all five relaxed consistency levels, we also report the probabilistic bounded staleness metric directly to you.

The granularity of consistency is scoped to a single user request. A write request may correspond to an insert, replace, upsert, or delete transaction. As with writes, a read/query transaction is also scoped to a single user request. The user may be required to paginate over a large result-set, spanning multiple partitions, but each read transaction is scoped to a single page and served from within a single partition.

You can configure a default consistency level on your database account that applies to all collections (and databases) under your Cosmos DB account. By default, all reads and queries issued against the user-defined resources use the default consistency level specified on the database account. You can relax the consistency level of a specific read/query request using in each of the supported APIs. There are five types of consistency levels supported by the Azure Cosmos DB replication protocol that provide a clear trade-off between specific consistency guarantees and performance, as described in this section.

By default, for user-defined resources, the consistency level for queries is the same as the consistency level for reads. By default, the index is updated synchronously on each insert, replace, or delete of an item to the Cosmos DB container. This enables the queries to honor the same consistency level as that of point reads. While Azure Cosmos DB is write optimized and supports sustained volumes of writes, synchronous index maintenance and serving consistent queries, you can configure certain collections to update their index lazily. Lazy indexing further boosts the write performance and is ideal for bulk ingestion scenarios when a workload is primarily read-heavy.

As with read requests, you can lower the consistency level of a specific query request in each API.

If you'd like to do more reading about consistency levels and tradeoffs, we recommend the following resources:|||

Azure Cosmos DB has five consistency levels to help balance eventual consistency, availability, and latency trade-offs.